
Having missed out on the 1930s, Michel Houellebecq is perfectly suited to the 
age of Trump. The war of ideologies, religious fundamentalism and sexual 
dystopia are well-worn Houellebecq themes, but under them like an ostinato runs 
the death of western liberalism: the fullSpenglerian decline 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Decline_of_the_West>. As he explains in “A 
Last Stand Against the Free Market”, “We reject liberal ideology for failing to 
show the way, or a route to reconciliation between the individual and his 
fellow beings.” As snappy aperçus go (and bear in mind, that’s a line of 
poetry), it’s not quite “We must love one another or die”. Long-windedness, 
however, is the least of Houellebecq’s problems.

The poems collected in Unreconciled tack between rhythmical grumbles about the 
state of the world and more straightforwardly sensory epiphanies, Baudelairean 
ennui permitting. Most are untitled, and few cross the page. As a rule, 
modernity is an enemy. Houellebecq is one of those who suspect the invention of 
the fridge has been bad for the soul: “A well-cleaned kitchen; / Ah! This 
obsession with kitchens!” The ascendancy of the domestic has repercussions for 
masculine high-mindedness too: “Hollow, decayed discourse; / The opinions of 
the woman next door.”

No better, by way of spiritual improvement, is the “porn cinema” of “Love, 
Love”, with its audience of “wheezing pensioners” toiling their way to erotic 
gratification. Worse still, “There was no story line”. The supreme pleasure of 
love,Baudelaire <https://www.theguardian.com/books/charles-baudelaire> thought, 
“lies in the certainty of doing evil”, but Houellebecq’s cosmic vision will 
take some fine tuning before his crew of banal old onanists achieve much moral 
grandeur. Window shopping in a red light district, Houellebecq is an amateur 
sociologist turned sweaty-palmed punter:

A few chavs threw menacing looks
At the loaded babes and the dirty mags;
Some executives were consuming; their only function.
And you weren’t there. I love you, Véronique.

In his essay on Baudelaire 
<http://www.std.com/~raparker/exploring/tseliot/works/essays/lesson-of-baudelaire.html>
,TS Eliot <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ts-eliot> describes the poet’s 
feelings of spiritual superiority over the Parisian bourgeoisie: unlike the 
hollow souls of the crowd, at least the poet was “man enough to be damned”. 
Houellebecq settles for a more worldly superiority: “In the almost empty metro 
/ Filled with semi-gaseous people / I entertain myself with stupid, / But 
potentially dangerous games.” Over the course of these poems he indulges 
daydreams of killing himself, becoming a Muslim or joining a sect; perhaps one 
of his blacker moods is responsible for the “blood of disembowelled neighbours” 
we encounter in “Distribution – Consumption”.

The various female figures who come and go are cyphers – not even semi-gaseous 
– and the Houellebecq clan doesn’t sound too promising (“My dad was a solitary 
and barbarous cunt”). Even with this raw material, Houellebecq’s agonies and 
ecstasies pass off like bubbles in a martini, transient and lacking in 
intoxicating aftereffect. Small victories are always possible, however, as when 
a poem braves the tyranny of political correctness to call a girl with Down’s 
syndrome a “mongoloid” (mongolienne: it’s offensive in French too.)

Window-shopping in a red-light district, Houellebecq is an amateur sociologist 
turned sweaty-palmed punter

Something in very short supply here for a satirical writer is laughter. As the 
callow exaggerations of Houellebecq’s political gestures suggest, times of 
crisis are both a boon and a bane for satire.Shelley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/percy-bysshe-shelley> insisted poets were 
the unacknowledged legislators of the world, but satire allows for a more 
pessimistic slant on the artist’s calling, as whenPeter Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/peter-cook> described the inspiration for 
his comedy club, the Establishment, as “those wonderful Berlin cabarets which 
did so much to stop the rise of Hitler and prevent the outbreak of the second 
world war”. Perhaps, deep down, satire – even satire as dyspeptic and 
unillusioned as Houellebecq’s – is parasitic on what it attacks. In American 
poetry, the Houellebecq-resemblingFrederick Seidel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/06/frederick-seidel-interview-widening-income-inequality>
 has ploughed his own contrarian furrow (as in the poem “Trump for 
President!”), but the suspicion remains that he is a Manhattan liberal in deep 
camouflage. Occasionally, the combination of bibulousness and fatalism in 
Houellebecq is reminiscent ofPeter Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/02/peter-reading>, but for all his 
attempts to conceal it Reading was a warmer and more generous soul than the 
Frenchman.

Houellebecq’s poetry has been translated before, as The Art of Struggle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/nov/27/michel-houellebecq-art-of-struggle-review>
 (2010), and while Gavin Bowd’s versions eliminate annoying small errors, the 
French text’s prosy rhythms slip into English without much fuss. By and large, 
the poems ofUnreconciled serve up a flatly recognisable world, untroubled by 
the vertiginous abstractions of postwar poets such asJacques Dupin 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/05/arts/jacques-dupin-french-art-critic-and-poet-dies-at-85.html>
 orMichel Deguy 
<http://www.poetryinternationalweb.net/pi/site/poet/item/2043/18/Michel-Deguy>. 
Houellebecq’s very availability is a dubious virtue, however. Coming on top of 
his erotic abjection, his melancholy railway station platforms and retail 
outlets suggest a Larkinesque dimension, but Houellebecq’s closing cadences 
have little use for wistful regret (no “Hautes Fenêtres” here.) Cliched anomie 
reigns. Poems peter out rather than conclude.

The great Yves Bonnefoy 
<https://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/1790/yves-bonnefoy-the-art-of-poetry-no-69-yves-bonnefoy>
 died last year, and Houellebecq doesn’t exactly shine in a straight comparison 
with that modern master. Then again, he doesn’t do much better when read 
alongsideAlain Mabanckou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/29/tomorrow-be-twenty-mabanckou-review>
,Valérie Rouzeau 
<http://www.poetryinternationalweb.net/pi/site/poet/item/17178/18/Valerie-Rouzeau>
,Oscarine Bosquet 
<http://www.poetryinternationalweb.net/pi/site/poet/item/23622/18/Oscarine-Bosquet>
, or any of the many excellent poets extending the French-language tradition 
today. “My God, how insipid is man!” he grumbles to himself at one point. Where 
the author ofUnreconciled is concerned, these ineffectual poems offer no strong 
incentive to disagree.

• Unreconciled: Poems 1991-2013 is published by William Heinemann. To order a 
copy for £14.14 (RRP £16.99)go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/unreconciled.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 