
Three years ago Peter Koechley and Eli Pariser were eagerly telling investors 
about their radical vision for a viral content site devoted to significant 
social issues. In an era in which only gifs, kittens and music videos are 
deemed viral-worthy, the response was predictably meek. Koechley remembers the 
quizzical looks from suits as they wished the pair well in their endeavours and 
ushered them towards the door.

“Just the sense that you could build one of the top 50 web properties, 100% 
populated with important society-level stories seemed laughable to lots of 
people,” Koechley recalls.

Upworthy launched on 26 March 2012. By the end of October in the same year, 
the site had attracted 8.7 million users, leading to Business Insider naming it 
thefastest growing media company in the world 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/upworthy-how-to-create-a-fast-growing-media-company-2012-11?op=1&IR=T>
. Finally, the investments started to roll in.

A round of seed funding in October brought $4m 
<https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/upworthy> from a series of investors 
that reads like a who’s who of the new media world; BuzzFeed co-founder John 
Johnson, Facebook co-founder and New Republic owner Chris Hughes and Reddit 
co-founder Alexis Ohanian all donated to the Upworthy cause. Series A funding 
in September 2013 garnered another $8m.

Koechley, a former managing editor of the Onion, has carved out a distinctive 
editorial identity for the site, which now attracts on average 25-50 million 
unique browsers. It’s quite a feat for a media organisation that publishes 
between 200 and 400 pieces of content a month. But while Upworthy’s growth has 
been meteoric, it has not escaped the wrath of some online commenters.

The brand has become synonymous with a particular type of sensationalist 
headline that incredulously screams at would-be readers on social media: “This 
person did this – you won’t BELIEVE what happens next.” They range from the 
preachy to the faux naive but, ultimately, they work. Upworthy articles don’t 
just generate a huge number of clickthroughs, they also transform readers into 
their most valuable ambassadors. The average post is shared over 25,000 times.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fupworthy-peter-koechley-clickbait-charity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424946464600%2F3aa99080-5c70-4f16-a4fd-095e899ce86c-1020x700.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Upworthy's%20co-founder%20said%20the%20most%20amazing%20thing%20about%20clickbait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fupworthy-peter-koechley-clickbait-charity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Upworthy%27s%20co-founder%20said%20the%20most%20amazing%20thing%20about%20clickbait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fupworthy-peter-koechley-clickbait-charity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424946464600%2F3aa99080-5c70-4f16-a4fd-095e899ce86c-1020x700.png>
 A screenshot of the Upworthy homepage. Photograph: Upworthy 
Koechley rejects the term clickbait, which describes a headline that sets a 
reader up for a fall: “What we strive for is just that bond with our people. If 
we say ‘it’s amazing’, that you’re going to watch it and actually think it’s 
amazing is the most important thing to us.”

He says that the site’s immense growth spawned a number of rivals that have 
damaged the brand identity by association: “I think a lot of people have had 
bad experiences with a lot of these copycats. It’s totally out of our control 
but I think it isn’t great for us either. We try to do all we can, which is 
make sure that when we’re making promises the stories deliver. We take that 
really, really seriously.”

At the heart of Upworthy’s operation are its curators, who source the most 
eye-catching, important videos from every corner of the web, before 
fact-checking their claims and contacting the people behind them to liaise on 
how they can best be promoted.

The videos they choose to promote on their site and through social media often 
go viral, turning their creators into stars almost instantly and directing a 
huge audience to fundraising campaigns.

When Upworthy posted an article about a Kickstarter campaign for a feature 
film about how sexual abuse changed 
<http://www.upworthy.com/sexual-abuse-is-terrifying-to-a-child-one-survivor-is-responding-with-something-even-scarier>
 Sasha Neulinger 
<http://www.upworthy.com/sexual-abuse-is-terrifying-to-a-child-one-survivor-is-responding-with-something-even-scarier>
 and his familys’ lives 
<http://www.upworthy.com/sexual-abuse-is-terrifying-to-a-child-one-survivor-is-responding-with-something-even-scarier>
, it raised $137,000 in a week. Koechley says it is just one of a pocket full 
of times when the site has raised between $100,000 and $300,000 for charitable 
causes.

Upworthy doesn’t record exactly how much money campaigns promoted on the site 
and through their social media channels have raised but estimates it is in the 
millions. He adds: “We’ve still raised a lot more money for other people than 
for ourselves.”

We’re very humble. Working in social media means all we can do is share really 
great stories
Peter Koechley, Upworthy 
While curators review thousands of videos each week, Koechley says only a 
small number meet the high standards the site has for both importance and 
storytelling ability. He reveals that the company is starting to come up 
against the limits of curation and is beginning to experiment more with the 
creation of their own content.


Does the ability to pick and choose the campaigns that are shown to the world 
give the team a god-complex? “We’re very humble. Working in social media means 
all we can do is share really great stories. We know exactly how far we can 
push something before it takes off on its own, just based on the size of our 
audience. We can give something a little boost but it’s really only when things 
themselves are great, when stories are really wonderful that they take off.”

Since the site’s launch, its team has often been accused of encouraging 
slacktivism, which critics would describe as a kind of superficial, 
internet-based activism that takes the form of social media sharing rather than 
real-world action. To his detractors, Koechley offers the following response:

“I think that awareness actually matters and that we are in an all out war for 
attention between the forces of inanity and the forces of things that actually 
matter to society [...] We feel like people paying attention and being aware of 
important issues is one of the big roles of media.

We try to create the conditions for other people to make change
Peter Koechley, Upworthy 
“The second argument is, I spent a lot of time before Upworthy doing direct 
political organising and it’s incredibly difficult to actually organise people 
to take action, to go to a protest or call their congress person or give money 
to a campaign if they’re not aware of the issue, or it’s not really high up on 
their priority list.

“I feel like we think of ourselves as trying to help create, get people 
focused on the most important issues and try to create the conditions for other 
people to make change.”

The company announced last week that they had raised over $10m in revenue in 
the first nine months of last year from native advertising. Koechley says 
companies are eager to promote their corporate social responsibility: “Brands 
know, young people have been telling them loud and clear for a while now, that 
if your brand doesn’t stand for something more than the jeans that you sell or 
the soap that you dispense, it’s not going to be enough.”

He adds: “Young people actually make purchase decisions based on whether they 
agree with the company’s values and whether the brand stands for anything.”

As Upworthy nears its third birthday, Koechley and Pariser must look back on 
those early investor meetings with a sense of smug satisfaction. The pair who 
rejected the viral status quo have not only proven that the internet is 
interested in more than just gifs, kittens and music videos – they have also 
proven that hard-hitting society-level issues can make serious money.

Peter Koechley will be speaking at the Changing Media Summit 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/changing-media-summit>. See the rest 
of the line-uphere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/dec/02/changing-media-summit-2015-speakers>


More like this

• Hearst UK chief Anna Jones on the enduring power of print magazines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/jan/28/anna-jones-hearst-print-magazines-lifespan>
• Social engagement now more important than TV ratings, says Fremantle boss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/jan/21/social-media-engagement-tv-ratings-fremantle>
• Blake Cahill of Philips: ‘The marketer needs to be digital. It’s part of the 
DNA’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/21/blake-cahill-philips-digital-marketing>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled “Brought to you by” – find out morehere 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/sponsored-content>.
 