
Marijuana legislation

It was a big night for marijuana legalization. Voters in five states decided 
whetherto legalize recreational use of marijuana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/state-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare>
: California,Maine 
<http://www.nytimes.com/elections/results/maine-ballot-measure-1-legalize-marijuana>
, Massachusetts and Nevadavoted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/state-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare>
 in favour. Only Arizona rejected the ballot initiative. Voters in Arkansas, 
Florida and North Dakota passed measures making the drug available for medical 
use. And in Montana, a measure was approved that removes provider restrictions 
on the drug for medicinal use.

California, Nevada and Massachusetts vote to legalize recreational marijuana
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/state-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare>
More than 20% of Americans will now live in states where marijuana use for 
adults is legal, up from 5% before election day.

Colorado and Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/07/marijuana-legalisation-colorado-washington-yes>
 became thefirst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/18/colorado-marijuana-law-report-adult-usage-increases-not-kids>
 states tolegalize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/08/marijuana-recreational-washington-state-how-much>
 recreational marijuana in 2012, paving the way forOregon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/21/oregon-cannabis-legalization-medical-marijuana-dying-market>
 andAlaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/28/charlo-greene-alaska-cannabis-club-reporter-marijuana>
 to follow suit.

Minimum wage 

Arizona, Colorado, Maine and Washington voted to raise the minimum wage to at 
least $12 an hour by 2020. South Dakota’s attempt to pass an initiative that 
would have lowered the minimum wage for non-tipped employees younger than 18 
was widely rejected.

Gun control measures

A handful of states elected to impose stricter controls on guns and ammunition 
purchases. In California, voters approved a multi-pronged referendum that 
requires background checks for ammunition purchases and bans on ammunition 
magazines that hold more than 10 rounds, adds penalties for not reporting lost 
or stolen guns, and enables law enforcement to confiscate guns from convicted 
felons.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fus-election-ballot-measures-marijuana-gun-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dffbe6f7a6157c9cfd6b5f3e685c2e04c8e46a1%2F0_14_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20election%20bright%20spots%3A%20gun%20control%2C%20recreational%20marijuana%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fus-election-ballot-measures-marijuana-gun-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20election%20bright%20spots%3A%20gun%20control%2C%20recreational%20marijuana%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fus-election-ballot-measures-marijuana-gun-control%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dffbe6f7a6157c9cfd6b5f3e685c2e04c8e46a1%2F0_14_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A California woman holds a sign advocating for gun control. Photograph: Elijah 
Nouvelage/Reuters 
In Nevada, voters approved universal background checks on private gun sales, 
with the exception of sales between family members. A similar proposal was 
narrowly rejected in Maine.

In Washington state, voters backed a measure that allows judges to keep 
individuals they consider a threat, such as domestic abusers, from possessing 
weapons.

Gender barriers broken 

While women failed to shatter the highest gender barrier in US politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-politics>, women of color did achieve 
major milestones in Congress. Nevada elected the nation’s first Latina senator 
when it voted for Catherine Cortez Masto. The granddaughter of a Mexican 
immigrant, Masto is also the first female senator the state has sent to 
Washington.


Democrats fail to retake control of the Senate after big losses on election 
night
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/us-congress-election-results-senate-house-democrats-republicans>
California elected attorney general Kamala Harris, the daughter of an Indian 
mother and a Jamaican-American father, to the Senate in a race that would have 
broken barriers regardless of the outcome. Harris’s opponent, Loretta Sanchez, 
would have been the first Latina.

Harris is the first biracial woman and first Indian-American to serve in the 
Senate. The first and only black female senator was Carol Moseley Braun, whose 
term ended in 1999.

Congresswoman Tammy Duckworth, a Democrat from Illinois born to a Thai mother 
of Chinese descent, will be the first woman in the Senate to have served in 
combat. She lost both of her legs in a grenade attack during the Iraq war.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fus-election-ballot-measures-marijuana-gun-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd9b5fc6d84c7ea2571bef6da360da1a51576173%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20election%20bright%20spots%3A%20gun%20control%2C%20recreational%20marijuana%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fus-election-ballot-measures-marijuana-gun-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20election%20bright%20spots%3A%20gun%20control%2C%20recreational%20marijuana%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fus-election-ballot-measures-marijuana-gun-control%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd9b5fc6d84c7ea2571bef6da360da1a51576173%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Tammy Duckworth will be the first woman in the Senate to have served in 
combat. Photograph: Seth Perlman/AP 
Florida sent Stephanie Murphy to the House of Representatives, making her the 
first Vietnamese-American woman ever elected to Congress.

In Minnesota, voters elected Ilhan Omar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/ilhan-omar-first-somali-american-legislator-minnesota>
, the first Somali American legislator, who came to the US as a refugee almost 
20 years ago.

Sheriff Joe Arpaio booted – North Carolina’s bathroom ban governor to follow?

After 24 controversial years, Arizona voted out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/joe-arpaio-arizona-republican-sheriff-loses-re-election>
 the self-styled toughest sheriff in America, Joe Arpaio.

A surge in Latino voter turnout helped thwart Arpaio’s attempt to win a 
seventh term as sheriff of Maricopa County. Arpaio gained national prominence 
for his hardline stance on immigration and a mandate that prisoners wear pink 
underwear and live in tents in Arizona’s unforgiving desert.

A week before election day, federal prosecutors charged the lawman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/sheriff-joe-arpaio-charged-contempt-court-arizona>
 with criminal contempt of court for allegedly violating an order by continuing 
to arrest immigrants with no evidence they had broken any state law. That came 
on top of a 2007 civil lawsuit that found against him in a claim that he 
racially profiled Latinos.

In North Carolina, Republican governor Pat McCrory inspired a wave of 
revulsion and a damaging boycott of the state by high-profile businesses and 
entertainment stars with hisanti-transgender “bathroom bill” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/14/north-carolina-bathroom-bill-hb2-transgender-rights>
. He appears to have lost his re-election, with Democratic rival Rory Cooper 
leading by less than than 5,000 votes.

Cooper claimed victory, but McCrory insisted “the election is not over” and 
will not concede until counties finish an audit of votes by 18 November.
 