
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> was forced to 
say that Mexico would pay for his planned border wall “later” after Republican 
officials indicated Congress and US taxpayers would first foot the bill.

The president-elect responded after reports citing Republican officials said 
Congress might make funds available for the wall, saying this would just be for 
the “sake of speed”. Headded in a tweet 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817329823374831617> that the 
“dishonest media” had failed to report that “any money spent on building the 
Great Wall” would be reimbursed.

The plan for taxpayers to advance the cash could be seen as a broken promise 
by some of Trump’s most ardent supporters.

The wall, and promises to make Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> pay, have repeatedly been criticized 
as unrealistic and damaging to relations.

“Build the wall” was not only a key campaign promise from the Republican, but 
also a popular chant at his rallies. “Who’s going to pay for the wall?” Trump 
askedcrowds during his campaign <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vJwi9aPsfRQ>, 
who would reply: “Mexico!”

The potential effectiveness of the wall is also questionable, as many 
smuggling routes areunderground 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/02/us/us-mexico-border-wall-tunnels.html>. 
Though Trump promised a reinforced concrete structure during his campaign, 
those promises have evolved. Following his election, Trump said he might be 
open tofencing 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/donald-trump-says-border-wall-may-be-part-fence-hints-n683191>
 along some parts of the wall. Trump has also said a “big, beautiful door” 
would be constructed in the wall for legal migrants.

Exactly how to force Mexico to pay for the wall has also eluded the 
president-elect.Mexican opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/03/mexico-responds-donald-trump-border-wall>
 to paying for the wall has been stalwart. During his campaign, Trump suggested 
he would cut off transfers of money to Mexican families from migrants in the 
US, who send more than$24bn in remittances home each year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/05/donald-trump-mexico-border-wall-plan-remittances>
.


The idea to ask Mexico to pay Americans back for the wall is not new. Trump 
first floated the idea inOctober 
<http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/1610/22/cnr.04.html>, according to CNN. 
But Republicans provided new details of the plan on Thursday.

Mexican president contradicts Trump's account of border wall discussion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/31/donald-trump-mexico-meeting-president-pena-nieto-immigration>
Republican congressman Luke Messer of Indiana told reporters 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2017/01/house-gop-trump-border-wall-233237> that 
Trump could fund a 2006 border security law as part of a large spending bill to 
avoid Democratic opposition. The Secure Fence Act, signed by former president 
George W Bush, called for 850 miles of fencing to be built along the US-Mexico 
border.

The reports about Congress paying pointed at using the appropriations bill 
process. Funding the wall through a large appropriations bill could force 
Democrats to choose between continuing to pay for government operations or 
stopping the wall. A failure to fund government operations could lead to a 
shutdown. In the past, such shutdowns have been deeply unpopular with the 
public.

Though Trump estimated the cost of the wall at about $8bn, previous government 
estimates of the cost of fencing off the border have varied widely. In one 2009 
report by the Congressional Research Service, the Army Corps of Engineers 
estimated the 25-year cost of each mile of border fence to be up to $70m.

Also on Friday, Trump taunted Arnold Schwarzenegger on Twitter for his ratings 
in a spin-off of Trump’s old reality television show, Celebrity Apprentice. In 
an early Friday tweet, Trump referred to himself as a “ratings machine” and 
said Schwarzenegger – who did not support his run for president – “got 
‘swamped’” by comparison.

Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Wow, the ratings are in and Arnold Schwarzenegger got "swamped" (or destroyed) 
by comparison to the ratings machine, DJT. So much for....
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817348644647108609> January 6, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817348644647108609> Donald J. 
Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
being a movie star-and that was season 1 compared to season 14. Now compare 
him to my season 1. But who cares, he supported Kasich & Hillary
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817350726800306177> January 6, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817350726800306177> Arnold 
(@Schwarzenegger) 
There's nothing more important than the people's work, @realDonaldTrump 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump>. https://t.co/fYtAfFPMKF 
<https://t.co/fYtAfFPMKF>
 <https://twitter.com/Schwarzenegger/status/817386048401469440> January 6, 2017
 <https://twitter.com/Schwarzenegger/status/817386048401469440>  