
The most expensive destroyer ever built for the US navy has suffered an 
engineering problem in thePanama <https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama> 
Canal and had to be towed to port.


 US Third Fleet spokesman commander Ryan Perry said a vice-admiral directed the
USS Zumwalt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/may/16/the-4bn-destroyer-uss-zumwalt-video-profile>
 to remain at ex-Naval Station Rodman in Panama to address the issues, which 
arose on Monday.

US navy to take charge of largest destroyer – the $4bn USS Zumwalt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/16/us-navy-to-take-charge-of-largest-destroyer-the-4bn-uss-zumwalt>
The ship was built at Bath Iron Works in Maine and was on its way to San Diego.

“The schedule for the ship will remain flexible to enable testing and 
evaluation in order to ensure the ship’s safe transit to her new home port in 
San Diego,” Perry said in a statement.

USNI News, a publication of the US Naval Institute, reported on its website 
that the ship was in the canal when it lost propulsion.

Crew also saw water getting into bearings that connect electrical motors to 
driveshafts, the website reported.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fthe-4bn-destroyer-uss-zumwalt-video-profile&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20%244bn%20destroyer%20USS%20Zumwalt%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fthe-4bn-destroyer-uss-zumwalt-video-profile>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20%244bn%20destroyer%20USS%20Zumwalt%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fthe-4bn-destroyer-uss-zumwalt-video-profile&media=>
The $4bn destroyer USS Zumwalt – video profile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/may/16/the-4bn-destroyer-uss-zumwalt-video-profile>
USNI News reported that the Zumwalt suffered minor cosmetic damage. The ship 
had been scheduled to arrive in San Diego by the end of the year to start the 
activation of its weapon system, the website reported.

The 610ft warship has an angular shape to minimise its radar signature and is 
regarded as the most technologically sophisticated destroyers ever built for 
the navy. One of its signature features is a new gun system that fires 
rocket-powered shells up to 63 nautical miles.

The Zumwalt cost more than $4.4bn and was commissioned in October in Maryland. 
It also suffered a leak in its propulsion system before it was commissioned. 
The leak required the ship to remain at Naval Station Norfolk in Virginia 
longer than expected for repairs.

The ship is part of the first new class of warship built at Bath Iron Works in 
more than 25 years.

The second Zumwalt-class destroyer, which also cost more than $4.4bn, was 
christened in a June ceremony during which US Rep Bruce Poliquin called it an 
“extraordinary machine of peace and security”. The third ship is expected to 
cost a bit less than $3.7bn.

A spokeswoman for Bath Iron Works said the shipyard was not planning to 
comment on the breakdown and referred questions to the navy.

 