
US stocks notched fresh records, capping a week when the Dow Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dowjones> Industrial Average breached 
19,000 for the first time, as investors continued to bet on a pickup in 
economic growth and rising corporate profits.

 The gains were modest but broad, with utilities rising the most, up 1.4%.

US market indexes have been rising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/uncertainty-over-trump-policies-rattles-markets>
 since the presidential election and this is the third consecutive week of 
gains as investors anticipate reduced corporate taxation and regulation, as 
well as greater infrastructure spending, under a Trump administration.

Why has Dow Jones hit a record high following Trump's victory?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/why-has-dow-jones-hit-a-record-high-following-trumps-victory>
Since the election on 8 November, the Dow industrials are up 4.5%. If the 
markets hold, they will be on track to end the year with 9.9% gains – their 
best since 2013.

Analysts say the markets are rising on recent signs of a pickup in growth in 
several other major economies around the world.

“We haven’t had a synchronized bounce in growth across the globe ever in this 
recovery,” Jim Paulsen, chief investment strategist for Wells Capital 
Management, told the Associated Press.

“This is the first time you’re getting all the economic boats going north at 
the same time, and I think stock markets are reflecting that.”

The stock market is benefitting from an exodus of cash from government bonds 
as well as real estate and gold even as investors anticipate interest rates 
rises next month.

“The surprising thing after the election was not that we rallied to this 
level, it was the speed at which we got there,” Scott Wren, senior global 
equity strategist at Wells Fargo Investment Institute told theWall Street 
Journal. 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/european-stocks-hold-steady-at-one-month-highs-1480062631>

Wren added that “there is a lot of enthusiasm out there” for Trump’s policies, 
including spending on infrastructure, relaxing regulation for big banks and 
cutting taxes.

Stock trading closed at 1pm eastern time. Trading was relatively quiet as 
investors returned from the Thanksgiving holiday.

 