
It was definitely no disgrace. In the minutes after the US went down 4-0 to 
Argentina on Tuesday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/argentina-usa-copa-america-semi-final-score>
, everyone – Jürgen Klinsmann, Geoff Cameron, Kyle Beckerman – was keen to make 
the same point: there was no shame in the loss. After all, this was Lionel 
Messi! And Argentina! And besides, the US had come so far! It’s true, of 
course: to lose in the Copa América semi-finals to Lionel Messi’s Argentina, a 
team that plays on atomic time when everyone else is left checking the stovetop 
clock, is no disgrace. But it depends on the manner of the loss – and this loss 
was, on anyone’s reading, a bum note on which to conclude an otherwise 
successful tournament for the US men’s national team.

Around 30% possession and zero shots on target 
<http://www.espnfc.com/matchstats?gameId=444699> (or off target, for that 
matter) told the story of a night on which the US players stumbled around the 
pitch with the open-mouthed adoration of fans waiting for an autograph. Sure, 
the US had lost three certain starters duringthe quarter-final triumph over 
Ecuador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/usa-ecuador-copa-america-2016-game-report-soccer>
, but it was the team’s established – and emerging – stars who disappointed the 
most on Tuesday. Michael Bradley was as hard to press in defense as he was 
quick to give the ball away in attack; Clint Dempsey, starved of service and 
unable to free himself of the suffocating attentions of Javier Mascherano, saw 
the fresh reserves of energy he’d discovered in the last few matches desert 
him; and John Brooks endured his worst outing of the tournament. Aftera 
performance for the ages against Paraguay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/12/john-brooks-brad-guzan-usa-copa-america-paraguay>
, Brooks seemed – like many of his team-mates – at once distracted, subdued, 
and utterly overawed by the company he had been asked to keep for 90 minutes; 
the young defender lost Ezequiel Lavezzi for Argentina’s first goal, and from 
that moment the US were never really in the contest. It was like watching a 
wedding band joined onstage by The Rolling Stones.

Argentina hammer four past outclassed USA to reach Copa América final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/argentina-usa-copa-america-semi-final-score>
Could we have expected more? After the progress of the last three games, in 
which the US, with a settled line-up, at last approached the mobile, attacking, 
aesthetic heights Klinsmann had long ago promised would be his gift to American 
football, this felt like a firm step back in the wrong direction. But let’s be 
fair: a semi-final appearance is well above par for the US at this Copa. Across 
most metrics – results and new talent unearthed especially, but also in the 
reboot that has been given to domestic football – the tournament has been a 
success for the home team.

And a word, if you please, for Tuesday night’s opponents. The US allowed 
themselves to be dazzled, yes – but Argentina, to their credit, did not pass up 
the invitation to dazzle. Mascherano, unpressured and unimpressed as always, 
steered proceedings from the base of the midfield, but it was the forward 
lights who shone most brightly: Lavezzi showed why Europe’s scouts are so keen 
to scour the Chinese Super League for promising young has-beens, while Gonzalo 
Higuaín’s Copa mini-slump can now be definitively declared over.

Colombia v Chile: a compelling clash of theories as Argentinian coaches do 
battle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/colombia-chile-copa-america-argentina>
Meanwhile Messi was Messi, scampering across the field with wriggling, elusive 
intensity. As he works the tight spaces and finds the pockets, head pushed 
forward and shoulders rolled in a stunning rebuke to the contemporary 
dictatorship of good posture, Messi resembles less an elite athlete than a 
surprisingly mobile and tattooed mole; it’s the casual earnestness of his 
mastery – his complete lack of ego or bombast on the field – that sets him 
apart from his fellow greats, present or past. In 2014 Messi played through an 
injury to drag Argentina to the final of the World Cup, but he seemed somehow 
burdened by expectations; at this Copa, by contrast, he’s played with a freedom 
not seen since his 2014-15 Barcelona bounce. His goal and assists last night 
were executed with a shrugged, no-look nonchalance that spells trouble for 
whichever side joins Argentina in the final. Sunday’s showpiece will be a 
fitting way to end a tournament that has been, on balance, far more 
entertaining than the more attritional, late-scoring affairtaking place on the 
other side of the Atlantic Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fusa-argentina-copa-america-jurgen-klinsmann%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7aebfc5c93edc51fee0037b98ad9d601c09bef4%2F0_89_4488_2693%2F4488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=USA%20were%20dazzled%20by%20Argentina%20-%20even%20if%20they%20were%20dazzled%20by%20the%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fusa-argentina-copa-america-jurgen-klinsmann%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=USA%20were%20dazzled%20by%20Argentina%20-%20even%20if%20they%20were%20dazzled%20by%20the%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fusa-argentina-copa-america-jurgen-klinsmann%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7aebfc5c93edc51fee0037b98ad9d601c09bef4%2F0_89_4488_2693%2F4488.jpg>
 USA fans can be happy about a tournament that saw good performances from 
players such as John Brooks and Bobby Wood. Photograph: Wilf 
Thorne/ISI/REX/Shutterstock 
For the US, the news is not all bad. In years to come this tournament will 
perhaps be remembered chiefly for the emergence of a new generation of talent 
to carry the USMNTT (US men’s national team torch) once Dempsey, Jermaine Jones 
and Bradley retire. The TV commentators throughout the Copa have thrown out all 
manner of ludicrous comparisons to make sense of how much we can expect of 
these players: Brad Friedel compared John Brooks to Eddie Pope at one point, 
while Bobby Wood drew comparisons to Brian McBride. On the evidence of the 
Copa, these analogies drastically undersell the ability of the US’s new stars. 
Reports out of England suggest several Premier League clubs are already sizing 
up the quality of Hertha Berlin’s fax machine ahead of a post-Copa swoop for 
Brooks – and with good reason, because he’s emerged in the last three weeks as 
that rare bird, a modern, mobile defender whose greatest strength might just be 
his ability to defend.

Wood has had a no less memorable tournament. The young Hamburg-bound striker 
was out of the game for two years – and even considered quitting – after 
sustaining a meniscus injury in 2011. His goal against Germany last year 
announced his re-emergence as a national talent, but it’s taken this Copa – and 
the similarly spectacular turn-and-shoot of his strike against Costa Rica – to 
confirm he’s the real deal. Arsène Wenger once said, “At 23, it’s time to 
play.” At 23, Bobby Shou Wood is playing – and he’s doing everything in his 
power to live up to the theatrical promise of his middle name. Add Gyasi 
Zardes, who was one of the few US players to show any enterprise in attack last 
night (one cross on the 41st minute in particular caught the eye), Christian 
Pulisic and Darlington Nagbe, and the US now has a firm core of players around 
which it can plan for the next four to six years.

And what, finally, of Jürgen? This tournament has not taught us anything we 
didn’t already know about US soccer’s pajama-top wearer-in-chief. We knew going 
into the Copa that Klinsmann is tactically naive but good at getting players 
motivated for the physical and emotional sprint that is tournament football; 
and so it has come to pass. Let’s not deny the man his due: he inspired the 
team to get through their group after a tough start, and the emergence of 
Brooks and Wood has been, at least in part, a Klinsmann production. But 
everything else about the German’s performance throughout the tournament – the 
way he’s set his teams up, the instructions he’s given his players, his at 
times bizarre management of substitutions – has confirmed the picture of 
Klinsmann as a well-meaning, exuberant lightweight. “We need to stay physical,” 
Klinsmann told his team at half-time last night, according to the Fox Sports 
sideline boffins. “We need to keep going at them.”

Klinsmann’s guileless, everyone-gets-a-prize, “go for it!” approach to 
tactical thought presented no problem as long as the US was swatting aside 
fellow middle powers such as Ecuador. But against Messi and co, the German was 
comprehensively found out. For a start, his selections backfired: Chris 
Wondolowski and Kyle Beckerman were consistently overrun. Starting Wondolowski 
up front was the kind of bold move that, had it paid off, would have seen 
Klinsmann hailed as a tactical seer. It didn’t pay off, on any measure. 
Klinsmann also left his substitutions late, bringing Pulisic and Nagbe on once 
the game was already well out of the US’s grasp.

The German’s comments after the match did nothing to dispel the sense that as 
a football thinker, he’s no more astute than a weekend coach. Argentina, 
Klinsmann said, were simply far too good. This is true, of course, but the 
words were conveyed in a way that suggested Klinsmann absolved himself of all 
responsibility for what was, no matter the quality of the other side, a 
thoroughly wretched display. The great coaches believe they can beat any team, 
no matter how superior: Klinsmann’s defeatism on Tuesday night carried the 
slightly condescending implication that the US cannot hope to compete against 
superpowers such as Argentina. To be clear, he didn’t say any of this directly 
– but it was there in the far-away, slightly dreamy look he took on when 
discussing the victors, just as it’s been there in the nostalgic way he’s 
evoked Europe’s superior footballing culture throughout his tenure as US 
manager.

The US have played enterprising football over the last couple of weeks, and 
Klinsmann deserves credit for some of that. But the team still depends on 
individual virtuosity, collective pluck and sheer enthusiasm to carry it 
through the major tournaments. That might work occasionally, but it’s not a 
plan for long-term success. Making it to the semi-final might constitute a 
meaty rebuke to Klinsmann’s many critics, but nothing about the way the team 
performed in this Copa suggests a platform for durable progress has been put in 
place. Signs of intermittent progress bookended by a pair of comfortable 
failures: such is the performance review of the US at this Copa. After five 
years of Klinsiball, five years of stasis, five years of hoping for the best 
against all the evidence, five years of the US being managed by a sideline 
dad-in-chief, that’s surely not good enough.
 