
Well, that escalated quickly. The preamble to last year’s USA v Mexico clash, 
for the right to represent Concacaf at the Confederations Cup, seems impossibly 
quaint at this moment. To pick out a couple of random phenomena,Fox Soccer were 
forced on the defensive 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/sporting-scene/donald-trump-makes-mexican-soccer-great-again>
 for a video montage that seemed to make light of Donald Trump’s inflammatory 
rhetoric, while on the Mexican side it was possible to walk through the Rose 
Bowl parking lots before the game, and see Trump piñatas dotted among the 
portable BBQs. But it still all seemed like so much carnival posturing on both 
sides.

The symbolism just went up a notch after Trump’s presidential election victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/will-trump-destroy-america>. 
The soccer rivalry ischarged enough in the best of times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/usa-mexico-world-cup-qualifier-tensions-donald-trump>
, but under the circumstances there’s now an additional level to add into the 
history of Dos a Cero. So while we can make some guesses at the technical side 
of what’s coming up, it’s hard to say how the cultural side of the occasion 
will play out, when emotions are still raw. There is of course the possibility 
thatlove ends up beating hate 
<https://twitter.com/lmechegaray/status/796339225683697664> on away goals ...

Anyway, to the game. And while there’s no such thing as just a game, however 
much anyone might want to wish such an abstract concept into being, the odds 
are that a game of football is about to break out on Friday. So let’s talk 
about that...

Dos a Cero

... actually, before we get to the game, let’s think for a moment about the 
streak of 2-0 US wins over Mexico in Columbus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/us-soccer-mapfre-stadium-columbus-ohio-azteca-mls>
 — a streak which now goes back four World Cup cycles. It’s been a remarkable 
run, and has become a beloved part of US fan folklore, but it’s tempting to 
wonder if Dos a Cero has become a distraction as much as an inspiration for the 
US going into this game. There’s work to be done and the context of this 
particular game, let alone the opponents, will be difficult enough without 
either set of players losing sight of each phase of the game.

America's Azteca: how a small Columbus stadium became a fortress for US soccer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/us-soccer-mapfre-stadium-columbus-ohio-azteca-mls>
And the context, aside from all the geo-political distraction, is awkward. The 
US roster has shifted emphasis towards drawing on MLS players in recent years, 
especially since the great reverse-migration that started in 2014. And those 
players have either just finished their domestic seasons or – as in the cases 
of Jermaine Jones, Tim Howard, Michael Bradley and Jozy Altidore – they are 
locked into playoff campaigns. Then there are the likes of Sacha Kljestan and 
Alan Gordon, whose domestic seasons ended in disappointment last weekend. The 
international break is coming at an awkward time for some key players.

The timing of the Mexico and Costa Rica games (which on paper represent the 
second and third hardest games the US will play in qualifying, after Mexico 
away) is awkward too. The Hex is starting some 20 months out from the World 
Cup, this time round. In the lastWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> cycle, this final 
qualifying round did not start until February 2013, the year before the 
tournament, and while the US did not get off to an ideal start (an opening loss 
in Honduras was the prelude to the coach being undermined to the press by 
anonymous playing staff, and it took a chance goal in a Colorado blizzard to 
wobble the campaign back on track), they were not in the generally fatigued, 
demob state that marks the final games of any calendar year. These games have 
the potential to set the tone for their campaign, before the team are truly 
prepared for the campaign to start.

USA

Not a lot of surprises in the roster picked to play Mexico 
<http://www.ussoccer.com/stories/2016/11/08/13/09/161108-alan-gordon-replaces-jordan-morris>
 – the convincing claims made by the likes of Christian Pulisic and Kljestan in 
the most recent round of games was always likely to see both men retained as 
intriguing elements of a rapidly transforming US midfield. Kljestan picked up a 
nasty knock in the MLS playoffs last week, but you’d have to imagine Klinsmann 
might want him to see minutes, especially against a Mexican team that has 
struggled for coherence at times and could be vulnerable to Kljestan’s ability 
to drift between the lines.

Of the players on the periphery, keep an eye on whether Klinsmann gets an 
opportunity over these two games totie Cameron Carter-Vickers of Tottenham to 
the US 
<https://sports.vice.com/en_us/article/the-rise-of-american-soccer-talent-cameron-carter-vickers>
 by giving him a substitute appearance. Other emerging players such as Caleb 
Stanko andLynden Gooch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/21/lynden-gooch-sunderland-premier-league>
 are also on the roster, but just how big a part they play is questionable. 
Still, they might feel good about becoming more fixed in the team as the US 
gets deeper into next year and the endgame of qualification.

USA-Mexico World Cup qualifier given added tension in wake of Trump victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/usa-mexico-world-cup-qualifier-tensions-donald-trump>
If anything, the major surprise might be the inclusion of Alan Gordon as a 
late replacement for the injured Jordan Morris. Gordon had a decent climax to 
the season with LA Galaxy, and kept Robbie Keane out of the starting line-up 
upon the latter’s return from injury, but he hardly represents the future. 
Still, Gordon offers a physical presence to troubleMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mexico> on set pieces. The US have 
already talked about Mexico’s vulnerability in the realtive cold of Columbus, 
and the looming presence of Gordon might just add insult to injury during 
testing periods of the game.

Still, for large portions of the game the presence of Gordon, not to mention 
Aron Johannsson, in the roster ought to be moot. Jozy Altidore is playing very 
well for Toronto right now – scoring a kind ofbudget-Van-Basten goal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NPQB8erg2iE> in the rout of NYC FC last 
weekend, and generally looking like the all-round striker who promised so much 
for the US going into the last World Cup, before his injury changed the entire 
team set-up. How Altidore leads the line and how much Mexico commits to 
managing that in lieu of pushing forward themselves will be a key to the game.

Mexico

The good news for Juan Carlos Osorio is that the team has lost only once since 
he took over as manager almost a year ago, though what a loss: a 7-0 battering 
by a rampant Chile team at the Copa America Centenario this summer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fusa-mexico-world-cup-qualifier-team-news%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F538f96f9da0fc74ff57e1fed1d75560d33cf2bf6%2F0_21_3333_2000%2F3333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=USA%20v%20Mexico%20will%20be%20an%20incredibly%20awkward%20encounter%2C%20on%20and%20off%20the%20field&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fusa-mexico-world-cup-qualifier-team-news%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=USA%20v%20Mexico%20will%20be%20an%20incredibly%20awkward%20encounter%2C%20on%20and%20off%20the%20field&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fusa-mexico-world-cup-qualifier-team-news%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F538f96f9da0fc74ff57e1fed1d75560d33cf2bf6%2F0_21_3333_2000%2F3333.jpg>
 Mexico’s Jesus Manuel Corona (C) celebrates his goal against Venezuela in this 
summer’s Copa Centenario. Photograph: Nelson Almeida/AFP/Getty Images 
Osorio has so far failed to ignite much enthusiasm among the Mexican fans, and 
despite the generally promising results it’s hard to point to any particular 
performance, or even phase of play, where the project looks coherent.

That’s always been the criticism of Osorio sides. He is detail-oriented and 
loves the minutiae of analyzing players (when he was coach for the New York Red 
Bulls his perpetual notebook scribbling and subsequent bizarre line-up 
tinkering was the subject of plenty of satire), but the suspicion has always 
been that when it comes to putting the parts of the disassembled engine back 
together, he doesn’t always get it to run.

And Osorio isn’t helped by the fact that the man he replaced, Miguel Herrera, 
is a man-motivator who has gone on to take Tijuana to the top of the Liga MX 
standings. Herrera infamously followed uphis cult sideline appearances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2014/jun/29/world-cup-2014-miguel-herrera-mexico>
 at the World Cup by going full self-caricature at last year’s Gold Cup – 
winning the trophy,then punching a reporter at Philadelphia airport 
<http://www.si.com/planet-futbol/2015/07/27/miguel-herrera-punches-reporter-mexico-jamaica-gold-cup>
 on the way home and being sacked.

Osorio could not be a greater contrast, but instead of being seen as a safe 
pair of fans he’s still living in the shadow of Herrera, who’s still regarded 
as the favorite to take his old job back if Osorio stumbles.

Still, for all the motivational deficit, Osorio’s analytical ability is not 
really in question – and there aren’t many arguments with the roster he has put 
together, nor the methodical nature of his preparations. If previous Mexican 
managers viewed dismissing US domestic soccer as a matter of pride, Osorio has 
had cautious appreciation for MLS and has extensively scouted the opponents who 
play in the league.

As for his own team, Osorio, like US counterpart Klinsmann, is looking to put 
a premium on players with experience in Europe. He has singled out Marco Fabian 
(Eintracht Frankfurt), Diego Reyes (Espanyol) and Carlos Salcedo (Fiorentina) 
as bellwethers of a new era of Mexican players plying their trade in the big 
European leagues. Of course, everyone knows about Javier “Chicharito” Hernandez 
in this regard, or Gio dos Santos for that matter (even if the latter is now 
back in North America with LA Galaxy), but it’s the more general trend of 
what’s happening with young players that interests Osorio. Fabian, Reyes and 
Salcedo are all in the roster to face the US, by the way.

And of that trio, Reyes is perhaps one of the keys to Osorio’s approach. The 
coach has put a premium on the team becoming more physical and believes it’s 
important that the team have at least six good headers of the ball. And Reyes’ 
position of defensive midfielder is one area in particular where Osorio has 
tried to put emphasis.

The truism about games between Mexico and the US is that Mexico will have more 
possession and will try to push forward, overloading wide positions, while the 
US will have the advantage on set pieces and look to break swiftly on the 
counter. Some of that may hold true on Friday night. But just as importantly, 
keep an eye out for a more cautious Mexico, with more defensive inclinations 
than we’re used to.
Whether that helps Osorio in the longer term, given the cultural resistance he 
faces among the media and fans, is another matter. But for Friday at least, 
he’ll be sticking to his principles.
 