
Winners

Jürgen Klinsmann

After the first Colombia loss and before the Costa Rica game, Jürgen Klinsmann 
was sent the clearest message yet by Sunil Gulati that he needed results to 
keep his job. After five years during which Gulati and Klinsmann seemed joined 
at the hip, this was the first indication yet that the head of US Soccer might 
be prepared to sacrifice his coach and head of technical development before the 
World Cup qualifying campaign.

Why Fox Sports, not ESPN, is winning America's summer of soccer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/25/espn-fox-sports-soccer-tv-coverage>
We know what happened next – a resounding victory over Costa Rica not only 
changed the mood around the team, but swept the US to the top of the group 
after the Paraguay game, once goal differential was factored in. And when 
Ecuador were beaten in the quarter finals and the team had achieved its 
pre-tournament benchmark of the semi-finals it was clear that, even with the 
4-0 Argentina humiliation, Klinsmann’s job was safe for now.

And for now, read till 2018. Barring a World Cup qualifying collapse, this 
moment is realistically the last one where the two-term Klinsmann reign could 
be ended abruptly before Russia. After the relative personnel stability of this 
tournament, he may go back to infuriating tinkering in the games to come. The 
same complaints that have dogged him since the 2014 World Cup may gather 
momentum again. But having reached the semi-finals of this tournament, whatever 
the result there, Klinsmann can look to the end of his contract knowing those 
complaints will be moot.

Clint Dempsey

Deuce is still here. There’s been a sense, since the World Cup, that Clint 
Dempsey has been on the wane. Some of that perception was perhaps based less on 
empirical observation of Dempsey’s performances and more on a back-of-the-mind 
projection of where he would be by the time Russia 2018 came round.

And there are valid concerns about what will happen when the familiar Dempsey 
hunger and harrying can not be sustained by aging legs, and what the US will do 
then. But as Dempsey has reminded us at this tournament, that moment has not 
yet come. And with the tournament being given a competitive edge it perhaps 
might not have occupied on Jürgen Klinsmann’s intended developmental arc 
towards Russia, what with the coach’s job apparently being on the line for the 
first time since he took it, it’s telling that he didn’t consider making a 
Donovan-like example of Demspey. He’s still needed.

There’s a caveat to thi,s of course. Playing Dempsey as a second striker 
against Argentina resulted in the Seattle player watching most of the game as a 
spectator to Argentina possession building around him. There’s still something 
of a dilemma for Klinsmann about when to trade in the points Dempsey can still 
earn him in Concacaf qualifiers for the need to build for the future and a 
Russian campaign that may be a World Cup too far for the player. But with no 
credible alternatives, Dempsey’s put down a marker for the forseeable future.


John Brooks

A complaint about the Klinsmann regime has been the near constant defensive 
rotation. The hunt for a viable left-back, in particular, has reached almost 
farcical proportions, but the coach’s critics have been just as vocal about 
Klinsmann’s reluctance to select and stick with a center-back partnership 
worthy of the name.

But this tournament has seen John Brooks and Geoff Cameron not only start each 
game, barring the third-place playoff, but also provide a defensive solidity 
that’s made them look like the answer for the forseeable future. Cameron did 
have one moment to forget in the opening game against Colombia, but Brooks, for 
the most part, has not put a foot wrong – even if the Argentina game revealed 
the step of anticipation he still has to find in his game at the very highest 
level.

When you look at the expectations around the young players who unexpectedly 
grabbed goals for theUSA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/usfootballteam> 
in the last World Cup, you might have thought Julian Green was the one most 
likely to blossom in the months and years that followed, while it was unclear 
what the puppyish enthusiasm of John Brooks would turn into.

Well, the answer is that Brooks is a much-improved Bundesliga regular, who 
doesn’t look out of place in international tournaments. Green, meanwhile, has 
slipped back to obscurity — long since relinquishing his “next big thing” crown 
(current incumbent — Christian Pulisic).

There may be several players on the Copa roster with big question marks 
against their names for World Cup qualifying, let alone the tournament, but 
something will have to go seriously wrong for Brooks not to be starting in the 
finals should the USA get there.

Losers

Brad Guzan/Tim Howard

The two US goalkeepers have been locked in a mutual transitional moment in the 
lead up to this tournament. Howard might have known his international 
sabbatical would have put him out of starting contention, even before Klinsmann 
confirmed Guzan would be his tournament starter, but with he and Guzan 
alternating games in the lead up to the tournament, Howard perhaps had hopes 
that he might be able to make his summer move to Colorado at rather more of a 
visible high point than sitting on the bench for the whole Copa. Or at least 
the whole meaningful portion of the Copa.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fusas-copa-america-tournament-winners-and-losers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23c08b1887b0274107e7d762d38c9e66fe0bcce0%2F0_153_2888_1732%2F2888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=USA%20at%20the%20Copa%20Am%C3%A9rica%3A%20the%20team's%20winners%20and%20losers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fusas-copa-america-tournament-winners-and-losers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=USA%20at%20the%20Copa%20Am%C3%A9rica%3A%20the%20team%27s%20winners%20and%20losers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fusas-copa-america-tournament-winners-and-losers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23c08b1887b0274107e7d762d38c9e66fe0bcce0%2F0_153_2888_1732%2F2888.jpg>
 Brad Guzan is beaten by Gonzalo Higuain. Photograph: Omar Torres/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Guzan on the other hand, might feel like he should be careful what he wishes 
for. He was solid without being spectacular throughout the tournament, but 
never looked like there was a Howard-versus-Belgium performance in him to 
solidify his claim as undisputed number one. He competently saved some shots 
and competently picked some out of the net.

Against Argentina, Guzan had what might be a tournament-defining moment when 
he stood rooted in no man’s land as Lavezzi cushioned the simplest of headers 
over him in the 3rd minute. He could do nothing about Messi’s sublime free kick 
into the one square foot of space that would have led to a goal on that side of 
the net, but perhaps unfairly, it solidified an impression of Guzan in this 
tournament as a Washington General among Harlem Globetrotters. By the time he 
made a decisive save against Messi in the 84th minute, the score was 3-0.

Whether William Yarbrough is ready to grow into the part in time for Russia is 
a vexing question, if not a total reach, but among the two senior US keepers 
coming into this tournament there’s been less a sense of keen competition 
driving them both on, and more a sense of mutually assured destruction as time 
passes both by.

Michael Bradley

He’s neat, hard-working, and when the US are on song he’s the metronome of the 
team. Against Costa Rica Michael Bradley looked as if he was having a 
tournament defining performance in the more familiar defensive midfield role 
that Klinsmann has a habit of pushing him out of.

Unfortunately, he picked the highest profile game of the tournament to have 
one of his worst games in a US shirt. Bradley’s first touch and passing was off 
all night, while he had a habit of arriving on the scenes of Argentina’s pass 
and move just in time to watch the ball zipping past him to another blue shirt.

You can say that Bradley receives more unfair scrutiny than other US players, 
but it’s scrutiny he invited with his symbolic big money move from Roma to 
Toronto, amid his international coach’s suggestion that that could only harm 
the standard of his game.

Nobody doubts Bradley’s enduring honesty and commitment (and his rainbow 
captain’s armband in the wake of the Orlando shootings was emblematic of the 
straightforward decency of the man), and he’ll have the chance to rebuild his 
reputation and greatly influence the USA’s World Cup qualifying campaign over 
the next 18 months or so. But after the Argentina game it was hard to escape 
the conclusion that his coach was right.

Darlington Nagbe

Came into the tournament as Klinsmann’s possible secret weapon. Ended the 
tournament being given 15 minutes to help retrieve a 3-0 deficit — the slot you 
usually give to “one for the future” (Christian Pulisic, for what it’s worth, 
got a complete half), rather than the player you have faith in to change the 
game.

You might say that Argentina was never the game for Nagbe, but you might also 
say that Ecuador was never the game for Alejandro Bedoya, and made for Nagbe. 
Klinsmann played Bedoya. Nagbe’s still on the outside looking in.
 