
The dual Olympic gold medal-winning cyclist Victoria Pendleton confirmed on 
Thursday that she is keen to ride at next year’sCheltenham Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival>. The amateur rider made 
the comments after winning a charity race run prior to the Flat meeting on 
Newmarket’s July course.

Victoria Pendleton: Cheltenham race ‘was a dream, audacious and ridiculous’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/victoria-pendleton-cheltenham-festival-foxhunter-chase-dream-audacious-ridiculous>
“I don’t think I’ll ever ride at Aintree but if I get the opportunity to ride 
atCheltenham <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham> and have a horse 
good enough, I will definitely take it up,” she told BBC Radio Cambridgeshire.

“It’s so exhilarating, I can’t even explain, it’s such a thrill and I just 
love the company of the horses and how generous and accommodating they can be. 
“They’re a marvel. A wonder. I’m in love. I’m going to carry on racing and see 
where it goes,” she added.

The 35-year-old, who finished fifth aboard Pacha Du Polder in the Foxhunter 
Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/victoria-pendleton-fifth-foxhunter-chase-cheltenham-festival>
 at this year’s Cheltenham Festival in March having previously partnered him to 
victory over fences at Wincanton, was speaking after cruising to victory on 
Royal Etiquette.

Content to track the early pace set by Nifty Kier close to the far rail, 
Pendleton effortlessly moved her mount into the lead around a furlong from 
home. Once shaken up the Lawney Hill-trained gelding drew right away to cross 
the line 12 lengths clear of his nearest rival and follow up his victory of 12 
months ago.
John Hunt (@HuntyCaller) 
And @v_pendleton <https://twitter.com/v_pendleton> gave her horse a lovely 
ride! Well done@LawneyHill <https://twitter.com/LawneyHill> ace coach 
pic.twitter.com/e2LQeXQScp <https://t.co/e2LQeXQScp>
 <https://twitter.com/HuntyCaller/status/745953002226343936> June 23, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/HuntyCaller/status/745953002226343936> 
Pendleton said: “I’ve ridden in a couple of point-to-points, but it was nice 
to come back to the Flat as I started with a couple of rides on the Flat with 
[Royal Etiquette].

“I rode him at Beverley and Ripon and we had a second which was really 
exciting. It was just nice to be back without any turns, bends or ditches.”
 