
There are bigger films than Victoria (Curzon, 15), out on DVD tomorrow, but 
none that can quite match it for grand, gutsy vision. You may have heard by now 
that Sebastian Schipper’s heart-speeding heist thriller was shot in one 
continuous take – one prodigiously athletic 130-minute take, that is, racing 
through more than 20 locations in downtown Berlin without a single cut or 
digital join. This is true, and altogether belief-defying: no film in recent 
years has inspired astonishment at such a fundamental, how-did-they-do-that? 
level.

But what’s most extraordinary about Victoria is that the trick isn’t what 
you’re thinking about as you watch it. Rather, it’s the desperate, double-quick 
romance that blooms over two hours between a winsome Spanish waitress (Laia 
Costa) and the German charmer (Frederick Lau) who draws her into a wild robbery 
scheme. It’s the high-wire, high-stakes love story between wholly believable 
people in wholly insane circumstances that grips your heart while you’re on the 
run; it’s only when this technically miraculous but very human stunt comes to a 
stop that you realise how long you’ve been running.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fvictoria-spotlight-big-short-assassin-mavis-eat-your-bones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F951dad2d28885db00679d608c02d0639cc97f1e1%2F0_209_3344_2007%2F3344.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Victoria%3B%20Spotlight%3B%20The%20Big%20Short%3B%20The%20Assassin%3B%20Dirty%20Grandpa%3B%20Mavis!%3B%20Eat%20Your%20Bones%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fvictoria-spotlight-big-short-assassin-mavis-eat-your-bones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Victoria%3B%20Spotlight%3B%20The%20Big%20Short%3B%20The%20Assassin%3B%20Dirty%20Grandpa%3B%20Mavis%21%3B%20Eat%20Your%20Bones%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fvictoria-spotlight-big-short-assassin-mavis-eat-your-bones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F951dad2d28885db00679d608c02d0639cc97f1e1%2F0_209_3344_2007%2F3344.jpg>
 ‘Impassioned’: Mark Ruffalo in Spotlight.
 Photograph: LMK 
The welcome surprise winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/how-did-spotlight-beat-the-revenant-to-the-biggest-oscar-win-of-all>
 of this year’s best picture Oscar,Spotlight (eOne, 15) is a film approximately 
as stock-still asVictoria is kinetic, yet it rivets in its own unassumingly 
rigorous way. Tom McCarthy’s tightly wound true-life thriller was 
unsurprisingly hailed by critics as a paean to journalism – and certainly, its 
methodical examination of the Boston Globe crack team that uncovered a systemic 
history of child abuse in the city’s Catholic church makes the profession look 
good. But it’s something more special than that: a procedural drama that 
champions general human decency above all other objectives, and celebrates the 
unfashionable virtues of listening. Appropriately enough, then, its superbly 
integrated ensemble players do some of their best work in wordless response to 
one another; whenMark Ruffalo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mark-ruffalo>, 
as star reporter Michael Rezendes, finally gets an impassioned rant in, it 
feels hard earned.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvgqG3ITMv1Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvgqG3ITMv1Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvgqG3ITMv1Q&media=>
Watch the trailer for The Big Short. <https://youtu.be/vgqG3ITMv1Q> 
By contrast, virtually no one in The Big Short (Paramount, 15) – thankfully, 
one of the filmsSpotlight beat to the Oscar – is able to shut up for a 
nanosecond. Adam McKay’s anarchic, semi-comic breakdown of the real 
estate-driven US financial crisis of 2007 is a caffeinated, cacophonous beast, 
darting frantically between the overlapped dialogues of assorted bankers, 
brokers and victims of the crash as it seeks to stridently assign blame. 
Essentially a feature film influenced by the short-form bittiness of YouTube, 
it’s ambitious and obnoxious in equal measure, tilting more towards the latter 
when McKay, over-enamoured of his role as Irreverent Explainer of Big Things, 
cuts away to Selena Gomez and a bubble-bathing Margot Robbie to simplify dense 
financial theory for us drooling yokels.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYSoXoOAY1zU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYSoXoOAY1zU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYSoXoOAY1zU&media=>
Watch the trailer for The Assassin. <https://youtu.be/YSoXoOAY1zU> 
After all that fevered hyperactivity, Hou Hsiao-hsien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/18/hou-hsiao-hsein-the-assassin>’s 
swooning martial arts romanceThe Assassin (Studiocanal, 12) is something of a 
deep, Margot Robbie-free bubble bath in itself. The imagery magicked up here by 
Hou and genius cinematographer Ping Bin Lee is so ravishing, sometimes 
recalling the saturated colour processes of Jack Cardiff, that one risks 
wallowing in it at the expense of tracing its arcane, intricate narrative of 
braided revenge and mercy. It locked together for me on a second viewing, 
though the first was still a rush. Hou’s sensory storytelling is richly 
specific to engender feeling even when the details are lost in the glow.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFiPLfwi2Uqo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFiPLfwi2Uqo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFiPLfwi2Uqo&media=>
Watch the trailer for Mavis! <https://youtu.be/FiPLfwi2Uqo> 
The unseemly waxen beauty of Zac Efron, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/zac-efron> meanwhile, does its best to make 
sense of – or at least to locate purpose in –Dirty Grandpa (Lionsgate, 15), but 
to no avail. This wheezing, crotch-scratching comedy squanders the comic 
potential thatBad Neighbours  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/07/dvds-and-downloads-bad-neighbours-concussion-sopranos-blue-ruin>
tapped in Efron’s dude-bro exterior by casting him as the straight man to a 
grimly gurningRobert De Niro <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdeniro>, 
about whose character the title pre-empts every gag you might care to predict. 
You’ll need a shot of joy after that mirthlessness, so get it viaMavis! 
(Dogwoof, E), Jessica Edwards’s infectiously devoted documentary about gospel 
music legend and civil rights activistMavis Staples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/12/mavis-staples-i-often-think-what-would-have-happened-if-id-married-bob-dylan>
. Conventionally but exactingly constructed, with killer performance footage 
and on-screen tributes from the likes ofBob Dylan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> and Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince>, it’s a portrait vibrant and 
persuasive enough to shake up even those with the most atheistic musical 
preferences.

Finally, Mubi.com <https://mubi.com/films/eat-your-bones> uncovers an 
exciting, never released curio from Cannes 2014 in Jean-Charles Hue’sEat Your 
Bones. Already unusual in its choice of social focus – the Yeniche Gypsy 
community of northern France – the film follows a ragged, reckless group of 
brothers over a one-night joyride in which the youngest must choose between 
church and crime. It’s an age-old good versus evil premise, given tang and 
tension by the vivid, antsy milieu and Hue’s hard-driving technique – and a 
pretty good companion piece toVictoria, if you fancy two fast, dark nights of 
the soul in a single sitting.
 