
There was boundless possibility for disaster or embarrassment but Victoria 
Pendleton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/victoriapendleton> avoided all the 
pitfalls this intimidating place has to offer and rode into fifth place in the 
Foxhunter Chase, 13 months after sitting on a horse for the very first time. 
Her achievement was met with a generous, wholly approving response from the 
crowd and amounts to a vindication of those involved in her training, who gave 
her the green light to compete here a fortnight ago.

“The reception was almost like I’d won coming back in, which was special,” she 
said, beaming in a way that was quite unfamiliar to those who have followed her 
round the point-to-point circuit this winter, who have generally caught her in 
a mood of either quiet determination or occasional ruefulness. “I didn’t expect 
to get that cheer as I came back. It was quite humbling. It was an experience I 
will never forget. It will rank right up there with being in the Olympic 
Velodrome.”

Don Cossack wins Cheltenham Gold Cup under Bryan Cooper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/bryan-cooper-cheltenham-gold-cup-favourite-don-cossack>
Anyone predicting the unbridled joy of her post-race press conference would 
have seemed wildly optimistic just a month ago, when she was unseated after a 
circuit at Fakenham and was criticised by John Francome as “an accident waiting 
to happen”. “Where’s Francome now?” bellowed Lawney Hill, one of the trainers 
most closely involved in Pendleton’s project, moments after Pendleton crossed 
the line on Pacha Du Polder.

Pendleton’s penchant for self-criticism was again to the fore afterwards as 
she revealed that she had managed to get her whip stuck in the horse’s 
breast-girth during the race, but for which she may have managed fourth place. 
Certainly Pacha Du Polder finished with a momentum that could never have been 
predicted from his history, this race being three-quarters of a mile longer 
than any he had ever won.

Indeed, had Pendleton been a seasoned professional, she would perhaps have 
faced some questions from the stewards after finishing fast but too late from 
an early position at the rear of the field. But as someone having only her 
third ride over fences on a formally run racecourse and only her 17th, if 
point-to-points are included, what she did here was close to astonishing and 
had racing professionals united in admiration.

“She’s given that an absolutely superb ride,” said Paul Nicholls, trainer of 
Pacha Du Polder and the champion trainer for most of the last decade. “I can’t 
tell you, I’m so proud of the whole thing that’s happened. It was so good for 
everybody, that race today. A huge achievement.

“A little bit more experience, a year’s time, she might win the race. He’s 
well capable of it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fvictoria-pendleton-fifth-foxhunter-chase-cheltenham-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44658a5fdf328e11a9a7de381ede4f8ee2cd6d49%2F0_0_4252_2668%2F4252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Victoria%20Pendleton%20fifth%20in%20Foxhunter%20Chase%20at%20Cheltenham%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fvictoria-pendleton-fifth-foxhunter-chase-cheltenham-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Victoria%20Pendleton%20fifth%20in%20Foxhunter%20Chase%20at%20Cheltenham%20Festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fvictoria-pendleton-fifth-foxhunter-chase-cheltenham-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44658a5fdf328e11a9a7de381ede4f8ee2cd6d49%2F0_0_4252_2668%2F4252.jpg>
 Victoria Pendleton on Pacha Du Polder chase the leaders up the hill. 
Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
Nicholls was, however, quick to rule out a suggestion from the horse’s owner 
that Pendleton might ride Pacha Du Polder over the Grand National fences next 
month in Aintree’s equivalent of this race. That would, in any case, require a 
rule change to which the British Horseracing Authority will not accede. Will 
Biddick, who finished half a length in front of Pendleton here, will take the 
ride at Aintree.

Martin Pipe, who was champion jumps trainer for decades before Nicholls took 
over, said: “It was a great ride. She jumped nicely and finished a flying 
fifth. She’s done really well. It’s incredible what she’s done. Of course the 
balance from riding the bikes certainly helped. She’s put a lot into it, very 
dedicated, and it was great for racing, great for sport.”

There was praise also from the Grand National-winning trainers Oliver Sherwood 
(“I take my hat off to her”) and Ted Walsh, who nevertheless counselled against 
racing seeking a gimmicky celebrity rider for this race each year. “By all 
means, if somebody wants to do it, grand. But would you want Ant and Dec riding 
round there?” he asked, rhetorically.

Nick Rust, chief executive of the BHA, said Pendleton’s mission “has been 
great for the sport” and added: “We’re thrilled that she has expressed her 
intention to continue within racing.”

Nina Carberry, who guided On The Fringe to a second consecutive Foxhunter 
success, barely three lengths in front of Pendleton, also congratulated her 
rival. “It’s the first time I’ve met her today and I think she’s great,” 
Carberry said. “She’s got an unbelievable attitude to the whole thing and I’m 
delighted she got around. Fifth place is a great achievement. She had a great 
horse to ride and look after her and may she go onwards from here. She has the 
competitive edge and she loves it to bits.”

Cheltenham Festival: Don Cossack wins Gold Cup as Pendleton lands fifth-place 
finish – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/18/cheltenham-festival-2016-gold-cup-day-live-victoria-pendleton>
Not all the news here amounted to such good news for the sport, Long Dog 
breaking a leg while running between hurdles in an earlier race, while 
Montdragon collapsed and died later on the card. That brought the total of 
equine fatalities during the Festival to seven, a number to unsettle the most 
committed fan of jump racing and one that will surely necessitate a study of 
the various causes, to see what might be done to improve safety here.

One Cheltenham staffer said only three of the deaths could be attributed 
directly to fall-related injuries and appeared to feel that there was at least 
a degree of ill-luck in the fact that the total ended up being so much higher. 
But there is no waving away such a quantity of loss and heartache.

The Festival, however, appears to be more popular than ever, since the total 
attendance over the four days surpassed a quarter of a million for the first 
time. The final-day crowd, a sell-out at 70,242, took the four-day total to 
260,649, an impressive 10% more than for the 2014 Festival.
 