
In the end it almost looked easy. Victoria Pendleton saw off her critics, 
stayed in the saddle and left the experts wondering whether, if she had just 
timed her run a bit better, she might, instead of finishing a respectable fifth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/victoria-pendleton-fifth-foxhunter-chase-cheltenham-festival>
, have challenged the brilliant and very experienced Nina Carberry and On the 
Fringe at the line. Women don’t get much of a look-in in horse racing, at least 
not as jockeys. There are a few top-flight trainers and the sport depends 
on thousands more women who are willing to rise before dawn in the bitter cold 
and put up with mucky, rainy, unlovely conditions for the mysterious joy of 
being around horses.

Victoria Pendleton fifth in Foxhunter Chase at Cheltenham Festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/victoria-pendleton-fifth-foxhunter-chase-cheltenham-festival>
So the triumph of two women in one race is reason enough for celebration. 
Imagine, in one afternoon, Carberry’s uncomplicated piece of top-class riding, 
worthy of any professional, and Pendleton’s controversial commercial venture 
that – however hardthe sponsors Betfair insisted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/07/victoria-pendleton-cheltenham-festival-pr-genius-disaster>
 it was an attempt to bring new people to racing – looked more like an attempt 
to bring new gamblers to Betfair.

The thing about national hunt racing is that while it is obviously 
about money, it’s never only about money. Luckily – since only the bookies make 
money out of the jumps, and everyone else is locked into a dysfunctional 
relationship built at least as much on disaster as on triumph. Of all the many 
barriers to Pendleton’s improbable success in the amateur rider’sFoxhunter chase
 
<http://www.racingpost.com/horses2/cards/card.sd?race_id=644254&amp;r_date=2016-03-18#raceTabs=sc_>
 at Cheltenham, winning over at least some of a sceptical crowd of 
knowledgeable punters might be the greatest.

But that is not to diminish her extraordinary athletic achievement. I’ve 
ridden in a few amateur races. I cannot watchCheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham> without reliving the 
half-terrified, half-thrilled anticipation going down to the start. And I 
cannot watch the final furlong or two without feeling a crazy relief not to be 
involved, to be cheering from the stands rather than being among the 
contenders, riding stupidly fast while holding half a tonne of tiring horse 
together galloping downhill into the largest, stiffest fences on any racecourse 
in the world.

It wasn't like The Jump. Most of Pendleton's training took place before dawn 
on remote gallops

Not much more than a year ago, Pendleton had apparently never even sat on a 
horse. She didn’t have the most basic skills. She couldn’t rise to the trot, 
which is probably lesson two, and according to the trainers Alan and Lawney 
Hill who have guided her through this past year, she didn’t even know how to 
approach a horse, which is definitely lesson one.

But Pendleton did know a thing or two about racing and risk-taking from her 
years as one of the world’s best track cyclists. Theremust be a bit of 
read-across 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/victoria-pendleton-racing-cheltenham-festival-jockey>
. Athleticism, a strong sense of balance, a highly competitive spirit, they’ll 
all have helped. Then there’s motivation. It’s not easy rebuilding a life when 
you’ve stepped off the pedestal; she didn’t fall flatfail in Strictly Come 
Dancing 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/9668105/Strictly-Come-Dancing-Its-unfair-says-Victoria-Pendleton.html>
 a year or two back, but she didn’t prosper either. But by her success in the 
4.10 at Cheltenham on a grey Friday, she has demonstrated extraordinary courage 
and grit.

The racing industry has had a moment in the limelight too. That won’t have 
done it any harm. Channel 4 stayed at the races a bit longer than usual. 
Betfair will have upped its name recognition and, since gambling is the 
lifeblood of the industry, its supporters shouldn’t grumble. And what of the 
naysayers, the experts who complained that what Pendleton was being asked to do 
was too dangerous, not just to herself and to the horse she was riding but to 
anyone competing alongside her?

She proved them wrong. This time, at least. And if they were motivated, at 
least in part, by a sympathy for the little person who toils away in the 
smaller, less successful yards taking unpromising runners toselling chases 
<http://www.greatbritishracing.com/the-inside-track/jargon-buster/?letter=S#tFGX1Sdv87CtBW5P.97>
 at Wolverhampton or Fakenham in the hope of earning a few quid, then maybe 
they should focus more on trying to make sure that everyone in racing earns at 
least the minimum wage than worrying about a bit of PR at the top.

Horse racing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/horse-racing> used to boast it 
was the sport of kings, but that was always another bit of PR, if only because 
there weren’t enough of them to make it a viable proposition. Racing has always 
been sustained by being a brilliant vehicle for a bet, a way of playing the 
market but in the open air instead of tethered to a computer screen, involving 
real money going on a beautiful creature of flesh and blood and guts and 
ability. That is why the Pendleton experiment finally gained traction.

It wasn’t like The Jump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/feb/11/how-to-save-the-jumps-stars-from-further-physical-disfigurement>
, where celebrities get paid shedloads of cash to take crazy risks on ski 
jumps, indulge in narcissistic physical training and bitch about their rivals. 
Most of Pendleton’s training took place before dawn on remote gallops in places 
almost impossible to film. Every public appearance was a high-risk event.Each 
time she fell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/24/victoria-pendleton-newbury-fall-flat-race-jumps>
 off in public – at least twice, in not many outings – there was a round of 
tooth-sucking disapproval.

But slowly the tortured romance of the racing world won over at least some of 
the sceptics. Yesterday afternoon may not have been a climax for the purists – 
that came in theagonising closing stages of the Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/18/cheltenham-festival-2016-gold-cup-day-live-victoria-pendleton?page=with:block-56ec28a2e4b0d5bc16af5680#block-56ec28a2e4b0d5bc16af5680>
 when Cue Card lost the prospect of a £1m bonus by crashing to the ground three 
from home leaving Don Cossack in front. But it was a triumph for Pendleton. Her 
horse, Pacha du Polder, was another star. As was his trainer, Paul Nicholls. 
And all the connections who made up the team that supported her. For the rest 
of us, it was a fine day out.
 