
Nearly two thirds of people who watch video-on-demand services such as Hulu, 
All4 and ITV Hub say they would like to block the ads on them.

In a survey of global users of video-on-demand services by Nielsen, 62% of 
respondents found ads on those services annoying or distracting and a further 
65% said they would like to block them.

Neither Netflix nor Amazon have ads on their paid-for on-demand services, but 
others such as Channel 4 and ITV in the UK and Hulu in the US run ads.

Adblocking is a 'modern-day protection racket', says culture secretary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/02/adblocking-protection-racket-john-whittingdale>
The Guardian reported earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/10/bbc-and-itv-in-talks-to-launch-a-netflix-style-streaming-service>
 that ITV was in talks about setting up a subscription TV service with the BBC 
and NBC Universal.

Adblocking <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ad-blocking> has been growing 
rapidly in recent years, especially on desktops. While it is considered a 
greater threat to digital news publishers, it also poses a problem for 
ad-funded video services.

The survey of 61 countries did not specify what a video-on-demand service was 
so the respondents could also be including ads on YouTube in their response. 
The questions were tilted towards programming more likely to be found on more 
TV-like services such as Netflix.

The report optimistically suggests that more relevant, targeted advertising 
might make the 65% of people saying they want to block ads “intentionally tune 
in for them”.

However, the survey also found that almost six in 10 respondents said they 
would be prepared to watch ads in return for free content, rising to 68% in 
North America.

The survey also covered pay TV services, finding that the majority of those 
adopting video-on-demand subscriptions such as Netflix or Amazon Prime were not 
using them to replace pay TV such as Sky.

In total, nearly seven in 10 people in the UK pay for TV but they are more 
likely to stump up for Sky than video-on-demand services such as Netflix. One 
in five have signed up to video-on-demand, below the global average of nearly a 
quarter and only slightly more than half of the 37% of those who pay for 
satellite TV such as Sky.

 