


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F05%2Fchristmas-gift-guide-for-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F377efebc138ae23d7dbea12cc1404f76a17d0eeb%2F180_0_909_720%2F909.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Video%20games%3A%20what%E2%80%99s%20new%20for%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F05%2Fchristmas-gift-guide-for-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Video%20games%3A%20what%E2%80%99s%20new%20for%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F05%2Fchristmas-gift-guide-for-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F377efebc138ae23d7dbea12cc1404f76a17d0eeb%2F180_0_909_720%2F909.jpg>
 Tearaway Unfolded Photograph: PR 
FOR THE UNDER-10

Tearaway Unfolded (PS4)

Tearaway Unfolded offers a magical, child-friendly world to explore without 
patronising capable young players. It stands out thanks to its charming 
paper-crafted world and the ability to draw your own creations to add to the 
game, as well as the creative ways in which you use the DualShock 4 controller 
to interact.

Alternatively:
Skylanders SuperChargers (multiplatform) , the latest in the toys-to-life 
series, is an expensive but almost inevitably popular alternative.JW

Minecraft: Story Mode Episode 1 review: a treat for young fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/15/minecraft-story-mode-episode-1-review>
FOR THE TEEN

Minecraft: Story Mode (multiplatform)

Young teens who’ve grown up playing Minecraft will appreciate experiencing its 
world anew through the story of Jesse and his/her friends off on an adventure 
that involves making narrative choices, fighting, and - of course - crafting 
(PEGI 12 rating thanks to mild bad language).

Alternatively:
Life Is Strange (PC) is similarly driven by narrative, but its story of 
young-adult drama mixed with science fiction is only appropriate for older 
teens.JW

The Talos Principle review – compelling puzzler that tackles big themes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/12/talos-principle-review-compelling-puzzler-big-themes>
FOR THE PUZZLE-LOVER

The Talos Principle (PS4)

A first-person puzzle game like Portal, this gives the player the tools to 
solve a sequence of increasingly difficult physical puzzles with things like 
lasers and switchesWith the philosophical questions it asks between these 
puzzles, it’s recommended for those who really like to use their brain.

Alternatively:
Mushroom 11 (PC) is a puzzle platformer with a difference, giving you control 
of an organism that moves through destruction and regrowth.JW

Lego Dimensions review: the best Lego game yet – just beware of costly add-ons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/05/lego-dimensions-review-best-game-yet>
FOR THE FAMILY

Lego Dimensions (multiplatform)

Stands out in the toys-to-life genre thanks to the requirement that you 
actually build the characters and vehicles that are then transported into the 
game. With split-screen co-op and Lego representations of a range of different 
franchises, it’s perfect for families to play together.

Alternatively:
Rocket League (PS4/PC), often described as “football with cars”, also has 
local multiplayer so the family can play together.JW

Super Mario Maker review – a designable Mario for the Minecraft generation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/15/super-mario-maker-review-nintendo-wii-u-designable-shigeru-miyamoto>
FOR WHEN IT HAS TO BE NINTENDO

Super Mario Maker (Wii U)

Technically a toolkit that lets you create your own levels based on a range of 
Mario games from old to new, but because it gives you access to other players’ 
creations it’s also basically a never-ending Mario game itself. A must-buy for 
the budding game designer.

Alternatively:
Yoshi’s Woolly World (Wii U), a charming and well-crafted platformer best 
played with a friend.JW
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F05%2Fchristmas-gift-guide-for-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2ea0fad82d375b983f38b4c2784502eb96d4885%2F0_0_1280_720%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Video%20games%3A%20what%E2%80%99s%20new%20for%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F05%2Fchristmas-gift-guide-for-video-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Video%20games%3A%20what%E2%80%99s%20new%20for%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F05%2Fchristmas-gift-guide-for-video-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2ea0fad82d375b983f38b4c2784502eb96d4885%2F0_0_1280_720%2F1280.jpg>
 Code Name: S.T.E.A.M - ‘inventive and absorbing’. 
Code Name S.T.E.A.M. review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/15/code-name-steam-review> 
FOR THE PLAYER WHO WANTS HANDHELD GAMES

Code Name: S.T.E.A.M. (3DS)

An adventure where you fend off alien invaders in an alternate Victorian era, 
while playing as real historical figures, all portrayed in comic book style? 
Sheer genius. The fact that it’s also a deep strategy game from the makers of 
Fire Emblem is the icing on this inventive, absorbing cake.

Alternatively:
The Legend of Zelda: Majora’s Mask (3DS): arguably Link’s darkest outing, this 
apocalyptic N64 classic gets a magnificent portable port.MK




Fallout 4 review – spectacular, messy and familiar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/10/fallout-4-review-spectacular-messy-and-familiar>
FOR THE PLAYER WHO WANTS RPGS

Fallout 4 (PC, PS4, Xbox One)

Bethesda’s post-apocalyptic vision of a ruined Boston is a twisted 
wonderland.One of the most ambitious games of the year, it improves on its 
predecessors by adding complex city building systems, letting you literally 
rebuild the world – all while shooting radioactive monsters in the face, of 
course.

Alternatively:
Xenoblade Chronicles X (Wii U): this Nintendo-exclusive offers another 
impressiveopen world and a sprawling space fantasy.MK




Halo 5: Guardians review – a competent campaign, but the multiplayer makes it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/28/halo-5-guardians-review> 
FOR THE PLAYER WHO WANTS SHOOTERS

Halo 5: Guardians (Xbox One)

Master Chief’s next gen debut introduces a major new character - rival Spartan 
Locke - and expands the Halo universe with one of its deeper tales. Don’t care 
for story in your shooters? Also offers the series’ most robust and varied 
online multiplayer, too.

Alternatively:
Destiny: The Taken King (PS4, PS3, Xbox One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one>, Xbox 360): adding in the 
story that should have been in the original release, Destiny finally lives up 
to its potential.MK

FOR THE PLAYER WHO WANTS SPORTS

NBA 2K16 (PS4, PS3, Xbox One, Xbox 360, PC)

With a story-focused career mode directed by Spike Lee, gameplay refinements 
at every level of the game and complete body scans of professional ballers, NBA 
2K16 is inarguably one of the finest basketball simulations ever. A fantastic 
entry point to the real sport.

Alternatively:
Pro Evolution Soccer 2016 (PS4, PS3, Xbox One, Xbox 360, PC): Fifa has club 
licences and (laudibly!) added female players, but this is simplybetter.MK

FOR THE PLAYER WHO WANTS SOMETHING DIFFERENT

Persona 4: Dancing All Night (PS Vita)

This genre mash-up combines elements of visual novel, rhythm action, and the 
RPG roots of the original Persona 4. The result? One of the most unique games 
of the year, the story drags you in, then the brilliant soundtrack and 
addictive beat-matching gameplay keeps you hooked.

Alternatively:
Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture (PS4): a sedate walk around an idyllic village 
where something terrible has happened. Glacially paced but hauntingly 
atmospheric.MK
 