
Video games used to compete with toys for pocket money, but combining the two 
is proving increasingly popular.Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> such as Skylanders, Disney 
Infinity and Amiibo feature a collectible line of toys which interact with 
virtual games characters.

The toy figures are integral to the gaming experience and extend the 
storytelling away from the screen and invite imaginary adventures on the living 
room carpet.

Rather than movies introducing characters that then spawn toys and video 
games, this hybrid category creates a new point of contact for brands such as 
Toy Story, Spider-Man, Transformers and The Avengers. Star Wars is likely to be 
added next year.

The three-inch static plastic characters work as toys in their own right 
through their detailed design, paintwork and tactile materials. Each toy has a 
chip in the base that unlocks its character in the game when placed on a USB 
peripheral plugged into the console. Progress and customisations are 
automatically saved back to the toy ready for the next play session. On the 
shelf they look appealing, but in the hand they are hard to put down.

Thom, nine, has filled his toy box with them over the last three years. 
“They’re not like my other toys because they work in the game too when I put 
them on the portal. I don’t have to press save or anything; they remember my 
upgrades and money automatically. I can upgrade them at my friends’ too.”

The children’s fantasy game Skylanders went big on the idea three years ago, 
offering more than 30 toy figures to collect and special editions hidden on 
store shelves in a “golden ticket” style. The gamble paid off.Skylanders proved 
that its “toys to life” genre had legs.

According to Dorian Bloch, business group director of entertainment reseach 
company GfK Chart-Track, the hybrid toy-game sector generated £200m in revenue 
in 2011-13 in the UK.Skylanders shifted 175 million toys worldwide in that 
period and even scooped a Bafta award.

These big numbers come in part from purchases of add-on toy packs that cost 
from £9. In-game videos highlight characters not yet purchased and instigate 
considerable pester power. With tens of figures coming on the market each year, 
families wanting to collect them all can end up spending as much on the game as 
on the console it runs on.

While big chains such as Toys <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/toys> 
R Us quickly recognised the retail significance, independent toy sellers have 
been more cautious. “Toy shops were initially reluctant,” said Samantha 
Loveday, editor ofToyNews magazine, “but now see greater benefit in stocking 
games likeDisney Infinity with its popular Frozen and other Disney characters.”

John Vignocchi, vice-president of production for Disney Interactive, sees the 
power ofDisney Infinity in its game creator mode. “In the Toy Box mode you can 
become the Disney and Marvel storyteller. It gives players a chair at the table 
with developers.” This lets children take on-screen adventures in any direction 
they please, mixing up the usually tightly segregated brands.

This year Ellen, 11, encountered an array of Marvel characters for the first 
time. “I didn’t know who Rocket Racoon, Iron Man and Venom were, but now we’ve 
played the game I’d like to see the films too, maybe get some other toys.”

She is equally enthusiastic about Skylanders. “The Trap Team toys are pretty 
fun as well, I like how they are really different and the girls aren’t all 
princessy.” John Coyne, senior vice-president of marketing at Activision, 
suggests that this comes from the genre’s ability to be the starting point 
rather than terminus for brands. “I think it’s creativity and innovation that 
sets [Skylanders] apart, because we’re not just borrowing equity or characters 
from something that’s already created.”Skylanders offers characters that feel 
less commercial and buck the usual buff/slender binary for male/female heroes.

Like it or not, there is no going back now. The toys, video games and related 
media franchises create a powerful draw for young minds. Understanding how this 
changes children’s interactions with branded stories is essential for parents 
to make informed decisions about what to buy and when to resist pestering.

This revolution may not be televised, but it is certainly appearing on 
video-game screens, the living room carpet and playground games everywhere.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvideo-games-smart-plastic-figures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417613430345%2Ff87f14de-b3aa-45e5-ae31-91f3ea64e3e2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Video%20games%3A%20%E2%80%98smart%E2%80%99%20plastic%20figures%20put%20fantasy%20play%20back%20on%20living%20room%20carpet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvideo-games-smart-plastic-figures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Video%20games%3A%20%E2%80%98smart%E2%80%99%20plastic%20figures%20put%20fantasy%20play%20back%20on%20living%20room%20carpet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvideo-games-smart-plastic-figures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F3%2F1417613430345%2Ff87f14de-b3aa-45e5-ae31-91f3ea64e3e2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Amiibo characters for Wii U. Photograph: Jae C. Hong/ASSOCIATED PRESS 
TOYS TO LIFE


SKYLANDERS 

2011: Skylanders Spyro’s Adventure launched.

2012: Skylanders Giants adds larger and light-up figurines.

2013: Skylanders Swap Force introduces mix-and-match swappable toys.

2014: Skylanders Trap Team adds Trap-able player-controlled villains.

Unique selling point: Collectible original characters and multiple special 
editions.

Old toy figures can be used in the later games’ adventure modes and grant 
access to secret areas. Trap Team restricts its Elemental zones to the new Trap 
Master toys.

Prices: Starter pack, £39.99 to £44.99; single figures, £8.50 to £13.50; 
Traps, £5.99.

Formats: Wii, Wii U, Xbox 360, Xbox One, PS3, PS4, 3DS, iOS, Android, Kindle 
Fire.

DISNEY INFINITY 

2013: Disney Infinity launched.

2014: Disney Infinity 2.0 Marvel Super Heroes adds Marvel adventures and 
upgraded game creator mode. Disney Infinity 2.0 Disney Originals offers an 
alternative upgrade based on classic characters.

USP: Disney characters and game creator Toy Box mode. All 1.0 figures can be 
used in the 2.0 game creator mode.

Prices: Starter pack, £39.99 to £42; single figures £9.50.

Formats: Wii U, Xbox 360, Xbox One, PS3, PS4, Tablet, 3DS.

AMIIBO 

November 2014: First wave, with Super Smash Bros., including Mario.

December 2014: Second wave, including Luigi.

February 2015: Third wave, including Sonic.

USP: Nintendo characters that work across multiple games. Amiibo figures work 
acrossSuper Smash Bros., Mario Kart 8 and Hyrule Warriors.

Prices: Single figures, £10.

Formats: Wii U, 3DS.
 