
My approach to coalition was a mixture of defence and offence. Some things had 
to be stopped; others had to be done. I sought to block what I regarded as 
ideologically driven spending cuts, beyond what had been agreed as necessary 
for fiscal stability. There was a long hiatus after the breakdown of 
negotiations on 2015/16 spending, when demands from the Treasury would have 
done serious harm to vocational education outside the universities. I carried 
out a five-year, rearguard action to prevent high-flying Treasury graduates 
demolishing adult and further education – which they neither understood nor 
respected.

Vince Cable: Osborne is cynical but will be next prime minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/05/vince-cable-osborne-is-cynical-but-will-be-next-prime-minister>
Under the coalition, it was possible to mobilise Nick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> when the Conservatives 
wouldn’t take no for an answer. Not all the disagreements were between the 
coalition parties. Although I had difficult exchanges with the home secretary
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> and prime minister
over immigration controls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/15/immigration-numbers-game-doesnt-add-up>
 on non-EU students and skilled workers, almost all Conservative colleagues and 
ministers agreed, at least privately, that their policies were seriously 
damaging to business, universities and the wider national economic interest. As 
a Lib Dem, I was able to speak publicly about the way the government’s claim to 
be “open for business” was being undermined. But I was struck by the inability 
of powerful Conservatives such asGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, or even the prime 
minister, to move the home secretary an inch.

Most of the time and energy of my team was devoted to finding common ground 
with the Conservatives. Sometimes, an explicit deal was involved. I got 
Osborne’s backing for theBritish Business Bank 
<http://british-business-bank.co.uk/> [a state bank that gives loans to small 
and medium-sized businesses], in return for not opposing his controversial 
scheme to create a new form of worker ownership with fewer rights [where 
workers received shares in exchange for waiving their rights to, for example, 
redundancy pay]. I assumed it wouldn’t fly, as it didn’t.

The coalition did many useful things, but usually at the price of a messy 
compromise. In my department, we boosted the advanced manufacturing and 
creative industries, undertook corporate governance reform, introducedshared 
parental leave <https://www.gov.uk/shared-parental-leave-and-pay/overview> and 
flexible working, rescued thePost Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/27/royal-mail-stake-will-not-be-sold-vince-cable>
 and much else. The dilemma for me was whether to gain a distinctive identity 
for my party by opposing and blocking, or to get results by gaining Tory 
support for my proposals – which often meant I risked losing ownership of the 
issue.

A typical example was apprenticeships. In the tough bargaining around the 2010 
spending round, I managed to ease some of the political pain of increasing 
student tuition fees by channelling more resources into apprenticeships. The
Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> were quick 
to spot the appeal, and never ceased to claim ownership of the policy. We 
struggled as a party to gain the credit for popular policies that originated 
with us, since we were outgunned five to one across government.

Whitehall gossip had it that ours was one department where coalition worked, 
with genuine give and take. Others included Work and Pensions underIain Duncan 
Smith <http://www.iainduncansmith.org.uk/> (IDS), Health under both Andrew 
Lansley <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley> and Jeremy Hunt 
<http://www.jeremyhunt.org/>, and Transport under Patrick McLoughlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/patrick-mcloughlin>. Others were 
notoriously factional. The experience of Nick Harvey at Defence and Norman 
Baker at the Home Office was altogether less happy.

The Tories collectively could be appalling, with some ugly tribal prejudices, 
and when their party interests were directly challenged, they could be vicious. 
During thealternative vote referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/av-referendum>, they channelled funding 
to Labour-led groups that specialised in scurrilous personal attacks on Nick, 
which led to one of the few cases of real verbal fisticuffs in Cabinet. But as 
individuals they were invariably courteous, professional, often likable.

This ability to operate on different levels is part of the modus operandi of 
the House of Commons. But the Tories appeared to have an exceptional ability to 
compartmentalise, to commit political murder with a charming smile. I worried 
that, in its rapid ascent from the Championship to the Premier League, my party 
hadn’t acquired this ruthlessness, and has now paid the price.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fvince-cable-tories-collectively-could-be-appalling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441188883181%2F965c8cd5-ec82-4738-b7ac-098089f24fac-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Tories%20collectively%20could%20be%20appalling%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fvince-cable-tories-collectively-could-be-appalling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vince%20Cable%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Tories%20collectively%20could%20be%20appalling%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fvince-cable-tories-collectively-could-be-appalling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F2%2F1441188883181%2F965c8cd5-ec82-4738-b7ac-098089f24fac-680x1020.jpeg>
 Cable with George Osborne: ‘I became more aggressive, and this contributed to 
a steady distancing. He had a ruthless eye for party advantage’ Photograph: EPA 
A key mechanism for resolving disputes was the “Quad” [where decisions are 
made by four ministers, two from each party]. It was Nick Clegg’s achievement 
to have created a mechanism in which the two parties had equal status. I 
understand why he should have wanted his close friend and confidantDanny 
Alexander <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/danny-alexander> alongside. (I 
was told that Cameron would not have tolerated my being the fourth member.) But 
the upshot was that there were two Treasury ministers, and no one from 
elsewhere in government. Whatever their other admirable qualities, Nick and 
Danny seemed convinced of Treasury orthodoxy on matters of economic policy. I 
think they genuinely believed we should accept the Treasury’s received wisdom 
over deficits and debt as part of the Lib Dem Strong Economy–Fair Society 
message. I didn’t agree. I was never sure whether the economic thinking of the 
Treasury originated with officials within that department, seeking to retrieve 
their credibility after the financial crisis, or with George Osborne and his 
political advisers. But it amounted to the same thing. Osborne and the Treasury 
had effective control over the government machine, with political cover often 
provided by the Quad.

Since I was considered difficult to sack, I could be bloody-minded. The 
Treasury was able to intimidate weaker departments, such as Culture, Media and 
Sport, Defra and Justice. Some of the greatest pressure came on IDS at the 
Department for Work and Pensions, whose poor, disabled, unemployed and 
otherwise vulnerable clients were seen as easy targets for cuts. IDS was a 
significant figure, and a fundamentally decent man, but he spent much of his 
time fighting off pubescent advisers and Treasury officials with cruel ideas 
for saving money.

My relations with the Treasury were forged in the negotiations around the 2010 
spending review. I believed that we had given too much ground, and in the 
process had compromised some good programmes. My officials, however, felt we 
had got off lightly; the agreed cuts to spending (25%) had already been agreed, 
in principle, by my Labour predecessors. I compensated by being more 
aggressive, and this contributed to a steady distancing from the chancellor. I 
believed in the need for government to be disciplined in its management of 
public money and deliver large savings; he had an ideological belief in a small 
state, as well as a ruthless eye for party advantage.

Vince Cable: ‘Historically, the coalition will be seen as a success’ – 
interview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/05/vince-cable-historically-coalition-will-be-seen-as-success>
I suspect there is an institutional problem with a powerful Treasury operating 
opaque and antiquated systems of spending controls, with no balancing force – 
and no obvious capacity for thinking long term about the economic future of the 
country. I tried, likeMichael Heseltine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michael-heseltine> and Peter Mandelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/peter-mandelson> before me, to create a 
balancing mechanism in the form of a strong and respectedBusiness Department 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-business-innovation-skills>
, but my successors have their work cut out to preserve it – if they want to.

Civil servants often observed that the coalition worked better than the Labour 
government, since personalities were not allowed to get in the way. Cameron and 
Clegg deserve credit for that. In my own corner, sometimes portrayed as an 
ideological battleground between a grumpy, leftwing secretary of state and 
true-blue Tory ministers, relations were always businesslike, often cordial. 
WithDavid Willetts <http://www.davidwilletts.co.uk/>, universities minister, 
there was a real sense of partnership.

I took the view from the outset that we should leave our weapons at the door 
and work as a team. Towards the end, there were spats about who should claim 
the credit for various achievements, though I take satisfaction from the fact 
that there were achievements to fight over, rather than disasters for which to 
apportion blame.

• This is an edited extract from After The Storm: The World Economy & 
Britain’s Economic Future, by Vince Cable, published on 17 September by 
Atlantic Books at £18.99. To buy it for £15.19, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/329437/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, or call 0330 333 6846
 