
Vince Cable <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable> is looking 
remarkably well for a dead man – politically dead, that is. The May election 
deprived him not just of his cabinet job as business secretary, but of the 
Twickenham seat he had held for the Lib Dems for 18 years. There is no more 
brutal arena than politics; no end more sudden or public. He walked into his 
count at just before 5am on8 May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/general-election-2015> as one of the most 
powerful men in the country; he walked out humbled, his majority of 12,000 
overturned. At 72, he says he will not contest another election.

The only word I can conjure up when we meet at his home in the shadow of 
Twickenham rugby ground is bereavement. Was that how it felt? “It was 
initially,” he says in his precise, slightly strangulated voice. “But I 
adjusted to the new world very quickly.” He has finished a book on economic 
policy since the crash, taken a holiday in Corsica (he is tanned: his wife 
Rachel says he looks 10 years younger), joined a gym and returned to ballroom 
dancing – a long-time love, as the trophies on top of a cupboard in the living 
room attest.

Cable was offered a peerage in the wake of his defeat, but turned it down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/15/vince-cable-four-senior-lib-dems-lords-nick-clegg-peerage-politics>
 (he did accept a knighthood). “I’ve done 18 years in parliament, and all the 
stuff around whips and late-night voting, even in the gentler environment of 
the Lords, I’m happy to leave to other people,” he says. “And I don’t want to 
go into an institution that’s overcrowded and unreformed.” Instead, he is 
preparing for the national ballroom championships, pondering another two books, 
working with a startup bank, angling for an academic job.

During the dying years of New Labour, Cable was dubbed St Vince for predicting 
the financial crisis of 2007/8 and for seeming to be above the fray. The public 
trusted him; journalists liked him. There were no moat-cleaning expenses. Cable 
lives in a modest semi; as business secretary, he prided himself on travelling 
by train and carrying his papers in a rucksack, rather than the expensive red 
boxes sported by Tory junior ministers as they were ferried around by limo. By 
all accounts, he treated his team well. “An awful lot of politicians are 
bullying and unreasonable,” his former special adviserGiles Wilkes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/giles-wilkes> says. “I found him not. He 
wasn’t likeThe Thick Of It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-thick-of-it>, and quite a lot 
are. They are often abysmal managers who compensate by being tyrants.”

How does a politician, especially a saintly one, deal with rejection? “We knew 
from a year out there was a risk of losing,” Cable says calmly. “It’s helped 
that there are other things I want to do. It isn’t as if I’m stepping into a 
bottomless void.” ButEmily Walch 
<http://www.csap.cam.ac.uk/network/emily-walch/>, another of his special 
advisers, says the night of the defeat was traumatic; at the count he looked 
shellshocked,hands clasped as if in prayer 
<http://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2015/08/27/15/2870995200000578-3212992-image-m-11_1440686951121.jpg>
.

“I spoke to him at about three in the morning,” Walch recalls. “I could tell 
his heart had already sunk.” Afterwards she went home and cried. “It felt as if 
there’d been a death in the family. I spent the whole of Friday grieving, and 
didn’t call or text, to give him some space. I rang on the Saturday, which was 
his birthday, and he was eating cake and sounded quite chirpy, as if he could 
already see the benefits of the freedom imposed on him.”

Cable’s new book, After The Storm 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/329437/>, a look at 
the post-crash global economy, is the first fruit of that freedom. After toeing 
the line for five years, he can go public with his criticisms of chancellor
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>’s handling 
of the economy. He warns that the emphasis on consumption rather than 
investment, the continuing reliance on house price inflation as the driver of 
growth, the decline in productivity and innovation mean fundamental problems 
are not being addressed. He is also the first minister to lift the lid on the 
coalition: we learn the Tories could be likable colleagues but “collectively 
appalling, with ugly tribal prejudices”; that Osborne andDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> were unable “to move 
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> an inch”; that 
Osborne’s Treasury effectively controlled government, with a hands-off Cameron; 
and that, in Cable’s view,Nick Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> and Danny Alexander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/danny-alexander> were too accepting of 
the Treasury line.

Vince Cable: Osborne is cynical but will be next prime minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/05/vince-cable-osborne-is-cynical-but-will-be-next-prime-minister>
Back in 2010, it was no secret Cable would have preferred a deal with Labour. 
“I’d had links withGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown>. He was difficult to get to 
know, but we had a rapport and I respected him. We met from time to time, 
trying to lay the foundations for what he called a progressive alliance.”

In the days after the election, Clegg focused on negotiations with Cameron, 
while Brown and Cable kept talking. “I had several conversations with him at 
antisocial hours,” he says. “In my case, and in a lot of my colleagues’ cases, 
we had a more natural affinity with Labour. But it was clear the numbers 
weren’t there, that for a lot of leading Labour people their heart wasn’t in 
it, and that from the point of view of Nick Clegg and others, Brown was the 
problem, not the solution.”

Cable, a Labour parliamentary candidate as long ago as 1970, who also stood 
twice for the SDP in the 80s before migrating to the Lib Dems, did not find the 
Tories natural bedfellows. “It was a difference between heart and head: my 
heart was definitely not in it, but when you tried to think about it 
rationally, it was the right thing to do. We had a series of meetings when we 
were negotiating the coalition agreement, and I stood up and said, ‘I really do 
not like these guys, I’ve spent my life fighting them. But the economic 
situation is very serious, and we’re going to have to swallow our prejudices 
and get on with it.’”

Does he think Clegg made an early mistake by appearing to enjoy being in bed 
with the Tories? “I felt from the outset we should be businesslike and 
semi-detached, whereas he felt we had to persuade the public that coalition 
government could work. And to have too many arguments initially would have 
given the impression we were ferrets in a sack.” Does he blame Clegg for the 
rout in May? “No. It was a collective responsibility. I don’t think pointing 
the finger is sensible.”

I wasn’t involved in a leadership coup. People who wanted change wanted me. It 
was guilt by association
 Cable with Nick Clegg. Photograph: PA 
He won’t say so, but it is clear his relationship with Clegg became strained. 
“Economics was never Nick’s strong suit,” says the Lib Dem peer Matthew 
Oakeshott, a long-standing friend of Cable’s. “In opposition, it was almost a 
father-and-son relationship. But gradually, as Nick’s advisers told him to 
assert himself, it got more difficult. Slowly, that avuncular relationship 
changed.”

It may also be that early in the parliament Cable was inclined to believe in 
the idea of Saint Vince. He saw himself as the vital leftish cement in the 
coalition mix, and says his “head before heart” speech was crucial in 
persuading his colleagues to back a deal with the Tories. But hubris led to 
nemesis when,in December 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/dec/21/vince-cable-could-end-coalition>
, he claimed to two undercover Daily Telegraph reporters posing as constituents 
that he could bring the government down if he chose to resign over the 
direction of economic policy, and that he had “declared war” on Rupert 
Murdoch’s News Corporation, which was trying to take over BSkyB. He came very 
close to resigning, had responsibility for media policy taken away from him, 
and appeared vain and boastful – a middle-aged man trying to impress two 
attractive young women.

“I wasn’t saying it in a boastful way,” he insists. “I was just making the 
point that it was the early days of the government, we were at a difficult 
stage, and unless both sides of the coalition stuck together it would fall.” As 
for Murdoch, he says this was a point of principle, not a vendetta. “There was 
an issue about media concentration of ownership. People forget I did refer it 
to the competition authorities. Had that not happened, the BSkyB takeover would 
have taken place.”

Was vanity the reason he fell for the sting? “No. Some of the press wanted to 
get a nice story about these two beautiful women, but from what I remember they 
weren’t particularly beautiful. The reason it went pear-shaped was that it was 
the night we had a riot over tuition fees outside my constituency office. There 
were people banging at the door, police sirens, all the constituents who had 
come to see me about legitimate things had vanished. I was really quite charged 
up, these two women came in and wanted to talk about tax credits, and I let my 
guard slip. In a less emotionally charged environment, I wouldn’t have done. It 
was nothing to do with sexy women flattering me. I may be vain, but that isn’t 
a good example of it.”

One Lib Dem who worked closely with Cable suggests his pride was wounded by 
coalition politics: he didn’t like being ignored, belittled and briefed 
against. Early on, Osborne launched a charm offensive of cosy chats. But once 
Clegg, Alexander andDavid Laws <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/david-laws>
 had a lock on policy, Cable was marginalised. That must have hurt.

He is critical of the way government devolved to the so-called Quad of 
Cameron, Clegg, Osborne and Alexander. “I understand why it happened,” he says. 
“Nick Clegg was trying to establish parity with the Tories, and a two-and-two 
negotiation made sense. And Danny Alexander was a close ally. But it meant you 
had two party leaders and two Treasury ministers. So the economic orthodoxy of 
the Treasury, which in some crucial respects was damaging and wrong, was 
reinforced. It was very difficult to challenge anything.” Alexander was far too 
“on message” for Cable’s liking, and many Lib Dem insiders report tensions 
between them. I call Alexander, but he doesn’t ring back.

***

We break for photographs, and Cable turns out to be an uncomplaining subject, 
even demonstrating a few dance moves in the garden. But Rachel, a formidable 
former dairy farmer, has eventually had enough, and with a snap of her fingers 
draws the session to a close. A bird flies in through the kitchen door, with me 
and Cable in hot pursuit. The former business secretary remains unnaturally 
calm, as if this is an everyday occurrence.
 On Strictly Come Dancing. Photograph: BBC 
Cable didn’t enter the Commons until his mid-50s and in many ways this shaped 
his parliamentary career, not least because it telescoped the chance for him to 
become leader. He didn’t stand in 2006 whenCharles Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/charleskennedy> was ousted, because Ming 
Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sirmenziescampbell> was seen as 
the “safe pair of hands” the party needed; when Campbell stepped down a year 
later, the Lib Dems felt a need to turn to youth. Time and circumstance 
conspired against Cable.

Being 30 years older than most of his coalition colleagues conditioned his 
relationships in government. “Vince had a reputation as a lone wolf, partly 
because he was generationally above most of his peers,” Wilkes says. “I don’t 
think he had a natural ‘pick up the mobile and call Nick’ temperament. He was 
used to ploughing a lonely furrow.” That was fine in opposition, but in 
government it enabled the Tories to isolate him.

Cable argues that there were advantages to his age. “I knew things and I had 
done things. I was a contemporary ofNorman Lamont 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/norman-lamont> at Cambridge, and he was 
retiring when I was arriving. But I think I did it the right way round.”

He puts his lifelong commitment to politics down to his background – the son 
of a working-class father he describes as a “diehard Tory with the prejudices 
to match”. “It wasn’t sophisticated politics, but there was a lot of raw, 
bad-tempered political debate around the dinner table.” His childhood was in 
many ways difficult: his father was a disciplinarian, his mother had a 
breakdown soon after the birth of his brother, when Cable was 10; in his 2009 
autobiographyFree Radical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/nov/14/free-radical-vince-cable-review>
, he alluded to occasional domestic violence.

A further source of alienation from his father was that Cable married Olympia 
Rebelo, a Kenyan Indian with a PhD in history from Glasgow University. His 
father objected to a mixed-race marriage. Cable and his wife were together for 
more than 30 years, and her presence is palpable in the Indian books and 
ornaments that fill his home, but she was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1987 
and died in 2001. “She lived for 14 years with cancer, and knew for five or six 
that it was terminal. She was in the prime of life and had bags of energy, and 
it was difficult trying to be positive, while at the same time being realistic. 
She threw herself into setting up my MP operation, and died a few days after I 
was re-elected in 2001.”

In 2004 Cable married again, having met Rachel just four months after 
Olympia’s death. He says his three children found this difficult at first, but 
“by the time Olympia had died, I was reconciled to the idea. I had grieved for 
her when she was alive, I suppose. I wanted to move on and do other things. I 
met Rachel and we lived happily ever after, but it was difficult for her family 
and mine.”

***

I ask Cable what he is most proud of having achieved in government. He points 
to various policies – an industrial strategy, a green investment bank, an 
apprenticeships scheme, introducing shared parental leave and flexible working, 
getting women on the boards of major companies. But even more important, he 
says, is what the Lib Dems stopped: with a majority Tory government, we are now 
seeing nature blue in tooth and claw.

“Without anybody really noticing, Osborne has increased considerably the scale 
of cuts,” he says. “They are committed to taking another £40bn out of the 
economy. The housing policies are appalling. They are taking the pressure off 
the banks in a way I wouldn’t have supported. Historically, the coalition will 
be seen as a success, and people, once they have seen Tory government on its 
own, will realise the difference. Absence makes the heart grow fonder.” It 
sounds like self-justification, I say. “I have to be an optimist,” he counters.

Vince Cable: ‘The Tories collectively could be appalling’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/05/vince-cable-tories-collectively-could-be-appalling>
In many ways the coalition already feels like ancient history; when Cable and 
I discuss Clegg and Alexander – omnipresent on the airwaves just four months 
ago – we seem to be summoning up ghosts. I suggest the achievements of the Lib 
Dems are outweighed by the opportunities missed, especially the chance to 
change a voting system that looks increasingly anachronistic.

“The AV [alternative vote] referendum was a disaster,” Cable admits. “The 
Tories were frightened by it, and very cynical. The thing I thought 
unforgivable was that their donors, clearly with the knowledge of the Tory 
leadership, were putting money into campaigns that were personally trashing 
Nick Clegg – over things like tuition fees, where the Tories were to the right 
of us. They got their way, but any illusions that remained on our side that 
these were soulmates disappeared.”

The accusation of cynicism – Cable uses the word three times during our 
conversation – is an odd one coming from a former government minister. 
Saintliness, though popular with the public, is double-edged. Politics is a 
dirty business and corners have to be cut, liberties taken – otherwise you 
lose. The Lib Dems were outmanoeuvred at every stage in the coalition, and 
would perhaps have been stiffened by a little more self-interest.

On the subject of cynicism, Cable singles out Osborne, whom he describes as 
“extremely shrewd politically, but very cynical” – one imagines the chancellor 
would take that as a compliment. “He is engaging, a good listener, and highly 
intelligent, but he focused on political strategy and didn’t really engage with 
economic stuff – he took that from the Treasury. The economy turned out all 
right, but I don’t think that was because of him.”

In Cable’s view, Osborne was the key figure in the coalition – the master 
strategist, whereas Cameron was “pretty hands off” – and is likely to succeed 
Cameron unless the economy hits fresh storms, though he doesn’t rule out May. 
“I fell out with her badly over immigration. Throughout the whole five years, 
we never saw eye to eye [Cable opposed an arbitrary cap on migrants]. But she’s 
a very formidable person, strong and effective.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fvince-cable-historically-coalition-will-be-seen-as-success%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F1%2F1441121993791%2F2fd5bde3-3d2c-4c3a-8699-ca76333b0983-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vince%20Cable%3A%20%E2%80%98Historically%2C%20the%20coalition%20will%20be%20seen%20as%20a%20success%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fvince-cable-historically-coalition-will-be-seen-as-success%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vince%20Cable%3A%20%E2%80%98Historically%2C%20the%20coalition%20will%20be%20seen%20as%20a%20success%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fvince-cable-historically-coalition-will-be-seen-as-success%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F1%2F1441121993791%2F2fd5bde3-3d2c-4c3a-8699-ca76333b0983-1020x612.jpeg>
 With Michael Gove, George Osborne and David Cameron. Photograph: Stefan 
Rousseau/PA 
Successful politicians tend to convince themselves that their underhand 
behaviour is for the good of the country. Cable’s tendency to set himself above 
the battle underlines the fact that he is not a career politician. “The thing 
to remember about Vince,” Oakeshott says, “is that he’s an academic. He’s not 
really a professional politician. That’s a great strength and part of his 
public attraction, but also a weakness.”

The word “academic” comes up repeatedly when you talk to friends and 
colleagues, inevitably perhaps with someone who has a PhD in the 
industrialisation of developing nations and taught economics at Glasgow 
University. “Vince was always concerned to get the right policy outcome,” says
Chris Huhne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrishuhne>, a cabinet member 
until he wasforced to resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/feb/03/chris-huhne> in February 2012 
– a departure that deprived Cable of a key ally on the left. “Maybe someone who 
was more political would have been more concerned about theselling of politics.”

Ahead of the 2010 election, the Lib Dems pledged to abolish tuition fees, but 
as business secretary Cable steered through a policy that saw fees treble to 
£9,000. “On that big issue he got it badly wrong,” saysMark Pack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mark-pack>, editor of the monthly 
newsletter Liberal Democrat Newswire. “He takes a heavy degree of 
responsibility. But there is an odd Teflon quality about him – a lot of 
activists were very angry about tuition fees, but they blamed Nick Clegg and 
said how lovely Vince Cable was.”

“I’ve endlessly gone over in my head what we might have done differently,” 
Cable says now. “There was always scepticism about abolishing fees, but our 
national executive insisted on retaining this totem. That was the disaster.”

He was also attacked over the sale of Royal Mail, with critics arguing the 
price was too low, but here he has fewer qualms. “Royal Mail had to be put into 
the private sector if it was going to raise money for investment – which is 
what it’s done, though nobody seems to have noticed.” He argues that an 
independent report into the share offer supported the price his department had 
set. “It was traumatic at the time,” he says, “but in the end I felt we had 
been largely vindicated.”

The other time Cable’s political antennae let him down – and the parliament’s 
other great might-have-been – was the 2014 attempted coup against Clegg. In 
May, as the party prepared itself for disastrous results in local and European 
elections, Oakeshott and backbencher John Pugh sought a change of leader. 
Oakeshott commissioned polls in key Lib Dem seats, including Twickenham, the 
results of which suggested the general election would be apocalyptic for the 
party.The plan was to oust Clegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jun/01/lord-ashdown-calls-for-lib-dem-unity-after-attempted-coup>
, who was already having doubts about carrying on, and install Cable; Oakeshott 
leaked his findings to the Guardian to force the issue.

Patrick Wintour and Nicholas Watt, writing in the Guardian in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/24/the-nick-clegg-catastrophe>, 
concluded that the coup had the “tacit support of Cable”.Stephen Lotinga 
<https://twitter.com/stevelotinga>, the Lib Dems’ head of communications, told 
them he phoned Cable – on a trade mission to China at the time – with an 
ultimatum: “Distance yourself from this, or you and Oakeshott are going to be 
named as the people behind it.” It was a bluff (Lotinga had no evidence), but 
it succeeded. Cable publicly distanced himself from the plot, backed Clegg and 
said there was no issue over the leadership. “Never go to China if you want to 
mount a coup,” was Lotinga’s satisfied conclusion.

Cable disputes much of this account. “I wasn’t connected with it,” he says 
calmly, betraying not the slightest suggestion that he blew his moment to seize 
the crown. “There were some MPs who felt it might improve matters if we had a 
change. I wasn’t involved, but was in the awkward position that a lot of people 
who thought there should be a change wanted to change to me. There was guilt by 
association. But it wasn’t quite as it was portrayed in the more machiavellian 
histories.” Cable is choosing his words carefully here: “not quite as 
portrayed” is hardly a thundering denial.

“He didn’t want to strike,” one of those who favoured a change tells me off 
the record, “but he had made it clear he was willing to take over. I think if 
he’d kept his mouth shut and not declared his loyalty to Clegg, there would 
have been a change. Vince wanted the leadership on a plate, but shot the waiter 
bringing it to him.”

Chris Huhne, however, doubts whether he was ever set on the leadership: “If 
Steve Lotinga managed to bully Vince out of it, it suggests his heart wasn’t in 
it.” Walch agrees: “He’d already been leader, albeit briefly [he was acting 
leader in 2007 after Ming Campbell resigned]. The thing he was interested in 
above all was economics, and the job he would have loved was chancellor.” In 
any case, by 2014 it was too late; the party’s image was already terminally 
tarnished. Even Saint Vince would not have worked a miracle.

***

We meet at the height of Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>mania and, unlike many 
commentators, Cable does not dismiss the new messiah of the left. Perhaps he 
sees in Saint Jeremy traces of the plain-speaking, tube-travelling Saint Vince. 
“I’ve seen him in parliament for 18 years and he’s a straightforward man with a 
lot of integrity,” he says. “I also remember him from my days in the Labour 
party in the late 1970s, and he was one of the hard core [on the far left] that 
did terrible damage to the party. I can see that being repeated. But I don’t 
want to minimise the significance of this movement he’s created. There is a 
large group of people who are very alienated and looking for radical solutions, 
mainly young people shut out of secure jobs and housing. They are looking for 
someone to rally round – and unlike the late 70s and 80s, there is a mass 
movement.”

What would be most likely under Corbyn, he says, is further fragmentation on 
the centre-left and the “slow death of Labour England”. But he insists the Lib 
Dems will recover from their crushing defeat in May. “The election was an 
enormous setback for the idea that you can have the best of both worlds – be a 
radical centre-left party but soil your hands in government. The public walked 
away from that, but I still believe we will be vindicated in the long run. 
There has already been a kind of buyers’ remorse: ‘We voted Tory but did we 
really intend it?’

“It’s a long way back, but membership is going up, and unlike in the Labour 
party, there is a sense that we’ve touched bottom. We can only go up.”

 * After The Storm: The World Economy & Britain’s Economic Future, by Vince 
Cable, is published on 17 September by Atlantic Books at £18.99. To buy it for 
£15.19, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/329437/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, or call 0330 333 6846  