
Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, the Russian 
president, replaced the nation’s sports minister Vitaly Mutko with his deputy 
on Wednesday, in a move possibly aimed at getting the controversial minister 
out of the international limelight prior to the 2018 World Cup.

Russian Olympic Committee chief Alexander Zhukov steps down
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/russian-olympic-committee-chief-alexander-zhukov-steps-down>
However, the move is not a demotion: Mutko has in fact been promoted to a 
newly created role, that of deputy prime minister responsible for sport, 
tourism and youth policy. Mutko has been hit by scandal after scandal during 
his tenure, most notably the allegations of a widespread state-sponsored doping 
system under his watch, but he has always remained untouchable.

Mutko has been at the helm of the sports ministry during the whole of the 
doping scandal. A July report by the World Anti-Doping Agency which alleged 
widespread doping across summer and winter sports with the collusion of state 
bodies said it was“inconceivable” that Mutko himself was unaware of the 
cover-ups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/18/wada-mclaren-report-russia-sochi-2014-doping-live>
.

It also suggested Mutko may have personally intervened to cover up a positive 
doping test of a foreign footballer playing in the Russian league. The doping 
allegations led to a ban on all but one of Russia’s track and field athletes 
competing in the Rio Olympics this summer as well asa blanket ban on the 
Paralympic team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/06/russian-athletes-banned-paralympic-games-rio>
.

Russian officials have portrayed the ban as politicised, insisting that the 
situation is no worse inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> than 
elsewhere, despite the overwhelming evidence provided and the testimony of the 
whistleblower Grigory Rodchenkov, who said he oversaw a massive rigged doping 
system with the collusion of the Russian authorities and security services.

Mutko is known for his idiosyncratic English, employed during a speech for 
Russia’s World Cup bid in 2010 that went viral, and in a number ofsubsequent 
semi-comprehensible interviews <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hjdc8c5HKt8>. 
During the European Championship in France this year, after the game between 
Russia and England, Mutko was pitchside and appearedto egg on Russian fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/moscow-football-official-to-violent-fans-well-done-lads-keep-it-up>
 as violent clashes were taking place in the stands.

The controversial politician will still have much involvement with the 
preparations for the 2018World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>. Russian media 
suggested he would remain head of the organising committee for the event, and 
his new deputy prime minister brief includes oversight of sport.

Mutko was also re-elected as chairman of the Russian Football Union last 
month. The union’s deputy chairman, Nikita Simonyan, told Tass news agency on 
Wednesday he expected Mutko to keep the post.

Pavel Kolobkov, who had previously served as Mutko’s deputy, was made the new 
sports minister.
 