
Controversial sports scientist Stephen Dank will face a Court of Arbitration 
for Sport hearing after the World Anti-Doping Authority announced it is 
appealing the decision to clear him of 21 charges.

In April, the AFL anti-doping tribunal cleared Dank of 21 of 31 breaches of 
the game’s drug code over theEssendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> supplements scandal, including 
administering the banned peptide Thymosin beta-4 to Bombers players.

He was found guilty of 10 charges, many of which related to trafficking banned 
substances, butWada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> director general 
David Howman announced on Tuesday the world’s top anti-doping body would appeal 
the 21 not guilty verdicts.

“After a thorough examination of the evidence contained within the case file, 
Wada has decided to lodge its independent right of appeal to the Court of 
Arbitration for Sport (CAS),” Howman said.

The Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority (Asada) welcomed the news, with 
chief executive Ben McDevitt saying it “will fully support” Wada’s decision.

Dank has staunchly maintained his innocence and said last month he would 
appeal the AFL’s 10 rulings against him on the grounds the findings were 
inconsistent with the facts.

They mostly related to his time with Essendon, but also included his stint 
with the Gold Coast Suns and dealings with a former Carlton coach.

It’s the latest development in a saga which has run for more than two years, 
and follows Wada’s move last month to appeal theAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> anti-doping tribunal’s not guilty 
verdict for the 34 past and present Essendon players’ alleged to have used of 
banned substances.

Asada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asada> opted not to appeal that 
ruling, leaving Wada free to take the matter to CAS, the same court that will 
hear Dank’s case.

In a sign the investigation could continue for many more months, the world’s 
highest anti-doping body was last week granted a 45-day extension by CAS to 
build its case.
 