
Wadjda <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149734/wadjda> – one of 2013's 
best films so far – deserves its success. To get the formalities out of the 
way, the first feature entirely shot on Saudi Arabian soil and the first by a 
Saudi female director has struck blows both for the kingdom's film-makers and 
its women, thanks to Haifaa al-Mansour'smassively endearing tale 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm5152687> of a 10-year-old girl prepared to do 
anything for a bicycle of her own.

We should be careful, though, of praising Wadjda just because of its clutch of 
firsts. Groundbreaking is a showy word;Al-Mansour photographed in her 
lime-green jeans and Adidas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theobserver/2013/jul/14/haifaa-mansour-wadjda-saudi-arabia>
 is an exciting notion of future Saudi womanhood. But it's as much about 
marketing, about feeding western expectations of progress needed to sell the 
film, as it is about the rights of Saudi women. Rarely mentioned are the other 
two full-length Saudi features from the last decade – 2006'sKeif al-Hal? 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TX4tiKtigF4> and 2009's Menahi 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oOWSiAGN9S0> – neither of which had 
al-Mansour's film's killer hook: a feminist story filmed in the heart of one of 
the world's most repressive nations.

Wadjda's marketability blinds us to the fact it's part of a bigger story that 
receives little sustained attention: the difficulties faced by Arab 
film-makers, men and women, across the region. In the Gulf especially, 
authorities rarely understand cinema that is onlyjust beginning to shift 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2011/oct/27/united-arab-emirates-film-industry>
 in less conservative regimes, like Qatar and the UAE, let alone in Saudi 
Arabia. That means a poor skills base from which directors such as al-Mansour – 
who is lucky enough to be foreign-educated and supported by a progressive 
figure likePrince Al-Waleed bin Talal 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Waleed_bin_Talal> – can draw. Paradoxically, 
the high expectations towards this most high-profile of cultural activities can 
lead to disasters like Jean-Jacques Annaud'sBlack Gold 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146086/black-gold>, along with invariable 
interference from censorship boards.

All of this is rooted in deeper struggles about the pace of modernisation, and 
how these societies are learning to present and ultimately think about 
themselves. Because of Saudi Arabia's secretive nature, any film from the 
country is groundbreaking in this respect, as BBC Arabic producer Mona Deeley 
recentlynoted about Wadjda on an Australian website 
<http://www.cpa.org.au/guardian/2013/1602/19-independent-arab-cinemas.html>: 
"Saudi Arabia is a society covered in other people's projections of it because 
it never represents itself. The film gives an insight into things we never see, 
from streets to schools to life behind closed doors."

Ultimately, every Arab film-maker has to negotiate this minefield, and choose 
how adventurously to push the limits of representation. Wadjda makes a catchy 
girl-power headline, but it's interesting that al-Mansour has been more 
circumspect about its purpose in interviews, stressing that her earlier version 
of the script attacked Saudi life more directly. But the finished film plays a 
cleverer game, and even pays tribute to tradition to some extent: Wadjda tries 
to earn the money to pay for her bike by entering a Qur'an-reciting competition.

Al-Mansour doesn't mock or criticise this. Her choice of passage for her 
protagonist, fromsura two <http://quran.com/2>, is striking: "Allah hath set a 
seal on their hearts." In its initial context, this refers to non-believers, 
but the chosen extract directs it towards "the people … who say, 'We believe in 
Allah and the Last Day,' but they are not believers. They [think to] deceive 
Allah and those who believe, but they deceive not except themselves and 
perceive [it] not." It seems to be hypocrisy that offends al-Mansour – perhaps 
fuelled by a devout society that permits great inequality, where rich Saudis 
indulge in the vices Wahhabi Islam demonises. One that produces characters like 
the moralising teacher, who is rumoured to be having an affair herself.

Significantly, al-Mansour doesn't reject Islam, but simply requests that women 
have access to its core values: tolerance and human dignity. I have the feeling 
she knows that any change will, and perhaps should, be hard-negotiated – anda 
Marie Claire puff piece 
<http://www.marieclaire.co.uk/blogs/543655/7-reasons-why-we-re-in-awe-of-haifaa-al-mansour-saudia-arabia-s-first-female-filmmaker.html>
 is only the tiniest part of that. The western lionising of Wadjda could even 
be counterproductive, comfortably setting up al-Mansour as the property of the 
lucrative globalised film festival circuit while her debut has yet to secure a 
release in a single Muslim country.
 Post-Taliban cinema ... Samira Makhmalbaf's At Five in the Afternoon 
I wonder if that was the case with Samira Makhmalbaf 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0538533/>, whose excellent 2003 film At Five in the 
Afternoon <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/97597/at.five.in.the.afternoon> 
also made a powerful case for women's education. It was trumpeted in the west 
as the first post-Taliban feature from Afghanistan – but media exposure didn't 
translate into a long-term future for an Afghan industry.

Ultimately, it's up to Arabs – including their film-makers – to define their 
own future on their own terms. Like Wadjda's heroine, they should be wary of 
dubious offers of stabilisers (as if the Middle East hasn't had enough of those 
from outsiders recently). Al-Mansour's film, asXan Brooks noted in his review 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jul/18/wadjda-review> last week, "stands 
on its own merits", separate from western accolades, and makes its own case for 
how life could be. The Arabic version of the sexual revolution, when it comes, 
could look different from ours (which, judging by the current agonising over 
porn, is still a work-in-progress anyway). As for us, we can help most by 
watching Wadjda, then the next film, and listening clearly to what the Arab 
world has to say.

Wadjda is out now.

Next week's After Hollywood will look at gay Nollywood. Which global cinematic 
stories would you like to see covered in the column? Let us know in the 
comments below.
 