
President-elect Donald Trump on Wednesday chose a Wall Street attorney with 
experience in corporate mergers and public stock launches as his nominee to 
head theSecurities and Exchange Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/securities-and-exchange-commission> (SEC).

Trump announced his nomination of Jay Clayton, a partner in the law firm 
Sullivan and Cromwell, as chairman of the independent agency that oversees Wall 
Street and the financial markets. If confirmed by the Senate, his 
responsibilities will include enforcing the scores of rules already written by 
the agency under the 2010 law that reshaped financial regulation after the 
2008-09 crisis.

Related: What will President Donald Trump do? Predicting his policy agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-president-policy-immigration-agenda-healthcare>

The law, known as Dodd-Frank, has long been scorned by Republicans and is high 
on Trump’s target list.

Clayton has worked on many of the securities deals that the SEC regulates and 
has represented Wall Street powerhouses including Goldman Sachs and Barclays. 
He is the latest Trump choice with Wall Street connections. His nominee for 
Treasury secretary,Steven Mnuchin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/steven-mnuchin-expected-to-be-named-us-treasury-secretary>
, is a former Goldman executive. Trump also has tapped current Goldman president
Gary Cohn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/gary-cohn-national-economic-council-goldman-sachs-trump>
 to be his top economic adviser and billionaire investorWilbur Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/24/donald-trump-commerce-secretary-talks-wilbur-ross>
 to head the commerce department.

Clayton would succeed Mary Jo White, a former federal prosecutor who also had 
worked as a corporate attorney before being named SEC chair by President Obama.

Trump will be able to put an even broader stamp on the SEC. In addition to 
Clayton, he’ll have a chance to name two of the other four commissioners. The 
five-member body has been down two since December 2015. Two candidates 
nominated by Obama to fill vacancies, one Democrat and one Republican, have 
been stalled in Congress over whether they support requiring publicly traded 
companies to disclose their political spending.

Related: Trump's cabinet picks: here are all of the appointments so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/donald-trump-administration-cabinet-picks-so-far>

The complex Dodd-Frank legislation didn’t offer quick remedies; it laid down 
prescriptions for regulators to flesh out. The SEC was responsible for writing 
a large chunk of the nearly 400 required rules. Overall, federal regulators 
have completed about 70% of the rules more than six years after Dodd-Frank 
became law.
With Trump in the White House and Republicans in control of Congress, a major 
overhaul of the law is expected, if not an outright dismantling.

“We will carefully monitor our financial sector, as we set policy that 
encourages American companies to do what they do best: create jobs,” Clayton 
said in a statement.

In announcing the appointment, Trump’s transition team said Clayton will 
encourage investment, “while providing strong oversight of Wall Street and 
related industries.

“Robust accountability will be a hallmark of his tenure atop the SEC, and the 
financial security of the American people will be his top priority,” the 
statement said.
 