
Wallace and Gromit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/wallace-and-gromit> fans will be 
treated to a grand day out in Melbourne next year as Aardman – the studio 
responsible for some of the world’s most successful animated films – brings a 
major collection of sets, props and design materials from their award-winning 
films to the Australian Centre for Moving Image.

Wallace Gromit and Friends: The Magic of Aardman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/aardman>, which premiered in Paris last year 
at Art Ludique – Le Musée, will feature 350 original artworks and more than 50 
set pieces from the studio responsible for Wallace and Gromit, Shaun the Sheep 
and Chicken Run. Sketchbooks, concept drawings and storyboards will be on show, 
as well as handmade puppets. The flying machine from Chicken Run will be on 
display, and a whole section of the exhibition is focused on Wallace’s 
inventions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwallace-and-gromit-plan-a-grand-day-out-with-melbourne-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14d2e6053a31a84689ed38a71cf8f2beeafd82fd%2F0_0_4962_3509%2F4962.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wallace%20and%20Gromit%20plan%20a%20grand%20day%20out%20with%20Melbourne%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwallace-and-gromit-plan-a-grand-day-out-with-melbourne-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wallace%20and%20Gromit%20plan%20a%20grand%20day%20out%20with%20Melbourne%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwallace-and-gromit-plan-a-grand-day-out-with-melbourne-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14d2e6053a31a84689ed38a71cf8f2beeafd82fd%2F0_0_4962_3509%2F4962.jpg>
 A character study of Gromit from the Aardman exhibition 
Exclusive to the Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> exhibition will be a 
number of artworks from the studio’s feature film in-progress, Early Man, which 
is due out in 2018.

Aardman is most famous for its stop-motion clay animation films, and in 
particular for the characters of Wallace and Gromit – a cheese-loving inventor 
and his very intelligent dog. The pair came to public attention in 1989 with 
the premiere of the short film A Grand Day Out. Only 24 minutes long, it was 
followed up in 1993 and 1995 with The Wrong Trousers and A Close Shave 
respectively, both of which won Oscars.

Aardman has since released a number of feature films using this stop-motion 
technique, including Chicken Run in 2000, and Wallace and Gromit’s fourth 
outing, The Curse of the Were-Rabbit, in 2005, for which they won an Academy 
Award and a Bafta.

Stamina trousers and Aeroplane jelly: 200 years of Australian advertising – in 
pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/nov/16/stamina-trousers-and-aeroplane-jelly-200-years-of-australian-advertising-in-pictures>
Aardman co-founder and executive chair David Sproxton said the exhibition, 
which marks the studio’s 40th anniversary, would give audiences the opportunity 
to see behind-the-scenes material that “demonstrates not only the amount of 
work it takes to get to a finished film but also the imagination and skill of 
the large number of artists the studio depends on”.

Speaking to Guardian Australia, Sproxton said he looked forward to sharing the 
collection with Australians. “There is a strong connection between the humour 
enjoyed by the Brits and the Aussies; some of this stems from the language 
itself but mostly because both populations don’t take themselves too seriously 
and are happy to laugh at themselves readily,” he said. “And of course the 
Aussies love laughing at the Brits!”

• Wallace Gromit and Friends: The Magic of Aardman will be showing at Acmi 
from 28 June 2017 as part of the Melbourne Winter Masterpieces series.
 