
It was a lively scene outside Walthamstow Town Hall: hundreds of people 
<http://www.guardian-series.co.uk/news/wfnews/13925622._We_need_to_listen___Deputy_Leader_after_Mini_Holland_protests/>
, young and old, female and male of many faiths and ethnicities united in 
advance of afull council meeting 
<http://democracy.walthamforest.gov.uk/ieListDocuments.aspx?CId=335&MId=3904> 
against what they see as the heedless imposition of one of Boris Johnson’s 
“mini-Holland” cycling infrastructure schemes. “Let’s have justice not a 
dictatorship,” read one placard. “We are not the silent minority, we are the 
vocal majority,” a banner cried.

This is not how things were meant to be. When the Labour-run borough secured 
“full mini-Holland status” and £30m from Conservative-run City Hall in March 
2014, Johnsondeclared himself 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/media/mayor-press-releases/2014/03/suburbs-transformed-for-cyclists-in-100m-mini-holland-revolution>
 “incredibly impressed” by the “thirst” of all the leading borough funding 
bidders “to transform themselves into better places for people.” Clearly, a lot 
of people who live in Waltham Forest aren’t seeing the changes in their streets 
in quite that way.

Their grievances are deep and various. Formally opened in Walthamstow Village 
two months ago, the Waltham Forest “mini-Holland 
<https://www.walthamforest.gov.uk/Documents/mini-holland-tender-13-dec.pdf>” was
heralded by the council 
<http://press.walthamforest.gov.uk/PressReleases/2015/September/14/4538> as 
“improving conditions for people who walk, cycle and drive” and for creating 
new public spaces, “providing our community with the perfect place to relax and 
unwind.” Alas, the road closures this has entailed have inflamed rather than 
soothed at least some of those most affected.


Town Hall protesters, mobilised by campaign group E17 Streets 4 All 
<http://www.e17streets4all.co.uk/join-us.html>, complained that delivery vans, 
visitors, carers and even emergency service vehicles have been unable to gain 
access and that motorised traffic now clogs neighbouring residential streets - 
so much for cleaner air and a more tranquil environment, they snorted. They 
thinkdeputy council leader Clyde Loakes 
<http://democracy.walthamforest.gov.uk/mgUserInfo.aspx?UID=287>, chief advocate 
of the scheme, has been far too friendly with theWaltham Forest branch of the 
London Cycling Campaign 
<https://wfcycling.wordpress.com/2014/03/10/waltham-forest-wins-30m-for-mini-holland-proposals/>
.


Local businesses have aligned themselves with unhappy residents, claiming 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/transport/hundreds-protest-as-roads-close-for-miniholland-cyclefriendly-scheme-a3098921.html>
 that trade has fallen through the floor. A telling exception, though, are 
estate agents. They are mentioning mini-Holland funding in their sales pitches 
to the sort of people who might be in the market for athree-bedroom terrace in 
Leyton <http://www.rightmove.co.uk/property-for-sale/property-51487390.html> 
for nearly half a million or a two-bed adjacent to (ahem) “Blackhorse Village” 
for£375,000 
<http://www.rightmove.co.uk/property-for-sale/property-51487390.html>: 
cafe-dwellers, loft-converters, gentrifiers; the sort of people who ride 
bicycles.


The furore has also produced some diverting political alignments. While Loakes 
has been accused of incompetence, arrogance and indifference to the views of 
most ordinary locals, Conservative opposition members have cutely positioned 
themselves as champions of the trampled masses.


With most protesters denied access to the council chamber - well, there were 
an awful lot of them - Conservative group leaderMatt Davies 
<http://democracy.walthamforest.gov.uk/mgUserInfo.aspx?UID=244> proposed a 
motion, seconded by his Tory colleagueJohn Moss 
<http://democracy.walthamforest.gov.uk/mgUserInfo.aspx?UID=3490>, which noted 
<http://democracy.walthamforest.gov.uk/mgAi.aspx?ID=27329> that the plans that 
had come forward so far would “clearly disadvantage all road users including 
bus passengers other than the small minority of residents who are cyclists, 
whom a study [funded] by the Camden NHS and TfL has proven are almost entirely 
middle-class, young white men.” That rings a bell. Have Davies and Moss been
reading the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/oct/12/why-are-london-cyclists-so-white-male-and-middle-class>
?


Davies had addressed the crowd outside, as had a local Green. He’d stressed 
that his local party, which is very big on cycling, had yet to finalise its 
stance towards the mini-Holland, but he expressed a personal view that it did 
not meet the requirement for London’s street transport networks to be 
sensitively integrated.


Two of the borough’s three MPs have intervened as well. Looking on from the 
north, where Waltham Forest and Essex meet, Chingford’s Iain Duncan Smith (very 
Conservative) has taken a break from hisquarrels with the chancellor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/06/george-osborne-iain-duncan-smith-universal-credit-tax-credits>
 to challenge the council to “rethink and reconsult”, claiming, like others, 
that the public consultation had been flawed. This, though, was not the view of 
a High Court judge, who on Fridayfirmly rejected 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/transport/miniholland-cycling-scheme-critics-told-by-judge-there-is-no-merit-whatsoever-in-your-claims-a3108856.html>
 the protest group’s application for a statutory review.


As for Walthamstow’s Stella Creasy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/01/stella-creasy-interview> 
(Labour), her in-box has been rammed with mini-Holland matters for many months. 
Shereports 
<http://walthamstow.networkmaker.org/takeaction/mini-holland-update-for-walthamstow-residents/>
 that the largest volume of correspondence has been concerned about particular 
details of the scheme, rather than expressing overall support for or it or 
opposition to it. In aletter 
<http://walthamstow.networkmaker.org/takeaction/mini-holland-update-for-walthamstow-residents/>
 to Loakes (and Waltham Forest’s chief executive Martin Esom) she has urged a 
promised six-month review to be undertaken.


Following the council meeting protests, Loakes told the Waltham Forest Guardian
 
<http://www.guardian-series.co.uk/news/wfnews/13925622._We_need_to_listen___Deputy_Leader_after_Mini_Holland_protests/>
 that he would “listen to our residents’ concerns even more.” At this early 
stage the form that listening will take and any action that ensues remain to be 
seen, though Loakes’s tone was more conciliatory than that ofMayor Johnson’s 
media friend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/17/boris-johnson-cronyism-claims-andrew-gilligan>
 and£59,000 a year 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/mayor-assembly/mayor/andrew-gilligan> part-time 
“cycling commissioner”Andrew Gilligan 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/mehdi-hasan/2010/11/andrew-gilligan-islamism-press>
 when he previouslydeclared 
<http://road.cc/content/news/169394-andrew-gilligan-detractors-cycling-programme-will-be-embarrassed-once-they-see>
 that opponents of the Walthamstow Village scheme “should be embarrassed.”


Initial consternation and traffic chaos are not unusual when new road 
management arrangements are introduced, whether to facilitate cycling, combat 
rat-running or anything else. Often, things settle down in time. Cycling 
activists produce check lists of evidence that cyclised streets are good for 
local businesses, not bad. That said, those Waltham Forest residents who feel 
the project has not been properly thought out might sympathise with the view of 
others across London who say the Johnson Vision for Cycling is beingrailroaded 
through 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2014/sep/18/boris-johnsons-cycling-vision-a-railroading-exercise>
 in order to give the Conservative mayor something to boast about before he 
leaves office next May. After all, he won’thave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/03/new-routemaster-old-london-bus-boris-johnson>
a lot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2013/sep/25/boris-johnson-cable-car-passenger-numbers>
else 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/20/metropolitan-police-say-knife-up-18-in-london>
.


Still, if the scene at B&Q on Lea Bridge Road 
<http://www.allinlondon.co.uk/directory/1142/80137.php> on Friday is anything 
to go by, the council is plainly seeking to reach out over the next part of its 
infrastructure programme. I ran up there (yes,ran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/oct/11/the-glory-of-londons-royal-parks-foundation-half-marathon>
) from my homeacross the border <http://davehill.typepad.com/> in Hackney (for 
radiator paint 
<http://www.ronseal.co.uk/home/radiator-paint/one-coat-radiator-paint/>, since 
you ask), and encountered in the car park a mobile promotional kiosk where a 
trio of young men were handing out leaflets and inviting people to examineplans 
to upgrade <https://lbrproposals.commonplace.is/> this major east London 
thoroughfare right through to the Whipps Cross roundabout.


Better footways, bridges and segregated cycle tracks are promised. The kiosk 
proclaimed that the uplifted Lea Bridge Road will be “a street for everyone.” 
It is easy to see how this long, eclectic stretch of High Street could be 
enhanced, including by making it more hospitable for cycling. But will the 
changes be perceived as truly for “everyone”?

This article was updated on 9 November 2015 to include the outcome of the High 
Court application. 

 