
When HG Wells saw off the invading Martians at the end of his 1897 science 
fiction classicWar of the Worlds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/19/war-worlds-hg-wells-review>, he 
didn’t envisage them making a comeback. But that hasn’t stopped a century’s 
worth of conjecture about what happened next.

It seems that, despite the best efforts of HG Wells and the common cold, you 
can’t keep a good Martian down: 119 years on, a sequel to War of the Worlds has 
been announced, to be penned byStephen Baxter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/25/stephen-baxter-interview-why-science-fiction-is-like-therapy>
, one of Britain’s brightest high-concept science fiction writers. Co-author 
with Terry Pratchett of theLong Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/20/long-earth-terry-pratchett-stephen-baxter-review>
 series of novels,the most recent of which was published after Pratchett’s death
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/12/the-long-utopia-terry-pratchett-stephen-baxter-review>
 in March, Baxter has also collaborated with Alastair Reynolds and Arthur C 
Clarke, as well as having a wide body of solo work under his belt.

Stephen Baxter interview: why science fiction is like therapy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/25/stephen-baxter-interview-why-science-fiction-is-like-therapy>
With publisher Gollancz 
<http://www.gollancz.co.uk/2015/12/gollancz-signs-up-sequel-to-the-war-of-the-worlds-from-stephen-baxter/>
 unveiling the title of Baxter’s sequel as The Massacre of Mankind, we can 
safely say this is not going to be any boring summit meeting. Due out in 
January 2017, The Massacre of Mankind is set in late 1920s London. Thirty years 
after Wells’s book ended, the Martians have licked their wounds, beefed up 
their immune systems, and readied themselves for a second round against the 
bacteria that beat them back the first time. As Britain put up the most 
resistance to their first invasion, they have made ol’ Blighty the target for 
their fresh attack. Lucky, lucky us.

While Wells (also known as “the daddy of modern SF” according to Baxter) was 
drawing on traditions that dated back to Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein, and 
Jonathan Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels, and he had important near-contemporaries 
such as Jules Verne, Baxter says Wells “did more than any other writer to shape 
the form and themes of modern science fiction, and indeed through his wider 
work exerted a profound influence on the history of the 20th century.”

Despite not being endorsed by the Wells estate, The Massacre of Mankind is the 
first sequel to War of the Worlds to be published after the copyright expires 
on HG Wells’ original tale in December 2016, distinguishing it from all 
previous unofficial spinoffs and tie-ins. Wells himself never wrote a sequel, 
or showed interested in doing so, but many other writers have before.

The first of many unofficial sequels to Wells’s novel came out in the US just 
weeks after the serial publication of the original novel had ended. Perhaps 
taking a little umbrage that all the action in the original book was in 
Britain, the Boston Post ran a serial in 1898 calledEdison’s Conquest of Mars 
<http://www.cracked.com/article_19949_the-6-most-important-sci-fi-ideas-were-invented-by-hack.html>
, by Garrett P Serviss, which featured the real-life American inventor taking 
the war back to those pesky Martians on their own turf.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fwar-of-the-worlds-hg-wells-massacre-of-mankind-unofficial-sequels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4592d6fa50518b7413db90ced9a643f6084bd6e%2F73_97_745_447%2F745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20of%20the%20Worlds%20gets%20a%20sequel%20119%20years%20on%20%E2%80%93%20but%20what%20about%20all%20the%20unofficial%20ones%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fwar-of-the-worlds-hg-wells-massacre-of-mankind-unofficial-sequels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20of%20the%20Worlds%20gets%20a%20sequel%20119%20years%20on%20%E2%80%93%20but%20what%20about%20all%20the%20unofficial%20ones%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fwar-of-the-worlds-hg-wells-massacre-of-mankind-unofficial-sequels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4592d6fa50518b7413db90ced9a643f6084bd6e%2F73_97_745_447%2F745.jpg>
 Edison’s Conquest of Mars by Garrett P Serviss 
One of the most curious responses to Wells’s tale – if not exactly a sequel – 
was released in 1962 in the form of a pamphlet by Russian author Lazar Lagin.
Major Wellandyou <http://www.war-ofthe-worlds.co.uk/major_wells_you.htm> 
followed a traitorous British army officer and his collaboration with the 
Martians. Lagin’s interesting title is apparently a Russian pun on what is 
perceived as a typical English greeting: “Well. And You?”

In 1975, father-and-son writing team Manly Wade Wellman and Wade Wellman took 
Wells’s story and mashed it with everyone’s favourite pipe-smoking sleuth: the 
product wasSherlock Holmes’s War of the Worlds 
<http://www.hardsf.org/HSFRSher.htm>, in which the Great Detective turns his 
abilities to solving the conundrum of the invasion (hint: it’s those big 
three-legged machines throwing people into a basket at the back).

Two decades later, Alan Moore’s League of Extraordinary Gentlemen 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/league-of-extraordinary-gentlemen-omnibus-2.html>
 also mashed up Victorian literature in comic book form, and also including a 
retelling of the War of the Worlds.

 For true sequels, perhaps one of the most innovative is the comic book 
Scarlet Traces <https://www.darkhorse.com/Books/12-426/Scarlet-Traces-HC>, 
created by Britons Ian Edginton and D’Israeli and published by Dark Horse in 
2003. Like Baxter’s forthcoming novel, Scarlet Traces is set some years after 
the original invasion, with the added twist that Britain has ingeniously 
reverse-engineered the left-behind Martian technology to create advances in 
everyday life – including a devastating heat-ray that the British Empire has 
found quite useful overseas.

 A special mention: Eric Brown’s short story Ulla Ulla  
<http://ericbrown.co.uk/stories/>(named for the eerie call of the Martian war 
machines). The short story, which appeared in 2002’s Mammoth Book of Science 
Fiction, follows the first manned mission to Mars, finding evidence that War of 
the Worlds was actually rooted in fact.

• This article was amended on 9 December 2015. An earlier version described 
Stephen Baxter’s book as an “official” sequel to The War of the Worlds. His 
book has not been endorsed by theHG Wells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hgwells> estate, but it is the first sequel 
to The War of the Worlds to be published after the copyright in Wells’s novel 
expires in December 2016.

 