
War and Peace <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/war-and-peace> bowed 
out with 5.7 million viewers on Sunday as it was revealed that scriptwriter 
Andrew Davies is set to follow the drama’s success with another period epic, 
Les Misérables.

Davies told the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/bbc/12145291/War-and-Peace-ends-in-a-flood-of-tears-but-writer-vows-return-with-adaptation-of-Les-Miserables.html>
 he has signed up film producer Harvey Weinstein, who co-produced War and 
Peace, to the project, and is due to begin talks with the BBC. The Guardian
reported earlier on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2016/feb/07/tom-bradby-war-peace-bbc-cuts>
 that War and Peace producers Lookout Point were in “active” talks with Davies 
and his team about working on another “major classic”.

The writer, who is also responsible for the much loved Pride and Prejudice 
adaptation featuring Colin Firth, has admitted to sexing up Tolstoy’s original 
text. As well as including numerous nude scenes, the adaptation also makes more 
explicit an incestuous relationship between two of the characters.

Davies has been criticised for trying to squeeze the 1,400-page book into six 
episodes. TheBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> granted the final 
episode a 20-minute extension, the first time it has done so for a Sunday 
evening drama.

Though the final episode failed to reach the heights of the show’s debut, 
which pulled in 6.3 million viewers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/04/bbc-war-and-peace-countryfile>, 
the series has attracted an average of 7.2 million once catch-up watching is 
included. The final episode also overtook ITV’s Vera on the night, havingfallen 
behind the detective drama starring Brenda Blethyn last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/01/the-voice-uk-war-and-peace-bbc1-itv-vera>
.

War and Peace recap: episode six – bows out with a bonkers beard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/feb/07/war-and-peace-recap-episode-six-bows-out-with-a-bonkers-prisoner-beard>
Critics have responded largely positively to the adaptation, with the 
Guardian’s Viv Groskopsaying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/feb/07/war-and-peace-recap-episode-six-bows-out-with-a-bonkers-prisoner-beard>
: “Davies, director Tom Harper and the entire cast can hold their heads high as 
the final, almost-feature-length episode upheld the standards they have 
established from the outset: classy, sensitive, lavish, memorable.”


Davies, who is critical of recent stage and big-screen adaptations of Les 
Misérables, says his version will not feature musical numbers. However, those 
concerned about the way in which War and Peace was condensed for the small 
screen may be worried; Victor Hugo’s tale is by some counts more than 60,000 
words longer.
 