
 This year marks the eightieth anniversary of the publication of Evelyn 
Waugh's first novel, Decline and Fall. It was an instant success, despite only 
narrowly being accepted for publication by his father's company Chapman & Hall, 
and lifted Waugh to the top tier of comic novelists at the tender age of 25. 
His only previously published work had been a monograph on the life ofDante 
Gabriel Rossetti <http://www.rossettiarchive.org/>; respectable enough, but 
hardly an accurate indicator of the talent of one of the century's great 
writers.

It seems as if Waugh's reputation now mainly lies on the behemoth of the 
second half of his career, Brideshead Revisited, which in no small part owes 
its reputation to the seminal 80stelevision adaptation 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LIgwiKxEMI8> of it, and also of its continuing 
reputation as a handbook for chinless teddy bear-wielding dilettantes. It is 
also true that after Decline and Fall, Waugh never wrote anything so 
uncomplicatedly funny again. Its follow-up, Vile Bodies, was a cutting satire 
on the idle lives and loves of the "Bright Young Things" set to which Waugh 
always desperately wanted to belong, and thereafter his divorce from his first 
wife Evelyn Gardiner ("She-Evelyn" to Waugh's "He-Evelyn") and conversion to 
Catholicism saw his worldview sour considerably.

Along with Lucky Jim <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucky_Jim> and A 
Confederacy Of Dunces <http://www.levity.com/corduroy/toole.htm>, Decline And 
Fall is surely one of the greatest debut comic novels of the last century. In 
its picaresque story of the decent, somewhat staid and often put-upon Paul 
Pennyfeather, Waugh establishes an archetype that he would use for many of his 
later heroes, from Charles Ryder in Brideshead to Guy Crouchback in the Sword 
of Honour trilogy. After he is expelled from Oxford owing to an unfortunate 
encounter with the Bollinger Club, which leads to the cherishable line from the 
porter "I expect you'll be becoming a schoolmaster, sir...that's what most of 
the gentlemen does, sir, that gets sent down for indecent behaviour", he does 
that very thing, as Waugh himself had done. Adventures, both pleasant and 
bizarre, ensue, almost casually painting a picture of an uncertain, fragmented 
society, suffering from the constant tension between class, nationality and sex 
that existed between the two wars.

Yet as so often with Waugh, it isn't his protagonist who interests him so much 
as the range of supporting characters. When he is forced to become a 
schoolmaster at the primitive Llanabba Hall, run by the eccentric Dr Fagan, 
Pennyfeather encounters some of Waugh's most enduring characters, such as the 
short-tempered pederast Captain Grimes, who is forever "in the soup" due to his 
predilections, and the mysterious Philbrick, who is by turns butler, con-man 
and exiled aristocrat. However, when he meets the mother of one of the pupils, 
the fragrant Margo Betse-Chetwynde (pronounced "Beast Chained"), his antics 
begin in earnest, including slave trading, imprisonment and an ironic reversal 
of fortune in the final chapter.

One of the reasons why the book possibly isn't as popular today as it has been 
is that it can be argued that Waugh's depiction of a world of 20s high society 
means very little to modern readers, and that the arch dialogue and authorial 
commentary make it difficult to care about any of the characters. This seems an 
unfair criticism. Wodehouse, perhaps Waugh's only equal at constructing
brilliantly unexpected sentences <http://www.drones.com/pgw.cgi> and indelible 
comic characters, came up with improbable variations on the same plot countless 
times, but with such brio and wit that he has remained a perennial favourite. 
Yet Wodehouse idolises his fantasy world of the idle rich and treats his 
characters with affection. Waugh was unafraid to visit all manner of 
indignities on his figures, merrily killing them off as he sees fit, and 
allowing for some far harsher and more biting satire on the upper classes than 
Wodehouse would ever have considered. The title's knowing nod to Gibbon was far 
from a coincidence.

It's possible another reason that the book isn't as appreciated as it should 
be is that it has never been adapted for TV; the only version of it is an
appalling film <http://uk.imdb.com/title/tt0062872/> that has never been 
released on DVD. (Lindsay Anderson and Malcolm McDowell'sO Lucky Man 
<http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9B05E6D8123DE63ABC4C52DFB0668388669EDE>
 loosely borrows some aspects of the plot, however.) It's possible to imagine 
it working brilliantly with a younger David Tennant as Pennyfeather, Stephen 
Fry as Dr Fagan and someone very short "of about thirty, with a short red 
moustache, and slightly bald" to play Grimes. I quite like the idea of Toby 
Jones, who already proved in Infamous how skilled he was at portraying
undesirable literary figures 
<http://youtube.com/watch?v=BXOCTJnFR58&feature=related>.
 