
The 44th president of the United States of America respectfully sent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-death-obama-trump-response>
 his condolences in an official statement to the family of Fidel Castro, Cuba’s 
revolutionary leader. Some foreign countries did more. At the Spanish embassy 
in Havana, for example, the flag was hoisted at half-mast last Monday. As I 
passed the US embassy in a cab, I noticed the flag was flying high. The 
soon-to-be 45th US president tweeted “Fidel Castro is dead”, and thathe would 
look <https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/803237535178772481> for “a 
better deal for the Cuban people [and] the Cuban-American people”.

Since December 2014, when Barack Obama and Raúl Castro brokered a historic 
breakthrough in relations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/17/us-cuba-diplomatic-relations-obama-raul-castro>
 between Cuba and the US, I have been trying to imagine how we could have got a 
better deal. When I say “we”, I include myself in the more than 11 million 
Cubans born and raised on the island who are struggling to survive 
economically; who have family on both sides of the Florida straits as a result 
of economic or political reasons; who saw the 43rd president, George W Bush 
strictly limit travel and money transfers from one country to the other; who 
pay $2 for an hour of internet use, and almost the same for a bottle of cooking 
oil. That day in December, we did not get a perfect deal. We got a realistic 
one. We got the kind of bittersweet deal that makes you hope for more.

Now the president-elect is making a Twitter promise. My expectations are high. 
So what would a better deal look like for the Cuban people?

Trump and Obama offer divergent responses to death of Fidel Castro
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-death-obama-trump-response>
Two points get general agreement among the vast majority of Cubans: the US 
should return Guantánamo to Cuba and the embargo must be lifted. This 
generation of Cubans and Cuban-Americans should definitely put the Guantánamo 
and the embargo. There is no way of fully normalising relations betweenCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> and the US without doing these things. 
We do not deserve to have a torture camp in our backyard. Cubans do not deserve 
to suffer economically just so the US can make our government look bad. By 
doing so for more than five decades, the US government has transformed our 
political system into a lighthouse of resistance and dignity.

There are also red flags: human rights, freedom of the press, freedom of 
speech, freedom of association. Cuba has more than five independent media 
outlets, created in 2015 and 2016, among them Periodismo de Barrio (where I am 
editor-in-chief), El Estornudo, Postdata, Cachivache Media and El Toque. All 
are directed by young women and men who did not want to work for state news 
media outlets. They are diverse in content and opinion, but have something in 
common: none is financed by the US government.

When we say “independent”, we mean independent from the Cuban government, but 
also from the US. It has not been easy. Lonely is the word most used to 
describe these young journalists who do not have the support of Cuban state 
institutions. Some have been arrested and detained, but they still believe in 
the power of their stories. Cubans have proved that we can take care of our 
humans rights, defend them, fight for them. Even if it is a long and hard 
process, I’m confident that fully restoring civil liberties in Cuba is going to 
be my generation’s legacy for the future.

I’m not naive. Of course, I’m perfectly aware this is not the sort of 
agreement the soon-to-be president was thinking of. And it makes perfect sense. 
After almost 60 years, it is hard to expect “a partner and an ally” from the 
political elite in the US, no matter how hard Obama tried to work for it. But 
the least Cubans can expect from another country is respect. President-elect 
Trump can make a deal on behalf of his interests. It will never be on behalf of 
the Cuban people. And certainly not in my name.
 