
Girls in Kenya miss an average of 4.9 days of school each month because of 
their periods 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/sabrina-rubli/menstrual-cups-east-africa_b_6313436.html>
. In fact, the United Nations Children’s Fund says one in 10 African girls skip 
school during menstruation.Some drop out entirely because they lack access to 
sanitary products 
<http://www.ipsnews.net/2014/08/east-africa-breaks-the-silence-on-menstruation-to-keep-girls-in-school/>
.83% of girls in Burkina Faso and 77% in Niger 
<http://menstrualhygieneday.org/advancing-education/> have no place to change 
their sanitary menstrual materials at school. Similar issues affect girls in 
India, Cambodia and Iran.

In WaterAid’s report on menstruation, Menstrual Hygiene Matters 
<http://www.wateraid.org/what-we-do/our-approach/research-and-publications/view-publication?id=02309d73-8e41-4d04-b2ef-6641f6616a4f>
, a woman from Tanzania about her first period. She remembered, “I didn’t know 
what was happening or what to do to manage menstruation. I used cotton wool, 
pages from an exercise book, leaves from trees. I suffered much embarrassment 
at school because I leaked and stained my uniform.”

It’s not just girls’ education that suffers during menstruation, but overall 
health. For instance, 70% of all reproductive diseases in India are caused by 
poor menstrual hygiene – it can alsoaffect maternal mortality 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-26260978>. In urban India, 43%-88% of girls 
use reusable cloth during menstruation <http://menstrualhygieneday.org/health/>
, yet they are often washed without soap or clean water.

Moreover, girls also suffer from social exclusion due to inaccurately held 
social beliefs about menstruation. Helen Walker ofAfripads 
<http://afripads.com/blog/>, a social business in Uganda that manufactures and 
sells cost-effective reusable sanitary pads, says, “menstruating women and 
girls are wrongly considered to be ‘contaminated, dirty and impure’. Girls 
suffer stigma.” Such stigma can be found in dozens of cultures across the globe 
and in different eras (the Roman author Pliny thought menstruating women had 
the power to turn wine sour 
<https://dublin.sciencegallery.com/blood/bloodmatters>), and they limit access 
to hygiene, community and family time.

There is evidence that in some developing countries, girls are not allowed to 
access water fountains because of wrongly held beliefs about menstruation. 
Until 2003, Nepali communities forced menstruating women and girls to engage in
chhaupadi a practice that forces women and girls to sleep in separate huts or 
sheds (and subjects them to other harsh restrictions).The practice is now 
illegal but it is still observed in many rural areas 
<http://menstrualhygieneday.org/human-rights/>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fwe-need-to-talk-about-periods-why-is-menstruation-still-holding-girls-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432733247980%2F5431c25b-e06a-4433-85ec-7bcf0ae59a73-1480x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20need%20to%20talk%20about%20periods%3A%20why%20is%20menstruation%20still%20holding%20girls%20back%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fwe-need-to-talk-about-periods-why-is-menstruation-still-holding-girls-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20need%20to%20talk%20about%20periods%3A%20why%20is%20menstruation%20still%20holding%20girls%20back%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fwe-need-to-talk-about-periods-why-is-menstruation-still-holding-girls-back%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432733247980%2F5431c25b-e06a-4433-85ec-7bcf0ae59a73-1480x2040.jpeg>
 In March Mercy Corps Yemen trained 1,850 women to make re-usable menstrual 
pads. Photograph: Mercy Corps Yemen 
Today is the second Menstrual Hygiene Day <http://menstrualhygieneday.org/>, 
founded to “create a world in which every woman and girl can manage her 
menstruation in a hygienic way – wherever she is – in privacy, safety and with 
dignity”. The day aims both to end the silence around menstruation and 
highlight positive solutions for managing periods.

So what are NGOs doing to address this global challenge? Nancy Muller, senior 
programme officer at international health NGOPath <http://www.path.org/>, who 
works on designing solutions to good menstrual hygiene, gives one example of a 
recent initiative. “We were trying to determine whether we could turn 
agricultural waste – bananas, rice and so on – into an absorbent pulp, which 
women and girls could then use to make their own pads. But we’ve moved away 
from that now: girls go to school for long days, so the pads need to be 
adaptable to different absorbent materials.” For another initiative, Path gave 
women and girls disposable cameras to take pictures of their sanitation 
systems. “We wanted them to record their relationships with menstrual hygiene,” 
says Muller.

Afripads provides girls in Uganda with washable sanitary pads. Helen Walker 
says these are preferable to disposable pads, because they “come close to what 
girls and women in Uganda are already used to”. Reusable pads are also more 
suitable for women and girls in refugee camps: “Since our pads last for at 
least 12 months, [aid workers] don’t need to distribute them as regularly as 
they would need to do with disposable pads. Plus you don’t have the issue of 
disposal. Now you have latrines at refugee camps filling up rapidly because 
girls and women throw their pads in the latrines.”

People prefer not to think about it or talk about it ... it’s a challenge to 
secure funding

One problem facing NGOs in this sector is cost. Many sanitary products are 
simply too expensive for women and girls to buy, so they must rely on aid. But 
solutions to this problem are being developed. Arunachalam Muruganantham 
discovered his wife could not afford to maintain good menstrual hygiene and set 
about designing a machine to help women manufacture their own low-cost sanitary 
products. Since then, he has supplied machines to 1,300 villages in 23 Indian 
states. Hetold the BBC <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-26260978> that his 
sanitary pads are “by the women, for the women, and to the women”.

But most NGOs agree the main obstacle to securing good menstrual hygiene for 
girls is a culture of silence around periods. Nancy Muller says, “people prefer 
not to think about it or talk about it. It’s a challenge to secure funding 
because menstruation is not seen as a critical or life-threatening issue.” 
Helen Walker agrees, “we need to raise more awareness that this is a very 
important issue, affecting so many girls and women in so many ways.”

There is still squeamishness around menstruation that affects most women 
across the world. This creates a twofold challenge for organisations wishing to 
improve menstrual hygiene: on one hand, it is hard to convince partners in 
developed countries to talk about supporting menstrual hygiene initiatives. On 
the other, it is difficult to convince women and girls in developing countries 
to take up support because of the stigma of coming forward.

Nevertheless, those working in the sector remain sanguine. “It’s an amazing 
opportunity to reach girls at a really formative time in their lives,” says 
Muller. “Menstruation is a critical gender issue. We’d love to have 
conversations with boys about girls, puberty and gender too.” Her colleague 
Laura Wedeen, a senior policy adviser in the reproductive health division, 
agrees: “Menstrual hygiene is a critical entry point for talking about sexual 
health more generally.” And though Wedeen concedes menstrual hygiene is not a 
well-developed element of sex education globally, she says: “I am very 
optimistic that we will get there. We just have to have these conversations.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 