
Christmas is a time for – well, fill in the blank according to whichever 
cliche you prefer. But in my house it is usually a time for games and therefore 
conflict.

I never like myself less than when I am playing games with my children and 
inadvertently finding myself taking them too seriously, likeSimon Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/04/comedy-error-simon-day-review>’s 
Competitive Dad in The Fast Show <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TFq8rBe79L0>. 
How can it be a healthy impulse to want to obliterate your pint-sized opponent 
in a game of Ludo or Monopoly? And now the season is coming round again, I look 
forward to another episode of Nietzschean will to power and the subsequent 
inevitable self-shaming.

I blame my father for this, who never let me win any game. My mother was also 
fiercely competitive and so is my younger brother. My elder brother wisely 
opted out of the whole thing and emigrated to America.

The secret history of Monopoly: the capitalist board game’s leftwing origins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/11/secret-history-monopoly-capitalist-game-leftwing-origins>
The virus of competitiveness has spread somewhat to my children, either by 
their genes or the examples they have witnessed. The sweetest among them can 
become a Stalinist gorgon once they get the bit between the teeth in a 
world-domination game such as Risk, in which they have the opportunity to 
destroy all opposing forces.Monopoly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/11/secret-history-monopoly-capitalist-game-leftwing-origins>
 is just as bad, if not worse – which is ridiculous as both games rely 
primarily on pure luck.

The trouble is, it’s hard to extricate yourself from what is a highly 
competitive society – even though society seems to still be, officially at 
least, in two minds about it. As a principle, it still holds good in many 
primary schools where, commonly, all must win for fear of hurting any child’s 
feelings. At the same time, in professional sport it is clear, whatever anybody 
says, that only winners matter. In society, much the same pertains. Crush the 
opposition or you’re toast.

I share this double standard. There is no doubt in my mind that competitiveness
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/15/avoid-the-competitive-parent-trap>
 is a driver of excellence in any field, and as a meritocrat and one of those 
vulgar self-made men, I cannot be entirely against the domination of the field 
by those who work hardest and are most talented.

Football violence would be unlikely to continue if it didn’t matter which team 
won or lost

That’s the trouble with competitiveness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/15/avoid-the-competitive-parent-trap>
. Unchecked, it simply makes you unpleasant. Consider, even, competition at one 
remove, such as supporting a football team. I recall, when I did support one 
(as a teenager) I became sour and sullen when we lost and triumphalist and smug 
when we won, gleefully mocking other supporters whose teams had done less well 
that particular Saturday. And football violence would be unlikely to continue 
if it didn’t matter which team won or lost.

I don’t know if competition is a “natural” instinct. Whatever the case, I have 
never encouraged my children to be competitive (for all the good that’s done). 
There’s enough pressure from the world to compete. I keep repeating that it 
doesn’t matter if you win or lose so long as you do your best. Obviously, this 
isn’t true. But it should be. For myself, I dearly wish it were.

To try to abolish competitiveness is pointless and probably unhealthy. It’s an 
old-fashioned idea, but the thing is to teach generosity in playing, losing and 
winning, whether at aboard game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/25/the-board-hoard-your-monthly-guide-to-the-best-new-board-games>
, a sport or life.

This will be an uphill struggle, given that triumphalism has become the norm 
in many sports. The punch in the air, somersault on the pitch, or growling of 
two boxers before a fight. Business isn’t much better, with all focus on 
annihilating the opposition.

Yet what can render competitiveness a positive force is that it provides a 
theatre for virtuous behaviour. I find few things more admirable than a 
genuinely humble winner or a graceful loser, perhaps because I am usually 
neither. I shall keep trying – but the truth is I would still rather be the 
former than the latter.

@timlottwriter 
<https://twitter.com/timlottwriter?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 