
When I look up Heather Matarazzo online, the top results remember her as the 
“dorky” or “geeky” girl from the cult 1995 indie comedy Welcome to the 
Dollhouse. The actor, who shot to fame soon after the film, and also as Anne 
Hathaway’s eccentric best friend in The Princess Diaries and its sequel, has 
often found herself reduced to those labels.

How we made Welcome to the Dollhouse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/23/how-we-made-welcome-to-the-dollhouse-todd-solondz-heather-matarazzo-interview>
Matarazzo first began acting when she was seven, though it was her role in 
Todd Solondz’s brutal debut that thrust her into the spotlight, winning her an 
Independent Spirit award and alerting Hollywood to her presence. Roles in 
high-profile films such as The Devil’s Advocate, 54, Scream 3 and the 
aforementioned Disney franchise soon followed but after 2007’s Hostel: Part II, 
she vanished from mainstream cinema, only to reappear with a cameo role in the 
2015 hit comedy Sisters.

“I don’t know if I took a step back from Hollywood, or Hollywood took a step 
back from me,” the 34-year-old says during a rather late, and incredibly 
candid, Skype chat. Things reached an all-time low in 2009, a dark period that 
led the actor to consider suicide after months of unsuccessful auditions.

 “I was like, what kind of sick and twisted universe is this? The fact that 
I’m still here is a miracle in itself,” she says.

She can’t pinpoint the moment when it became harder to get work, but she 
suspects it was the association with playing the “dork” that led to Hollywood’s 
limited view of her. “I had difficulties dealing with my own insecurities and 
identity when I was in my late teens,” she says. “It was strange because I 
never thought about the characters that I played when I was younger. But it 
wasn’t until I became an adolescent that I started hearing words such as ‘ugly’ 
or ‘plain’. I started to get a firm grasp on how other people saw me, and I 
took other people’s views of me as absolute truths.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fheather-matarazzo-interview-working-actors-rejection-suicide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff44e25fad863fe8c55fb17077d17fecf01884c27%2F0_557_1743_2435%2F1743.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20the%20Dollhouse's%20Heather%20Matarazzo%20on%20rejection%2C%20suicide%20and%20ayahuasca&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fheather-matarazzo-interview-working-actors-rejection-suicide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20the%20Dollhouse%27s%20Heather%20Matarazzo%20on%20rejection%2C%20suicide%20and%20ayahuasca&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fheather-matarazzo-interview-working-actors-rejection-suicide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff44e25fad863fe8c55fb17077d17fecf01884c27%2F0_557_1743_2435%2F1743.jpg>
 Matarazzo in Welcome to the Dollhouse, 1995. Photograph: 
Pics/Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
2016 was a vital year for women in Hollywood who chose to speak out against 
the sexism they face in the industry. While equal pay is still an ongoing 
problem, female actors also suffer from a narrow set of roles, from the bitch 
to the mom and back again. Matarazzo found herself being forced into going to 
auditions that were ill-fitting, just to stay in the game.

“I had the experience of being a good girl and doing the thing I’m suppose to 
do,” she says. “I literally felt like I’m fucking dying every time I went 
before the proverbial gods to audition for something that I know I wasn’t right 
for. But I had to do it because it shows I’m willing and open to everything, 
and I had bills to pay. It was frustrating because eventually I didn’t get 
those roles anyway.”

The industry still frowns upon women who reject typecasting. Another child 
star, Thora Birch, best known for her roles in Ghostworld and American Beauty, 
disappeared from the limelight and admitted,in an interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/23/thora-birch-hollywood-darling-disappeared>
, it was partly because of her defiance to the same old roles the industry 
wanted to typecast her in.

 “A lot of people resist women who know their worth because they’re not 
playing the role they’ve been assigned to, which is to say yes and say thank 
you,” Matarazzo says. “I think of [auditioning for these roles] as being a 
prostitute and being interviewed to see if you’re going to be good enough to 
put out on the corner to get fucked.” She reassures me she isn’t being “crass, 
just honest”.

 Although her tough stance hasn’t completely banished her from the industry, 
it has pushed her out of the mainstream, which has led to considerable 
financial issues.

The last few years have been particularly hard for Matarazzo; she’s even 
considered driving for the ride-share service Lyft. “Most people think that I 
probably get paid a lot of money,” she says. “But I really don’t and most 
working actors don’t. I drive a beat-up fucking Prius and I just bought my 
first pair of new shoes in over two years. There is this ‘untouchable’ and 
made-up image of actors, where they live this extravagant, beautiful life. But 
in reality, it’s just not the experience.”

 For the past few years, save for small roles in shows such as Grey’s Anatomy 
and Law & Order, the actress has been primarily involved in independent films 
such as Girl Flu and Stuck, both set for release next year. She is also running 
anonline petition 
<https://www.patreon.com/HeatherMatarazzo?utm_campaign=creatorshare2&utm_medium=social&utm_source=facebook>
, to fund her creative projects and create a “diverse and inclusive” production 
company, on Patreon.com, an internet-based platform that helps artists raise 
money through the support of their fans. She explains at the moment she gets 
paid less than minimum wage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fheather-matarazzo-interview-working-actors-rejection-suicide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2afbd1aab1186dc5978479cccd6b02a7378a7a83%2F0_70_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20the%20Dollhouse's%20Heather%20Matarazzo%20on%20rejection%2C%20suicide%20and%20ayahuasca&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fheather-matarazzo-interview-working-actors-rejection-suicide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20the%20Dollhouse%27s%20Heather%20Matarazzo%20on%20rejection%2C%20suicide%20and%20ayahuasca&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fheather-matarazzo-interview-working-actors-rejection-suicide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2afbd1aab1186dc5978479cccd6b02a7378a7a83%2F0_70_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Matarazzo with Anne Hathaway and Mandy Moore in The Princess Diaries, 2001. 
Photograph: Allstar/Walt Disney 
“An independent project runs for two to three weeks – at most and we get paid 
$125 for the day, that’s after working for 16-18 hours,” she says. “And I’m 
thinking, all I want to be able to do is pay rent, create and bring about 
stories to the world that need to be told. It’s not about the awards for me. 
It’s about a single tweet or the email or a letter that says, ‘That movie 
changed my life.’ And I would honestly just like some help.”

She has previously supplemented her income through teaching and co-writing 
scripts, but says it still hasn’t been enough to keep her afloat. Matarazzo, 
who was adopted after being placed in foster care, openly acknowledges her 
personal struggles with depression and PTSD that worsened after losing her 
birth father and adopted father in the same year. It led her to consider taking 
her own life.

“It wasn’t even a dramatic thing,” she says. “And that’s the thing about 
suicidal thoughts. It’s like, ‘Maybe I should put gas in the car.’ It’s very 
matter-of-fact.”

 On the recommendation of her therapist, she then travelled to Costa Rica to 
experiment with the popular spiritual hallucinogenic ayahuasca, which she 
claims saved her life. The plant-based drug has gained notable popularity with 
celebrities and millennials alike in the past few years. Comedian Chelsea 
Handler most recently endorsed her “experience” with it, in her Netflix 
documentary Chelsea Does.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fheather-matarazzo-interview-working-actors-rejection-suicide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a3c2579edf5b42886320cadd3296e6da1ecdc88%2F0_0_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20the%20Dollhouse's%20Heather%20Matarazzo%20on%20rejection%2C%20suicide%20and%20ayahuasca&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fheather-matarazzo-interview-working-actors-rejection-suicide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20the%20Dollhouse%27s%20Heather%20Matarazzo%20on%20rejection%2C%20suicide%20and%20ayahuasca&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fheather-matarazzo-interview-working-actors-rejection-suicide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a3c2579edf5b42886320cadd3296e6da1ecdc88%2F0_0_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Heather Matarazzo in Hostel: Part II, 2007. Photograph: Allstar/Lionsgate 
“I had come to the point where I was like, if this doesn’t work, I don’t know 
what I am going to do,” Matarazzo says. “It’s not about going and getting high 
though. You literally are puking and shitting in a bucket. You go to hell and 
back. I was terrified.”

However it eventually ended up being a “transformative” experience, one that 
gave her a spiritual awakening of sorts and clarity on the current state of 
things, however bleak.

Wiener-Dog review – Todd Solondz finds something to feel good about in pet 
project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/12/wiener-dog-review-todd-solondz-daschund-danny-devito>

 Indeed, in our almost four-hour conversation that runs into the early 
morning, she attests a great amount of importance to things such as identity, 
determination and the power of self. And as things stand, she’s going to need a 
lot of it.

The latest blow to that determination came in the form of director Todd 
Solondz’s 2015 film Wiener-Dog. The film, which is a spin-off from Welcome to 
the Dollhouse, saw Greta Gerwig in the role of Dawn Wiener, originally played 
by Matarazzo.

Was she hurt for not even being approached for the film?

“Of course, my ego was bruised,” she says. “I found out about it on Twitter. I 
felt sad and hurt.” When she finally got an opportunity to ask Solondz about 
it, a few months later, he told her that because she said no to coming back to 
play the character years ago, “it freed him to able to cast different actors in 
the same role”.

But she isn’t letting it or anything else deter her spirit. Not any more, 
anyway.

“People grow and people change and that’s part of life,” she says. “As for 
Dawn, she will always live on that bus to Disney World, singing the hummingbird 
song.”

 