
Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> berated his 
Arsenal players for a lack of urgency and incision after they conceded two 
“cheap goals” in suffering a first defeat since the opening weekend of the 
season in the League Cup quarter-finals against Southampton. They left the 
pitch at the end of both halves to a chorus of boos from the home support.

Jordy Clasie allows Southampton to swagger past Arsenal into semi-finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/arsenal-southampton-efl-cup-match-report>
The hosts made 10 changes to the team who defeated Bournemouth on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/arsenal-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
, and lost Mohamed Elneny to illness before the interval, as Southampton 
reached their first semi-final in this competition for 30 years. Goals from 
Jordy Clasie and Ryan Bertrand secured a two-legged tie with Liverpool in the 
new year, and Claude Puel’s team were dominant throughout.

“I’m disappointed,” said Wenger, who hopes to have Olivier Giroud available 
for Saturday’s trip to West Ham after a groin problem. “We had a disappointing 
performance, particularly in the first half. I think we were not good enough 
defensively and gave cheap goals away.

“ It was better in the second, but it was one of those nights where you look 
like you could play two hours without scoring a goal. We didn’t have enough 
urgency in the first half and were weak in some departments. We paid for that.

“We were not incisive enough and they were sharper than us and fitter. If you 
give someone a handicap of two goals, against a Premier League side it’s 
difficult. We had players out there who are used to top-level competition, but 
we didn’t have the right urgency.”

Asked about the supporters’ reaction, Wenger said: “The fans never expect too 
much. It’s down to us to give them what they want. It is a fact. We have to 
live with that. But, of the players who featured today, Gabriel played on 
Saturday, Carl Jenkinson has been in the team recently, and Kieran Gibbs has 
played a lot recently.

“ On the night we were just not at our best. That’s an explanation more than 
an excuse because there are no excuses. But I can only say ‘well done’ to
Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton>. They were 
better than us tonight.”
 