
Last year, we looked at realistic targets all staff can buy into and feel 
involved in, and all of them still apply. So, instead of looking at general 
resolutions that can fit into any small business, we’ve looked at specific 
trends of what will happen in 2017 and how your business can react to them.

It’s never too late to write your business resolutions, and stick to them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/kia-fleet-partner-zone/2016/jan/25/write-business-resolutions-five-year-plan-goals-growth-celebrate>
The year of VR

Virtual reality (VR), is constantly developing, and constantly improving. Even 
since we publishedour piece on how it will affect your business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/kia-fleet-partner-zone/2016/mar/21/virtual-reality-affect-small-business>
, it has come on in leaps and bounds. VR poses the opportunity to experience 
new environments and challenges without going anywhere. Brands are already 
jumping on this technology – Merrell created virtual mountain hike Trailscape 
to launch a new hiking boot and Marriott Hotels created 4D Tourism experience 
Teleporter. Think about how this could transform your business – from providing 
immersive training for your staff (ifastronauts can use it 
<http://rewind.co/portfolio/bbc-home/>, so can you) to offering your customers 
a ‘try before you buy’ experience of everything from hotel rooms to white-water 
rafting.

The year of sustainability

One of the most popular programmes of 2016 was Planet Earth II, which received 
higher viewing figures than the X Factor. At the end of the series, David 
Attenborough delivered a messaged to his 9.5 million strong audience: ‘It’s 
surely our responsibility to do everything within our power to create a planet 
that provides a home not just for us, but for all life on earth.’ His sign-off 
is a powerful reminder that sustainability needs to be top of the agenda for 
2017, and years to come. This needs to be woven into every part of our lives, 
including our working lives. As a business owner you are responsible for 
ensuring sustainability and eco-friendly practices – this could range from 
monitoring printing levels, to usingGreen Tomato 
<http://www.greentomatocars.com/en-uk/> cars, to implementing green supply 
chain management.

The year of video 

Just last week, Twitter released an update that will let you broadcast live 
video from within its app. This follows a high-profile campaign from Facebook 
to promote its live functionality. As this trickles down to mainstream usage, 
you need to decide if you should make investment in live streaming. Think about 
whether your core audience need to see your content now and whether you have 
unique content – if you are involved in sports coverage for example, this could 
be a good avenue to go down.

360-degree video is also making headway in becoming a more mainstream tool 
that small businesses should be investing in. Facebook have also just selected 
certain pages – such as National Geographic – to feature live 360-degree video 
– and it’s more than likely that this will roll out to all users soon. There is 
a lower entry point for pre-recorded 360 video, as all you need is access to 
the internet and a decent bandwidth in order to watch and explore them. Think 
about any additional experiences you could provide to your customers – stories 
that tie in with new product launches are a fantastic use of 360-degree video, 
take theseries published alongside the release of The Jungle Book 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TtOvDWvAfK4> as an example.

The year of Artificial Intelligence (AI)

From self-driving cars to chat bots, the growth in artificial intelligence in 
recent years is staggering. Just this year, Amazon released personal assistant 
‘Alexa’ to answer queries and control connected devices in the home and office. 
And Kia launched the NiroBot to deliver instant access to product information 
for the 2017 Niro hybrid utility vehicle. This mirrors a growth in 
personalisation across all markets. Cars too, are developing sophisticated 
infotainment and advanced driver assistance systems, as we move closer to 
completely driverless cars. So start thinking about how you could use this 
technology, both from a customer services point of view, and a fleet point of 
view, if your business has one.

Whatever 2017 brings, there are ways that you can make the most of the trends 
that emerge. Just be sure to only invest in the ideas that fit within your 
business model and your audience. As long as you stick to those rules, you’ll 
be able to reap the rewards for you and your small business.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Kia Fleet  
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx>sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
 