
Suffering from back pain, headache, fever or cold? The pill of choice is 
usually paracetamol. The drug was introduced into the market in 1956, andGPs 
issue a staggering 22.9m prescriptions 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1513980/nhs-spends-87million-on-paracetamol-tablets-which-can-be-bought-20-times-cheaper-elsewhere/>
 for paracetamol every year. So it’s disconcerting to read that it’s largely 
ineffective,according to a blog on Evidently Cochrane 
<http://www.evidentlycochrane.net/paracetamol-widely-used-ineffective/>.

The solution

Cochrane is the international research group that adds up the evidence for 
treatments by combining results from high-quality studies, and it has looked at 
paracetamol quite thoroughly. Guidance from Nice recommends paracetamol as the 
first-line painkiller for low back pain 
<https://pathways.nice.org.uk/pathways/low-back-pain-early-management#path=view%3A/pathways/low-back-pain-early-management/drug-treatments-for-low-back-pain.xml&content=view-index>
. Yet Cochrane says that for acute back pain,4g of paracetamol a day is no 
better than a placebo 
<http://www.cochrane.org/CD012230/BACK_paracetamol-low-back-pain>. It couldn’t 
find any good evidence that it worked for chronic backache.

For hip and knee pain from osteoarthritis 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/351/bmj.h3705>, the drug provides such a small 
amount of pain relief that researchers wondered if it actually provided any 
benefit a person would notice.

If you’ve got a cold, paracetamol can help make your nose run less 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/351/bmj.h3705>, but won’t help with sneezing, 
coughing, discomfort, tiredness or a sore throat. For migraines, it is is 
better than placebo but not as good as other painkillers. Meanwhile, if you 
have a tension headache, you have only a 10% chance of feeling better than if 
you’d taken a placebo. It can reduce fever in children – but Cochrane says the 
studies are poor and sponging down had a similar effect in the research it 
assessed. The drug does seem to reduce the pain from having your wisdom teeth 
extracted.

Paracetamol reduces the production of prostaglandins that are involved in 
inflammation, and so make nerve endings less sensitive to pain. How people 
break it down and how well it works for them is determined by genetics –it 
works better for some people than for others. 
<http://www.evidentlycochrane.net/paracetamol-widely-used-ineffective/> It’s 
fairly safe, although rarely it can cause liver failure within the maximum 
standard dose (eight 500mg tablets a day).

Professor Phillip Conaghan, of the Leeds Institute of Rheumatic and 
Musculoskeletal Medicine andauthor of a paper on the safety of paracetamol 
<http://ard.bmj.com/content/early/2015/02/09/annrheumdis-2014-206914.full>, 
says we have been restricted to three types of pain killers for close to a 
century, one of which is paracetamol. The other two are non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (which are associated with stomach ulcers and bleeding, 
kidney and liver damage) and opioids, which include codeine. The latter group 
causes constipation and a host of other side effects, and can also create 
dependency 
<http://www.mayoclinic.org/drugs-supplements/codeine-oral-route/side-effects/DRG-20074022>
.

Conaghan adds that a painkiller may not always be the answer – for backache 
and osteoarthritis, strengthening muscles may work better than relying on 
painkillers. Headaches can often be prevented by looking away from screens, 
getting enough rest and avoiding dehydration. He thinks most people know that 
paracetamol isn’t great, although if it does work for you, keep taking it (but 
restrict your alcohol, as together they can damage your liver).
 