
AT&T, the US’s second largest wireless telecommunications company, agreed to 
acquire media powerhouse Time Warner over the weekendin a deal worth $85bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/22/att-buy-time-warner-donald-trump>
.

One of the largest acquisitions of all time, the deal brings together Time 
Warner’s content brands includingHBO <https://www.theguardian.com/media/hbo>, 
CNN and Warner Bros with AT&T’s portfolio of mobile, broadband and satellite TV 
services – the company has more than 130 million mobile phone customers and 25 
million pay-TV subscribers through DirecTV.

AT&T’s CEO Randall Stephenson said the deal would enable the two companies to 
move quicker and operate better in a world where people increasingly access 
content on their mobile devices.

AT&T agrees to buy Time Warner for $85bn as Trump slams deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/22/att-buy-time-warner-donald-trump>
“The world of distribution and content is converging, and we need to move 
fast, and if we want to do something truly unique, begin to curate content 
differently, begin to format content differently for these mobile environments, 
and this is all about mobility,” he said.

Gartner analyst Akshay Sharma said the deal was about AT&T trying to become 
smarter. “Instead of being a dumb pipe provider, now it’s all about content and 
user experience,” he said.

However, critics were concerned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/23/trump-att-time-warner-deal-clinton-kaine>
 that the deal could lead to less consumer choice, higher prices and a threat 
to media plurality. Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump said that it 
would give the combined company “too much concentration of power” and that he 
would block the deal if he wins next month’s election.

But what does it mean for consumers?

Pricing problems

A key concern is whether the newly merged company might use its huge 
distribution network (the customers of DirecTV and its wireless and broadband 
services) to give an unfair advantage to its own content, delivering it in a 
way that is faster or more accessible than competitor content. This would, of 
course, violate theprinciple of net neutrality 
<https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2016/02/zero-rating-what-it-is-why-you-should-care>
, whereby internet service providers should not favor or block any particular 
products or websites.

AT&T has form for this. It already offers AT&T wireless customers the ability 
to watch DirecTV without it counting against their data plan 
<http://www.fiercewireless.com/wireless/at-t-mobility-ceo-lurie-defends-carrier-s-directv-zero-rating-no-regulatory-concerns>
. This “zero-rating” strategy means it’s cheaper to stream DirecTV than it is 
to use other services. Following the Time Warner deal, AT&T could extend this 
zero rating to Game of Thrones, Harry Potter movies or NFL football on TNT. 
That’s good news for AT&T customers but could be seen to give its own service 
an unfair advantage over competitors such as Dish Network’s Sling TV or 
on-demand services such as Netflix and Hulu, unless they pay AT&T to have their 
own zero-rating deal.

“Whether it’s channel position or recommendations on your home screen, the 
distributor certainly has the technical capability to give their own content 
more visibility than their competitors if they are left to do so,” said analyst 
Jim Nail of Forrester Research.

AT&T and Time Warner shares fall as investors' doubts over merger grow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/24/att-time-warner-merger-shares-fall-investors>
The end result is that it becomes harder for other content providers to 
compete for end users’ attention. In the long run this could mean less 
competition altogether, which could lead to higher prices.

Not everyone agrees. “In reality, regulatory constraints mean that it is 
almost impossible to use vertically owned content to the advantage of 
distribution, and it is equally impossible to use captive distribution to the 
advantage of vertically owned content,” analyst Craig Moffett said.

A less clunky experience between devices

This type of deal should allow AT&T to create a better user experience as they 
access content across multiple devices, whether that’s their cellphone, tablet 
or TV – an experience that has traditionally been clunky and painful for users.

“They can connect the dots as the content flows from the big screen to the 
laptop to smartphone or tablet,” Sharma said. AT&T will be able to data mine a 
person’s location, devices and behaviour in order to provide the right content 
at the right time in a more efficient way.

“It makes for a more holistic user experience that could lead to 
consumer-friendly innovations.”

More targeted advertising

Like it or not, advertising helps fund most of the content we consume. The 
merger of AT&T andTime Warner <https://www.theguardian.com/media/time-warner> 
could mean more granularity to ad targeting. AT&T has already launched 
addressable TV advertising, where different households watching the same 
program will see different commercials, through DirecTV. This approach could be 
extended throughout all of the new company’s offerings and across platforms.

“I know ads are painful to watch sometimes, but it’s necessary because it pays 
the bills. More contextual advertising means the doctor might get the ad for 
Mercedes or BMW while the child might see Pepsi, Coca-Cola or video game ads,” 
Sharma said.
 