
There was once a city called Crocodilopolis, where they worshiped the 
crocodile god Sobek. The people of Crocodilopolis paid devotion to an earthly 
representative of Sobek, a living crocodile they called Petsuchos and covered 
in gold and gems and kept in a temple, though it is unclear how they did this 
without loss of life or limb. When one Petsuchos died, they simply replaced him 
with another, like a fairground goldfish.

Crocodilopolis was established on the Nile, southwest of Memphis, about 
4,000BC. The Egyptians called it Shedet (it was the Greeks who, wise to the 
city’s USP, gave it its snappy name), and it was possibly the most ancient city 
in ancient Egypt. It is now part of the modern city of Faiyum – which makes 
Faiyum possibly the oldest continuously inhabited city in the world.


But only possibly. Beyond the easy task of immediately discounting every city 
in North America and Australasia, identifying the world’s oldest continuously 
inhabited city is an uncertain business. There is a mess of claim and 
counterclaim, myth and legend, architectural digs and disputed evidence.


 One reason for the stickiness of this subject is the whole matter of deciding 
when a settlement becomes a city at all – some argue when it abandons simple 
self-sufficiency and establishes trade, others when it develops plumbing. There 
is also a long-running spat in academic circles about whether cities could 
predate agriculture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhats-the-oldest-city-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F13%2F1423836840017%2F509eead0-88b2-4f84-9a2d-ba7cdd5b0b8e-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20the%20oldest%20city%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhats-the-oldest-city-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20the%20oldest%20city%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwhats-the-oldest-city-in-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F13%2F1423836840017%2F509eead0-88b2-4f84-9a2d-ba7cdd5b0b8e-1360x2040.jpeg>
 The ancient Roman theatre (built sometime between AD114-117) in Plovdiv, 
Bulgaria. Photograph: De Agostini/W Buss/Getty 
But even among places that are undisputedly cities, the claimants stretch from 
Varanasi, India to Plovdiv, Bulgaria. Varanasi (once known as Benares) can 
count Mark Twain in its corner – “Benares is older than history, older than 
tradition, older even than legend, and looks twice as old as all of them put 
together,” Twain said – but its claim seems to rest on the legend that it was 
established by Lord Shiva in 3,000BC, while all the actual evidence suggests it 
was founded on the Ganges 2,000 years later. Plovdiv, meanwhile, has a far 
stronger case, with evidence of continuous settlement dating back to 6,000BC.

But it is the Middle East and the Fertile Crescent that is the most, well, 
fertile area for antique urbanity. Not that this makes the job of firmly 
planting a flag on the oldest city any easier. Cities in this region have not 
shouted their claims, or investigated them, or tried to trade them for the 
tourist dollar, as energetically as have the big hitters in ancient city fame, 
such as Rome, Athens or even Cirencester.


Iraq for instance has Kirkuk, once the ancient Assyrian capital of Arrapha, 
founded around 2,200BC, and with the ruins of a 5,000-year-old castle to prove 
its bona fides. Then there is nearby Erbil, capital of the Kurdistan region of 
Iraq, which claims settlements dating back to 6,000BC.

Iran meanwhile has Susa, now the delightfully named Shush, administrative 
centre of Shush Country, which has an acropolis – a sure sign of ancient city 
status – that is carbon-dated to around 4,200BC, and evidence of permanent 
homemaking going back another 800 years. Susa’s claims are somewhat dented, 
however, by the fact that it was downgraded to “small settlement” between the 
15th and 20th centuries.

Jerusalem and Beirut can both claim urbanisation going back to at least 3,000 
BC, as can Jericho in the West Bank. Indeed, archeologists have found evidence 
of 20 successive settlements in Jericho dating back as far as 9,000BC. And they 
were already building walls around their proto-city: serious 12ft high, 6ft 
wide walls, a remarkable and unprecedented feat of defensive architecture. 
Jericho, as the Bible tells us, developed a thing about walls. The city later 
became a private estate for Alexander the Great, and Herod – that Herod – 
leased it from Cleopatra, who had been given it by Mark Anthony as a gift. What 
else do you give the woman who has everything?

Again, though, Jericho has a tenuous grip on the “continuously inhabited” tag, 
having been largely abandoned for centuries on end. Byblos, a once groovy 
Mediterranean resort in Lebanon, is possibly the first Phoenician city, founded 
in 7000BC – not as old as Jericho, maybe, but at least it can claim continuous 
habitation since 5,000 BC.

Damascus was once a (largely) undisputed shoo-in for oldest city. It was 
name-checked in Genesis, and there is evidence of settlement going back to 
9,000BC. Unfortunately, there is no clear evidence of meaningful activity in 
what is now Damascus proper until the 2nd millennium BC – a bit like West 
Bromwich arriving seven centuries before Birmingham. (Herod, by the way, may 
also have been gifted Damascus. He was clearly doing something right.)

Ironically, it is not Damascus but Aleppo, poor, benighted Aleppo, which is 
actually Syria’s largest city and was once a mighty rival to Cairo and 
Constantinople, that has a far stronger case for being the world’s oldest city. 
The evidence of settlement goes back to 6,000BC, but excavations north of the 
city suggest wandering nomads made domestic camps here 5,000 years before that.


Written records show that Aleppo was an important city long before Damascus. 
It is really only since the opening of the Suez Canal that Aleppo has declined 
as a major trading city. Until the recent civil war, there had been serious 
efforts to preserve the citadel, which dates back to the first century BC, as 
well as Aleppo’s mosques and its medieval hammams and souks. All that has now 
gone up in smoke, and Aleppo’s old city is so much rubble and ruin. It may be 
impossible to say with any certainty what is the world’s oldest city – for a 
very old argument, it is remarkably fluid, with new discoveries all the time – 
but for now it seems only right to give it to Aleppo, the oldest city currently 
being fought for and sacked, as all these cities have from the beginning.
 