
A tailor’s workshop on the Turkish coast, a petrol station near Greece’s 
border with Macedonia, an unemployed woman’s flat. What do they have in common?

They are unofficial headquarters along the 2,000-mile refugee trail staffed by 
volunteers who cannot stand by as Europe’s biggest refugee crisis since the 
second world war unfolds.

Young and old, ideological and humanitarian, left and right, these are people 
often with little in common except their desire to make a difference when human 
suffering is tangible – and treatable.

In Izmir, a city on the coast of Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, the tailor and shoemaker Yalçın 
Yanik cuts soles in his workshop. The 73-year-old Afro Turk, a descendant of 
Ottoman slaves from Africa who has founded an informal association of trade 
unions, spends his days collecting and distributing donations, trying to find 
work for Syrian tailors and organising protests and rallies. Only in the early 
morning and evening does he manage to do his tailoring work, and he has not had 
time for dinner with his family in years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd576257f1d867352dbe4bb3ec9a7c7e723ecd7e1%2F0_241_3513_2108%2F3513.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe's%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe%27s%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd576257f1d867352dbe4bb3ec9a7c7e723ecd7e1%2F0_241_3513_2108%2F3513.jpg>
 Yalçın Yanik’s workshop. Photograph: Juliane Löffler for the Guardian 
His neighbourhood, Basmane, is home to about 100,000 Syrians – and the 
smuggling mafia. “Once, there were police officers here asking me if I was a 
smuggler. I asked them: ‘Are you kidding me?’” Racism against Syrians is 
widespread in Turkey. Even among leftwingers, the notion prevails that Turkey 
has enough problems of its own and Syrians should go back and fight for their 
country. Yanik has a different view. “It’s not about Syrians or Turks – it’s 
about working conditions.” Fewer than 0.1% of Syrians have been allowed toapply 
for a work permit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/fewer-than-01-of-syrians-in-turkey-in-line-for-work-permits>
, and those forced to work illegally drive down wages.

A few miles west, Güray Yalvaçlı turns his car towards a small hill to get a 
good view of the beach from where boats cast off. The shore is deserted, with 
an air pump the only sign of activity. The sea is rough today, the Aegean 
island of Chios only dimly visible on the other side. “That’s where 
international waters begin,” says Yalvaçlı, pointing to the sea. Sometimes, 
people in inflatable boats jump into the water in a vain attempt to escape the 
Turkish coastguard. “The police or the coastguard call me and tell me what they 
need – food and liquids, dry clothes. We come and give them what they need,” 
explains Yalvaçlı, the founder of a 20-strong volunteer organisation called 
İmece, based in the resort of Çeşme, 55 miles from Izmir.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02101d7739af029b57efb07963af684387d09eb8%2F4_259_3192_1915%2F3192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe's%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe%27s%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02101d7739af029b57efb07963af684387d09eb8%2F4_259_3192_1915%2F3192.jpg>
 Watching and waiting in Turkey. Photograph: Juliane Löffler for the Guardian 
There have been fewer refugees since the EU-Turkey deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/08/eu-turkey-refugee-deal-qa>, 
which stipulates that those arriving in Greece must be sent back to Turkey. Yet 
there will always be those desperate enough to take the risk.

Four times a day, Yalvaçlı drives along the same route to check the refugees’ 
hiding places – but only between 8am and 8pm. The boats usually set off after 
sundown. Asked why his team don’t come after dark, Yalvaçlı shrugs. “The mafia 
have weapons – I can’t just show up, not just like that.” On his daily patrols, 
though, he can help people avoid extortionate taxi fares by taking them to 
hospital in emergencies. Today Yalvaçlı makes phone calls in his car for a 
woman without a passport who has gone into labour. He is committing a crime by 
transporting refugees for smuggling purposes, but the police turn a blind eye 
in the same way that he ignores the corruption between them and the smugglers.

The next morning, an exhausted Yalvaçlı sits smoking under the awning of his 
cafe, the meeting point for İmece. He is hunched over his mobile phone: Turkish 
aid workers remain in constant contact with one another and with volunteers in 
Chios. “Tonight,” they may write, when they find out groups are getting ready 
to move. “Thanks” is the brief response from those such as Toula Pothiti.

Pothiti coordinates the Chios eastern Shore Response Team (CESRT) across the 
sea. She has come to Izmir for a decent night’s rest. For now, though, she’s 
taking a walk through Basmane, where she rubs her fingers against a child’s
lifejacket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/refugee-crisis-turkish-police-find-factory-making-fake-lifejackets-izmir>
 being sold on the street. It is pink, decorated with a cartoon princess, and 
scarcely thicker than a pair of water wings. Pothiti clicks her tongue in 
disgust. “Where is the fucking EU?” she asks and walks on.

In a side street sits a family from Aleppo, waiting with black plastic sacks 
in which they have hidden their lifejackets from the gaze of the police. Six 
adults and 10 children are here, including a baby being breastfed by its 
mother. They have been sleeping rough for two nights; the youngest girl is pale 
and listless. Pothiti lays her hand on the girl’s forehead. “She’s running a 
fever,” she says, and goes to buy medicine at a pharmacy. Then the smuggler 
turns up – it’s time to go. Pothiti kisses the girl on the forehead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1206148cc470ecd43af02a21d248cd97f2a4d93%2F604_374_3044_1826%2F3044.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe's%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe%27s%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1206148cc470ecd43af02a21d248cd97f2a4d93%2F604_374_3044_1826%2F3044.jpg>
 Toula Pothiti, centre, with a family in Izmir. Photograph: Juliane Löffler for 
the Guardian 
Back home at her hotel in Chios, Pothiti rents out rooms to volunteers at a 
special rate, and uses her flat inside the hotel as the base for CESRT. Seventy 
per cent of the island’s tourism industry has collapsed since the refugees 
started arriving, but the local population has shown its readiness to help. “I 
remember the first time one of the boats arrived on our beach,” recalls 
Pothiti. “People started yelling: ‘Refugees!’ So I went. Lots of children were 
crying. That was the moment I realised we had to do something.”

Pothiti’s decision to take action is typical of how most volunteers get 
involved. Frequently, they will have been thinking for weeks or months about 
helping before something galvanises them: a television report, a Facebook post, 
a friend’s question. The extent to which this moment will change their lives 
will not be immediately apparent. Pothiti soon found herself dedicating all her 
time to refugees. Her relationship ended as a result. She hasn’t been alone 
with her nine-year-old son for weeks. “He’s always saying: ‘Mum, turn off your 
phone.’ And I tell him: ‘But we have to help the children.’ ‘I’m your child,’ 
he tells me – and he’s right,” she says.

Why do volunteers give up so much? “We are happy,” says Pothiti “because we do 
something good.” But there is more to it. The feeling of being needed and the 
gratitude of refugees are rewarding. Young volunteers from all over the world 
come for an experience that wealthy societies don’t provide: a reduction to the 
essentials. They can be independent, have responsibilities and do meaningful 
work, with a dash of adventure and no time to fret over what to wear or where 
to eat. More than anything, it’s a chance to be part of a community that shares 
the same ideals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a9d915dbb9c39d018244f771b6e519eaad44579%2F788_827_1574_1531%2F1574.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe's%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe%27s%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a9d915dbb9c39d018244f771b6e519eaad44579%2F788_827_1574_1531%2F1574.jpg>
 Donated children’s shoes in Chios. Photograph: Juliane Löffler for the Guardian
Yet there is a big difference between foreign volunteers and local helpers: 
the former can choose the degree and duration of their involvement, while the 
latter have to find a way to keep going long term. Pothiti is working to have 
her team registered as an NGO so it can accept larger financial donations from 
abroad. Private gifts are difficult to anticipate. One week, €2,500 may come 
in; other weeks much less. Good coordination is required: donations have to be 
sorted and distributed; refugees’ wet clothes need washing and drying; up to 
2,000 meals need preparing three times a day, a job formerly left to 
volunteers. At night people keep watch in shifts from a dozen vantage points, 
using phone apps to keep tabs on the weather. A central phone line is manned 
24/7. New helpers are trained, including learning levels of hypothermia. 
Everyone finds their place, depending on their skills and wishes, doing 
everything from emergency sea rescues to collecting rubbish from the beaches.

Captain Borja, who runs a Basque sea rescue team, views his work 
pragmatically: “I help these people reach land even if the police arrest them 
later. When I’m out there, I only have one job: get the people out of the 
water.”

**

Aisha Kalaily (not her real name) zooms across Chios in her car with the 
window down and radio blaring. The 19-year-old Palestinian was questioned for 
three hours by police back home in Jerusalem after returning from her first aid 
mission. They wanted to know whether she had discussed politics. Kalaily’s 
father had been afraid for her safety. Still, she has returned to Chios, where 
she cannot stop thinking about a dead baby she saw arriving on the shore in 
February. The parents had run out of money for food in Turkey and the 
undernourished six-month-old did not survive the boat journey. Kalaily keeps 
visiting the grave and praying for the child. “At home, I feel useless,” she 
says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faae564d5276d0aad6a5bc1dea7169d08078180d6%2F992_682_2068_1241%2F2068.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe's%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe%27s%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faae564d5276d0aad6a5bc1dea7169d08078180d6%2F992_682_2068_1241%2F2068.jpg>
 Aisha Kalaily visits the infant’s grave. Photograph: Juliane Löffler for the 
Guardian 
Beside her in her car now sits a pregnant Syrian woman whom Kalaily is driving 
from a camp to see her husband in hospital where he has been for four days, 
bedridden with a broken vertebra in his neck and heart problems linked to high 
blood pressure. No one has been able to communicate with him during his stay, 
explains Kalaily, since the doctors speak neither English nor Arabic. She looks 
after the EVIs – extremely vulnerable individuals – spending most of her time 
translating.

“He has to go. We don’t have any beds left. Make sure he doesn’t eat too much 
salt,” a Greek nurse says to her, as the Syrian is transferred to an ambulance, 
his face distorted with pain. Back at Camp Souda with the patient, Kalaily 
begins to cry. “If there’s no room here, I’ll take him home with me,” she snaps 
at one of the camp’s first-aid workers. “That’s not how it works,” comes the 
blunt reply. “There are procedures for registration. You can’t just drop people 
off. This isn’t some competition to see who can be the better helper.”

In Athens, Thomai Tomatis has ridden home on her scooter, swerving to avoid a 
dead pigeon. “Bashar sleeps over here; Rania and I sleep over there on the 
couch. I’ll make the bed later,” she says. For the past two months, Tomatis has 
been volunteering at Piraeus harbour, where thousands of people have been 
waiting. Among them was Bashar al-Mohamad who, because of his good English, 
quickly became a helper himself. He got to know Tomatis at the donation centre 
and she offered him a place to stay in the small flat she shares with her 
girlfriend, Raina.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd20550a2346617581c0d0cb899412c6f98bf569e%2F50_124_3540_2124%2F3540.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe's%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe%27s%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd20550a2346617581c0d0cb899412c6f98bf569e%2F50_124_3540_2124%2F3540.jpg>
 Children play near Piraeus harbour. Photograph: Juliane Löffler for the 
Guardian 
Tomatis has been pitching in at the camp in Piraeus, but with the Greek 
authorities seemingly determined to clear the space her focus is switching. Now 
she will organise accommodation for Afghans in Athens’s anarchist district of 
Exarchia. There’s always something to be done.

Other volunteers move on to Idomeni, where there is no end in sight to the 
humanitarian crisis. Near the fence on the Macedonian border, unofficial camps 
have popped up, like the one sheltering 2,000 people at the EKO petrol station 
at Polykastro. Nadira Babji, a 24-year-old doctor from Malaysia, has been 
volunteering here for six months. Today, she is running the medical tent of 
Médecins Sans Frontières with a team from the non-profit MedVint group. An 
asthmatic woman can’t breathe because of the smoke from open fires; a little 
girl has passed out from fever; for a man with an injured spinal cord, the mere 
movement of his big toes makes him wail.

“The most difficult part of my job is when I have to tell people I can’t do 
anything more for them,” says Babji that evening at the Park Hotel, a volunteer 
contact and infrastructure point. Soup kitchens have been set up next to the 
terrace, where spirits are high. “Yes! We got the donations,” a young German 
woman posts on Facebook. “Tonight, we’ll be able to have a decent meal!” 
Computers and smartphones charge on plug bars. Some volunteers are reading the 
daily news digest byAre You Syrious? <https://medium.com/@AreYouSyrious/>, a 
Zagreb-based aid group that has put together an international team of 
reporters. A few Spanish volunteers are playing Bob Marley on guitar while 
Babji drums along on the table.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed4eaa21520b1ce30642089682baded8b7861f7b%2F134_115_818_491%2F818.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe's%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe%27s%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed4eaa21520b1ce30642089682baded8b7861f7b%2F134_115_818_491%2F818.jpg>
 Nadira Babji checks a young refugee. Photograph: Juliane Löffler for the 
Guardian 
Babji is the eldest of six children and used to responsibility. Her mother 
still hopes she will build a career and get married but even at university, she 
says, it was clear she wanted to volunteer. “I want to see the world and I want 
to help,” she adds, smiling. Before Idomeni she was in Torbalı near Izmir, an 
informal camp where Syrian Bedouins worked in local fields. When Babji arrived 
with her team it was the first time for weeks the refugees could get medical 
aid. She likes connecting with people, she says. “I saw people coming for three 
days. What can you achieve in such a short time? That’s voluntourism.”

Now in Idomeni she talks critically about anarchist groups from Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, Spain and Italy. “They’re just 
pursuing their own goals. They challenge the refugees to storm the fences. The 
refugees are desperate, so of course they go along with it. At the end, the 
activists are detained at the police station for 12 hours and pay €25. But the 
refugees drown in the river or are beaten by the police. I took care of someone 
today whose arm was covered in bruises. That’s seriously fucked up. The 
activists are exploiting people for their own agenda.”

Some international volunteers prefer having their pictures taken holding 
babies to collecting rubbish. Even so, they are additional sets of eyes and 
ears, witnesses to events. Something is growing that is bigger than the sum of 
individual moments. Once you start helping, you can’t stop – maybe because 
going home is more difficult than heading into the fray. Anyone who has seen 
their help is needed can no longer turn their back on the responsibility, 
becoming more politically aware in the process. There’s no turning back.

**

When she got to Calais last September, Dani Lawrence from north London met a 
boy who, at 15, was just a year older than her own daughter. “He told me how 
the boat he was travelling on between Turkey and Lesbos began to sink and they 
began throwing single people into the water,” says Lawrence. “He said he linked 
arms with another boy and told him ‘We’re brothers, we’re brothers’ so that 
they would not throw them off. He was alone.”

She told him she had driven over from the UK with goods and clothes and asked 
him what he needed. “He looked at me and he started crying and he said: ‘I 
don’t want anything. I just want my mum.’”

His journey had echoes of her own father Leon’s escape from Morocco at the age 
of 17 in the 1960s. He had left in the middle of the night in a little boat, 
smuggled across the sea to Gibraltar by Jewish organisations in Casablanca.

Lawrence contrasts the welcome her father received, at a large refugee camp in 
Marseille, with the dire situation faced by many of the unaccompanied children 
in the Calais camp, and tells of her astonishment at the lack of large 
organisations. “Back in London, when my husband opened the door, I broke down. 
I said: ‘We can’t stop now. We can’t just give them stuff. We need to help.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b28876d280a55faf1d33ff9bbfc76527374391e%2F0_137_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe's%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20in%20it%20for%20them%3F%20The%20volunteers%20saving%20Europe%27s%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fwhats-in-it-for-them-the-volunteers-saving-europes-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b28876d280a55faf1d33ff9bbfc76527374391e%2F0_137_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Dani Lawrence in Calais. 
The French-born graduate in French and Spanish says: “I’ve never run a 
charity. I’ve never travelled to war zones or visited refugee camps in the 
past. But as a mother, as a human being, I can’t stand by. People need dignity 
and self-worth. I know it sounds like a cliche but I talk from the heart. There 
are so many children who need help. I can’t imagine my own children going 
through this.”

Eight months later, Lawrence is still volunteering with Help Refugees 
<http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/>, doing everything from fundraising to 
translating work. Along with the French organisation L’Auberge Des Migrants, 
the charity set up a massive warehouse outside Calais, which stores and 
distributes goods to the camp. It now has a volunteer-staffed community 
kitchen, cooking meals for some of the estimated 6,000 refugees in Calais and 
Dunkirk.

Asked how her family’s toiletry business and her own three children have 
managed without her over the past eight months, Lawrence says: “I’m very lucky. 
I have an incredible husband who understands what I’m doing. I did the accounts 
and paperwork, which he has now taken over. He has had to work harder and he 
helps more with the children. He doesn’t cook but he can make pasta. He will 
say: ‘You do what you need to do.’ He feels like he is helping refugees by 
helping me.”

Lawrence works around her family life. “I drop the kids at school. I do 
homework with them every evening. I can be in the playground and I’ll get an 
email and I can deal with it there and then. If I go to Calais, I can be back 
in a day. My son Sam asked me on Saturday: ‘Mummy, how old do you have to be 
before you can volunteer?’ It’s incredible going there, seeing shelters we 
helped build. We sometimes say we can help people help. I’m very proud of the 
public. They have given me faith in human nature.”

**

Nadira Babji is now in Istanbul. Thomai and Rania are in Thessaloniki. Bashar 
is sleeping at the harbour once again. Borja is in Spain planning his next 
mission. Their journeys are crisscrossed by thousands of others: Franziska from 
Germany is back in Dresden. Kanwar from London is in Jordan. Mattias has gone 
home to Gothenburg, and says he can only shake his head when he sees his 
children squabbling over an iPhone. Veronica has gone back to Mexico because 
her visa expired. Ali is in Torbalı.

Translation by Charles Minnick 

This piece was made possible by a scholarship from the Robert Bosch Stiftung. 
JulianeLöffler is an editor at Der Freitag <https://www.freitag.de/>.

This piece is part of our Half-full series. If you have suggestions of 
stories, trends, innovations and people that you’d like to see included in this 
series please share them in the form below.

 