
“Don’t fool yourself,” said a 1928 advert for Listerine mouthwash 
<http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-iFvnoN4P6o8/VNITFHVO_YI/AAAAAAAAAQY/QXW-FOgu18Y/s1600/ttc-health_listerine.jpg>
, “Since halitosis never announces itself to the victim, you simply cannot know 
when you have it.” Many of us do indeed worry that our breath smells fetid and 
sulphurous. There’s even halitophobia, when people are convinced they have bad 
breath but don’t.It is estimated that up to half of us have bad breath 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12787198>, which seems a bit excessive: the 
rate of “objectionable bad breath” isthought to be more like 2.4% of adults 
<http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/867570-overview#a2>.

It’s hard to diagnose it yourself. Breathing into your hands and sniffing them 
only tells you if your hands smell. Licking the back of your wrist and smelling 
it after 10 seconds isn’t accurate either. Flossing and then smelling is only 
likely to reflect any decaying food. The taste in your mouth isn’t closely 
related to how your breath smells. Breath clinics have machines such as 
halimeters that measure sulphur emissions, but the most reliable way is for an 
expert to smell and score the level and type of odour. Or failing that, a close 
friend.

In 85% of people, halitosis originates in the mouth 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22722640>. You may think that’s obvious, 
but tonsillitis, acid reflux in the oesphagus and kidney and liver problems can 
also make the breath smell.However, it’s the 600-plus bacteria in the mouth 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17071291> – particularly the ones producing 
unstable sulphur compounds from proteins breaking down – that are usually the 
culprits.

A BMJ review <http://www.bmj.com/content/333/7569/632> says that it is poor 
oral hygiene that’s usually to blame. The most likely cause is food and 
bacterial plaque on the tongue and teeth – especially when this causes gum 
inflammation. The main culprit is the back of the tongue, and some people 
happen to have grooves that allow a white coating to accumulate. A coating that 
is only 0.1mm thick can reduce the oxygen to the tongue, allowing the bacteria 
that grow best without oxygen to flourish and produce smelly compounds.

The solution

Regular teeth-brushing and flossing will reduce the problem. A systematic 
review 
<http://www.cochrane.org/CD005519/ORAL_tongue-scraping-for-treating-halitosis> 
found that tongue scraping (which I always thought was a stupid idea) might 
work – but do it gently, back to front, as there are more bacteria at the back.
Another review found that mouthwashes 
<http://www.cochrane.org/CD006701/ORAL_mouthrinses-for-the-treatment-of-halitosis>
 with chlorhexidine gluconate, which reduce bacterial levels, can help, 
especially after tongue-brushing when the bacteria are exposed and defenceless 
(although too much mouthwash can stain the teeth). Using before bedtime may 
also work well, as bacteria multiply at night when the mouth is dry and gets 
less oxygen. Ones without alcohol are best as they avoid drying out the mouth.

But all these things need to be used continually. Chewing sugar-free gum 
stimulates saliva 
<https://www.dentalhealth.org/tell-me-about/topic/caring-for-teeth/sugar-free-chewing-gum>
 and reduces bad breath and is a good insurance policy during the day.
 