
It’s a commonly asked question - when your running shoes have lost their 
spring, and you need a new pair, what do you do with the old ones? Of course, 
you can just keep them for doing gardening, or other messy activities, in. But 
if you don’t have the space, then you’ll probably want to either recycle or 
pass them on. Certainly, being a virtuous (but never smug) Guardian reader, you 
wouldn’t think of sending them to landfill, would you?

Depending on their condition - and their stock levels - your local charity 
shops may accept them. If they (the shoes, not the runners) are still in good 
nick then female runners could donate toA Mile In Her Shoes 
<http://www.amileinhershoes.org.uk/>, who also always need good quality running 
clothing.

But if you fancy donating or recyling an old pair, and quite like the idea of 
getting something back in return, then head toRunners Need 
<http://www.runnersneed.com/about-us/recyclemyrun.html>. Their #recyclemyrun 
campaign has just launched, and anyone bringing in a pair of old trainers will 
get a £20 voucher off their next pair in return.

The campaign is running for a month, until November 2016, but it’s worth 
pointing out that the actual recycling/donating facility will stay in stores so 
you can always drop off your old pairs there. Donated shoes will be collected 
by the EuropeanRecycling <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/recycling> 
Company (ERC) - ones in good condition will be sent on to countries with a need 
for affordable footwear, and those too far gone will be recycled.

More info and store locations at runnersneed.com 
<https://www.runnersneed.com/about-us/recyclemyrun.html>

Runners not in the UK - sorry! - but please feel free to share local info on 
where you recycle or donate your own shoes below the line.
 