
For Jasmin Bueno, aged seven, and her brother Aaron, aged six, there is little 
that can make swallowing chemo-profilactic pills any less bitter. But the 
tablets they stoically gulp down daily during the next six months are the best 
protection they can get from contracting tuberculosis.

Just a sheet draped over a washing line separates their sleeping area from 
that of their 20-year-old brother, Jose, a tuberculosis sufferer. The whole 
family, their mother and an older sister with an infant baby, live in shack on 
a hill overlooking the sprawling Carabayllo slum. It is a tuberculosis hotspot 
where the overcrowded, poorly-ventilated and often damp homes provide a 
breeding ground for one of the world’s most ancient diseases, which recent 
research shows claims1.8 million lives a year globally, not the 1.5 million it 
was previously thought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/13/tuberculosis-killing-more-people-than-thought-who-tb-cases-death>
.

Related: TB kills three people every minute - the world must wake up to this 
pandemic | Jessica Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/05/tb-kills-three-people-every-minute-the-world-must-wake-up-to-this-pandemic>

Peru has the highest incidence per capita of tuberculosis in the Americas, 
including virulent multi-drug resistant (around 2,300 patients per year, 35% of 
all cases in the region) and extensively drug resistant (around 100 patients 
per year, 75% of all cases in the region) strains. Its reduction is slow at 
around 1.5% a year, just short of the global reduction of 1.65% annually, 
according to the World Health Organisation (WHO). The rate of reduction would 
need to increase to a 4-5% annually, in order to reach sustainable development 
goal target 3.3 –ending epidemics of tuberculosis and other infectious diseases 
by 2030 <https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg3>.

The WHO admits this is an ambitious aim. It said in a statement last year 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/statements/2016/tb-day/en/>: “While there 
has been significant progress in the fight against TB, with 43 million lives 
saved since 2000, the battle is only half-won: more than 4,000 people lose 
their lives each day to this leading infectious disease. Many of the 
communities that are most burdened by tuberculosis are those that are poor, 
vulnerable and marginalised.”

We go to the patients’ houses and we find the best way on ensuring they don’t 
abandon the treatment
Carmen Contreras​,​ Partners in Health 
But as well as being one of the hotspots for the disease, Peru has some of the 
world’s highest cure rates for tuberculosis 
<http://www.who.int/tb/country/data/profiles/en/> at 87% for all new cases and 
the extremely drug resistant strain (XDR-TB) at 66% in 2013. The global 
reduction rate for multi-drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) is around 52% and 
is just 28% for XDR-TB.


“Search, treat, prevent – that’s our approach,” says Carmen Contreras of 
US-based charityPartners in Health <http://www.pih.org/country/peru>. “We go to 
the patients’ houses and we find the best way on ensuring they don’t abandon 
the treatment.” The WHO’sEnd TB <http://www.who.int/tb/strategy/end-tb/en/> 
hands-on approach has been implemented since 2015 and it is reaping rewards in 
Peru.

Decades on the streets as a drug addict smoking unrefined cocaine left 
56-year-old Francisco Verastegui’s health in ruins. He became HIV positive then 
found out he had tuberculosis. Now off the streets in a homeless shelter run by 
an evangelical church, Verastegui says he has cheated death more than once. 
“I’ve abandoned the treatment on several occasions in the past but I didn’t die 
so I know that God must have a purpose for my life,” he says, taking his daily 
dose of pills.
 Francisco Verastegui is HIV positive and has TB after years living on the 
streets as a drug user. He now lives on a farm for homeless men on the 
outskirts of Lima. Photograph: Jorge de la Quintana 
Partners in Heath works with several thousand patients in Peru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru> and has seen the number of people who 
abandon treatment reduce from 7-8% to less than 1%. The secret of their success 
is training local health promoters in the community itself, says Leonid Lecca, 
the NGO’s director in Lima: “They come from the same community; they know who 
the coughers are, who has lost weight, who’s hiding because they have problems. 
They find those people who sometimes never reach the health services.”

The NGO’s aim for 2017 is zero deaths and zero abandonment of treatment. A 
quick and accurate diagnosis is key to achieving this. So Partners inHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> built a state-of-art tuberculosis 
detection laboratory in an old shipping container in the heart of this deprived 
community. It’s been operating in Carabayllo, in northern Lima, since 2012.

Related: Romania's drug-resistant tuberculosis patients – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/sep/05/romanias-drug-resistent-tuberculosis-patients-in-pictures>

The lab is the only one of its kind in Latin America and can make 25 diagnoses 
a day. This is a big boost for Peru’s strained healthcare services, says its 
head, Roger Calderon: “The diagnosis is very important because the patient 
often doesn’t know what’s wrong with them. A quick and opportune diagnosis is 
best way to control tuberculosis but the problem is not just a medical one, 
it’s a social one. While there’s poor and needy people, there will be 
tuberculosis.”

Taking patients like Julia Roque, 53, through the lengthy treatment for 
multi-drug resistant tuberculosis is part of the job for Contreras at Partners 
in Health as she strolls arm-in-arm with her patient. Roque caught MDR-TB while 
being treated in hospital for diabetes.

Recovery is arduous. She is too weak to continue her work as a street vendor 
and lack of money to support herself and her family is constant worry, says 
Roque. “To recover you have to be determined, strong and have plenty of 
willpower otherwise you won’t get better,” she says. “If you quit the treatment 
then only God will gather you up.”

Accompanying patients on the road to recovery with consistent moral support is 
how Peru is leading by example. Perhaps the rest of the world can follow in its 
footsteps to make a dent on the global epidemic.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#Dev2030 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Dev2030&src=typd>.
 