
Name: Cyber physical systems.

Age: Ten. It was first coined by the US’s National Science Foundation.

Description: The thing that’s keeping Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> awake.

In a bad way or a good way? Honestly, it’s hard to say. On Monday, Corbyn 
tweeteda picture of himself next to the words 
<https://twitter.com/jeremycorbyn/status/800779565119336449>: “We now face the 
task of creating a New Britain from the fourth industrial revolution – powered 
by the internet of things and big data to develop cyber physical systems and 
smart factories.”

Right. Yeah, me neither.

I mean, is that a real sentence he actually said? With all those words? In 
that order? Actually said and actually tweeted. Whether or not he actually 
understood them is a different matter.

And people knew what he meant? Well, no. The responses suggest people were 
wondering if he was talking about a new Kraftwerk album, or the Terminator, or 
online sex.

Are cyber physical systems even an actual thing? Yes, they really are. I 
promise.

What are they? If you check the Wikipedia page 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyber-physical_system>, there’s a heavily 
labelled triangle on it. Part of the triangle reads: “Time machine for 
variation identification and memory.” Another part reads: “Self-optimise for 
disturbance.” Does that help?

Literally not at all. Oh, fine then. It’s driverless cars and stuff.

Really? That’s it? Why didn’t he just say “driverless cars”? Because that 
doesn’t sound knowledgable enough. “Driverless cars” doesn’t grab the 
electorate as hard as “cyber physical systems”.

So this is something the electorate is worried about? Oh, totally. Much more 
so than Brexit, or the NHS, or affordable living,or the snoopers’ charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/19/extreme-surveillance-becomes-uk-law-with-barely-a-whimper>
, or Labour providing any sort of meaningfully relevant opposition to the 
government at a time when we need it most.

Really? No, of course not.

So, what are we supposed to do now? Now we face the task of creating a New 
Britain from the fourth industrial revolution – powered by the internet of 
things and big data to develop cyber physical systems and smart factories, 
obviously. Weren’t you listening?

Do say: “We now face the task of withdrawing egregiously chosen jargon – 
powered by the thesaurus and short words to develop a less opaque brain-mouth 
interface.”

Don’t say: “Wait, there was a third industrial revolution?”
 