
LIFE AND DEATH

Patti Smith is as hard as nails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/patti-smith-hyde-park-london-gig-july-interview>

“You can decide your own fate. Are you going to let it all fall apart? Or are 
you going to own it?”

Keith Richards reckons the Rolling Stones’ Altamont gig, where a man was 
killed by a Hells Angels security guard, wasn’t all bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/01/keith-richards-rolling-stones-blue-and-lonesome>

“I think given that there were about half a million people there, I’d say that 
499,000 had a good time. Which is not bad on the average, you know? And one man 
died, but a baby was born, so the same number came out as went in. If that 
hadn’t happened, it would have been considered a Woodstock on the coast. All it 
takes is one sucker with a knife.”

Thandie Newton is furious about abuse and exploitation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/04/thandie-newton-i-wake-up-angry-theres-a-lot-to-be-angry-about>

“I’m always angry. I wake up angry. There is a lot to be angry about. Anger,” 
she says calmly, “is a positive energy.”

Nicola Adams enjoys her work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/nicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview>

“I guess when I’m smiling, waving to the crowd, looking really happy, an 
opponent is going to look at me and think – wow, is she even nervous? But 
really, I’m just enjoying myself.”

Woody Allen hasn’t overcome trauma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/25/woody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon>

“I don’t believe in the Nietzschean notion that what doesn’t destroy you makes 
you stronger. You see these soldiers come back with PTSD; they’ve been to war 
and seen death and experienced these existential crises one after the other. 
There are traumas in life that weaken us for the future. And that’s what’s 
happened to me. The various slings and arrows of life have not strengthened me. 
I think I’m weaker. I think there are things I couldn’t take now that I would 
have been able to take when I was younger.”

Jeremy Irons  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/24/jeremy-irons-have-natural-tendency-benign-dictator-batman-v-superman>
thinks abortion is ‘a tremendous mental attack’

“I believe women should be allowed to make the decision, but I also think the 
church is right to say it’s a sin. Because sin is actions that harm us. Lying 
harms us. Abortion harms a woman – it’s a tremendous mental attack, and 
physical, sometimes. But we seem to get that muddled. In a way, thank God the 
Catholic church does say we won’t allow it, because otherwise nobody’s saying 
that it’s a sin.”

Vanessa Redgrave wanted to die 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/13/vanessa-redgrave-interview-simon-hattenstone>
 after having a heart attack

“Trying to live was getting too tiring. I was with my daughter, and I said, 
‘I’m sorry, I just think I’m going to have to give up,’ – knowing she’d be 
unhappy, of course. And she was wonderful.” How did Joely (another successful 
actor) encourage her to keep living? “By telling me I could. Her saying I could 
give up released me.”

Lauren Laverne shudders at the memory of being a teenage pop star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/13/lauren-laverne-late-night-womans-hour-ramones-6-music-interview>

“I look back now and I feel terrified about all the things that I did. But 
also more forgiving towards myself because I was so young. Everyone’s an idiot 
when they’re 16.”

The Heseltines have shot lots of grey squirrels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/23/lord-and-lady-heseltine-gardening-squirrels-thenford-brexit>
 on their Northamptonshire estate

“Three hundred and fifty. Absolutely awful things.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwhat-george-clooney-lupita-nyongo-elton-john-and-eddie-the-eagle-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cfacd548227463678efd63bc7f5bffade7b2bde%2F0_0_5333_3200%2F5333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20George%20Clooney%2C%20Lupita%20Nyong%E2%80%99o%2C%20Elton%20John%20and%20Eddie%20the%20Eagle%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwhat-george-clooney-lupita-nyongo-elton-john-and-eddie-the-eagle-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20George%20Clooney%2C%20Lupita%20Nyong%E2%80%99o%2C%20Elton%20John%20and%20Eddie%20the%20Eagle%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwhat-george-clooney-lupita-nyongo-elton-john-and-eddie-the-eagle-taught-us-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cfacd548227463678efd63bc7f5bffade7b2bde%2F0_0_5333_3200%2F5333.jpg>
 Shah Rukh Khan, Robbie Williams, Clare Short, Samuel L Jackson and Marilyn. 
Composite: Linda Nylind, Getty, Sarah Lee, 
TALENT

Making mix tapes taught Lin-Manuel Miranda how to compose a Broadway smash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/25/lin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem>

“I feel lucky to have grown up in the era when we made mix cassettes. I think 
it affected how I write scores. Because when you’re making a mix tape for your 
friends, it’s 90 minutes of music, in the order in which you curate it, so 
you’re creating the ebb and flow. That prepared me to write scores more than 
anything else. You want to surprise them, tell them how you feel about them, 
you want to express the wealth of your taste. How is that different from 
writing a Broadway score?”

Elton John doesn’t play the piano at home  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/07/elton-john-i-really-hate-the-cult-of-celebrity>

“I play 107 shows a year, why am I going to go home and play the fucking 
piano? I’ve got one at Woodside [his Windsor estate] and one at my house in 
Atlanta, and I never touch them. Rufus Wainwright plays every morning when he 
gets up – ‘I have to play an hour every day’ – so everyone’s different, but, 
God, I couldn’t think of anything worse. I have leisure, and I have work. And I 
do enough work. When I get home, the last thing I want to do is play the piano.”

Boy George misses ‘the wizard behind the curtain’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/08/boy-george-were-all-clinging-to-a-rock-and-some-people-have-got-a-better-grip-than-others>

“When I was 19, there was still the mystery of rock’n’roll; there was still 
the wizard behind the curtain. Kids now, they know how to make records, they 
know where to get their clothes. We had to dream about it: is this possible? 
Now, it’s like: ‘Yeah, you can be famous, you get on this show, you do that, 
you do this,’ but I think the thing is, I don’t think it necessarily means that 
much. I’m glad I had that exciting first part of my career in a decade when you 
could make a cultural difference of sorts, you know?

Phil Collins didn’t get his message across on his 1993 album Both Sides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/11/phil-collins-interview-take-a-look-at-me-now-remastered-albums-rerelease-2016>

“It was like coming out of a toilet with toilet paper on your foot and trying 
to walk elegantly while trying to get it off. I think that’s one of the reasons 
I did retire, frankly. It seemed that the only way I could stop this was to 
stop and start again. I stopped. I’m yet to start again.”

Eddie the Eagle knew the sky was the limit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/28/eddie-the-eagle-film-olympic-ski-jumper-interview-michael-edwards>

“I’d like to say I flew like an eagle, but I was probably closer to the 
ostrich.” Did he ever say to the makers [of film Eddie the Eagle], you’re doing 
me down?“I thought the skiers skiing down that slope in the film are not very 
good, whereas in actual fact I’m a hell of a lot better. But that didn’t matter 
to me because I know I’m a good skier, and people who know me know that.”

Shah Rukh Khan says women made him a star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/27/shah-rukh-khan-my-success-is-all-down-to-the-women-ive-worked-with>

“I lost my father, then my mother, early on,” he says. “But the women in my 
life – the actresses – have helped me immensely. Everything I am is because of 
them. They are doing all that work and, mostly, I take away the credit for the 
film. I’m Shah Rukh Khan. None of them has become Shah Rukh Khan and I hope 
they do. I’m not trying to be pompous about myself. Madhuri Dixit has held my 
hand in those dancing scenes and I’m not leading her, she’s leading me. Juhi 
Chawla taught me how to do comic timing, Kajol taught me how to cry. They 
worked their asses off and then, at the end of the film, it’s ‘Shah Rukh Khan: 
the superstar’. And I know it. I can’t deny it. And I can never ever forget I 
am [there] because of women. All my chivalry, goodness, gentlemanliness only 
stems from the fact that it’s my way of saying thank you. They are fabulous in 
the films. In every film.”

ADDICTION

Robbie Williams gave up smoking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/30/robbie-williams-my-main-talent-is-turning-trauma-into-something-showbizzy>
 but got hooked on Minstrels

“That’s the thing with having an addictive personality. One fire goes out and 
another pops up. And that fire became working out and eating Minstrels. I 
transferred the smoking to working out three hours a day, and then eating 
Minstrels for three hours every night. That’s not an exaggeration. And then I 
stopped the working out and just carried on with the Minstrels and I ballooned 
to the point where the Daily Mail suggested I was akin to Elvis before he died. 
It was horrible, terrible. I had to go on stage, too: ‘Yeah, I know, I look 
like Elvis before he died. Sorry, everybody, as I’m pointing at you 
suggestively, pretending that you think I’m sexy.’”

“So I went on this pretty hardcore diet. You woke up and had a boiled egg, 
then nothing for five hours, then had vegetable broth, then steamed veg, then 
nothing until the next day. After five days of that, first off, I was really 
fucking emotional, because you’ve got nothing, your body’s starving. And the 
second thing is, you just needed something to suppress your appetite, so this 
started again. I tried to hide it from my wife for five weeks. At night I’d 
hide my mouthwash and hand sanitiser in a safe place, then wake up an hour 
before she got up, climb out of the window, take my top off, so as not to smell 
of anything, then smoke, hand sanitiser and mouthwash, top back on, shoes off 
so as not to wake her up, climb back in the window.”

Even when Samuel L Jackson was out it, he always hit his marks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/30/amuel--ackson--was-a-drug-addict-out-of-my-mind-but-showed-up-on-time-and-hit-my-marks>

“I had a very good theatre reputation. Granted, I was a fucking drug addict 
and I was out of my mind a lot of the time, but I had a good reputation. Showed 
up on time, knew my lines, hit my marks. I just wasn’t making a lot of money, 
but I was very satisfied artistically. I was doing Pulitzer prize-winning 
plays. I was working with people who made me better, who challenged me. So I 
was doing things the right way, it was just that one thing that was in the way 
– my addiction. And once that was out of the way, it was – boom! The door blew 
wide open.”

Marilyn spent 20 years taking crack and heroin while watching the Alien movies 
on loop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/27/marilyn-peter-robinson-sat-in-room-20-years-taking-crack-watching-alien-films>

He retreated to his mother’s house in Hertfordshire and stayed there for 20 
years, “without going out, unless it was to the hospital or a dealer, or a 
doctor. But in general I just sat in a room for 20 years. I didn’t want contact 
with people. The phone would ring and I just wouldn’t pick it up. The curtains 
were always drawn, I didn’t know whether it was night or day.

What did he do all day? “You know the Alien movies? I had the box set of that. 
I had my laptop and my drug paraphernalia was all set up around me. And I’d 
watch the first Alien film, then the second, then the third, fourth, fifth. And 
when it got to the end of the fifth one, I’d put the first one back on again. 
So that was it. Over and over again. It was, like, my life has gone out of 
control, but I can control this, this tiny little bubble of behaviour: that was 
my safety, sitting in front of this computer screen with what I’m watching, and 
I know all the dialogue and I know what’s going to happen. I could control how 
I felt. ‘Oh, I’m bit tired, let me have some crack. Oh, I’m a bit depressed, 
let’s have some heroin. I need to go to sleep, I’ll take a downer.’ I just 
wanted to die, but I couldn’t do that, I think because I was brought up a 
Catholic, with that idea that if you kill yourself you go to purgatory. I kept 
thinking, ‘Well, it’ll be just my fucking luck, I’ll kill myself and wake up in 
exactly the situation I’m trying to get away from and it’ll be for eternity.’ 
At least I know this is going to end at some point.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwhat-george-clooney-lupita-nyongo-elton-john-and-eddie-the-eagle-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce1204bf4d283705eb29f96b394b2896be724de8%2F0_0_5333_3200%2F5333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20George%20Clooney%2C%20Lupita%20Nyong%E2%80%99o%2C%20Elton%20John%20and%20Eddie%20the%20Eagle%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwhat-george-clooney-lupita-nyongo-elton-john-and-eddie-the-eagle-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20George%20Clooney%2C%20Lupita%20Nyong%E2%80%99o%2C%20Elton%20John%20and%20Eddie%20the%20Eagle%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwhat-george-clooney-lupita-nyongo-elton-john-and-eddie-the-eagle-taught-us-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce1204bf4d283705eb29f96b394b2896be724de8%2F0_0_5333_3200%2F5333.jpg>
 Boy George, Leslie Jones, Gary Lineker, Lupita Nyong’o, Suggs and Steve 
McQueen. Composite: EPA, REX, Getty, Rob Greig, 
STYLE

Native Americans were like a religion for Adam Ant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/26/adam-and-the-ants-heroic-sexy-warrior-bravado-kings-wild-frontier>
 in the 1980s

“It was all the things I’d grown up with that I felt were heroic and sexy and 
had a warrior bravado to them. I’d been reading about and studying pirates and 
the Native Americans for a few years – the Native American thing was as close 
to a religion as I had. Putting the Apache war stripe across my nose was a 
declaration of arms against the music industry, which I felt had ignored me and 
treated me very unfairly. I wanted to look like a buccaneer: when they raided 
somewhere, they would take all the stuff they could carry or wear and not take 
anything else. And then I got the Hussar jacket, the one worn by the 11th 
Hussars in the charge of the Light Brigade. They were the most ridiculed 
regiment in the British army because they were thought to be too well dressed. 
People called them ‘the Cherrybums’, because their uniforms were so tight, and 
all the young ladies came out to look at them when they were on parade. They 
were despised by the rest of the army, but they did this heroic, disastrous 
thing.”

Boy George explained the art of glamour and survival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/08/boy-george-were-all-clinging-to-a-rock-and-some-people-have-got-a-better-grip-than-others>

“Life is kind of like clinging to a rock, isn’t it? We’re all clinging to a 
rock, and some people have got a better grip than others. Some people look 
bedraggled and other people look like Jerry Hall dressed as a mermaid on that 
Roxy Music album cover.”

POLITICS

Zac Goldsmith ranted about Sadiq Khan  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/23/zac-goldsmith-london-mayor-fight-danger-turned-nasty>

“Who’s criticised me? Honestly, who’s criticised me? He has. No one else has. 
Love it or hate it, the Labour party is more radical now than any time in my 
lifetime. He is radical and divisive because of his approach to politics. He is 
a fundamentally partisan figure in politics. These are terms that I use and 
will continue to use to describe Sadiq Khan. And it is obvious to anybody who 
is not unfair or wanting to misinterpret, the terms I was using were in a 
political context.” He looks at me, and his hands are shaking.

Labour deputy leader Tom Watson is not friendly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/09/tom-watson-interview-jeremy-corbyn-labour-rifts-hug-shout>
 with Jeremy Corbyn

“At PMQs I always try to get myself into a Buddha-like state. I try not to 
have any facial expression at all. Because if I laugh at a Jeremy joke, two 
hours later on social media it’s either interpreted as me laughing at Jeremy, 
or laughing at an opposition joke. Or, if I scowl at something someone says, 
people are accusing me of scowling at Jeremy. So I try to keep a straight face, 
which everyone always interprets as me looking really sad and miserable. That’s 
actually not the case. I’m generally just trying to remain expressionless.”

Watson remains in contact with Corbyn, though it sounds rather semi-detached. 
“We still send the odd text to each other. It’s usually about family stuff, you 
know. My dad’s ill, and he [Corbyn] is always asking about my dad. My dad’s a 
big supporter of Jeremy. It’s a sort of chat really.”

Clare Short was underwhelmed by the Chilcot report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/20/clare-short-the-chilcot-report-is-longer-than-the-harry-potter-books-put-together>

“I don’t think anyone’s even going to read it. Except perhaps historians. Do 
you know, it’s longer than all the Harry Potter books put together?”

“I thought,” she says of the extracts she read, “it was terrible. It was 
deeply underwhelming, and not well informed. It had lost the plot on what it 
was meant to do. The person who had written it – well, I don’t believe this is 
John Chilcot, because he is a very bright guy.”

HOLLYWOOD AND RACE

Leslie Jones knew it was important to be in Ghostbusters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/07/leslie-jones-ghostbusters-us-most-depressed-nation-blame-comedians>

“Back in the day, when I was coming up, the last page of Jet magazine was a 
guide to all the times black people were going to be on TV, because we were 
hardly on TV and we needed to see and support our people when we were. So my 
thing is, my parents and grandparents would have been, ‘Woah! She is in a Big 
Movie! A superhero in a BLOCKbuster.’ Why wouldn’t you be dancing in the 
street?”

Steve McQueen said the Oscars whitewash was like apartheid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/steve-mcqueen-oscars-whitewash-watershed-moment>

“Hopefully, when people look back at this in 20 years, it’ll be like seeing 
that David Bowie clip in 1983.” He is referring to a clip that has been widely 
circulated online since Bowie’s death, in which the singer politely assails his 
interviewer about MTV’s under-representation of black artists. “I’m hoping in 
12 months or so we can look back and say this was a watershed moment, and thank 
God we put that right.”

It is not just actors and directors either. “It’s like Johannesburg in 1976, 
if you go behind the scenes. I made two British movies [Hunger and Shame] and I 
never met one person of colour in any below-the-line situations. Not one. No 
black, no Asian, no one. Like, hello? What’s going on here? Very odd.”

When it came to working in the US, making 12 Years a Slave, McQueen was 
adamant that he wouldn’t let the same thing happen again, particularly not on a 
film about slavery. “I expressly said in a meeting, ‘Look, I can’t make this 
movie in a situation where I don’t see any black faces other than my own behind 
the camera. We need to employ certain people.’ I made that very clear and it 
was attended to.” Two African American assistant directors were duly hired.

Lupita Nyong’o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/lupita-nyongo-art-is-political-in-whatever-way-you-slice-it>
 is going to keep calling out the film industry

For the third time in as many years, she appeared on the front of the US 
edition of Vogue, which ran the coverline: “I want to create opportunities for 
people of color.” It’s not the sexiest way to sell a fashion glossy, but 
Nyong’o is unapologetic.

“Films inspire people to feel differently. A lot more can be done. We can be 
more empathetic when we realise how much more alike we are than how different 
we are.”

Does she feel a burden, as a black actor, to keep talking about the “issues”?

“But you see, I don’t like to fight the reality. The reason it is so acute is 
because of the stage we are at. When we are talking about inclusion in 
entertainment, it’s because entertainment isn’t inclusive and, until such a 
time as that becomes the norm, then this work has to be done.”

SPORT

Nicola Adams says boxing is like chess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/nicola-adams-muhammad-ali-gold-interview>

“Boxing is 50/50, mental and physical. You can be the strongest, fastest, most 
technical boxer out there, but if you’re not there mentally, you won’t win. You 
see boxers who look unbelievable in the gym, and then they get into the ring 
and they fall to pieces. The mental aspect is about how to stay in control, to 
get your opponent to make mistakes and then to capitalise on them. It’s a bit 
like chess, really.” She has played chess since she was 10.

Gary Lineker compared football and sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/11/gary-lineker-leicester-interview-match-of-the-day-premier-league-2016>

“The one thing about scoring a goal is you never know if it’s going to happen 
again. Whereas with sex, there’s always the chance that something …”

Chris Eubank Jr and Sr explained the psychology of boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/06/chris-eubank-and-son-the-integrity-of-the-warrior-means-you-have-to-stay-and-take-the-beating>

Jr: “Obviously, in the buildup to some fights, there’s animosity and 
testosterone and banter but at the end of the day, we all understand that this 
is a business, just two men who are trying to further their careers and provide 
for their families. There shouldn’t be any true malice towards your opponent.

“I learned very early on once I started boxing as a kid that if you go into 
the ring emotionally charged you make mistakes. I have fought fighters in the 
past who I don’t like as people, but you have to block out any type of dislike 
or hate. ”

Sr: “The feeling between two fighters is profound. You smell a man’s blood, it 
smells like rust. You get into a clench, you feel his strength, you feel his 
desperation, he feels yours. You’re sharing this.”

RELIGION

Sarah Perry had a churchy childhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/31/the-essex-serpent-author-sarah-perry-kids-at-school-found-me-strange-i-didnt-mind>

“I would go to school and people would be talking about television, which was 
meaningless to me, and bands. I can remember someone talking about Take That, 
and I was like: ‘Take what?’” Her church, the Ebenezer Strict and Particular 
Baptist Chapel, was a 19th-century building in Chelmsford with thick, 
mottled-glass windows, “like the bottom of a beer bottle, inappropriately. And 
on a Sunday morning, when Sunday trading opened, I would see people walking 
past the windows on the way into town. That glass might have been a gap of 100 
years as far I was concerned, because I was in chapel with my head covered, in 
a long skirt, with my King James Bible, and at the front of the church a little 
old organ being pedalled away, and a man with a beard and proper 
fire-and-brimstone rhetoric. And people just trolleying along into town. I 
think that will never leave me, that feeling that something that may only be a 
pane of glass but might as well be an abyss separates me from everything else.”

Vanessa Redgrave thinks there is no conflict between science and religion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/13/vanessa-redgrave-interview-simon-hattenstone>

I know it’s a strange question to ask a Marxist, but do you have faith? She 
smiles, almost beatifically. “Yes, certainly I do. And the reason I do is 
because I don’t consider science and religion two fixed opposites. Human beings 
have felt the need to explain things that they couldn’t explain, and 
acknowledge the existence of things they can’t explain but want to.” She is 
talking so slowly, so deliberately, she could be setting a dictation test.

So religion and Marxism is another contradiction she is happy to embrace? 
“Yes, because if you’re not happy to embrace contradictions you’re not going to 
get very far in understanding anything.”

LOVE

Ben Whishaw found it a relief to come out publicly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/03/ben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview>

“And that just made it worse. Because then people assume you’ve got some 
really juicy, awful thing that you’re keeping from them.” After an intrusive 
journalist exposed his civil partnership with composer Mark Bradshaw, he was 
forced to speak more openly, and he found this something of a relief. “Because 
now people aren’t that interested, because now there’s nothing being 
concealed,” he says.

He tries not to think about how others might consider him or perceive his 
sexuality. “If you don’t let it be a weight upon you, it won’t manifest as one 
in your life,” he says. “I just try to give it little space in my brain. It’s 
not interesting to me.”

George Takei was in the closet on Star Trek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/06/star-treks-george-takei-id-take-a-female-friend-to-premieres-then-go-out-to-a-gay-bar>

“You live under the fear of being outed all the time. I played the game. I 
took a female friend to premieres and parties, and then I’d take her home and 
go to a gay bar. It was a double life. Interestingly, I recognised some faces 
in those bars and we’d say ‘Hi’, but we didn’t mention it the day after.”

Christine McVie says Fleetwood Mac are ‘umbilically tied together’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/06/christine-mcvie-on-fleetwood-mac-without-one-of-us-were-incomplete>

“I still think there’s a certain need for each other in our band. In a strange 
way. We’re umbilically tied together, somehow. Without one of us, we’re 
incomplete.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwhat-george-clooney-lupita-nyongo-elton-john-and-eddie-the-eagle-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F889d47e59a300cf38c42567c014a30a451ed8926%2F0_0_5333_3200%2F5333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20George%20Clooney%2C%20Lupita%20Nyong%E2%80%99o%2C%20Elton%20John%20and%20Eddie%20the%20Eagle%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwhat-george-clooney-lupita-nyongo-elton-john-and-eddie-the-eagle-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20George%20Clooney%2C%20Lupita%20Nyong%E2%80%99o%2C%20Elton%20John%20and%20Eddie%20the%20Eagle%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwhat-george-clooney-lupita-nyongo-elton-john-and-eddie-the-eagle-taught-us-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F889d47e59a300cf38c42567c014a30a451ed8926%2F0_0_5333_3200%2F5333.jpg>
 George Clooney, Macaulay Culkin, Lady Leshurr, Jay McInerney, Mark Ruffalo and 
Dustin Hoffman. Composite: Getty, Linda Nylind, Laura Barisonzi, WireImage 
MONEY

Woody Allen spends $100 a week on lottery tickets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/25/woody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon>

“I’ve talked this over with my wife. We would still go on living in the same 
house, I would go on working, I don’t want a boat, I don’t want a plane.”

So why do it? He seems stumped. “The odds are bigger than astronomical. You’d 
have a better chance of shuffling a deck of cards and naming them all in row. 
I’ve never got more than two numbers. I’d probably shoot myself if I got five 
and missed by one. That would really be a killer – but I don’t have that 
problem.”

Eddie the Eagle was rolling in cash in his heyday

“In 1988, I earned something like £700,000. Yeah! I was earning 10 grand an 
hour opening shopping centres. Yeah! The most I earned in one day was 65 grand. 
I opened the Alton Towers fun ride in the morning, did a commercial in the 
afternoon and an appearance at a nightclub in the evening. Sixty-five grand in 
one day!”

Suggs from Madness says London is no good for would-be stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/27/madness-suggs-album-cant-touch-us-now>

“Nowadays, you can’t even find somewhere to rehearse unless your mummy and 
daddy can pay for you. All the arts are just fucking old Etonians and that is a 
big problem. And it’s boring. Where are the urchins? We certainly wouldn’t be 
sitting here now.”

Elton John doesn’t spoil his children, Zachary and Elijah

“They get £3 pocket money, but £1 is for charity, £1 is for saving and £1 is 
for spending, they get three coins and put them in separate jars. And they have 
to work for it – help in the kitchen, help in the garden. They’ve got to learn 
the value of doing something and earning something for themselves. They live a 
very local life in Old Windsor, they go round their mates’ houses, it’s not a 
showbiz life as such. They’re not stuck behind the gates of a mansion. 
Saturdays when I’m home, we go to Pizza Hut with them, we go to Waterstones, we 
go to the cinema. I’ve never been a recluse, I’ve never hidden away. I’m on the 
school run.”

Lady Leshurr turned down her first big break because it meant starting a beef 
with Nicky Minaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/01/lady-leshurr-they-wanted-to-pit-me-against-nicki-minaj-i-wasnt-feeling-that>

Atlantic Records in the US offered her a deal. “They flew me out and we had a 
conversation, but their idea was that they were going to pit me against Nicki 
Minaj. It was like: ‘She’s the biggest female MC and you need to take her 
down,’ and I wasn’t feeling that at all. That whole stereotype of female 
rappers and their supporters having to compete with each other – it seems to be 
a crime to be a fan of two female rappers that are successful. So I turned it 
down. The amount of money they were offering me was amazing. I’ve always turned 
to music to get my mum out of the house, out of that situation, so to see that 
type of money thrown at me ... I’m not going to lie, I cried on the plane home, 
because I thought I’d made a mistake and my mum needed the money. It might have 
been my only chance. But I know by now I would probably have been dropped and 
my career would have been ruined.”

DONALD TRUMP

George Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/03/george-clooney-donald-trump-is-a-xenophobic-fascist>
 thinks he’s a fascist

“I met Donald once. I was sitting in a booth and we talked for a while. Then 
he did Larry King, and he said I was very short. And I was like: ‘I was sitting 
down the whole time, Donald! … He’s just an opportunist. Now he’s a fascist; a 
xenophobic fascist …

“Let’s put things into perspective. You know, the truth of the matter is, in 
election season, things go crazy, and the loudest voices are the furthest and 
most extreme. So you hear a massively stupid idea, like we’re going to ban 
Muslims from the country. Now, we’re not ever going to do that.” He shrugs. “It 
says in the Statue of Liberty, bring us your huddled masses. It’s not what’s 
going to happen.”

Elton John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/07/elton-john-i-really-hate-the-cult-of-celebrity>
 wouldn’t let his music be played at election rallies

“I don’t really want my music to be involved in anything to do with an 
American election campaign. I’m British. I’ve metDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, he was very nice to me, it’s 
nothing personal, his political views are his own, mine are very different, I’m 
not a Republican in a million years. Why not ask Ted fucking Nugent? Or one of 
those fucking country stars? They’ll do it for you.”

Macaulay Culkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/18/macauley-culkin-no-i-was-not-pounding-six-grand-of-heroin-a-month>
 is superstitious about even saying his name

“I have leanings, but I’m the definition of a disenfranchised voter – I think 
the system is ugly. This whole Trump thing is amazing.” (Trump cameos in Home 
Alone 2, showing our hero the way to the Plaza Hotel lobby, although we can’t 
talk about it.) Culkin doesn’t want to be drawn further. “Discussing politics 
is the quickest way to alienate people, so I don’t wanna go into it.” And Trump 
has enough column inches? “Exactly! He’s like the Candyman, we have to stop 
saying his name.”

Mark Wahlberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/mark-wahlberg-i-played-golf-with-donald-trump-he-was-very-donald-trump-like>
 has played golf with him

“He’s an OK golfer. I’ve gotten to know him a little bit since, on various 
occasions. I’ve never met Hillary Clinton.”

It turns out that Wahlberg and Trump met almost a decade ago at one of those 
weird celebrity golf events that always seem to be happening in California or 
Florida. What did they talk about? “He was very Donald Trump-like, talking 
about the things that he does, things that he has, business interests, 
properties, stuff like that. But he wasn’t ever mean or rude. I don’t think he 
asked me too many personal questions, or about what I do.”

Dustin Hoffman thinks he’s a conman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/06/dustin-hoffman-interview-kung-fu-panda-3>

“It’s not that he’s there, it’s that he has a following that’s more 
disturbing,” says Hoffman. “He fell in at this moment when the majority of the 
Republican electorate feel, as they say, betrayed by their own party. He’s not 
that original – we’ve seen people throughout our lifetime that are Donald 
Trumps. He does have a charisma, but so does the guy selling you a watch on the 
corner and telling you that it’s a Rolex.”

Tim Roth hates him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/04/tim-roth-if-you-neglect-working-class-for-so-long-they-will-rebel-against-you>

“I hate everything that he stands for. He should never be forgotten or 
forgiven for anything he said on the road to the White House. There should be 
no concession to him. No ‘Let’s give him a chance’. None of it,” he says. 
“‘Grab them by the pussy,’ right? Look at where we are now and who is in charge 
of this country and, by extension, a good chunk of the world – someone with 
misogynistic tendencies.”

“If you neglect the working class for so fucking long they will rebel against 
you. There was a dire need to stop a rise of fascism in America and we didn’t 
take it seriously enough.”

Mark Ruffalo says he’s a blip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/21/mark-ruffalo-on-spotlight-the-whole-of-boston-was-complicit-everybody-looked-the-other-way>

“I feel bad for the Republicans. It’s an untenable situation for them in a lot 
of ways. The people who are clear-headed and really do hold conservative values 
are on the outs. What’s driving the party at the moment is nothing other than 
fear and xenophobia, and a kind of paranoia that is not sustainable. You can’t 
govern with it.” Trump, he says, is “an interesting blip” in a country that is 
undergoing “kind of a correction”. Money has “corrupted the political system”, 
which has lost its credibility “on both sides of the aisle”. To Ruffalo, [Tump] 
“is playing into all the ugliest aspects of the fear that has been fomented by 
the media and the politicians themselves”; in contrast, he says, Bernie Sanders 
is offering “a reimagining of the basic premise of what America is”.

Jay McInerney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/01/jay-mcinerney-regret-trump-associated-city-i-love-new-york-bright-lights>
 says he gives New York a bad rep

“He’s this cartoon of a New York tycoon, and barely a tycoon at that. I have 
friends in the real estate business and they say, number one, he has hugely 
overinflated his wealth, and number two, he’s impossible to do business with; 
he’s not trustworthy, he sues everybody. He’s not well regarded in that 
community … As a New Yorker, I regret that he’s associated with the city I 
love.”

Interviews by Alex Needham, Paula Cocozza, Jess Cartner-Morley, Catherine 
Shoard, Simon Hattenstone, Archie Bland, Emma Brockes, Alexis Petridis, Dorian 
Lynskey, Nosheen Iqbal, John Patterson, Decca Aitkenhead, Steve Rose, Emine 
Saner, Alexis Soloski, Ryan Gilbey, Peter Robinson, Andrew Pulver, Rhik 
Samadder, Hadley Freeman, Tim Jonze and Rory Carroll.
 