
Until recently, there was news and “not news” – as denoted by comments of 
“that’s not news” below the line on more light-hearted stories or features. Now 
there is “fake news”, said to be behind the election ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> as US president and a recent 
incident involving a gunman at a Washington pizzeria.

The term has become widely used – too widely. But it’s understandable there’s 
confusion when some fake news is only a bit fake, or fake for an arguably 
legitimate reason (such as satire).

Can we still make a useful definition of fake news? And should we even be 
worried about it at all?

‘Pizzagate’ gunman for days tried to recruit friends to join raid, affidavit 
says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/pizzagate-gunman-planned-raid-recruit-friends>
Definitely real fake news


First the most famous example of an indisputably (or so you would think) fake 
news story that has had real-world consequences.


On 4 December, a North Carolina man opened fire at the Washington pizzeria 
Comet Ping Pong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/pizzagate-conspiracy-gunman-i-regret-how-i-handled-the-situation>
, which an online conspiracy theory purports to be the headquarters of a child 
sex ring run by Hillary Clinton.

Subscribers to “Pizzagate” point to apparent “code” within the hacked emails 
of John Podesta, the Clinton campaign chair, and the fact the restaurant has 
the same initials as “child pornography”. (Googling Pizzagate is not advised. 
The background to this extraordinary story has beenexplored in detail on the 
Reply All podcast <https://gimletmedia.com/episode/83-voyage-into-pizzagate/>.)

Mike Cernovich 🇺🇸 (@Cernovich) 
"I think it has a map that seems pizza-related."

This is code. I know this from representing drug dealers. 
https://t.co/9mX3kivmPz <https://t.co/9mX3kivmPz> pic.twitter.com/yk1vJIOlMd 
<https://t.co/yk1vJIOlMd>
 <https://twitter.com/Cernovich/status/794289600847953920> November 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Cernovich/status/794289600847953920> 
From 4chan and Reddit, the online message board where the story took root, the 
story gained sufficient momentum fora poll of 1,224 registered voters 
<http://www.publicpolicypolling.com/main/2016/12/trump-remains-unpopular-voters-prefer-obama-on-scotus-pick.html>
 in late September to find that 14% of Trump supporters believed it to be true.

A significant 32% of respondents were “not sure” – just like the 25-year-old 
gunman who, though not convinced of the theory, felt there were sufficient 
grounds to pay a visit to the restaurant to “self-investigate”.

Yes, it stretches the boundaries of belief – but a lot of fake news does. And 
yes, people nonetheless think it’s true.


How big a problem is this kind of fake news, really?

The poll lends weight to the suggestion that the US election result was 
influenced by a widespread belief in fake news among Trump supporters. That 
same poll found that 73% of Trump voters thought the billionaire financier 
George Soros paid protesters to disrupt the Republican candidate’s rallies – a 
fake news report later repeated by the president-elect himself.


Another fake news report, that Democratic senators wanted to impose sharia in 
Florida,was repeated by 
<http://www.politifact.com/florida/article/2016/nov/22/donald-trumps-security-adviser-pick-michael-flynn-/>
 Michael Flynn, Trump’s nominee for national security adviser. (Flynn also
tweeted a “MUST READ” link 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20161107234222/https:/twitter.com/GenFlynn/status/794000841518776320>
 about Democrats’ “sex crimes w children” – then deleted it.) A false report 
that Trump supporters chanting “we hate Muslims, we hate blacks, we want our 
great country back” at a rally was reported as true on election night.

These stories – compelling to click on, and with a “truthiness” quality to 
them – soar on the social web, where links are given the same weighting 
regardless of source, and particularly onFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, where there is a potential 
audience of 1.8bn.

Analysis by BuzzFeed found that fake news stories drew more shares and 
engagement 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/craigsilverman/viral-fake-election-news-outperformed-real-news-on-facebook?utm_term=.jtYyeddlK#.fvLPVppXj>
 during the final three months of the campaign than reports from (for example) 
the New York Times, the Washington Post and CNN.

Both Mark Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer of 
Facebook, pooh-poohed suggestion that fake news travelling on the network could 
have swung the election. But, on Thursday, Facebookannounced that it would begin
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/15/facebook-flag-fake-news-fact-check>
 flagging fake news stories with the help of users and outside fact-checkers.


Surely it’s easy to tell fake news from real news

Actually, no.

A recent study carried out 
<https://sheg.stanford.edu/upload/V3LessonPlans/Executive%20Summary%2011.21.16.pdf>
 by Stanford’s Graduate School of Education assessed more than 7,800 responses 
from middle school, high school and college students in 12 US states on their 
ability to assess information sources.

Researchers were “shocked” by students’ “stunning and dismaying consistency” 
to evaluate information at even as basic a level as distinguishing 
advertisements from articles.

If you think you, an adult with an internet connection, are better placed than 
a middle school student to assess sources, thiscollection of comments on 
“literally unbelievable” humour stories <http://literallyunbelievable.org/> is 
humbling.

It’s not that readers are stupid, or even necessarily credulous: it’s that the 
news format is easy to imitate and some true stories are outlandish enough to 
beggar belief.

Can you spot the fake US election news stories?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/17/fake-election-news-quiz> 
Where do these stories come from?

In its purest form, fake news is completely made up, manipulated to resemble 
credible journalism and attract maximum attention and, with it, advertising 
revenue. Examples include: “Transgender tampon now on the market”, “Pope 
Francis at White House: ‘Koran and Holy Bible are the same’”, “U2’s Bono 
rescued during terror attack, issues sick message to victims”.

Hosted on websites that often followed design conventions of online news 
media, with anodyne titles such as “Civic Tribune” and “Life Event Web” to give 
the semblance of legitimacy, the stories are geared to travel on social media.

With clicks come profit: a man running a string of fake news sites from Los 
Angelestold National Public Radio that he made 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2016/11/23/503146770/npr-finds-the-head-of-a-covert-fake-news-operation-in-the-suburbs>
 as much as US$30,000 a month from advertising that rewards high traffic. More 
than 100 pro-Trump fake news websiteswere being run by teenagers in one town 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/craigsilverman/how-macedonia-became-a-global-hub-for-pro-trump-misinfo>
 in Macedonia.

Is The Onion fake news?

Kind of. Strictly speaking, fake news is completely made up and designed to 
deceive readers to maximise traffic and profit.

But the definition is often expanded to include websites that circulate 
distorted, decontextualised or dubious information through – for example – 
clickbaiting headlines that don’t reflect the facts of the story, or undeclared 
bias.

With nearly all online media motivated to some extent by views, a publication 
doesn’t have to be written by teenagers in Macedonia to perpetuate 
misinformation. The very structure of the web enables whatBuzzFeed’s head of 
data science calls 
<https://points.datasociety.net/fake-news-is-not-the-problem-f00ec8cdfcb#.4q11rixw5>
 “not-fake-but-not-completely-true information”.

Humour sites, too, can be easily taken at face value, especially if they touch 
on current events or politics and if they appear free of context on social 
media. The Onion, Clickhole and the New Yorker’sBorowitz Report 
<https://www.google.com.au/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiz-ILW4ffQAhUHI8AKHXAkCAcQFggjMAI&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.newyorker.com%2Fhumor%2Fborowitz-report&usg=AFQjCNExSbMz6UsPPbhwwm-762_dlCbrxA&sig2=jNbBTAocm4aEfRq-j-ZDMQ>
 are often taken at face value – Clickhole in particularhas the spirit of fake 
news <https://twitter.com/i/moments/717796457361838080> about it, with its 
tagline: “because all content deserves to go viral”.
Kaitlan Collins (@kaitlancollins) 
That time Russell Crowe thought Clickhole was real pic.twitter.com/MqsAupXn6Y 
<http://t.co/MqsAupXn6Y>
 <https://twitter.com/kaitlancollins/status/593830701830647809> April 30, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/kaitlancollins/status/593830701830647809> 
It’s that quality of “truthiness” again. “#NotTheOnion 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23nottheonion&src=typd>” has become a popular 
catch cry for real stories that seem so ironic or ridiculous as to be fake at 
first glance – for example, “President-Elect tweets that Saturday Night Live is 
‘Unwatchable’.” The most successful fake news, as with humour, is deliberately 
pitched to seem just ridiculous enough to be true.

Is this column or review or news report I disagree with fake news?

Not if it doesn’t meet the definition above. “Fake news” is not a 
one-size-fits-all rejoinder for editorial decision-making or reporting you 
disagree with Stick with “that’s not news”.

So, how do you tell what is fake news?

Soon, Facebook will flag stories of questionable legitimacy with an alert that 
says “Disputed by 3rd party fact-checkers”. There arethree Google Chrome plugins
 <http://www.dailydot.com/debug/chrome-extensions-to-filter-fake-news/> and one 
just released by Slate 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/technology/2016/12/introducing_this_is_fake_slate_s_tool_for_stopping_fake_news_on_facebook.html>
 that do similar as you browse the web.

Melissa Zimdars, an associate professor of communication and media at 
Merrimack College in Massachusetts, compiledthis list of websites 
<http://www.dailydot.com/layer8/fake-news-sites-list-facebook/> that either 
purposely publish false information or are otherwise entirely unreliable, 
broken down by category – and publisheda helpful list of tips for 
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/10eA5-mCZLSS4MQY5QGb5ewC3VAL6pLkT53V_81ZyitM/preview>
 analysing news sources.


But Facebook’s approach has shortcomings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/facebook-fake-news-system-problems-fact-checking>
 and no list can ever be complete. You can’t go wrong by prioritising outlets 
known to be legitimate, and reading a lot of them. If it is published on the 
Guardian – just for example – it may well not be news, but it won’t be fake 
news. (Sorry, Breitbart. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/breitbart-fake-news-right-trump>
)

If you’re not sure if a site is legitimate, look for any red flags in its 
domain name, such as “.com.co”, and its About Us section. Google the sources of 
any quotes or figures given in the story – most fake news don’t have either, a 
warning sign in itself.

If the first you’ve heard of a particular event is from a website you’ve never 
heard of, there may be a reason. Be sceptical of stories about Trump, Clinton, 
the Pope, Kim Kardashian and Justin Bieber, and particularly of stories about 
any of them pledging allegiance to Isis.

Rest assured, if Bieber does pledge allegiance to Isis, mainstream media will 
cover it.

And what can I do to stop its spread?

Share responsibly. Much as it might depress you to think in such terms, you 
are an influencer within your own social network: put in the legwork above, and 
only post or share stories you know to be true, from sources you know to be 
responsible. It’s the “take only photographs, leave only footprints” for the 
post-truth era.

You can help shape the media you want, too. Withhold “hate-clicking” on 
stories you know are designed to make you angry. Pay for journalism you value.

And if you have connections on Facebook who think Onion stories are real, 
break it to them gently. Friends don’t let friends share fake news.
 