
For at least two decades, with stunning longevity, the persistence one might 
say of a Sicilian feud, much of British architecture has been divided into two 
camps. On one side the shape-makers, the iconists, the whooshers,Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/zaha-hadid>, Alsop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/will-alsop> and their imitators, for 
whom no form is too extravagant; on the other the rectangularisers, the 
whisperers, the purveyors of calm, measured, careful order, who would rather 
impale themselves on an early-Zaha pointy handrail than do a dodgy detail.

To which one wants to ask: is that all there is? Is there no architecture that 
can bare its soul without simultaneously crushing you with its ego, that stirs, 
moves, troubles, provokes, inspires? And is there no way of being controlled 
and passionate at the same time? Is there no other choice but blancmange or dry 
biscuits?

A glimmer of an alternative is suggested by Mavericks: Breaking the Mould of 
British Architecture 
<https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibition/mavericks-breaking-the-mould-of-british-architecture>
, an installation opening next week at the Royal Academy in London, with an 
accompanying book and programme of events. The installation is designed by the 
architectAlex Scott-Whitby <http://www.scottwhitby.com/workinprogress.html>, 
previously best known for proposing that the spires of City of London churches 
be adapted to make creative workspaces.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Froyal-academy-dials-m-for-maverick-british-architecture-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcf29a5356f5e166c3cf4371827dc18471e66a9b%2F0_0_3556_4153%2F3556.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20a%20maverick%20architect%20is%20made%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Froyal-academy-dials-m-for-maverick-british-architecture-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20a%20maverick%20architect%20is%20made%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Froyal-academy-dials-m-for-maverick-british-architecture-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcf29a5356f5e166c3cf4371827dc18471e66a9b%2F0_0_3556_4153%2F3556.jpg>
 The great Charles Rennie Mackintosh’s Glasgow School of Art. Photograph: Alamy 
Mavericks’ curator and author, Owen Hopkins, delves into history to identify a 
British tradition of architects determined to do things their own way, at any 
price, no matter what their peers might think. He argues that Britain has a way 
of being “at the tail end of adopting European cultural innovations” and “does 
so always on its own terms and for its own reasons”. He very much does not want 
to present these tendencies as a sideshow, but as essential to the development 
of British architecture.

The installation and exhibition therefore include some of the greatest British 
architects: Robert Smythson, who designed the biggest and most astonishing 
Elizabethan palaces,John Vanbrugh <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/vanbrugh>, 
John Soane, Charles Rennie Mackintosh,James Stirling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/mar/20/james-stirling-tate-britain-drawings>
. Hadid, indeed, is included, although she is hardly an outsider any more. 
There are others less famous, though none exactly unknown to architectural 
history, such as theAshmolean Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/nov/01/ashmolean-museum-rick-mather-reopening>
’s designer CR Cockerell, and HS Goodhart-Rendel, who from the 1920s to the 
1950s fused gothic, classical, art deco and modernism into unexpected 
combinations.

“Maverick” is a general term and Hopkins tries to refine it. It doesn’t mean 
genius, he says, though several of his choices are, and it doesn’t just mean 
wacko, bizarre, way-out. He likes a bit of commitment in his mavericks, a 
lifelong effort to stay true to their outsider visions, whether or not they are 
rewarded by admission to the mainstream. Naturally there’s a degree of 
randomness in his choice, and his top dozen mavericks are not mine, nor 
probably those of any other architecture anorak.

‘Maverick’ is a dubious word. Like its close cousin, ‘English eccentric’, it 
diminishes and trivialises

I’d have the polychromatic classicist John Outram <http://www.johnoutram.com/>
, andCuthbert Brodrick 
<http://www.leodis.net/discovery/discovery.asp?page=200335_519878567&topic=200335_316509426&subsection=2003611_627147854&subsubsection=2003611_77633083>
, the Hull-born maker of Leeds town hall and Scarborough’s Grand hotel, and
Rodney Gordon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/sep/10/architecture>, designer 
of mighty concrete monoliths, since demolished with municipal glee, in 
Gateshead and Portsmouth. I would put at the very centreIsi Metzstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/jan/22/isi-metzstein> and Andy 
MacMillan <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/07/andy-macmillan> 
of the Glasgow firm ofGillespie, Kidd & Coia 
<http://gillespiekiddandcoia.co.uk/>, creators of the near-instant ruin of St 
Peter’s seminary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/17/st-peters-seminary-glasgow-second-coming-for-scotlands-modernist-masterpiece>
, Cardross, who were maverick in the very best sense: idiosyncratic, 
distinctive, unafraid and completely serious at the same time. I’d think about 
Ernest George Trobridge, the Swedenborgian vegetarian maker of miniature 
castles and Tudor mansions in the north-west London suburb of Kingsbury. 
Hopkins includes more subtle choices, and prefers architects who hover between 
classifications, not quite one style or another, likeCharles Holden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2013/feb/02/london-underground-by-design-pictures#img-6>
, who designed the best of the interwar tube stations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Froyal-academy-dials-m-for-maverick-british-architecture-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dde4a541a5a7f8fdfe89613c10775391d3cc7fc%2F0_0_4595_3652%2F4595.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20a%20maverick%20architect%20is%20made%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Froyal-academy-dials-m-for-maverick-british-architecture-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20a%20maverick%20architect%20is%20made%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Froyal-academy-dials-m-for-maverick-british-architecture-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dde4a541a5a7f8fdfe89613c10775391d3cc7fc%2F0_0_4595_3652%2F4595.jpg>
 ‘Subtle choice’: Senate House, University of London, by Charles Holden. 
Photograph: Alamy 
In truth, though it has its uses for the Royal Academy’s project, “maverick” 
is a dubious word. Like its close cousin, the concept of the “English 
eccentric”, it diminishes and trivialises. It turns powerful and subversive art 
into whimsy, a bit of a giggle, with the implicit message that once we’ve all 
had our fun, we can get back to the grownup business of creating dull and 
soul-destroying buildings.

Such shrinking is very much not Hopkins’s intent. He wants to champion 
architecture that is “not just a reflection of society and the world as it is, 
but has the potential to articulate the future, and perhaps even play a part in 
creating it”. He points to the dictionary definition of the M-word as “an 
unorthodox or independent-minded person”. He has put his finger on a void in 
contemporary architecture, an unsatisfied hunger for buildings whose 
personalities are both strong and interactive.

FAT managed to be witty and provocative and professionally and conceptually 
serious at the same time

The people who did it best in recent times were the architectural practice FAT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2014/feb/04/fat-architecture-sean-griffiths-race-new-homes-quality>
, rightly included in Hopkins’s project. They managed to be witty, provocative, 
imaginative and engaging, and professionally and conceptually serious at the 
same time. You could love or hate their work, but at the very least it offered 
the possibility of an engagement, conversation, interaction. Their reward was a 
degree of fame and attention, but not a huge amount of work, and they disbanded 
two years ago, with the word “pranksters” carved even by sympathetic critics on 
their Google-search tombstone.

Which suggests that it is as tough as it has ever been truly to do your own 
thing and challenge orthodoxy. Which means that Mavericks has an important 
message to deliver. It is also a shame that the installation will be quite 
modest and occupy a marginal space within the Royal Academy, which seems to 
confirm as much as challenge the status accorded to such work. To fill the RA’s 
main galleries with it: that would really be something. And to call these 
architects something other than “mavericks”.

 * Mavericks: Breaking the Mould of British Architecture 
<https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibition/mavericks-breaking-the-mould-of-british-architecture>
 is at the Royal Academy, London from 26 January to 20 April
 