
The monthly release of print sales figures by the Audit Bureau of Circulations 
used to be a focal point of interest. Now eyes are averted. The details pass 
without comment.

Why? Because they confirm an old, old story. As everyone knows, fewer and 
fewer people are buying newspapers. Sales are going down. Tell us something new.

There’s a challenge. So let’s explore the latest set of ABC statistics for the 
national daily and Sunday titles, covering the month of October, to see what we 
can find.

The first fact to notice is the widespread use of bulks, those copies sold at 
less than cover price so that they can be given away free at airports, railway 
stations and hotels.

Several publishers, such as News UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsinternational>, are relying on them once 
more after eschewing their use in years past. It makes like-for-like 
comparisons difficult, so I have deducted bulks from the headline figures.

We can then see that the Times has closed to within 73,000 sales of the Daily 
Telegraph <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph>. While the former 
has been winning buyers month by month, the latter has been losing them, and at 
a greater rate.

If those trends at both titles continue then the obvious outcome will be the 
Times surpassing the Telegraph sometime within the next two years.

The outlook for the Guardian, over the same time period, is worrying if it 
continues to lose 5% year-on-year. But, like theFinancial Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/financialtimes>, it has long been planning 
for a digital-only future. (And please don’t read into this that I know 
anything about the paper’s plans).

One of the more fascinating up-and-down races is that between the Daily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> and the Sun. The gap between them 
has narrowed over the years and is now standing at 140,003.

Again, it is possible to imagine the Mail assuming the circulation leadership 
at some stage.Rupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> 
will surely strive to stop that happening, but the wind is behind the Mail, is 
it not?

Similarly, the struggle between the Sun on Sunday and the Mail on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mailonsunday> is one to watch, and the 
margin between them, 89,621, is smaller still. That could well be the first 
blow to News UK’s sales supremacy.


Meanwhile, the two Express titles are leaking copies without any sign of a 
turnaround in their fortunes. IfRichard Desmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-desmond> doesn’t find a buyer soon, 
there will be nothing to sell (in spite of his cut-price Stars enjoying little 
uplifts).

That said, Trinity Mirror’s stable is anything but healthy. The two Sunday 
titles are suffering from the largest falls of all. As for theDaily Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror>, it just cannot escape from 
its downward spiral in spite, it should be said, of often producing good issues.

I can’t finish without noting the success of the Observer in reaching what 
appears to be a circulation plateau. That is some achievement in the current 
market, especially with theSunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> maintaining its dominance.

Who is up... and who is down?

Headline sales; (bulks); =total without bulks; year-on-year percentage 
differences

THE DAILIES

Daily Telegraph 456,999 (20,901) =436,098 -3.79% 

The Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes> 437,352 (74,060) 
=363,292 +10.94%

i <https://www.theguardian.com/media/i> 278,843 (68,501) =210,342 +1.53%

Financial Times 194,152 (21,562) =172,590 -7.16% 

Guardian 157,778 -5.5%


Daily Mail 1,510,824 (73,882) =1,436,942 -5.2% 

Daily Express <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> 397,236 -3.4%

The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> 1,672,217 (95,272) =1,576,945 
-7.38%

Daily Mirror 756,142 (45,000) =711,142 -10.17% 

Daily Star <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailystar> 462,306 +7%

THE SUNDAYS

Sunday Times 781,237 (75,992) =705,245 +1.96 %

Sunday Telegraph <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sunday-telegraph> 364,785 
(24,913) = 339,872 +0.77%

The Observer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theobserver> 188,65 -0.17%

Mail on Sunday 1,315,977 (66,602) =1,249,375 -6.44% 

Sunday Express <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundayexpress> 349,220 -3.48%

Sun on Sunday <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun-on-sunday> 1,437,208 
(98,212) =1,338,996 -5.09%

Sunday People 263,011 (7,000) =256,011 -12.72%

Sunday Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaymirror> 680,497 
(45,000) =635,497 -15.03%

Daily Star, Sunday 274,796 +1.43%
 