
 Creeping on to DVD and streaming platforms almost exactly two years after its 
premiere at the 2014 Cannes film festival, When Animals Dream sets out its 
stall at a languid pace in keeping with a delay of that length. In a small 
Danish fishing village of Agger, the film finds 16-year-old Marie on the cusp 
of adulthood, having all but outgrown the home she shares with her stoic father 
and mysteriously catatonic mother. After finding a job at a fish-processing 
facility and a boyfriend who looks like Ronan Keating, Marie seems to have 
amassed all the key hallmarks of adulthood, and that’s to say nothing of the 
thick coat of hair growing all over her body.

Though its Nordic origins and sombre tone have seen When Animals Dream lazily 
compared to Let The Right One In, the film’s cerebral take on werewolf lore has 
more in common with a long line of North American horror movies in which 
lycanthropy stands in for the biological and social hurdles of adolescence. From
80s camp classic Teen Wolf <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9288e8zujFk> to 
po-mo millennial rompGinger Snaps <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zoa1A987A_k>
, such films have made a case for the horror genre as a medium uniquely well 
suited to the capturing the emotional whirlwind that is pubescence.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3vuW_58sAJ0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3vuW_58sAJ0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3vuW_58sAJ0&media=>
 Throughout When Animals Dream, Marie’s supernatural transformation is 
presented as just one of many teenage traumas. At work, her colleagues inflict 
a barrage of physical and verbal abuse under the guise of banter, while at home 
her father is controlling to the point of suffocation. Upon observing Marie’s 
changing physicality, he attempts to medicate her emergent animalism with drugs 
that will render her as comatose as her mother. He sees a woman unrestrained 
and his first impulse is to restrain her, in line with the Victorian doctors 
who pathologised unruly women as “hysterical”, or the contemporary fathers who 
police their daughters’ sex lives with the proverbial 8 Simple Rules.

 But if When Animals Dream gets the horror of puberty right, it’s blind to the 
comedy that comes with it. Lead actor Sonia Suhl maintains a look of cold 
indifference throughout the proceedings – lest the film dip even fleetingly 
below the austerity threshold of contemporary Danish cinema – and sometimes 
looks not so much angsty as anaesthetised. As viewers will no doubt be 
anticipating, Marie’s reticence eventually gives way to third-act carnivory as 
she allows the wolf within to take control. By this point, though, her loss of 
humanity is underwhelming; she displayed so little of the stuff in the first 
place.
 