
Advisers to Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> agonised over whether 
the then prime minister should agree to meet American civil rights leader Jesse 
Jackson, when he stopped in London in February 1990 on his way to South Africa 
– where a week later Nelson Mandela would walk free from prison.

Confidential files, newly released, provide a fascinating insight into the 
attitude of Thatcher’s advisers towards Jackson, whom they held in suspicion, 
and their continuing hostility to sanctions imposed on the apartheid regime in
South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>.

A briefing note prepared by Charles Powell, Thatcher’s private secretary and 
foreign policy adviser, commented that Jackson was “not exactly a friend”, 
noting that he had “spoken unhelpfully on Northern Ireland … compared your 
approach to European integration unfavourably with that of president Mitterrand 
and has written that 10 years of Conservative government have increased social 
disparities in the UK. These are all subjects on which he is profoundly 
ignorant.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fthatcher-advisers-suspicious-jesse-jackson-visit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba7051449912ebbe317f772ab27d83be9c9daa89%2F0_390_2187_1312%2F2187.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20Margaret%20Thatcher%20met%20Jesse%20Jackson%3A%201990%20file%20tells%20of%20%E2%80%98civil%20and%20lucid%E2%80%99%20talks%20despite%20adviser%20fears&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fthatcher-advisers-suspicious-jesse-jackson-visit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20Margaret%20Thatcher%20met%20Jesse%20Jackson%3A%201990%20file%20tells%20of%20%E2%80%98civil%20and%20lucid%E2%80%99%20talks%20despite%20adviser%20fears&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fthatcher-advisers-suspicious-jesse-jackson-visit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba7051449912ebbe317f772ab27d83be9c9daa89%2F0_390_2187_1312%2F2187.jpg>
 Margaret Thatcher on the steps of No 10 with Nelson Mandela in July 1990. 
Photograph: Gerry Penny/AFP/Getty Images 
Thatcher said sanctions 'had never been the answer'. Jackson replied it was 
'essential to keep up the pressure'.

Powell added that he suspected Jackson was making his way to South Africa to 
“claim some credit or reflected glory for Mandela’s release”. He suggested the 
aim of the meeting should be to ensure that Jackson acknowledged Mandela’s 
release would be a trigger for the US “to reconsider sanctions”, which Thatcher 
vehemently opposed.

Aware that Jackson might use the meeting to discuss race relations in the UK, 
Richard Gozney, private secretary at the Foreign Office, suggested that 
Thatcher read an article he had sent her fromBlack Enterprise magazine 
featuring success stories of people from ethnic minorities. The article, Gozney 
explained, “shows that ownership of consumer durables among blacks has risen 
dramatically since 1976” and “points to the growing numbers of black Britons 
who are acquiring professional qualifications”. Gozney, like Powell, was 
suspicious of Jackson. He noted that other black politicians in the US resented 
Jackson’s attempts “to associate himself with the memory of Martin Luther King, 
whom, in fact, he hardly knew”.

Gozney acknowledged there were risks to such a meeting, notably that Jackson 
“will want it for his own purposes and the publicity value” and that the UK 
would be granting him “a favour that he has not yet earned”.

However, weighing against those risks was the fact that Jackson, who at the 
time was running for US president, was “a figure of considerable importance” 
and a “symbolic figure for the black community”.

A confidential memo about the meeting itself, produced by Powell, notes that 
it went on for an hour-and-a-half, “twice as long as planned”. Powell wrote: 
“It was perfectly civil and generally lucid. But every so often, Mr Jackson 
would switch on to autopilot, the words would take over, and we’d dive into 
repetitive monologues.” During the meeting, Thatcher told Jackson that she 
believed apartheid was morally wrong. “But sanctions had never been the answer 
and were not so now.” Powell’s memo records her as saying a successful economy 
was essential to political progress. “She had always taken the view that 
contact was more important than isolation.”

Thatcher explained the she had never forgiven Winnie Mandela “for supporting 
use of the necklace”, a reference to the summary execution of a person by 
putting a tyre around a victim’s neck and setting fire to it, which Mrs Mandela 
had once apparently supported.Jackson was not convinced, and told the prime 
minister that boycotts worked, Powell noted. Jackson explained that in the US, 
black people had “boycotted [segregated] buses, believing it was better to walk 
with dignity than ride in shame” and that it was “essential to keep up the 
pressure” on South Africa through sanctions.

Thatcher shot back that prosperity “came from hard work and the right economic 
policies – and that did not include the nationalisation which Mandela still 
preached”. Following the meeting, a Foreign Office official wrote to Powell 
saying it had gone down well across the Atlantic and had advanced 
Anglo-American relations “because blacks and hispanics were the one element of 
American society which had been critical of the prime minister.”
 