
If Hollywood is to be believed, the most fascinating parts of a life are the 
rise and the fall — the ascent up the mountain and the inevitable tumble back 
to sea level. The middle bit — all the stuff about how one copes with the 
mundane reality of one’s fate — is less travelled territory. Look no further 
than the superhero origin story. Despite how often moviegoers have seen 
Batman’s parents gunned down in an alley, no shortage of films and TV shows 
choose to dramatise it yet again. But long before capes and masks were 
dominating cinemas, the film industry was giving audiences another kind of 
myth: the presidential origin story, of which Barack Obama filmsSouthside With 
You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/25/southside-with-you-review-obamas-first-date-is-before-sunset-sans-subtlety>
 andBarry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/barry-review-this-years-second-young-obama-movie-boasts-hope-and-audacity>
 are the latest entries in the genre.

Americans love a good presidential biopic, even ones for those 
commanders-in-chief who might not immediately jump to mind as worthy of the 
treatment. In 1944, 20th Century Fox releasedWilson 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilson_(1944_film)>, a film depicting the 28th 
president Woodrow Wilson, who shepherded the country through the previous war.
The Gorgeous Hussy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Gorgeous_Hussy>, a 1936 
film about Andrew Jackson, was a fictionalised account of thePetticoat affair 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Petticoat_affair>, a scandal involving the wife 
of a cabinet member.

Far more typical are the films that seek to canonise a former or sitting 
president. John Ford’sYoung Mr Lincoln 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BJKWguqabUU> – like Wilson, released by Fox, 
though five years earlier – is a lightly factual origin story about Abraham 
Lincoln.PT 109 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PT_109_(film)> – which hit 
cinemas five months before the assassination of its real-life inspiration, John 
F Kennedy – took inspiration fromJFK’s command of a navy boat 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motor_Torpedo_Boat_PT-109> during the second 
world war. In both cases, these films seek to build a throughline from the 
lessons learned in an early conflict to the rise to power. JFK discovers how to 
lead men through crisis. Lincoln learns fairness and compassion by coming to 
the aid of two brothers wrongfully accused of murder.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fbarack-michelle-obama-presidential-biopic-first-date%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc58ca24091d5c45d0df10f3aa4ca643ffc126fe8%2F0_87_2714_1628%2F2714.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20Barack%20met%20Michelle%3A%20the%20presidential%20biopic%20as%20love%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fbarack-michelle-obama-presidential-biopic-first-date%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20Barack%20met%20Michelle%3A%20the%20presidential%20biopic%20as%20love%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fbarack-michelle-obama-presidential-biopic-first-date%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc58ca24091d5c45d0df10f3aa4ca643ffc126fe8%2F0_87_2714_1628%2F2714.jpg>
 Canonising the president ... Henry Fonda stars as Young Mr Lincoln. 
Photograph: 20th Century Fox 
Barry and Southside With You both fall squarely in the hagiographic mould, 
though far from the theatrics of war or life-and-death consequences. Southside 
dramatises the first date between Barack and eventual first lady Michelle 
Obama. Barry, directed byVice on HBO <http://www.hbo.com/vice> host and 
documentarianVikram Gandhi <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vikram_Gandhi>, 
depicts Barack’s struggles to adapt to living in New York City in the early 
1980s.

Southside director Richard Tanne attempted to make a film that was both about 
Barack andMichelle Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama>, 
but also a film that could stand on its own as a romance. “My job was just to 
build a credible love story, but the dramatic irony of the film is we all know 
what they went on to accomplish, the history that they made, however not 
everybody feels the same way about them,” he explains over the phone.

Southside covers only a single day in the life of these two people, rather 
than the biographical sprawl of Oliver Stone’sNixon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jun/03/nixon-oliver-stone-reel-history> 
orW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/nov/12/reel-history-george-bush-w-biopic-josh-brolin>
, works that are significantly more critical of their subjects than the average 
film about a president. The film begins before the date, as Michelle Robinson 
and Barack Obama – colleagues at a law firm in Chicago – get ready, chat with 
their parents and express trepidation over the upcoming rendezvous. Is it a 
date? Michelle is convinced it isn’t. Barack’s mother asks if the new girl is 
white. She isn’t. Tanne plays up the initial friction, casting some doubt on 
the relationship, even if the outcome is predetermined.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fbarack-michelle-obama-presidential-biopic-first-date%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14dcbbbd62ce9b38264831757307ec04b19b97ec%2F0_185_1724_1034%2F1724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20Barack%20met%20Michelle%3A%20the%20presidential%20biopic%20as%20love%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fbarack-michelle-obama-presidential-biopic-first-date%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20Barack%20met%20Michelle%3A%20the%20presidential%20biopic%20as%20love%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fbarack-michelle-obama-presidential-biopic-first-date%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14dcbbbd62ce9b38264831757307ec04b19b97ec%2F0_185_1724_1034%2F1724.jpg>
 President as war hero ... Cliff Robertson plays Lt John F Kennedy in PT 109. 
Photograph: Allstar/Warner 
“Michelle was very picky and very selective and guys didn’t last that long,” 
he says. “I extrapolated from that that here was this 25-year-old woman whose 
intelligence was boundless. She skipped second and third grade and was already 
a second-year associate at the biggest firm in Chicago after graduating Harvard 
Law.” Michelle’s prodigious talent, her success to that point in her career, 
and her keen understanding of the unsavoury aspects of office politics make her 
initial scepticism over dating a subordinate understandable. “She was well 
ahead of where Barack was professionally at that time,” Tanne says.

Michelle is played by Tika Sumpter, who has popped up in a variety of 
high-profile projects – from a Madea movie andRide Along 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/13/ride-along-2-review-ice-cube-kevin-hart>
 to the James Brown biopicGet On Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/01/get-on-up-review-james-brown-biopic>
. She was the first actor cast and is also a producer on Southside. The search 
for Barack was far more complicated. “We read about 30 Los Angeles-based actors 
and we got tapes sent in from elsewhere around the country,” Tanne says. 
“Everyone we read was a terrific actor, but they weren’t quite Obama. They 
couldn’t get the president out of their minds. I just needed them to be a guy 
trying to get a girl.”

The role eventually went to newcomer Parker Sawyers, who does a remarkable job 
capturing the essence of one of the most famous men in the world. “I did the 
audition, but it was a straight-on impersonation. It was not nuanced, it wasn’t 
even very good acting,” says Sawyers. “I didn’t hear anything back, and then it 
came back around in April 2015. I spoke to Rich for 20 minutes. He says: ‘Dude, 
drop the impersonation. Just play yourself. Just be you. No Barack.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fbarack-michelle-obama-presidential-biopic-first-date%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F483950f86af83ea05557edd6a1b0a72697663c6a%2F0_0_1787_1072%2F1787.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20Barack%20met%20Michelle%3A%20the%20presidential%20biopic%20as%20love%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fbarack-michelle-obama-presidential-biopic-first-date%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20Barack%20met%20Michelle%3A%20the%20presidential%20biopic%20as%20love%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fbarack-michelle-obama-presidential-biopic-first-date%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F483950f86af83ea05557edd6a1b0a72697663c6a%2F0_0_1787_1072%2F1787.jpg>
 Oliver Stone’s Nixon, starring Anthony Hopkins (left) is considerably more 
critical of its subject than most presidential biopics. Photograph: 
Allstar/Buena Vista 
The note worked and Sawyers got the part. “I’m sure President Obama, when we 
don’t see him, acts a different way.” That’s the trick of playing a celebrity 
before they were a celebrity. They are fundamentally not the same person that 
they are today – less aware of people watching them, unaffected by the 
spotlight and significantly less performative. Sawyers and Sumpter don’t really 
tip their hats to the Obamas’ future role in American history until key moments 
in the film’s final act, but even then, it’s all quite subtle and never 
distracts from Tanne’s “credible love story”.

The most curious aspect of both Barry (which is to be released globally by 
Netflix) and Southside is that they are both coming out while Obama is still in 
office, which gives them another thing in common with PT 109. I tell Tanne that 
I was initially put off by the idea of a film about the Obamas coming so soon 
after they ascended to the White House. The history is too recent, I say. Of 
course, it’s not that recent, as the first date was over 20 years ago. Stripped 
of any political or historical significance, the film is simply a clever way to 
tell one of the most common stories there is: the initial spark of love between 
two interesting people.

“Back in 2007, I was really taken by them as a couple, the way they looked at 
each other, the way they flirted,” Tanne says. “It’s a very authentic, sexy, 
and vibrant connection between them. I find that to be rare in people that you 
meet, everyday folks, and even rarer in public figures.” How difficult it would 
be to pull off this movie about most other recent presidents. The Obamas are 
unique in that their affection pops off the screen whenever they share a stage.

I ask Tanne how Obama’s final presidential legacy might affect the way his 
movie is perceived in the future. Will it be a Young Mr Lincoln-esque work that 
spawns an enduring myth? Or will it be viewed with a sceptical eye, the way 
something like Wilson is consumed, as the public begins to sour on the Obama 
era? He pauses. Real history, he thinks, “shades the movie. As the legacy 
evolves, I can imagine that audiences will see the film differently, as the 
pendulum swings one way and then the other way, there’s going to be constantly 
changing perceptions of the movie as relates to his legacy.” What can never be 
undone is the barrier Barack and Michelle broke, and the impact that will have 
on the US, for decades to come.

• Southside With You <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=erpUF2ToUls> is released 
in the UK on 30 September
 