
Studio Ghibli, the revered Japanese house of lushly animated dreams, has 
enjoyed something of a protracted farewell. It’s more than two years sinceit 
announced its creative hiatus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/aug/04/anime-producer-studio-ghibli-makes-its-last-film>
, with co-founders Hayao Miyazaki and Isao Takahata having made their 
respective final films. But the lovely When Marnie Was There (Studiocanal, U) 
is, to all intents and purposes, Ghibli’s official farewell. Directed by the 
nowhere-near-retired Hiromasa Yonebayashi, this gentle, supernaturally tinged 
tale of young female companionship doesn’t seem as much a work of artistic 
closure as, say, Miyazaki’sThe Wind Rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-wind-rises>, but it’s a suitably wistful, 
whispery note to go out on.

The bond at its centre, between a lonely orphaned teen and the radiant, 
ethereally elusive girl who lives across the water, walks a gossamer line 
between friendship and romance. Though there’s an unearthly streak to the 
narrative, this is one of the studio’s most honestly human stories, run through 
with conflicted, bittersweet emotion.

The fan cult of Kristen Stewart is a powerful one, so when a film of hers 
skips cinemas, you sense something is amiss

The prospect of losing Ghibli’s subtle, serene brand of children’s 
storytelling is all the sadder when its latest is viewed beside Disney’sAlice 
Through the Looking Glass (Disney, PG), a nightmarish puree of corporate 
formula, literary misinterpretation and secondhand quirk that, almost 
impressively, outstrips Tim Burton’s2010 predecessor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/07/alice-in-wonderland-review> for 
sheer antic ugliness. Burton’s take on Lewis Carroll was already smug and 
smoggy and over-designed. James Bobin’s sequel is more airless still, muddling 
Carrollian whimsy with more turgid science fiction conceits and doubling down 
on the queasy CGI and nuclear colour palette.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fwhen-marnie-was-there-alice-looking-glass-mothers-day-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F664a8ba060401c9b5a2304a4c133820da2894e13%2F0_0_3504_2016%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20Marnie%20Was%20There%3B%20Alice%20Through%20the%20Looking%20Glass%3B%20Mother%E2%80%99s%20Day%3B%20Money%20Monster%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fwhen-marnie-was-there-alice-looking-glass-mothers-day-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20Marnie%20Was%20There%3B%20Alice%20Through%20the%20Looking%20Glass%3B%20Mother%E2%80%99s%20Day%3B%20Money%20Monster%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fwhen-marnie-was-there-alice-looking-glass-mothers-day-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F664a8ba060401c9b5a2304a4c133820da2894e13%2F0_0_3504_2016%2F3504.jpg>
 Disney’s ‘scarringly memorable’ Alice Through the Looking Glass. Photograph: 
Allstar/Disney 
It’s about as grim as major studio film-making can get these days, though 
Mother’s Day (Lionsgate, 12) at least wants in on that conversation. An 
unfortunate swansong for thelate Garry Marshall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/20/garry-marshall-obituary-creator-of-happy-days>
, closing out his trilogy of holiday-themed ensemble schmaltzfests, this blank 
greeting card of a film distinguishes itself from the others with particularly 
noxious streaks of misogyny and racism, not redeemed by such moments of 
emotional catharsis as Jennifer Aniston learning that a mother’s love is as 
eternal as a clown’s handkerchief. It arrives on DVD seven months too late for 
Mother’s Day, though there won’t ever be a good time for it.

Compared with these two, Jodie Foster’s Money Monster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jodie-foster> (Sony, 15) is a model of 
capability, though not quite as scarringly memorable. A hostage thriller with a 
side dish of defanged media satire, which sees a glossy TV finance show 
hijacked by a disenfranchised viewer, the film aims for jaded Trump-era 
topicality, but could hardly feel more comfortingly 90s in its styling.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqr_nGAbFkmk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqr_nGAbFkmk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqr_nGAbFkmk&media=>
Watch the trailer for Money Monster. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qr_nGAbFkmk> 
The fan cult of Kristen Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-stewart> is a powerful one, so when a 
film of hers skips cinemas, you sense something is amiss. Sadly,Equals (Icon, 
12) is a wide miss indeed. A gleamingly styled but wholly misconceived sci-fi 
romance from Drake Doremus, the Next Big Thing lustre he earned with Sundance 
winnerLike Crazy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/like-crazy> now a bit 
dulled, this junior-leagueGattaca knock-off appealingly matches Stewart with 
Nicholas Hoult. But it is scuppered by the wispy illogic of its fantasy 
premise: a dystopia where all feelings have been outlawed. You won’t feel much 
watching it, though that’s hardly the point.

A similar tenor of low-key family melodrama is on offer in both The Daughter 
(Metrodome, 15) andDeparture (Peccadillo, 15). The former is a fine-tuned 
Australian twist on Ibsen’sThe Wild Duck, marked by sharp, tart performances 
and a keenly evoked rural milieu. The latter is an affecting but slightly 
precious coming-out tale, centred on a British teen and his weary mother as 
they pack up their house (and, with it, lost parts of their lives) in the south 
of France. The week’s documentary pick isJim: The James Foley Story (Dogwoof, 
15), a portrait of the Isis-slain American photojournalist assembled with 
palpable affection and dedication by friends and family. It’s far more emotive 
than analytical, but hits hard on those terms.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpSse2RIapEA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpSse2RIapEA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpSse2RIapEA&media=>
Watch the trailer for The Daughter. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pSse2RIapEA> 
Finally, with The Blue Room, Mathieu Amalric’s short, sour, razor-shaved 
adaptation of theGeorges Simenon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgessimenon> mystery, having glided 
swiftly from cinemas to the exclusive online domain of Mubi.com, the arthouse 
streaming outlet is marking the occasion with amini-festival 
<https://mubi.com/specials/amalric> of lesser-seen Amalric vehicles. It’s a 
welcome showcase for the Frenchman’s singularly shaggy gifts, albeit a mixed 
bag. Viewers can find out for themselves why Arnaud Desplechin’sJimmy P: 
Psychotherapy of a Plains Indian, a starched dual-character study of a Native 
American second world war veteran and his patient shrink, never saw the light 
of day in the UK, though Nicolas Klotz’sHeartbeat Detector remains a sinuous, 
cerebral corporate thriller. Amalric’s 1990 directorial debut, the 20-minute 
you-can’t-go-home-again taleSans rires, serves as a tenderly melancholic chaser.
 