
Matt Damon once said <http://www.slashfilm.com/matt-damon-daredevil/> the only 
superhero he would ever consider playing was Marvel’s Daredevil, and only if 
Christopher Nolan agreed to direct. But that was before best pal Ben Affleck was
handed the keys to the Batmobile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/13/ben-affleck-batman-confirmed-direct-star-in-solo-movie>
.

Speaking at the UK premiere of Jason Bourne, Damon revealed he would consider 
pulling on the spandex 
<http://www.irishexaminer.com/breakingnews/entertainment/matt-damon-i-would-play-a-superhero-if-ben-affleck-directed-me-744315.html>
 provided Affleck made the offer, and didn’t go snagging the best role for 
himself. Which got us thinking about how the 45-year-old Oscar-winner would fit 
into theall-new DC expanded universe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/20/dc-comics-cinematic-universe-struggles>
 if his friend ever makes the call. Here are five colourful comic book titans 
that might just suit Damon down to the ground.

Ben Affleck's Batman film will be 'original story' independent of comics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/02/ben-affleck-batman-movie-original-story-comics>
Superman
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmatt-damon-super-hero-role-batman-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c93b78766cd57fd551febf101ad5582434dd661%2F0_289_3686_2212%2F3686.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20superhero%20should%20Matt%20Damon%20play%20in%20Ben%20Affleck's%20Batman%20movie%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmatt-damon-super-hero-role-batman-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20superhero%20should%20Matt%20Damon%20play%20in%20Ben%20Affleck%27s%20Batman%20movie%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmatt-damon-super-hero-role-batman-movie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c93b78766cd57fd551febf101ad5582434dd661%2F0_289_3686_2212%2F3686.jpg>
 Position filled ... Henry Cavill is the current Superman. Photograph: Supplied 
by LMK 
If Affleck wanted to bring the man of steel to Gotham, who better to step into 
Kal-El’s red and blue spandex than his old pal Matt? Damon certainly has the 
right combination of musclebound brawn and plain old ultra-decency to play the 
big blue boy scout. And the Bourne star surely isn’t going to sign up for a bit 
part: he’ll want to play the main man, the big cheese, the boss daddy of the DC 
megaverse. Anything less would be an insult.

Chances: 1/10. Despite the appalling critical response to Batman v Superman: 
Yawn of Justice, Henry Cavill surely has his fingers firmly on the role for a 
while yet. And at 5 ft 10in, Damon is just too tiny to play Superman opposite 6 
ft 4in Affleck without the aid of serious CGI. Or stilts. Casting him as the 
last son of Krypton would be likehanding the role to Nicolas Cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/06/unseen-footage-of-nicolas-cage-superman-lives-tim-burton-movie>
, orchoosing Bill Murray to play Batman 
<http://www.ranker.com/list/10-famous-roles-almost-played-by-bill-murray/adamhb>
. What’s that you say?

Green Arrow
 Off target ... Stephen Amell plays Green Arrow on the small screen. 
Photograph: DC Entertainment/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar/DC Entertainment 
Now we’re talking. Oliver McQueen is a perennial comrade of Batman in the 
comics, but has the spunk and standing to tell the caped crusader when his 
Batcave stinks, so Damon and Affleck would meet as relative equals. If Warner 
Bros chose to stick with the golden age take on the superhero, Matt might even 
get to rock up with his own Arrowcar, Arrowcave and Robin-style teenaged 
sidekick.

Which Batman villains should Affleck bring back – and who should play them?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/02/batman-villains-ben-affleck-film-riddler-penguin-poison-ivy>
Chances: 7/10. Green Arrow isn’t lined up to appear in next year’s Justice 
League, even though he often plays a vital part in the superhero ensemble in 
the comics. And there is little or no chance of Warner Bros parachuting in 
Stephen Amell from the middling The CW TV show Arrow, so the job’s up for grabs.

Nightwing

If Damon really wants to be Robin to Affleck’s Batman, this is probably the 
closest he’s ever going to get. Zack Snyder may have essentially killed off the 
boy wonder in Yawn of Justice, but if we’re following the comic book source 
material it’s pretty clear the Jason Todd iteration was the one who got copped 
by the Joker. The first Robin, Dick Grayson, might well be running around 
Gotham as Nightwing doing his independent, Batman-inspired crimefighting thing 
by this point.

Chances: 4/10. Nightwing has become well established over the decades as one 
of DC’s top superheroes, and even doubled for his former partner when Batman’s 
back was broken by Bane. But Grayson was once Bruce Wayne’s ward, and the pair 
are often painted as having a father-son style relationship, which for Affleck 
and Damon might prove a little awkward to say the least.

The Martian Manhunter
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmatt-damon-super-hero-role-batman-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4a52e139ec356ea60e29c5c816c5a30482d1e72%2F401_200_1059_635%2F1059.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20superhero%20should%20Matt%20Damon%20play%20in%20Ben%20Affleck's%20Batman%20movie%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmatt-damon-super-hero-role-batman-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20superhero%20should%20Matt%20Damon%20play%20in%20Ben%20Affleck%27s%20Batman%20movie%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmatt-damon-super-hero-role-batman-movie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4a52e139ec356ea60e29c5c816c5a30482d1e72%2F401_200_1059_635%2F1059.jpg>
 Alien among us ... The Martian Manhunter (centre) has often been a key member 
of superhero team the Justice League. Photograph: Warner Bros/Everett/Rex 
Here’s another perennial stalwart of the Justice League conspicuous by his 
absence from the upcoming Warner/DC slate. The green-skinned alien has been 
described by Superman as the most powerful being on Earth, and has often stood 
in for the man of steel when he’s been about other business. Surely Damon would 
enjoy picking up a skillset that includes telepathy, super-strength and speed, 
telekinesis, invisibility and shapeshifting just for starters? But would he 
really be up for spending all those hours in the make-up chair?

Chances: 6/10. Only if they let Damon do it by motion capture.

Green Lantern
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmatt-damon-super-hero-role-batman-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3978b534cdf0fb7419b17c8b873c8d80a9df793%2F923_0_5088_3054%2F5088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Which%20superhero%20should%20Matt%20Damon%20play%20in%20Ben%20Affleck's%20Batman%20movie%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmatt-damon-super-hero-role-batman-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Which%20superhero%20should%20Matt%20Damon%20play%20in%20Ben%20Affleck%27s%20Batman%20movie%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fmatt-damon-super-hero-role-batman-movie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3978b534cdf0fb7419b17c8b873c8d80a9df793%2F923_0_5088_3054%2F5088.jpg>
 Ring of failure ... the last Green Lantern movie fired box office blanks. 
Photograph: AP 
A superhero that even Ryan Reynolds couldn’t make look cool is a tough sell 
indeed, so it’s no wonder DC Films has pushed the intergalactic space cop so 
far to the rear of its superhero slate that it will probably take us light 
years to get there (well, at least until 2020). But if Marvel can make the 
cosmic freaks of Guardians of the Galaxy into A-list heroes, Warner ought to be 
able to do something similar with Hal Jordan and his magic power ring. Damon 
has the comic gifts to help elevate the sometime Justice League member to the 
top ranks of big screen superheroes, and he and Batmanhave always had an 
entertaining rivalry <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fOcC1y-9aeU>. 

Chances: 6/10. Green Lantern’s not the most obvious hero to appear in a Batman 
movie, and power rings are essentially deeply silly. So much so that the 
original 1940s Lantern was invulnerable to all weapons, bar those made from 
wood. Which makes us think it’s a good thing he rarely comes up against Green 
Arrow.
 