
Batman’s “rogues gallery” of villains is the classic comic book coterie of 
evil. So why have so many of them been absent from the big screen for so long? 
Penguin has been missing since Danny DeVito’s freaky turn in 1992’s Batman 
Returns, while The Riddler hasn’t been wheeled out since Jim Carrey’s 
nerve-shatteringly ebullient performance in 1995’s Batman Forever. Poison Ivy? 
Well, we haven’t seen her since Uma Thurman’s uber-camp 1997 portrayal in Joel 
Schumacher’s ill-fatedBatman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/batman> & 
Robin.


Ben Affleck confirmed to direct and star in solo Batman movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/13/ben-affleck-batman-confirmed-direct-star-in-solo-movie>
Some Batman bad guys, it seems, drew so firmly on the burlesque that they 
failed to find a natural place in Christopher Nolan’s grim and brooding Dark 
Knight trilogy.But a new report on birthmoviesdeath.com 
<http://birthmoviesdeath.com/2016/05/01/you-will-probably-see-your-favorite-villain-in-afflecks-batman-movie>
 suggests a number of famous villains might be on the verge of an unexpected 
return inBen Affleck’s upcoming solo outing for the caped crusader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/13/ben-affleck-batman-confirmed-direct-star-in-solo-movie>
. So which classic Bats baddies are long overdue a new appearance in Warner’s 
DC Comics-based cinematic universe, and who should play them? (Note: I haven’t 
included The Joker, Harley Quinn or Deadshot here, as that particular trio are 
nailed on to be portrayed by Suicide Squad’s Jared Leto, Margot Robbie and Will 
Smith).

The Riddler
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB2QVTiLGFVY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB2QVTiLGFVY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB2QVTiLGFVY&media=>
Like a toddler after guzzling too much candy, Carrey’s leering, gurning turn 
as Edward Nigma in Schumacher’s Batman Forever is so frenzied and manic that 
more than a few seconds of viewing is likely to make your eyes bleed. Where the 
comics play on the ingenious supervillain’s obsession with riddles and puzzles, 
making him the perfect foil for detective-mode Batman, Hollywood gave us a 
fatuous cackling loon whose crazed antics are even soundtracked with irritating 
Hanna Barbera-style sound effects. Any new version needs to be a genuine threat 
to Gotham’s dark knight, rather than a wacky passing distraction.

Chances of a comeback: High. Carrey’s turn, while much-maligned, helped 
establish The Riddler as one of Batman’s ultimate antagonists in the eyes of 
the public, and the villain also appeared in the old school 1960s Batman TV 
series and 1966 movie. Johnny Depp and Leonardo DiCaprio are among the 
Hollywood A-listers who have been linked to the role at various times in the 
past.

Ideal casting: Younger actors with the ability to pull off Carreyesque levels 
of intensity are few and far between. Tom Hiddleston certainly has the 
requisite supervillain chops, andappears to have no clear current path forward 
in the rival Marvel universe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/31/marvel-tom-hiddleston-loki-movie-deadpool-suicide-squad>
, if Warner Bros felt compelled to throw the ultimate curveball. Napoleon 
Dynamite’sJon Heder <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1hJHHZieNE4> would make 
for another fascinating choice.

The Penguin
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7qELPfzrDxI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7qELPfzrDxI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7qELPfzrDxI&media=>
DeVito imagined Oswald Cobblepot as a sinister sideshow circus freak with a 
vicious streak in Batman Returns, while the excellent Robin Lord Taylor gives 
us a gimpy, nerdy take on the TV show Gotham. Either way, The Penguin works 
best as a powerful crime boss with a chip on his shoulder and taste for the 
gothic, though Tim Burton’s missile-toting penguin army was surely a step too 
far into the realms of the absurd.

Chances of a comeback: Virtually guaranteed. The Penguin is right up there 
with The Joker as an ever-present member of Batman’s rogues gallery, and has 
been a vital screen presence ever since Burgess Meredith’s early turn in the 
1960s TV series.

Ideal casting: Boardwalk Empire’s Stephen Graham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stephen-graham> can shift from cool 
tranquility to murderous rage in the blink of an eye, whileJason Schwartzman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/12/on-my-radar-jason-schwartzman-cultural-highlights>
 andJoaquin Phoenix <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joaquin-phoenix> both 
have the required sinister, unnerving quality. Game of Thrones’sPeter Dinklage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/07/peter-dinklage-tyrion-lannister-game-of-thrones-pixels>
 would also make a fine choice.

The Scarecrow
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqCELYhYlLtU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqCELYhYlLtU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqCELYhYlLtU&media=>
Nolan’s superbly-essayed real world take on Dr Jonathan Crane was the glue 
that held The Dark Knight trilogy together, Cillian Murphy appearing as the 
demented quack psychiatrist in all three instalments, though far more 
prominently in series opener Batman Begins.
Chances of a comeback: Middling. Affleck would have to do something very 
different with the fear-obsessed supervillain to make Crane worth resurrecting 
on this stage.
Ideal casting: This could make a fantastic comeback role for Elijah Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/oct/18/elijah-wood-interview>.

Poison Ivy
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgdGdXVm4SN8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgdGdXVm4SN8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgdGdXVm4SN8&media=>
The extravagantly gifted Uma Thurman was perhaps the perfect actor to play the 
flora-obsessed villain in Batman & Robin, but Schumacher’s pantomime stylings 
foiled all her best-laid plans. Even better is the Rita Hayworth-inspired 
iteration from the classic TV show Batman: the Animated Series. In the era of 
environmental activism and militant veganism, a baddie keen on using the 
domination of plant-based species to take over the world couldn’t be more 
topical.
Chances of a comeback: Decent. Though Ivy surely needs a storyline of her own 
to flourish, rather than being rolled out as a sidekick to other better-known 
villains.

Ideal casting: Bombshells Christina Hendricks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/aug/03/christina-hendricks-joan-mad-men-gods-pocket-interview>
 andElizabeth Debicki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/02/elizabeth-debicki-on-hollywood-i-dont-think-i-even-really-dreamed-of-this>
, or a post X-MenJennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence> if Warner aims to 
transform the character into a major player.

Catwoman
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvXiGbkE5nSI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvXiGbkE5nSI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvXiGbkE5nSI&media=>
A Batfleck Batman movie without the ultimate feline femme fatale would surely 
be a missed opportunity to add some diversity to the DC universe. Eartha Kitt’s 
1960s take might not be as well known to modern audiences as Michelle 
Pfeiffer’s PVC-clad, finger-lickin’ dominatrix from Batman Returns, yet the 
role made Kitt the first black woman to achieve mainstream TV success. The 
comics later followed suit in a pioneering example of the kind of 
diversity-fuelled race-swapping that has become common in print. That led to 
surely the spikiest Selina Kyle yet seen, the African American sex worker 
version introduced in Frank Miller’s famous Batman: Year One.


Chances of a comeback: Anne Hathaway’s relatively recent portrayal of Kyle in 
2012’s The Dark Knight Rises makes this one a maybe.
Ideal casting: Rosario Dawson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rosario-dawson>
 orBeyoncé <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce>.
 