
At last, a price comparison more wantonly imbecilic than discussing how many 
nurses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/feb/24/wayne-rooney-manchester-united-new-deal>
 a Premier League footballer’s commercial contract would have bought. It is the 
confected outrage that someone or other is paid “more than the prime minister’s 
salary”.

Latest to deploy it is Karen Bradley, who has risen without trace to become 
secretary of state for culture, media and sport. Karen has taken to the pages 
of theDaily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/14/our-new-charter-will-make-sure-the-bbc-thrives-for-years-to-come/>
 to reveal that the government is today forcing the BBC to publish the salaries 
of all on-screen talentearning more than £150,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/14/bbc-presenters-pay-to-be-made-public>
.

Though Karen was appointed by Theresa May, the obsession with prime 
ministerial comparisons took hold particularly under the competitively priced 
premiership of David Cameron, whoseoriginal plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/government-to-force-bbc-to-declare-star-salaries>
 it was to force the Beeb to disclose talent paid more than £450,000. That 
today’s threshold is so much lower suggests the problem persists more 
virulently than ever. Anyway, let’s see it in action. “Latest data shows that 
109 stars currently earn more than that figure,” notes Karen, “which is just 
above the prime minister’s salary.”

BBC presenters' salaries over £150,000 to be made public
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/14/bbc-presenters-pay-to-be-made-public>
On the one hand, Karen is to be congratulated for catching the popular mood, 
which we all know has in recent years been a sense that television isn’t going 
through a golden age and that politicians are tireless and highly valued public 
servants who really ought to be given much more of our money. On the other 
hand, what on earth has the prime minister’s salary got to do with the price of 
rice, let alone the price of Laura Kuenssberg?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fbbc-salaries-who-cares-what-tess-daly-bake-off-stars-paid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75010514cf939bd00d6d38c7003deb09813da494%2F842_0_1119_1398%2F1119.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20cares%20what%20Tess%20Daly%20and%20the%20Bake%20Off%20stars%20are%20paid%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fbbc-salaries-who-cares-what-tess-daly-bake-off-stars-paid%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20cares%20what%20Tess%20Daly%20and%20the%20Bake%20Off%20stars%20are%20paid%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fbbc-salaries-who-cares-what-tess-daly-bake-off-stars-paid%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75010514cf939bd00d6d38c7003deb09813da494%2F842_0_1119_1398%2F1119.jpg>
 Former prime minister David Cameron: worth every penny? Photograph: Francois 
Lenoir/Reuters 
Still, if the government really wants to get into a comparison, I’d say bring 
it on. Let me put it like this: I’m sorry you’re wetting your pants about how 
much Tess Daly gets paid. Still, did Tess terminally destabilise the union, 
accidentally take us out of Europe, andcreate an entirely failed state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/so-goodbye-david-cameron-libya-is-not-the-only-failed-state-you-are-responsible-for>
 which allowed for the rise of Islamic State in North Africa? Did she, Karen? 
Because unless she did, she’s so far down my list of remuneration give-a-tosses 
that I honestly wouldn’t have time to get to her if I lived to the age of 876. 
I mean really. REALLY. How is it possible we’re giving a nano-fraction of a 
shit what Tess Daly is paid?

That the news should come in the very week that the BBC has lost the Great 
British Bake Off feels like a particularly sledgehammer instance of cosmic 
timing. The latter departure has amusingly short-circuited the Daily Mail, 
whose editorial line now has – yes – the soggiest of bottoms. Oh dear, did the 
Beeb lose your favourite show? Did it have to go to a commercial station 
because theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> can’t get into big-money 
bidding wars because “nobody wants it to”? Who’d a thunk it? I’ll definitely be 
sure to fax you when my tears liquefy. Or as Karen Bradley puts it: “Licence 
fee payers expect spending to be closely watched.” Can you see how thrilled 
they are this week, Karen?

And publishing talent salaries makes commercial poachings just so much 
simpler. Well done, Tories! You’ve made it far easier for many stars who people 
enjoy watching to be lured behind a paywall, which does not deliver value for 
licence fee payers. It delivers upset, annoyance, bewilderment and even rage.

BBC 'disappointed' by new rules on presenters' pay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/15/culture-secretary-bbc-chair-charter-karen-bradley>
I note from her biography that Karen is a “former KPMG tax manager”, an 
epithet I literally fell asleep in the middle of. Anyway, given she’s now a 
culture secretary, we already know she knowsnext to nothing about culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/14/is-there-more-to-karen-bradley-than-a-love-of-fiction-culture-minister>
, as is traditional for most occupants of the role. But it’s enlightening to 
discover she appears to know so little about business. I’d expect her favourite 
film to be something like Ghost, but I’d also expect the basic understanding 
that publishing a list of salaries is an absolute cast-iron, copper-bottomed 
way to deliver less value for the BBC and the people who use its services.

Even more grimly hilarious is Karen’s apparent belief that the BBC will 
deliver more value if it embraces “openness and transparency” as far as this 
sort of thing is concerned. Because that isexactly how the commercial sector 
works. Italways pays to tell everyone else your commercially sensitive 
information.

The charitable interpretation is that the government’s culturocidal maniacs 
are trying to hobble the BBC by design as opposed to out of arrant stupidity. 
Even so, what in the name of even being able to count was Karen doing at KPMG? 
Would any of her colleagues from the period care to get in touch to fill in 
some gaps? In the meantime, Lost in Showbiz would like to inquire of the 
culture secretary: do you think that publishing this commercially sensitive 
information will a) save the BBC money or b) cost the BBC money? The answer to 
that question is so fist-gnawingly obvious that it would be deemed too easy 
even for a money-grubbing phone quiz on ITV’s morning output.

Before I conclude, incidentally, allow me to indulge in some full disclosure 
of my own:my husband works at the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/corporate2/insidethebbc/managementstructure/biographies/clifton_kieran>
. Even fuller disclosure: I confess to never having been remotely across what 
his job is. The only aspect of it I ever happen to recall is that if any of the 
BBC’s output on any platform goes dark, it’s technically his fault. Just in 
case you need to put a name to an Ofcom complaint or whatever. Would appreciate 
it if you didn’t bring me into it, because there’s an outside chance he’s 
already going to have his head in his hands when he reads this column. But if 
you have to, you have to.
 