
Over the weekend, Anna Wintour, the formidable editor-in-chief of US Vogue, 
was compelled to issue an apology after being overheard on a train panning 
Donald Trump, saying his foundation had achieved nothing, and that he would use 
his presidency to further his personal brand. “I immediately regretted my 
comments,”she told the Sunday Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/world-news/vogue-editor-anna-wintour-apologises-9432803>
, “and I apologise. I hope he’ll be a successful president for us all.”

This apology came on the same day Vogue’s younger, savvier sister, Teen Vogue, 
published an excoriating op-ed on Trump, which quickly went viral. Headlined “
Donald Trump is gaslighting America 
<http://www.teenvogue.com/story/donald-trump-is-gaslighting-america>” the piece 
by Lauren Duca explained the president-elect’s strategy of lying so frequently 
and egregiously that the public are left not knowing what is true or false (a 
manipulative technique known as “gaslighting” after the 1938 play Gas Light). 
Trump’s “rise to power,” writes Duca, “has awakened a force of bigotry by 
condoning and encouraging hatred, but also by normalising deception.”

It’s not quite the mad-about-the-boy talk one might think of when it comes to 
teen magazines and, by extension, their readers. But Duca’s piece isn’t a blip 
for Teen Vogue. While other magazines are publishing ethically dubious trend 
pieces on the “fashy” haircuts of white nationalist Richard Spencer and his 
peers, Teen Vogue has beenensuring its readers know 
<http://www.teenvogue.com/story/mike-pence-record-reproductive-rights-lgbtq-refugees>
 that Vice-President-elect Mike Pence voted against theLedbetter Fair Pay Act 
<https://nwlc.org/resources/lilly-ledbetter-fair-pay-act/> and once said, 
referring to abortion law, that he “longed for the day thatRoe v Wade 
<http://caselaw.findlaw.com/us-supreme-court/410/113.html> is sent to the ash 
heap of history”.

Trump v the media: did his tactics mortally wound the fourth estate?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/22/election-2016-donald-trump-media-coverage>
There are a few reasons the magazine, which is printed quarterly but has a 
wide web and social media presence, has come out fighting. First, it doesn’t 
have to toe the same line many publishers do, terrified of losing access to 
Trump. Teen Vogue probably does not have access to Trump. When the tiny-fisted 
tantrum of a manrips press credentials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/14/donald-trump-bans-washington-post-from-officially-covering-his-campaign>
 from outlets such as the Washington Post for daring to ask questions, the 
danger is that the press will be cowed into taking an artificially softer line. 
Teen Vogue isn’t caught up in that game.

Second, teen mags and kids’ books and TV shows have always been more renegade 
than adults give them credit for: think JK Rowling smuggling political lessons 
for muggles into her books, or the pro-immigration story of Paddington Bear. It 
used to be that adults didn’t notice this subterfuge because they weren’t 
paying attention; now the misapprehension comes more from the pronounced 
tendency to dismiss the thoughts and culture ofGeneration Y 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/07/millennials-generation-y-guide-to-much-maligned-demographic>
 and all who come afterwards.

But perhaps the main reason for Teen Vogue’s success is the tag team of Phil 
Picardi <https://twitter.com/pfpicardi?lang=en>, digital editorial director, and
Elaine Welteroth <http://www.teenvogue.com/contributor/elaine-welteroth>, 
editor. Welteroth is a rare editor of colour in a glossy magazine industry 
weighed down as much by whiteness as by insert advertising. At 29, she became 
the youngest editor-in-chief in Condé Nast history.

Since Picardi and Welteroth took the helm, Teen Vogue’s journalism has 
included a video report from theStanding Rock protest 
<http://www.teenvogue.com/story/whats-happening-at-standing-rock-from-2-native-american-girls>
, a piece about recreational drugs being used to treat depression, and the 
exposure ofhomophobic tweets of Republican politicians 
<http://www.teenvogue.com/story/republican-response-orlando-shooting>. Duca’s 
op-ed might have gone viral, partly due to an element of surprise – Teen Vogue 
published this! – but it isn’t surprising to those of us who have been reading 
the magazine.

The title hasn’t been stripped of lighter, fashion content because – shocking 
as this is – young women can be interested in both. Perhaps it isn’t surprising 
that outlets with younger staff and readers (see also: US Cosmopolitan) are 
taking a more progressive editorial line, given that the demographic is more 
diverse in race and sexuality, so has more invested in that worldview. There’s 
been a lot of hand-wringing about who is or isn’t responsible for Trump, and 
what to do about him, but Teen Vogue proves that, as with mislaid keys and 
where you had them last, perhaps the answers aren’t always quite where you 
looked before.

• This article has been amended to include reference to Phil Picardi and his 
role at TeenVogue.com
 