
In the fifth episode of Insecure there is a surprisingly explicit sex scene 
that spins the season into a startling new direction. Like the rest of the 
series it’s gorgeously shot, intimate and told through a female perspective but 
it sets up a difficult, and often unexplored, situation for the show’s lead 
character.

Insecure, OJ and The Night Of: how TV tackled race in 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/19/insecure-oj-and-the-night-of-how-tv-tackled-race-in-2016>
The entire season was building up to this erotic and heartbreaking moment: 
Issa, played by writer/creator Issa Rae, cheats on her boyfriend of five years 
just when he’s finally getting his act together. Afterwards the show doesn’t 
provide easy answers or judgment. Instead it uses vulgar humor and pathos to 
interrogate the desires of black women with honesty. But Insecure isn’t alone. 
2016 has been full of pop culture breakthroughs that hinge upon exploring 
women’s sexuality from multiple angles. Looking at the modern television and 
film landscape there are deeply flawed, complex women wrestling with this 
subject everywhere. What makes this year different is that these stories aren’t 
cautionary tales or defined by sexual violence that acts only as an inciting 
incident.

For Variety, critic Maureen Ryan wrote, “Innumerable movies [and television 
shows] use attacks on women – usually a wife, girlfriend or daughter – as the 
motivating incidents for a male protagonist.” Elle, directed by Paul Verhoeven 
upends our expectations about the ways women deal with rape. It stars Isabelle 
Huppert in a powerhouse performance as a businesswoman brutally raped in her 
home by an unknown assailant. The film avoids conforming to one of the limited 
set of narratives we’ve come to expect with women beset by sexual violence. 
It’s neither a simple revenge story nor a chronicle of a woman’s unraveling. 
But I’m more interested in the works that exist on the opposite side of the 
spectrum exploring the ways twentysomething women approach their own virginity.

We often take the charming Jane the Virgin for granted since it makes its mix 
of telenovela archness and political commentary on the Latina experience seem 
easier to pull off than it is. Over the course of three seasons, creator Jennie 
Urman has deftly explored how religion and cultural expectations have warped 
the perspective of the titular character played by Gina Rodriguez. Of course, 
there has always been suspense as to how Jane finally having sex would play 
out, especially after she married longtime sweetheart Michael (Brett Dier). So, 
is her first time an earth-shaking, identity-redefining romp? Not quite.Sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> isn’t actually satisfying at 
first for Jane, making her worry about an incompatibility problem with Michael. 
She spends so much time worrying about Michael’s pleasure she forgets about her 
own, going so far to fake an orgasm. What follows is one of the most honest 
portrayals of something we don’t see much of on TV: the pressure on women to 
seem satisfied and satisfying during sex.

The comedy of despair: why 2016 was a vintage year for female TV stars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/19/the-comedy-of-despair-why-2016-was-a-vintage-year-for-woman-tv-stars>
The hidden gem Chewing Gum which premiered on Channel 4 last year and came to 
Netflix recently charts similar ground as Jane the Virgin albeit from a 
different cultural perspective. The show follows Tracey (writer/creator 
Michaela Cole), a 24-year-old virgin in London who is eager to get laid. 
Unfortunately, the religious dynamics of her Ghanaian family and boyfriend who 
don’t believe in sex before marriage make things difficult. Chewing Gum is 
equal parts effervescent and hilarious in its approach to Tracey’s storyline 
while maintaining a focus on her own point of view. Chewing Gum represents a 
wave of comedies led by women of color, like Insecure and Jane the Virgin, that 
use humor to explore the desires of women without making those desires into a 
punchline. But it isn’t just these comedies that have found success in 
exploring women’s sexuality on TV.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffemale-sexuality-women-sex-insecure-elle-jane-the-virgin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff580b29c5b905b42d40b3f803627454b084bb1a7%2F179_0_2646_1589%2F2646.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%202016%20was%20a%20game-changing%20year%20for%20the%20cultural%20portrayal%20of%20female%20sexuality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffemale-sexuality-women-sex-insecure-elle-jane-the-virgin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%202016%20was%20a%20game-changing%20year%20for%20the%20cultural%20portrayal%20of%20female%20sexuality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffemale-sexuality-women-sex-insecure-elle-jane-the-virgin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff580b29c5b905b42d40b3f803627454b084bb1a7%2F179_0_2646_1589%2F2646.jpg>
 Phoebe Waller-Bridge in Fleabag. Photograph: screengrab/BBC/Two Brothers 
Pictures Ltd. 
Fleabag, written by and starring Phoebe Waller-Bridge, uses dark comedy to 
mask its mordant, even bitter, truths. Waller-Bridge plays Fleabag (yes, that’s 
actually her name) as she navigates life in modern London in the wake of her 
best friend’s suicide. To her sex is a salve, distraction and often a means of 
self-destruction. Sex scenes are punctuated by Fleabag turning to the camera to 
toss off another fourth-wall breaking bit of venomous humor giving us a deep 
look into her barbed-wire mindset that even her partners aren’t privy to. If 
Fleabag uses sex to escape to herself, Christine Reade (Riley Keough), the icy 
lead of The Girlfriend Experience, uses it to realize her own identity. Over 
the course of 13 episodes we watch Christine as she juggles life as a law 
student with a new career as a high-end escort. Treating sex and emotion as 
transactional isn’t new in this kind of narrative. But a lead as cunning and 
resilient in the face tragedy as Christine definitely is. Sex and beauty are 
double-edged swords for women like Christine. The Girlfriend Experience is at 
its most fascinating when it explores how Christine must outsmart vengeful men 
who underestimate her and the contradictions in how she views her own desires.

Isabelle Huppert's rape non-victim makes Elle a perversely compulsive film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/nov/10/isabelle-huppert-elle-rape>
Pop culture has built on the successes of works like the time travel romantic 
drama Outlander, the bawdy buddy comedy Broad City, and the at times brutal 
comedy Girls. Now there is a surfeit of complex women from all walks of life 
exploring their own sexuality. It isn’t a coincidence that this trend coincides 
with a growth of female writers and showrunners in the industry. It’s hard to 
include every work that represents this from 2016. That’s how game-changing 
this year has been.

There’s also Anne Biller’s colorful feminist-minded horror The Love Witch that 
feels like a lost 1960s cult classic. Park Chan-wook’s lush puzzle box The 
Handmaiden is another work that fits this trend. It’s a complicated story about 
two women falling in love among a series of double crosses, disguises, 
half-truths and flat-out lies. It isn’t perfect, though. Wook falls into a trap 
male film-makers do in howhe depicts lesbian sex 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/shannonkeating/the-handmaiden-and-lesbian-sex-scenes?utm_term=.pjwMxyrq2%23.jlnDMnmNp>
. Yes, these long, explicit sex scenes act as character and plot development in 
ways few do. But the way these sex scenes are constructed sometimes tips into 
absurdity that seems more concerned in making these women beautiful objects in 
a film full of them. The Handmaiden, while a lush and challenging film that 
marks one of my favorites from this year, represents how far we still have to 
go in pop culture. Hopefully, next year will continue to build on these 
challenging, dynamic portrayals of women in control of their own sex lives.
 