
They are beloved by everyone from misunderstood teens and fools for love to 
the serious-minded middle-aged and those of a critical bent. Now the Brontë 
sisters are taking centre stage again as the bicentenary of Charlotte’s birth 
next month brings a host of events at their Yorkshire home and elsewhere.

At Haworth parsonage on the bleakly beautiful Yorkshire moors, where Charlotte 
and her sisters Emily and Anne lived and wrote and now home to theBrontë 
Parsonage Museum <http://www.bronte.org.uk/>, the bicentenary will be marked by 
a full programme from the Brontë Society. Highlights includeCharlotte Great and 
Small <https://www.bronte.org.uk/whats-on/225/charlotte-great-and-small/232>, 
an exhibition curated by the novelist Tracy Chevalier, which combines new art 
works with existing pieces, and the launch ofReader, I Married Him, a 
collection of short stories.

Happy 200th birthday Charlotte Brontë: illustrating Jane Eyre – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2016/mar/04/happy-200th-birthday-charlotte-bronte-illustrating-jane-eyre-in-pictures>
But it’s not just the Brontë Society that is succumbing to Brontëmania. The 
National Portrait Gallery has an exhibition,Celebrating Charlotte Brontë: 
1816-1855 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/whatson/display/2016/celebrating-charlotte-bronte-1816-1855.php>
, which will display personal items including previously unseen paintings, 
letters and journals from the parsonage museum alongside portraits from the 
gallery’s collection. BBC Radio 3 recently paid homage to Charlotte with the 
seriesI Am Yours Sincerely, in which a number of her letters were read, and 
Radio 4 has been dramatisingJane Eyre in 15-minute slots on Woman’s Hour this 
month.

On Saturday night, BBC2 screened Being the Brontës, in which presenter Martha 
Kearney, journalist Lucy Mangan and novelist Helen Oyeyemidebated their 
favourite sister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/23/being-the-brontes-bbc-lucy-mangan-anne-bronte>
 and examined their continuing appeal. Claire Harman’s well-reviewed biography 
of Charlotte is published in paperback next month, while three new novels will 
also consider the Brontë legacy: Catherine Lowell’s much praised debutThe 
Madwoman Upstairs, which centres on a young woman who is the Brontë family’s 
last living descendant; Sam Baker’shugely anticipated thriller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/29/the-woman-who-ran-by-sam-baker-review-the-tenant-of-wildfell-hall>
,The Woman Who Ran, a modern-day retelling of Anne Brontë’s The Tenant of 
Wildfell Hall; and Lyndsay Faye’s “satirical romance” Jane Steele, which riffs 
onJane Eyre for its tale of a Victorian female serial killer. Later this year 
Sally Wainwright will follow her crime seriesHappy Valley with To Walk Invisible
, atwo-hour drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/18/last-tango-in-halifax-bbc-drama-brontes-sally-wainwright>
 focusing on the Brontës’ lives between 1845 and 1848 “when they were all 
either drawn or forced back to the family home”.

So why exactly do the Brontë sisters, these rural curate’s daughters with only 
a handful of novels between them, continue to fascinate us? From the momentJane 
Eyre was published in 1847 they have exerted an almost hypnotic pull: where 
other literary sensations flash bright, then fade to earth, the Brontës endure, 
their stories adapted again and again for both stage and screenJane Eyre and 
Wuthering Heights.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fbronte-sisters-enduring-love-affair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc03763c069682432195a3878a93368a5ed70cf15%2F0_26_3100_3870%2F3100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20those%20subversive%20Bront%C3%AB%20sisters%20still%20hypnotise%20us&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fbronte-sisters-enduring-love-affair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20those%20subversive%20Bront%C3%AB%20sisters%20still%20hypnotise%20us&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fbronte-sisters-enduring-love-affair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc03763c069682432195a3878a93368a5ed70cf15%2F0_26_3100_3870%2F3100.jpg>
 Charlotte Brontë circa 1840. Photograph: Getty Images 
“I think a lot of it is that we’re fascinated by the idea that these three 
women living in a cold, cramped house in Yorkshire wrote these extraordinary 
novels about the most intense human experiences,” says author and playwright 
Samantha Ellis, whose book,Take Courage, about Anne Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/annebronte>, will be published early next 
year.

“There’s something very appealing about the idea that they pushed back against 
the limits of their world. There are lots of neater, better planned books, but 
the Brontë novels work because they’re open-ended. We don’t know what Anne, 
Emily and Charlotte really wanted us to think and that means we take away 
something new each time.”

Certainly it’s true that there’s something almost mythical about the Brontë 
creation story, the idea of these three isolated young women writing so 
desperately that the words were almost flung on to the page. Ted Hughes called 
them the “three weird sisters”, intentionally summoningMacbeth’s blasted heath 
to Haworth parsonage. To his wife Sylvia Plath, who paid homage in a poem named
Wuthering Heights <https://www.theguardian.com/film/wuthering-heights>, they 
“wrote … in a house redolent with ghosts”. Daphne du Maurier was so obsessed 
that she paid homage twice – toJane Eyre with the sharp-edged and haunting 
Rebeccaand to Wuthering Heights with the wild menace of Jamaica Inn – and 
writers from Jean Rhys and Muriel Spark to Emma Tennant and Fay Weldon have 
reimagined their lives and work.

“I think their tragic real-life experiences [the deaths of their mother and 
older sisters and later of their brother Branwell] undoubtedly give added 
appeal to readers,” says Kearney. “It’s amazing to think thatJane Eyre and 
Wuthering Heights are still so popular. I think it’s the sheer power of the 
storytelling – who can forget the madwoman in the attic or Heathcliff?”

Lowell agrees. “One of the things I most love about the Brontës is that they 
give the lie to the notion that to be a great writer you have to have epic life 
experiences – that whole Ernest Hemingway, Jack London thing,” she says. “Emily 
never left her home, but she wroteWuthering Heights. To be a great writer you 
just have to be a great observer. There’s also a real nugget of truth in all 
the books.Jane Eyre is a great lesson in authenticity and being true to 
yourself which still resonates in an era when women are still told so much how 
they should dress and act.”

Yet it is also true that the Brontë myth can confuse more than enlighten. 
Writing in theGuardian in 2011, Blake Morrison astutely noted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/09/charlotte-bronte-jane-eyre> that 
“the morbid caricature that developed in the wake of [Elizabeth] Gaskell’s 
biography – with Haworth depicted as a remote and sinister spot and the 
parsonage as a gloomy hideout for a trio of unworldly spinsters – is largely 
nonsense. The Brontë letters … are sharp and sometimes funny. Their novels … 
full of insights into the social conditions of the day.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fbronte-sisters-enduring-love-affair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc746ad8e47b281b12c1c58b5756894a1acf4438c%2F0_0_3748_4684%2F3748.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20those%20subversive%20Bront%C3%AB%20sisters%20still%20hypnotise%20us&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fbronte-sisters-enduring-love-affair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20those%20subversive%20Bront%C3%AB%20sisters%20still%20hypnotise%20us&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fbronte-sisters-enduring-love-affair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc746ad8e47b281b12c1c58b5756894a1acf4438c%2F0_0_3748_4684%2F3748.jpg>
 The Brontë Sisters by Patrick Branwell Brontë.
Circa 1834. Photograph: National Portrait Gallery/Corbis/Corbis 
Indeed, the most striking thing about the Brontë novels is how subversive they 
are. On the surface these might seem like tales of love lost and won, of happy 
endings and reader, I married him, but they are also strange and spiky tales. 
“There’s a lot of wanting and yearning, not all of it romantic,” says Ellis. 
“These are difficult books to contain. They’re over-egged and weird and often 
troubling.” Thus Jane takes Rochester once he has been crippled and blinded, 
unable to exert his male power.Wuthering Heights is less the story of wild 
romantic love as much as a tale of abuse, madness and unfettered rage, andThe 
Tenant of Wildfell Hall is more concerned with the act that frees Helen, her 
slamming of the door against her drunken husband, than it is with her 
conventional end. “There’s a clear line from Rochester to Heathcliff to Arthur 
Huntingdon,” says Baker. “All three male leads are really abusive.”

The forgotten genius: why Anne wins the battle of the Brontës
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/23/being-the-brontes-bbc-lucy-mangan-anne-bronte>
Nor does the uncomfortable subject matter stop there. While Wuthering Heights 
stands apart simply by dint of its strangeness – like it or loathe it, there is 
nothing else quite like it in literature – Charlotte and Anne were tackling 
subjects that women did not normally write about: the need to find your own 
place in the world; the tribulations of having to do soul-sapping, 
back-breaking, mind-numbing work simply to survive; the problems of being 
trapped in an abusive marriage. “I think of the Brontës as outsider authors,” 
says Baker. “Charlotte and Anne in particular are really radical and because of 
that their stories transcend their time. The themes feel just as relevant 
today.”

How the moors changed my mind about the Brontës | Lucy Mangan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/16/moors-brontes-yorkshire-charlotte-emily-anne>
Nor is it just women who respond to their work. “I know lots of men who love 
the Brontës,” says Ellis. “There’s a bit of myth that they’re writers for 
women, that it’s all about Heathcliff and Rochester, but more men read them 
than you’d think.”

Yet whoever is reading them, they’ll always have one sister they think of as 
“theirs”. “Definitely,” says Ellis. “You’re either Charlotte, Emily or Anne and 
you can tell a lot by which book someone claims as their own. I was doing a 
reading in London last year aboutJane Eyre versus Wuthering Heights and a 
teenage girl came up to me afterwards and said to me, ‘I will never give up 
Cathy and Heathcliff, not now, not when I am 40.’ And that’s how it should be. 
Your passions are your own.”

The Madwoman Upstairs by Catherine Lowell is published by Quercus Press, 
£14.99; The Woman Who Ran, by Sam Baker, is published by Harper Press, £7.99; 
Being the Brontës isavailable on BBC iPlayer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03kcd3l>

WATCH OUT FOR …

■ Charlotte Great and Small – exhibition curated by novelist Tracy Chevalier 
exploring the contrast between the tiny things in life and Charlotte’s huge 
desires. Includes items that belonged to Charlotte and new works commissioned 
by Chevalier and made for the bicentenary. Runs at Brontë Parsonage Museum 
until next January.

■ The Brontë Festival of Women’s Writing (9-11 September) includes The Magic 
of the Miniature where Jessie Burton, Grace McCleen and Tracy Chevalier discuss 
the psychology of the miniature, featuring readings from Burton’s and McCleen’s 
work.

■ Grace McCleen is writer in residence at the Brontë Parsonage Museum during 
2016. The work produced during this time will be shared in 2017.

■ Children’s author and former children’s laureate Jacqueline Wilson is an 
ambassador forCharlotte Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> during the bicentenary year.
 