


Storm Desmond decimated historic Pooley Bridge 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-35021614>, over river Eamont at the northern end 
of Ullswater, in December, whenmore than a trillion litres of rain 
<http://www.nwemail.co.uk/News/Lakes/Shocking-scale-of-biblical-Cumbria-floods-87d4697c-2e18-4f1c-a242-d4ba2edff230-ds>
 in the north-west flooded more than 7,000 properties and closed down three 
major highways in the Lake District. Officials in Cumbria say one unlikely 
factor proved crucial in the flood recovery that followed: the council’s 
decision a few years earlier to bring its outsourced major highway and housing 
services back in-house.

Across England, many local authorities have outsourced billions of pounds 
worth of services to private companies in a bid to save money and improve 
efficiency. But some of the earliest councils to do so have found that the 
approach had the opposite effect. Costs went up, and complications ensued. In 
Cumbria, the Conservative leader Eddie Martin bucked the party line in 2011 and 
brought nearly all outsourced services back in-house when its 10-year contracts 
withCapita <https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup> came to an end, 
and the following year when a seven-year roadworks contract with Amey finished. 
Since then, the council has balanced its budget and boosted its response time 
to crises.

After the floods, local government is fighting to stay afloat | Peter 
Hetherington
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/12/local-government-floods-fighting-stay-afloat>
A Guardian investigation of the 36 strategic public-private partnerships 
(PPPs) that local authorities signed between 2000 and 2007 has found that 13 of 
the contracts – which ranged from seven to 15 years and covered IT, back-office 
functions, property management and highways – have since gone back in-house, 
either at the end of contract or as a result of early terminations. That means 
that in more than a third (36%) of cases, councils found that delivering 
services in-house could save more than outsourcing to commercial companies in 
long-term, multi-service partnerships.

From the outset, Cumbria came face to face with the rigidity in its private 
contracts. The council committed to one of thefirst major public-private 
partnerships for highways and building management in 2001, 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/articlePrint.aspx?id=200011300701249727U> and it 
outsourced a host of services from roadworks to IT in the subsequent years. In 
the first year of its highways contract with Capita, foot and mouth disease 
broke out across the county. Cumbria’s then Labour council leader Stewart Young 
watched the negotiations around add-on services jack up the cost, which was 
initially about £20m a year for standard work.

Instead of the cost-efficiencies hoped for, Cumbria’s councillors say they 
tussled with contractors and lacked the bargaining power to keep prices down. 
They say that the private companies could name the price for any additional 
out-of-contract services that arose. When the contracts for highways and 
roadworks went up for renewal between 2011 and 2012, the Conservative council 
leader Eddie Martin fought off political pressure and brought all highways and 
road operations back in house.

“I was leading a very committed group of Conservatives and it was somewhat 
anathema to think about insourcing,” says Martin. “The government says that 
outsourcing is everything, but while it might get you an initial cheaper price, 
that price simply doesn’t last, you lose flexibility, and it causes a great 
deal of unrest.” Now, Cumbria estimates it saves £1.8m each year on highway and 
road services. And when disaster strikes, like the recent floods, it says it 
can deploy staff in a heartbeat.

Everyone had accepted this ‘private good, public bad’ mantra. We didn't 
realise how much we could save.
Richard Watts, Islington council leader 
On site at Pooley Bridge, following its collapse, Cumbria’s highway network 
manager David Spence says the Desmond recovery is far more nimble than disaster 
responses he managed under the former highways contractor. When rainwater 
overtook the streets and swelled up the hillsides this time, Spence’s staff 
didn’t need to negotiate on out-of-contract work. Instead, they rushed to take 
on emergency response roles as part of their remit. They cleared the roads of 
trees, sandbagged homes, and helped remove the dead sheep lodged in the brush.

Council outsourcing in Britain began life under the Thatcher government in the 
1980s as compulsory competitive tendering. New Labour came on board in the 
early 2000s, pushing the creation of markets in public services and developed 
strategic public-private partnerships. What was once a Conservative rallying 
cry grew into amainstream ideology that has cut across party lines 
<http://www.publicfinance.co.uk/news/2012/09/all-local-services-could-be-outsourced-say-council-chiefs>
. As councils desperately tried to cut costs between 2008 and 2013,the total 
number of new strategic public-private partnerships increased by 85%, according 
to research by the European Services Strategy Unit (ESSU) 
<http://www.european-services-strategy.org.uk/ppp-database/ppp-partnership-database/ppp-strategic-partnerships-database-2012-2013.pdf>
, which is one of the primary organisations that analyses major public-private 
partnership contracts at the local government level.

But new research due to be published later this year by the ESSU, has found 
that in the last 15 years, more than a quarter (28%) have failed – measured by 
contract terminations, major reductions in scope, and significant operational 
problems.

Dexter Whitfield, the director of the ESSU, says: “Councils have spent £14.2bn 
on 65 strategic public-private partnership contracts, but there is scant 
evidence of full costs and savings”.

According to Whitfield, this is due to “the lack of transparent financial 
audits of contracts, secretive joint council-contractor governance 
arrangements, poor monitoring, undisclosed procurement costs, a lack of 
rigorous scrutiny and political fear of admitting failure”.

Councils face billions more in budget cuts from April
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/17/councils-face-billions-more-budget-cuts-april-england-local-authorities-funding-settlement>
David Simmonds, chair of the Local Government Association’s improvement and 
innovation board, adds: “Many councils have discovered that contracts they may 
have signed with a view of saving money no longer represent good value for 
money,” he says. “You have to appraise that and say, well, can we do it better 
ourselves?”

Councils from Essex 
<http://www.publicfinance.co.uk/news/2009/06/essex-faces-damages-claim-after-terminating-bt-contract>
, in the south east, toSefton in Merseyside  
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/local-news/sefton-council-end-65m-technical-3356538>
have ended major contracts because of poor performance, whileSomerset county 
council announced an early end to a joint venture for back office functions 
with IBM in 2015 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-somerset-35039696> when 
savings looked to reachless than a third of the initial £192m target 
<https://www.publictechnology.net/articles/news/council-eyes-outsourced-ict-contract-exit>
.

When BT refused to accommodate Liverpool council’s budget cuts, the council 
discovered thatbringing its IT services back in-house from the telecoms giant 
after a 10-year contract ended in 2014 would save £30m over three years 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/liverpool-council-save-30m-over-7949750>. 
So insource it did. “PPPs aren’t always as good as they seem,” says Liverpool’s 
Labour mayor Joe Anderson. “And now, rather than money going to private sector 
shareholders, those savings and efficiencies can come back down into the city 
council.”

In north London, Richard Watts wanted to insource services when he became 
Labour leader of Islington council three years ago because he believed it was 
the right thing to do. But when he took a look at the books, he saw it would 
save £3.8m each year on housing and £3m a year on waste, street cleaning and 
grounds services. “Millions and millions a year,” says Watts. “These are big 
sums.”

In the case of housing, Islington realised it was duplicating major costs by 
working with a private company. It was paying one set of executives, lawyers, 
and accountants in the private organisation, and one set in the council to 
manage the contract.

“Everyone had accepted this ‘private good, public bad’ mantra that was going 
around,” says Watts. “I don’t think any of us running the council realised the 
amount of money we could save by doing this.”

When it brought the services back in-house in 2012, it discovered another 
upshot. Tenants started coming to the council for help with rent arrears, and 
housing officers could walk them over to employment support or benefits teams. 
Coordination between support teams improved, and tenants could more easily get 
help.

But bringing services back in-house may not always be easy, cheap, or even 
cost-effective. During the shakeup in Islington, the council also found that
Kier, its home repairs provider, had failed to meet performance targets. The 
council decided to insource that service in 2014 
<http://www.theconstructionindex.co.uk/news/view/islington-ends-kier-contract-to-bring-housing-repairs-in-house>
, but the switch meant designing a business from the bottom up – organising a 
supply chain, buying and managing vans, and stocking up on repair tools. 
Islington says that it can more easily control the quality of the service now, 
but it’s too soon to tell if the £2m investment 
<http://www.theconstructionindex.co.uk/news/view/islington-ends-kier-contract-to-bring-housing-repairs-in-house>
 has paid off. A 2013 council report found that in-house provision could 
increase the cost of the service by up to 20% in the short term 
<http://www.islingtongazette.co.uk/news/heritage/huge_home_repair_deal_set_to_be_ripped_up_by_islington_council_1_2246120>
.

Back in Cumbria, Martin confirms the view shared by a number of councils whose 
fingers have been burned in outsourcing deals with private companies in the 
past 15 years. “Outsourcing just isn’t the panacea that some people think it 
might be,” he says. “If I’m going against the Conservative ground, I’m 
delighted.”
 