
Why is it so much harder to lose weight than to regain it? 
<http://spectrum.diabetesjournals.org/content/20/3/166> The findings of recent 
research,published in the journal Obesity 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27136388/>, suggest that our bodies 
actually resist weight loss. While dieting, we reduce our resting metabolic 
rate, which lowers the number of calories we burn when we are not doing much. 
The authors of the research warn that keeping weight off requires “vigilant 
combat against metabolic adaption”.

The study followed 14 participants of the US version of the TV show The 
Biggest Loser <http://www.biggestloser.com/>. The researchers found that, after 
six years, all but one of the contestants in their study had regained weight. 
On average, they weighed 20st 10lb (131.5kg), compared with the average 
starting weight of 23st 6lb (149kg) and the 14st 4lb (91kg) at which they 
finished the show.

The solution

Six years is a long time, and being, on average, 2st 10lb (17kg) lighter is 
not insignificant. But the odds were stacked against the participants. 
The study showed that, before the competition, the group burned a daily average 
of 2,600 calories at rest, but this fell to around 2,000 calories a day when it 
finished. Six years later, instead of creeping back up to its normal level, 
their resting rate had slowed further to 1,900 calories a day. On average, the 
resting metabolic rate was 500 calories a day less than you would expect for 
the age and body composition of the person. So, the contestants had to eat less 
to stay at their lower weight. While researchers knew that dieting reduces the 
resting metabolic rate to save energy, this study shows how savagely your body 
subverts weight loss.

This was a small study without controls, though, and weight loss is influenced 
by factors such as genetics and hormones. Other studies show that some people 
are less affected than others. The report on The Biggest Loser participants 
cites another study showing that obese people who have weight-loss surgery seem 
to escape this metabolic adaptation. Somehow, the body resets to a new normal 
weight and the resting metabolic rate doesn’t fall.For the rest of us 
<http://www.webmd.com/fitness-exercise/how-to-boost-your-metabolism>, being 
vigilant about what we eat, and building up muscle mass (which is lost with 
age) through aerobic exercise and strength training are the only ways to fight 
back.

Your resting metabolic rate determines only a proportion of your energy 
expenditure. If you burn off more calories than you eat, you will lose weight.
Other research suggests 
<https://demystifyingmedicine.od.nih.gov/DM14/2014-02-04/Obesity-y2013v21p957.pdf>
 that reducing calories by 20% and doing moderate exercise for 20 minutes a day 
will keep weight off.
 