
There is something quite off-kilter about the idea of a Power Rangers movie 
with a budget of $150m, and starring – for goodness sake – Hollywood big 
hitters such as Breaking Bad’s Bryan Cranston and Elizabeth Banks. This could 
never have happened before the current explosion of comic-book movies, and the 
debut teaser trailer for Dean Israelite’s 2017 movie leaves us wondering 
whether a big-budget take on the long-running TV show might be the worst idea 
since Josh Trank’s dark and broodingFantastic Four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/fantastic-four> last year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ-C4qqsgs8w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ-C4qqsgs8w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ-C4qqsgs8w&media=>
For the original Power Rangers (often Mighty Morphin Power Rangers) series is 
oddly marvellous precisely thanks to its low budget and ersatz, 
exploitation-tinged qualities. In the early 1990s, creator Haim Saban hit on 
the idea of buying up footage from the completely insane Japanese show Super 
Sentai, which contributes most of the fight scenes in Power Rangers episodes to 
this day, and shooting new “story” sequences with American-based actors. The 
result is a pseudo-psychedelic blend of cheesy narratives with superbly nutty 
martial arts sections, and an abiding, discombobulating sense that something 
has been lost in translation, that neither the viewer nor the series’ creators 
really have much of a clue what is going on, and that both of us might have had 
something psychotropic put in our morning coffee.

Those early Power Rangers TV shows were fabulously kitsch in the way that the 
terrible, out-of-sync dubbing somehow added to the eccentric thrill of Shaw 
Brothers martial arts movies. Machiko Soga’s cackling, overcaffeinated Rita 
Repulsa came straight out of weirdsville because she’s a straight lift from 
Super Sentai, but dubbed by an American voiceover artist (Barbara Goodson), who 
naturally hammed it up to high heaven. The creators of Super Sentai clearly had 
a wonderfully eccentric Japanese approach to character design, and some of the 
Rangers’ other monstrous opponents were like nothing we would ever expect to 
see on western screens. My personal favourite from the current TV series is
venomous sweetie Poisandra <http://powerrangers.wikia.com/wiki/Poisandra>, an 
evil alien who appears to have been constructed entirely out of cutesie pink 
candy wrappers and colourful helium balloons.

With so much outrageous original material to draw from – there have been 23 TV 
seasons and two previous movies – plus a $150m budget, there’s surely an 
opportunity here for Israelite and his team. By all rights, Power Rangers 
should be a hyperreal, bombastic and totally over-the-top riff on established 
superhero themes. The timing, especially given the success ofDeadpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/deadpool>, is perfect for a sharp and spiky, 
irreverent comic-book movie that plays on its Japanese roots and gives Cranston 
(who actually voiced monsters Twin Man and Snizard in the original series) and 
Banks the chance to chew furniture like two hungry goats trapped overnight in a 
branch of Ikea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fpower-rangers-first-trailer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F143ab44f88ff05c28c01fced85e6075af426ff12%2F0_61_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20so%20serious%3F%20Power%20Rangers'%20first%20trailer%20ditches%20the%20kitsch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fpower-rangers-first-trailer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20so%20serious%3F%20Power%20Rangers%27%20first%20trailer%20ditches%20the%20kitsch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fpower-rangers-first-trailer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F143ab44f88ff05c28c01fced85e6075af426ff12%2F0_61_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
 Troubled teens … (from left to right) Billy (RJ Cyler), Kimberly (Naomi 
Scott), Zack (Ludi Lin), Trini (Becky G) and Jason (Dacre Montgomery) in Power 
Rangers (2017). Photograph: Kimberley French/Lionsgate 
Instead, at least according to the debut trailer, Israelite is planning to 
give us yet another grim and moody superhero epic about troubled teens who 
overcome their social detachment after gaining superpowers – via Power Rangers’ 
usual energems. They even appear to have turned the famous Ranger suits into 
creeping Venom-style symbiotes, perhaps because a similar approach proved so 
incredibly popular on Spider-Man 3. Banks looks like she’s channelling the 
unfortunate spirit of Cara Delevingne’s grubby Enchantress fromSuicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/suicide-squad>.

The teaser’s brooding look probably shouldn’t be too much of a shock given 
Israelite, previously best-known for middling time travel-themed found-footage 
movie Project Almanac,has told IGN 
<http://uk.ign.com/articles/2015/06/06/power-rangers-movie-will-be-mature-but-still-playful-says-director>
 the film will be “fun” and “joyful” but also “one that feels completely 
grounded in a real world, with real characters going through real things”. 
There has also beentalk of updating the series for a more mature audience 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/05/05/power-rangers-reboot-new-suits-first-look>
 from the film’s costume designers, which perhaps explains the suits.

Screenwriter Max Landis, who worked on an early draft of Power Rangers but was 
fired, has pointed out how similar the teaser looks to Chronicle. And Landis 
should know, because he wrote the pioneering (but in my opinion pretty 
overrated) 2012 found-footage superhero movie. Perhaps efforts to drum up a 
Chronicle vibe also explain why the trailer reminds me of last year’s dreary 
and listless Fantastic Four, another movie directed by one-time 
man-of-the-moment Trank.
Max Landis (@Uptomyknees) 
I wrote a silly, fun, goofy retro teen action adventure movie.

They fired me, and five or so writers later, it appears they made Chronicle.
 <https://twitter.com/Uptomyknees/status/784997076614524928> October 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Uptomyknees/status/784997076614524928> 
Hollywood seems to be operating on some kind of extreme version of satellite 
delay at the moment when it comes to superhero films, because the last truly 
“gritty and realistic” comic-book movie to really resonate with both audiences 
and critics was surely Christopher Nolan’s The Dark Knight in 2008, or possibly 
the film’s 2012 sequel The Dark Knight Rises. And yet the “mature” updates of 
popular kids’ favourites, from Transformers to Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, 
seem to keep on coming.

Power Rangers is due out in March next year, just a month after next year’s 
Lego Batman. Both are ostensibly superhero movies, but trailers for the two 
films suggest they might as well be operating in different dimensions.Lego 
Batman seems irreverent, full of meta-inspired humour and playfulness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/24/the-lego-batman-movie-trailer>. 
It is completely aware of its own silliness, and will pick up the current huge 
audience for animated movies, because adults will be able to go and see it with 
pre-teen moviegoers.

Power Rangers, on the other hand, is presumably aiming to convince older teens 
and twentysomethings that a thrillingly preposterous neon pantomime about 
school-age ninja-style superheroes and over-the-top invading space monsters has 
somehow morphed into something rather more furrow-browed and angsty – The 
Breakfast Club with superpowers. It’s a big ask.

 