
Extra funds for new roads, research and development and skills training 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/education-less-valuable-than-believed-by-adair-turner-2016-10>
 will drive up UK productivity and put the economy in a better position to 
withstand the looming Brexit shock.

That was the central message in Philip Hammond’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/hammond-seeks-productivity-boost-with-26bn-for-transport>
 and went to the heart of a debate about the UK’s low productivity growth, 
which according to official figures, has fallen well behind Germany, the US, 
France and Italy.

“The productivity gap is well known, but shocking nonetheless,” Hammond said 
on Wednesday. “It takes a German worker four days to produce what we make in 
five, which means, in turn, that too many British workers work longer hours for 
lower pay than their counterparts.”
international productivity comparison 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-24T09:59:59/embed.html>
The Office for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/office-for-budget-responsibility> (OBR) 
warned that productivity growth would be lower than it had previously forecast 
for the rest of this parliament and only return to its long-term trend of 2% in 
2020.

There have been times when the UK’s productivity growth has reached 5% and 
closed the gap with other major economies. The 1990s and early noughties were 
periods of intermittently strong growth. The early 1980s was another.


But the 2008 banking crash knocked the stuffing out of the economy and 
productivity growth has barely moved ever since, allowing the gap to open up 
again.

Business leaders call for 'tarmac and telecoms' from productivity fund
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/business-leaders-call-for-tarmac-and-telecoms-from-productivity-fund>
The commonly used measure of productivity is the rate of output per unit of 
input. 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/economicoutputandproductivity/productivitymeasures/bulletins/internationalcomparisonsofproductivityfirstestimates/2015>
 The Office for National Statistics (ONS) says improving productivity results 
in improved living standards “because an increase in productivity translates 
into an increase in output (amount and quality) without any increase in input 
(labour and materials)”.

There are generally two ways to improve productivity. One is the purchase of 
better machinery. The second involves a new process, which allows a worker to 
increase the speed or quality of what they are doing. Quality matters as much 
as quantity when firms can charge more for higher-grade goods.

There is no shortage of academic musing on the productivity puzzle. Senior 
policymakers have also written extensively about the possible reasons, among 
them theformer chief financial regulator Adair Turner 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/education-less-valuable-than-believed-by-adair-turner-2016-10>
 andMartin Weale at the Bank of England 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2014/785.aspx>.

where productivity would be if crash hadn't happened 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-24T18:10:00/embed.html>
It was Turner who dubbed much of the derivatives and other products sold by 
City investment banks to their clients before the financial crash as “socially 
useless”.

It was a comment that illustrated how good the Square Mile had been in the 
previous 20 years selling its services at high margins and taking the cash to 
reward not just its shareholders but also its workers.

According to the ONS, east London is the UK’s most productive area, but it is 
not only because the Ford engine factory in Dagenham is highly efficient in its 
use of labour t is also a measure of the high productivity rates still seen 
among banks in the City.

Next on the list of productive cities is Aberdeen, which is home to another of 
Britain’s high-margin industries: oil. It would therefore be easy to conclude 
that what Britain needs is more high-margin businesses, where the workforce is 
a relatively small element of the costs.

Rebecca Riley, a research fellow at the National Institute of Economic and 
Social Research, said declines in banking and the oil industry partly explained 
the UK’s low productivity rate, but there were also a host of other factors.

She also pointed out that most countries had failed to increase productivity 
since 2008, with many economists blaming it for the stagnation in wages across 
the north-east of the US that helped to propel Donald Trump into the White 
House.
productivity map UK 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/archive-2-zip/giv-15726u0xTJLrJMYha/>
She said comparing one country with another – as Hammond did – was difficult 
because the value of goods and services fluctuated with currency values. There 
can also be variations in the way different national statistics authorities 
measure the contribution of labour and capital in making a unit of production.

“But it is still the case that the UK sticks out against other countries that 
have at least had some growth,” she said.

Studies have looked at whether the near collapse of the banks restricted the 
supply of credit to companies and prevented them making productivity-enhancing 
investments. Riley said this would have had some impact.


The rapid expansion of mainly low-level service jobs that carry low levels of 
pay is another reason. In France and Germany, the coffee shop and online 
delivery culture is still in its infancy by comparison with the UK. These are 
businesses that provide a valued but unsophisticated service with limited room 
for productivity improvements.

It means the UK has lower unemployment and a bigger workforce, with fewer 
people economically inactive than France – but lower productivity and lower pay.


In France, and to a lesser extent Germany, restrictions on working hours are 
other factors at play. For instance, widespread industrial pay bargaining and 
limits on redundancies make hiring workers a more costly proposition than in 
the UK. This encourages French and German firms to invest in the latest 
machinery and limit employment.

Bill Martin, a former City economist who is now at Cambridge University’s 
Judge business school, has argued that the UK’s poor productivity is “more 
plausibly interpreted as a symptom of a largely demand-constrained, 
cheaper-labour economy”.

He is not alone in saying that companies would invest in new equipment and be 
more productive if only there was higher demand for British goods and services 
from its domestic businesses, consumers and the international community.

The UK has seen a much bigger fall in trade as a proportion of GDP than France 
or Germany in the past eight years, forcing it to rely increasingly on its own 
economy to drive demand – a challenge that consumers have met, but businesses 
have refused to join.

The OBR said a planned Brexit in 2019 would further damage Britain’s export 
sector and push down trade as a proportion of GDP. The fear must be that this 
will further discourage investment and delay again the moment productivity 
stages a recovery.
 