
I can assure your readers, Philip Hammond, Julie Kenny and her colleagues at 
Rotherham, and the Jane Austen Society that evidence that Wentworth Woodhouse 
in South Yorkshire was the inspiration for Pemberley in Pride and Prejudice is 
forthcoming (No evidence Jane Austen ever went to stately home mentioned in 
autumn statement, theguardian.com, 23 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/23/jane-austen-inspiration-receives-76m-funding-in-autumn-statement-wentworth-woodhouse>
). Jane Austen died in 1817. Her first biography, by her nephew, James Edward 
Austen Leigh, senior spokesman for the Austen family, was published in 1879. 
Though sketchy, it remains the authoritative and orthodox account of her life.

In March 2017, Folly is not Always Folly, the first volume of Jane & D’Arcy, 
will be published in Sydney, with the second volume, Such Talent & Such 
Success, to follow later in the year. Jane & D’Arcy is D’Arcy Wentworth’s 
family story, written by one of his descendants. It will fill out the many gaps 
in James Edward Austen-Leigh’s memoir and it will offer a key to much of Jane 
Austen’s writing. It recounts her meetings with William Wentworth Fitzwilliam, 
the 4th Earl Fitz william of Wentworth Woodhouse, and her visit there. The 
British government on its grant to restore Wentworth Woodhouse, the real life 
Pemberley, on the eve of the 200th anniversary of Jane Austen’s death, is a 
timely decision.
Wal Walker
McMahons Point, New South Wales, Australia

• Helen Pidd (People’s palace: £7.6m for mansion will only fix its roof, 25 
November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/24/inside-wentworth-woodhouse-a-key-piece-of-northern-heritage>
) seems very dismissive about the time that the Palladian, east front of 
Wentworth Woodhouse was used as a women’s PE college from 1949 until the late 
1970s. But had West Riding county council not taken out a lease, at the 
suggestion of Lady Mabel Smith, to train teachers for the introduction of 
compulsory secondary education, it’s likely that the house would have been 
demolished, as the coal board intended to surface mine the garden at the east 
front as well as the west. As I recall, during the tenure of the college under 
the auspices of the West Riding county council, the house was well maintained 
and looked after with respect.
Gwynneth Elliott
Doncaster, South Yorkshire

• As someone who grew up a few miles from Wentworth Woodhouse, I welcome the 
chancellor’s grant of £7.6m to fix its roof. But there’s just not enough 
lateral thinking in this country. If the full cost of restoring that 
magnificent building is £42m andthe cost of refurbishing Buckingham Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/18/buckingham-palace-to-undergo-370m-refurbishment>
 – an architecturally mediocre edifice – is £369m, why doesn’t the Queen move 
to Rotherham?

If we “did t’job reight”, we would see South Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> regenerated in no time. Alas, I 
fear that, England being England, what we would get would be the erection of 
Potemkin villages, facades with nothing behind them, of the kind that Catherine 
the Great’s favourite deployed in southern Russia, along the route of her royal 
progress, to sustain the monarch in the delusion that all was well in her 
benighted country.
Emeritus Professor Glyn Turton
Baildon, West Yorkshire
 