
I’ve lost count of the times I’ve been asked why a US-centric company like 
Allied Minds <http://www.alliedminds.com/> has staked its future to listing on 
theLondon Stock Exchange <http://www.londonstockexchange.com/home/homepage.htm>
, rather thanNasdaq <http://www.nasdaq.com/> or the NYSE 
<https://www.nyse.com/index>.


Why do I, as CEO of a Boston-based company which looks to commercialise the 
most exciting discoveries spinning out of leading American universities and 
government institutions shuttle across the Atlantic to tell our story to 
British and other European investors?

What do we get out of being a FTSE250 company when we could trade on Nasdaq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nasdaq>, the market so many regard as the 
natural venue for the biggest beasts of disruptive technology?

For Allied Minds, the answer is that we chose London because it is largely UK 
investors who understand our model.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Flse-tech-startups-nasdaq-nyse-investors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F349040f4a0bdf016778f0aa9065793794998f61a%2F0_25_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20LSE%20can%20serve%20tech%20startups%20better%20than%20Nasdaq%20or%20the%20NYSE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Flse-tech-startups-nasdaq-nyse-investors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20LSE%20can%20serve%20tech%20startups%20better%20than%20Nasdaq%20or%20the%20NYSE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Flse-tech-startups-nasdaq-nyse-investors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F349040f4a0bdf016778f0aa9065793794998f61a%2F0_25_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Chris Silva, chief executive of Allied Minds 
Indeed the case for our London listing in June 2014 was overwhelming because 
our biggest shareholders, such asWoodford Investment Management 
<https://woodfordfunds.com/> and Invesco Perpetual 
<https://www.invescoperpetual.co.uk>, were already UK based.

Typically, there’s a very different mindset in the US where venture investors 
only really start to become interested after the startup is created and is well 
down the track to selling its products or services.

By contrast, Allied Minds, and to some extent our UK-focused peers such as IP 
Group <http://www.ipgroupplc.com> and Imperial Innovations 
<http://www.imperialinnovations.co.uk>, are involved in identifying the most 
promising opportunities at inception, at the eureka moment in the laboratory of 
academic and government research institutions. In our case, once we have 
identified a prospect, we invest and set up the business as a majority owned 
subsidiary company.

The halo effect of this growing sector has not been lost on the London Stock 
Exchange <https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup> as it 
steps up efforts to win technology IPOs in competition with global rivals.

Yet the LSE has yet to showcase London’s success in the IP commercialisation 
field which perhaps represents one of its greatest strengths in reinforcing the 
UK market as a world leader in disruptive technology.

Given the ferocity of competition across exchanges for high growth listings, 
it must be wholly in the interests of the LSE to build its lead in this sector.

And beyond the LSE, it falls to all of us with an interest in this London 
success story to do more to explain the bigger picture behind IP 
commercialisation.

For this is a gateway to bring to market the most exciting research 
breakthroughs across high technology and life sciences.

At Allied Minds, we single out technologies which will disrupt existing large 
and growing markets and business models. It’s a gruelling process, sifting 
through thousands of prospects annually from our relationships with more than 
160 top American universities,the Department of Defense 
<http://www.defense.gov/> and other US government agencies.

This has led to the formation of several key subsidiaries capable of 
transforming their target markets, whether they are combating cancer or 
blindness, bringing the shared economy model to mobile phone spectrum, or 
pioneering a new form of digital memory. Any of these may have the potential to 
disrupt the status quo of multibillion-dollar industries.

And we’re making strides to move to commercialisation by partnering up with 
some of the biggest and most successful players in their particular sector, 
names such asBristol-Myers Squibb <http://www.bms.com/>, Google 
<https://www.google.co.uk/>, Intel 
<http://www.intel.co.uk/content/www/uk/en/homepage.html> and GE Ventures 
<https://www.geventures.com/>. To me, that’s a powerful validation of the 
potential of this business model.

And it’s is a model which continues to build in the London market. At the LSE, 
we’re seeing a virtuous circle where the faster the exchange attracts new 
listings in this sector, the more attractive it becomes to potential issuers.

We’re not the only US-based IP commercialisation company listed on the LSE. 
We’ve been joined byPureTech Health <http://puretechhealth.com/>. More will 
follow. Conversely, UK-based peers such as IP Group, which have hitherto 
concentrated on British research, are now looking to forge links with US 
academia and research institutes.

No surprise, perhaps, when you consider the scale of the US R&D spend relative 
to the UK. Given the breadth and depth of our relationships across US academia 
and federal institutions, we have no problem with competition. It’s a healthy 
evolution of our sector.

We’re very happy with our London listing. Yet markets ceaselessly evolve. 
There are signs that knowledgeable US and Asian investors are becoming more 
comfortable with this investment model.

The UK is a leader here. And let’s hope the LSE keeps at the top of this game. 

You can’t overestimate the importance of these disruptive technologies being 
readied for commercialisation.

Not just for investors. 

But in terms of improving lives and beating diseases, for the good of society 
too.

Chris Silva is chief executive of Allied Minds
 