
The Oscar-winning director Andrew Stanton, on making the leap from Finding Nemo
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/finding-nemo> and Wall-E 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jul/18/animation> to the ill-fated space 
spectacularJohn Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/mar/08/john-carter-review>, was asked to 
name the biggest difference between live action and animated film-making. His 
reply: the cost of reshoots.

Pixar, Stanton said, might reconfigure a movie half a dozen times before 
considering it finished. With an entirely digital mise-en-scène, the studio’s 
greatest expense when trying to turn around a failing film was the re-recording 
of dialogue. Video could then be reworked to match remarkably cheaply, via not 
much more (figuratively speaking) than a few swipes of an animator’s mouse.

Do Rogue One reshoots spell the end for Hollywood's dark side?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/03/star-wars-rogue-one-reshoots-hollywoods-dark-side>
With a live-action movie such as John Carter, even a single set of reshoots 
could see budgets ballooning out of control – especially if the faulty original 
footage had been shot on location. The idea of being able to shoot for a third 
or fourth time, if a film still didn’t sit quite right, was simply out of the 
question.

The anecdote perhaps explains why John Carter, still for me a fine movie, is 
generally seen as a black mark on Stanton’s otherwise spotless résumé. But it 
should also give us some perspective on reports this week that Gareth Edwards’ 
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story is in crisis, withsome fan sites suggesting up to 
40% of the movie is being reshot 
<http://makingstarwars.net/2016/06/how-extensive-will-the-rogue-one-reshoots-be/>
.

Star Wars: The Force Awakens also went through a limited reshoot process 
<http://screencrush.com/star-wars-the-force-awakens-reshoots/> before being put 
to bed. AndJJ Abrams has gone on record to say 
<http://www.hitfix.com/harpy/harrison-fords-star-wars-injury-helped-jj-abrams-make-rey-finn-better-characters>
 that Finn and Rey’s scenes on board the Millennium Falcon were completely 
rewritten (and later reshot) during a two-week break that followed Harrison 
Ford’s on-set injury. Movies do change in the making.

The term reshoot has come to resemble shorthand for rampant studio 
interference and a sense of film-makers floundering inHerzogian creative jungles
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/jul/03/werner-herzog-fitzcarraldo>
. But some of the greatest blockbuster movies of all-time, from Jaws to Back to 
the Future and ET, went through radical late reworkings.

Why Han Solo: A Star Wars Story must balance nostalgia with new adventures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/06/han-solo-a-star-wars-story-alden-ehrenreich-disney>
Spielberg’s pioneering shark thriller initially showed us far more of the 
dodgy-looking mechanical fish itself, until the young director realised that 
giving the viewer only occasional glimpses of the beast, Hitchcock-style, would 
radically amp up the movie’s fear factor. Back to the Future featured Eric 
Stoltz, not Michael J Fox, as the time-travelling teen Marty McFly. ET never 
woke up from under all those medical straps to resurrect Gertie’s chrysanthemum 
and finally go home.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-trailer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Rogue%20One%3A%20A%20Star%20Wars%20Story%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-trailer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Rogue%20One%3A%20A%20Star%20Wars%20Story%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Frogue-one-a-star-wars-story-trailer&media=>
Watch the trailer for Rogue One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/apr/07/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-trailer>
The difference with all of the above is that none of the changes were imposed 
on the film-maker by studios, and it remains to be seen whether the same 
applies to Rogue One.A Reddit thread 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/starwarsspeculation/comments/4m8d6w/forget_all_the_crap_about_people_saying_they_know/>
 posted by an anonymous source who claims to be close to the movie suggests 
Edwards is bitterly disappointed at Disney’s decision to add levity to a filmhe 
has always pitched 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/director-gareth-edwards-reveals-star-789951>
 as a relatively dark “war movie”. Some reports say Michael Clayton’s Tony 
Gilroy is effectively reshooting the film himself, with Edwards sidelined.
Others say <http://www.ew.com/article/2016/06/03/rogue-one-reshoots> Gilroy has 
simply been added as a second unit director and additional screenwriter.

It must be said that Rogue One does appear to be a heading into “too many 
cooks” territory, with After Earth’s Gary Whitta also previously removed from 
duties on a screenplay that, officially, is now entirely the work of The Golden 
Compass’s Chris Weitz. But again, The Force Awakens went through a similar 
process, with Little Miss Sunshine writer Michael Arndt’s script radically 
reworked by Abrams and Lawrence Kasdan. The end result there pleased mostStar 
Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> fans.

Reaction to reports of reshoots seems to have been split into two camps: those 
concerned that Disney might be trying to “water down” Edwards’ original vision, 
and those wondering why the Godzilla director was given the gig in the first 
place rather than somebody like Joss Whedon. Let’s not forget this is a 
director with origins in horror (the excellentMonsters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/136970/monsters>), whose first major 
movie opened with a scene in which a husband looks on in terror as his wife is 
left trapped on the wrong side of a blast door in a collapsing nuclear reactor. 
Rogue One was always going to have its dark side.

Pacific Rim 2: Star Wars' John Boyega cast as lead in sequel to monster epic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/06/pacific-rim-2-john-boyega-cast-lead>
Studio sources have told Entertainment Weekly 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/06/03/rogue-one-reshoots> that the reshoots 
were scheduled long ago as part of the normal production process for a major 
film, and are mainly to add extra crackle to dialogue. But if Disney really has 
asked for a lighter tone, it says a lot about the success of Star Wars: The 
Force Awakens and its effect on the brave new cinematic universe being built 
around Abrams’ blockbuster megalith.

When Rogue One was first announced, Edwards’ comments on the film suggested 
the spin-off movies would be given free rein to shift into spikier, weirder 
territory, while the main movies in Star Wars’ new trilogy cleaved closely to 
the long-running space saga’s traditional feelgood formula. That no longer 
appears to be the plan, if we are to believe some of this week’s reports. And 
in many ways that’s a pity.

Star Wars, despite its fantasy leanings and the original 1977 film’s U rating, 
has never been a saga of buttercups and fairy cakes. From the deaths of Obi 
Wan-Kenobi, Yoda, Han Solo and Vader himself to Luke Skywalker’s Kurosawan loss 
of limb in The Empire Strikes Back, the series has always balanced light and 
dark. Moreover, if Disney really does want to make future films about morally 
dubious figures such as Boba Fett, it is going to have to accept that some 
episodes will be grimmer than others, and therefore less suitable for children.

In the meantime, there are still a full six months before Rogue One hits 
cinemas, and there are far worse rumours to worry about than a few reshoots. 
Some fans still seem to be convinced thatHayden Christensen is returning as 
Darth Vader 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/StarWars/comments/43g662/why_do_people_want_hayden_christensen_to_be_darth/>
.
 