
Let’s begin with the inherent art prize problem. If, after the succession of 
20th-century avant gardes, anything can be considered contemporary art, but 
there are no universally agreed criteria by which such work might be 
objectively assessed, how can prizes for the so‑called “best” in the field 
justify their claims?

Rear of the year: meet the Italian behind the Turner prize buttocks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/30/gaetano-pesce-turner-prize-andrea-hamilton>
In truth, they can’t. One person’s genius is always another’s joker, and 
prizewinners almost always reveal more about the appointed judges’ 
sensibilities than anything else. The Turner, which will be awarded on 5 
December, is no exception. But despite Tate’s rhetoric, the “best of British” 
isn’t what the prize is really about. Its true value lies in the Turner’s 
existence as a public institution that each year opens up and reintroduces the 
field of contemporary art to the nation. At least, that’s how it is now. It 
wasn’t always the case.

The history of the prize <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/turnerprize>
 is best seen as a play of two acts, divided by the intervallic year of 1990, 
in which no award was given. Lacking a sense of purpose or identity, the 
pre-90s Turner (inaugurated in 1984, with Malcolm Morley winning) was an 
insular, inconsequential and increasingly directionless affair. Bizarrely,
Nicholas Serota <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/nicholas-serota> was 
“commended” in 1986 for refurbishing the Whitechapel Gallery, and by the 
decade’s end the prize found itself without funding and a public who cared.

Then the 90s arrived, which saw Charles Saatchi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jul/10/charles-saatchi-british-art-yba>
’s speculative buying sprees, the rise of the YBAs, Tony Blair’s Cool 
Britannia, and TV’s populist race to the bottom, jump-started by Channel 4, the 
award’s funder and ceremony broadcaster. These factors led to the prize’s 
reemergence and rebranding. What once was moribund became a brash and bratty 
celebration of “Brit Art”: that hollow brand of artworks seemingly made for 
mass media consumption or the indignation of curtain twitchers nationwide.

True, people began to talk about the Turner in the 90s. But, from cabdrivers 
to civil servants, a deep suspicion of fakery and pretension pervaded, helped 
in no small part by the media’s interest in the snarling, juvenile narcissism 
of artists such asDamien Hirst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/damienhirst>, and nominees who 
appeared to be enthralled by the vacuous exclusivity of celebrity, such asSam 
Taylor-Johnson, then Taylor-Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sam-taylor-johnson>. Although in fact a 
large proportion of the 90s art world was concerned with internationalism, 
identity politics, socially engaged practices, combating racism and dealing 
with the legacy ofAids <https://www.theguardian.com/society/aids-and-hiv>, the 
Brit Art caricature (part construct, part drawn from Tatler’s society pages) 
spurned all that in favour of lairy, coke-fuelled nights in London’s Groucho 
club.

So how can today’s Turner cut through the surface distraction to generate more 
pertinent and in‑depth social, cultural and personal debates? The simple answer 
is to be found in politics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhy-is-the-turner-prize-failing-to-engage-with-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91775db14889da4238058ba4291df5e40677cfe6%2F109_330_2783_1670%2F2783.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20the%20Turner%20prize%20failing%20to%20engage%20with%20politics%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhy-is-the-turner-prize-failing-to-engage-with-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20the%20Turner%20prize%20failing%20to%20engage%20with%20politics%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhy-is-the-turner-prize-failing-to-engage-with-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91775db14889da4238058ba4291df5e40677cfe6%2F109_330_2783_1670%2F2783.jpg>
 Michael Dean’s United Kingdom Poverty Line installation. Photograph: Joe 
Humphrys, ©Tate 
Drastic cuts to public funding have led to the demolition of social housing, 
and to the closure of public libraries, galleries and museums – Walsall’s New 
Art Gallery looks set to become the next victim. In higher education, as if the
2012 hiking of tuition fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/aug/09/tuition-fees-increase-15000-less-applicants>
 wasn’t enough, there has been a dissolution of provisions for working-class 
students via cuts to widening participation programmes, foundation courses and 
outreach projects. The arts and humanities are disappearing as educational 
options: most recently the preparatory step of A‑level art history was placed 
under threat.

Such measures have signalled the start of an era in which only those 
activities guaranteed to bring significant economic returns are deemed 
valuable. Politicians from Tory MPs to Barack Obama have all sung parochial 
variations on the same theme: the arts and humanities are, in essence, an 
indulgence.

And so, in a world where opportunities and spaces to learn about, think 
through, or discuss or anything complex are being erased, the Turner prize, 
almost by default, has entered its third phase as an important public British 
institution. Since the 1960s – fuelled by the civil rights movement, reactions 
to the Vietnam war and second-wave feminism – contemporary art has become an 
intrinsically politicised, critical medium through which everything, from 
culture to capitalism and the medium itself could be questioned and 
deconstructed. What the Turner prize represents, then, is a yearly induction 
into a field that can give space to politics, economics, sociology, philosophy, 
gender studies, rhetoric, information technology and all other disciplines of 
critical thinking; a field beyond the kooky, apolitical populism ofGrayson Perry
 <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/grayson-perry> or the Tory 
individualism ofTracey Emin <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/emin>. At 
a time when reductive thinking, lies, racism and sexism are increasingly 
prevalent what could be a more vital way to confront and resist them?

This year’s Turner debate has, however, seemed a rather contained and 
distracted affair. Broadsheet and tabloid criticism has been dutiful at best, 
the result, no doubt, of attention being devoted to cataclysmic world events. 
But perhaps this also has something to do with the strangely hermetic worlds 
Turner’s 2016 artists inhabit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhy-is-the-turner-prize-failing-to-engage-with-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c185b262a26879b9135151ef5b838f4e1628548%2F709_0_3072_3072%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20the%20Turner%20prize%20failing%20to%20engage%20with%20politics%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhy-is-the-turner-prize-failing-to-engage-with-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20the%20Turner%20prize%20failing%20to%20engage%20with%20politics%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwhy-is-the-turner-prize-failing-to-engage-with-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c185b262a26879b9135151ef5b838f4e1628548%2F709_0_3072_3072%2F3072.jpg>
 Morgan Quaintance in front of Hamilton’s Project for a Door. 
Of this year’s four nominees, only Michael Dean’s installation deals with our 
current sociocultural and political situation. While not the most robust or 
sophisticated of political interventions, his pile of pennies just one penny 
shy of the UK poverty line (titled:United Kingdom poverty line for two adults 
and two children: twenty thousand four hundred and thirty six pounds sterling 
as published on 1st September 2016) at least evokes and draws attention to the 
financial difficulties faced by many families today. On the other hand, the 
works ofHelen Marten <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/helen-marten>, 
Anthea Hamilton and Josephine Pryde turn away from the world to plumb more 
rarefied and cryptic depths.

Of course artists are under no obligation to make politicised art, or art that 
explores contemporary social, cultural or economic events. However, as the 
Turner enters its third phase – after a financial crisis, in an austerity-riven 
present – the prize highlights a failure to engage with what is happening now.

Not that this lack of reflection says anything about the quality of the work 
by this year’s nominees. But it does suggest their lack of suitability for a 
prize whose national significance and character have changed. The Tate has been 
slow to respond to these changes, and it is the Turner judges who have been 
remiss in their duty to ensure the prize brings wide audiences into contact 
with politically alert work this year. (It is also remiss of the Tate to charge 
an entrance fee of £12). There is plenty of political commentary happening 
elsewhere in the art world – such work should be allowed to feature on the 
Turner platform alongside that with a more oblique register.

Next year the Turner judges should heed the failings of 2016 and seek out 
pieces that deal with our present situation. That is what will keep the Turner 
vital as an institution that can provide a national platform to the kind of 
progressive ideas and political debates that struggle to be heard at other 
times of the year; and it is what will ensure the real winners of the Turner 
prize continue to be the British public.

• The Turner Prize: 2016: The Nominees is presented by Morgan Quaintance on 
BBC4 at 9.30pm on 5 December.
 