
Until as late as 2013 a joint (or comorbid) diagnosis of autism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism> and attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder> 
(ADHD) was not permitted by the most influential psychiatric handbook, the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diagnostic_and_Statistical_Manual_of_Mental_Disorders&oldid=746829844>
 (DSM). The DSM is an essential tool in psychiatry as it allows clinicians and 
researchers to use a standard framework for classifying mental disorders. 
Health insurance companies and drug regulation agencies also use the DSM, so 
its definition of what does or doesn’t constitute a particular disorder can 
have far-reaching consequences.

 One of the reasons for the prohibition of a comorbid diagnosis of autism and 
ADHD was that the severity of autism placed it above ADHD in the diagnostic 
hierarchy, so the inattention that is normally present in autism did not seem 
to merit an additional diagnosis. Nevertheless, that was an odd state of 
affairs, as any clinician working in the field would be able to quote studies 
that point to anything from30% to 80% of patients with autism also having ADHD 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20585847>. More problematic still is the 
fact that patients with both sets of symptoms mayrespond poorly to standard 
ADHD treatments or have increased side effects 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18416666>. 

 The fifth edition of the DSM opened the way for a more detailed look at this 
overlap, and just a year after the new guidelines were adopted, a consortium 
(which I am a part of) at the Radboud University in Nijmegen (Netherlands) 
calledNeuroIMAGE <http://www.neuroimage.nl/> published a paper 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24979066> which showed that autistic 
traits in ADHD participants could be predicted by complex interactions between 
grey and white matter volumes in the brain.
 Structures of the brains of participants in the NeuroIMAGE study. The caudate 
nucleus, which was found to be able to predict levels of autistic traits in 
ADHD participants, is shown in red. Photograph: Laurence O'Dwyer et al 
A more general finding from that work was that autistic traits were 
significantly raised in ADHD participants, a curious result given that a 
diagnosis of clinical autism was an exclusion criterion for participation in 
the study. Raised levels of autistic traits in ADHD participants in the 
NeuroIMAGE study reflect the fact that autism is a spectrum disorder 
distributed throughout the entire population. Interestingly,research from last 
year <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26488477> shows that autistic traits 
are also much higher among scientists compared to the general population.

 A paper (which I co-authored) published at the begining of this month in the 
journal Plos One 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article/related?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0165620>
, looking at MRI scans from over 500 participants in the NeuroIMAGE project has 
moved on to examine in detail the brain structures involved in the overlap of 
ADHD and autism. One structure in particular, called the caudate nucleus, was 
able to predict the level of autistic traits in ADHD, but similar to the 
earlier paper, a complex interaction was shown to be at work with another 
structure, the globus pallidus, also influencing results. Both of these 
structures are located in a part of the forebrain called the striatum that 
operates as a monitoring system for rewards, with the caudate guiding the 
selection of goals and the globus pallidus updating the reward value depending 
on the outcome of an action. With this kind of monitoring, the striatum plays a 
key role in planning, decision-making and motivation.

The results showed that autistic traits were highest when there was a coupling 
of higher caudate volume with lower globus pallidus volume. The statistical 
tools (called mixed-effects models) used in the paper were devised and 
optimised by a zoologist who hasused similar models  
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21931786>to study the transfer of 
information in flotillas of vultures as they optimise their search space while 
scavenging for food .

 The latest findings add to a growing body of evidence that suggests that 
problems in the reward circuits of the striatum may lead to diminished 
motivation to attend to social stimuli, such as a smile or a frown or a voice. 
Anearlier study in autistic children 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23776244> found a striking pattern of 
under-connectivity between voice-selective areas of the temporal lobe and nodes 
of the reward pathway suggesting that autistic children may not find voices 
inherently interesting. The first account of autism in the modern era, 
published by Leo Kanner in 1943, noted that one patient “did not register any 
change of expression when spoken to”.Kanner’s seminal paper 
<https://simonsfoundation.s3.amazonaws.com/share/071207-leo-kanner-autistic-affective-contact.pdf>
 contains many poignant descriptions of “social-blindness”, such as the case 
history of Elaine C, a seven-year-old girl, who did not look at a face when 
spoken to, was rarely communicative, never played with children but instead 
moved among them “like a strange being, as one moves between the pieces of 
furniture in a room.”

 A consistent thread in autism research has been the inconsistency of results. 
Some groups have shown a larger caudate in autism while others have shown the 
opposite. Small sample sizes are partly to blame, but another problem is that 
levels of ADHD in autism are often ignored. This is a serious oversight, as the 
degree of ADHD present in autism can have a large impact on the results. The 
latest publication in Plos One goes some way to addressing these problems by 
drawing on a sample size of over 500 participants and more importantly by 
looking at the subtle hinterland between the two disorders rather than 
separating them into binary units.

 There are many debates about the usefulness of the DSM since it first 
appeared in 1952. The first edition contained 130 pages and 106 diagnoses. 
Today’s edition runs to over 800 pages with almost 400 diagnoses, leading to 
criticism from Dr. Robert Spitzer, who was once the chairperson of a DSM task 
force, that the handbook has led to the medicalization of 20-30% of the 
population who may not have any serious mental health problems. Outside of this 
debate, it cannot be denied that the DSM has a large impact, positive and 
negative, on the way research is conducted but at least some of the changes to 
the fifth edition may lead to better clinical management of patients with both 
autism and ADHD. From a research point of view, the fifth edition of the DSM 
will certainly provide a better scientific framework for studying the overlap 
of these two disorders in more detail.
















 