
The ousting of Cyrus Mistry as boss of Tata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/tata-group-chairman-cyrus-mistry-replaced-ratan-tata-jaguar-land-rover-tata-steel>
 is a shock and could have serious implications for the UK.

Tata matters to the UK. It owns Jaguar Land Rover, which employs more than 
35,000 people in Britain,Tata <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> Steel 
(11,000 jobs) and other brands including Tetley Tea.

Theresa May is keen to draw up an industrial strategy for the country. One of 
the key people the prime minister needs to talk to for that is the boss of 
Tata. In fact, one of the first people Greg Clark met after becoming business 
secretary was Mistry in Mumbai.

The end of Mistry’s four-year tenure was revealed in a remarkably terse 
statement by the Indian conglomerate. “The decision was taken at a board 
meeting held here today,” Tata said. Sources say there was discontent on the 
board and among shareholders about the financial performance of the group.

The change at the top of Tata has created a storm in India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, where it is arguably the country’s 
most famous corporate group. Mistry’s exit was the lead story on Indian news 
sites on Monday. To put it into context, Ratan Tata, who is replacing Mistry on 
an interim basis, wrote to prime minister Narendra Modi to inform him of the 
news.

Tata has become renowned for its stability, privacy, and long-term 
perspective. Mistry only gave his first interview as Tata boss a few weeks ago, 
and that was to the group website. Tata’s overseas expansion, particularly into 
Britain, created much pride in India.

So this brutal switch at the top is extraordinary. Ratan Tata was chairman for 
21 years before stepping aside for Mistry in 2012 after turning 75. Now he is 
back as chairman, at least for the next four months as a committee looks for a 
permanent replacement.

Ironically, one the biggest criticisms from analysts and investors about Tata 
under Mistry has been the slow speed at which he has tackled the problems 
facing the conglomerate.

Although Ratan Tata expanded the company around the world, some of the 
businesses he bought now look overpriced and in need of restructuring – perhaps 
none more so than Tata Steel. Tata paid £6.2bn for the Corus steel business in 
2007, which in hindsight was the top of the commodities and financial cycle.

If only Tata had acted as decisively with its UK steel business as it has with 
axing Mistry. The Indian company announced it was reviewing the future of its 
UK business in March, but this remains unresolved.


The departure of Mistry as chairman could be good news for Tata Steel’s 11,000 
UK workers because Ratan Tata is a renowned Anglophile who bought the business 
in the first place.

But Mistry and Tata Steel had been making progress on a potential merger of 
its European steel operations with ThyssenKrupp and were close to a deal with 
the UK government about financial support and a restructuring of its pension 
scheme.

There is now a new uncertainty hanging over this deal. After months of 
worrying about their future, workers at the Port Talbot steelworks owned by 
Tata Steel could do without this.

Heathrow

The main argument about why Britain needs to expand its airport capacity in 
south-east England <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/heathrow-airport> is to 
help economic growth and encourage trade links with emerging markets such as 
China.

But on the eve of the government announcing whether to expand Heathrow, 
Gatwick or neither, British Airways has quietly put a spanner in that argument.

With remarkable timing, BA has decided to drop its flights from Heathrow to 
Chengdu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/ba-scraps-service-chinese-city-airport-expansion-heathrow-chengdu-decision-runway>
, the Chinese city that was cited by pro-expansion campaigners as a key 
destination. BA launched flights to Chengdu, its fourth Chinese destination, in 
late 2013. It had already trimmed the frequency of the service on the route.

The success or failure of one route should not determine Britain’s transport 
strategy. Willie Walsh, the chief executive of BA’s parent company IAG, has 
previously blamed the problems getting a British visa for weak demand on 
flights to and from China. Nonetheless, it shows that some of the presumptions 
behind the arguments to expand Heathrow or Gatwick – such as the boost to 
Britain’s economy – are by no means guaranteed.

BHS

Away from the House of Commons and its raucous criticism of Sir Philip Green, 
theBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> scandal is far from over. 

The department store chain’s administrators, the Insolvency Service, and the 
Serious Fraud Office are all still hard at work establishing why the company 
collapsed and trying to recover money owed to it.


As shown by the news at the weekend that the administrators to BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> are trying to wind up Retail 
Acquisitions, the company Dominic Chappell used to buy the retailer, there is 
still much work to do on this front.

If Retail Acquisitions is wound up then Duff & Phelps, the administrators, 
will gain access to it books and potentially recover funds that it owes BHS. 
This could be vital in understanding what went on before the collapse, which 
left more than £1bn of debts and led to 11,000 job losses.
 