
Every year, Vanity Fair unveils its Hollywood issue, a starry affair shot by 
Annie Leibovitz that awkwardly assembles an array of A-listers in an attempt to 
showcase the state of the industry at that given moment.

Actors are dolled up and strewn across each other in variously uncomfortable 
positions and, pre-Oscars, it gives us a chance to see which actors are at the 
forefront of the awards chatter. The choices made are often an important 
statement and previous issues have been contentious, as was the case with2010’s 
all-white issue 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/02/01/vanity-fairs-hollywood-is_n_444763.html>
.

Barack Obama on Oscars diversity: are we giving everyone a fair shot?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/28/barack-obama-speaks-oscars-diversity-academy-awards-2016>
This year it arrives at a sensitive time. We are in the middle of an awards 
season mired in controversy regarding a lack of diversity, which has in turn 
ignited a bigger conversation about unequal opportunities for actors of colour. 
The past 12 months have also shone light on an industry that still pays women 
less than their male counterparts, and offers few parts to actresses over the 
age of 50, with A-listers speaking out about their experiences.

So it makes business and PR sense that this year’s issue, out on Friday, is 
all-female and features key placements for women of colour as well as older 
actors. The shoot traditionally takes up a three-page spread. This year’s 
choices are Jane Fonda, Cate Blanchett, Jennifer Lawrence and Viola Davis, 
marking the first time since1999 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/photos/2012/03/hollywood-cover-timeline-slideshow-201203#5>
 that a black woman has appeared on the main cover and the first time ever for 
a black woman over the age of 30. In the extended image, she is joined by 
Lupita Nyong’o and Gugu Mbatha-Raw and, while it is refreshing to see diversity 
represented, the choices are also somewhat underwhelming.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fwhat-does-vanity-fair-star-studded-hollywood-cover-say-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dc52e6fafdfa0ca0846d854ba0f9641067c4350%2F0_0_900_445%2F900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Vanity%20Fair's%20Hollywood%20diversity%20cover%20fails%20to%20conceal%20industry%20prejudice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fwhat-does-vanity-fair-star-studded-hollywood-cover-say-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Vanity%20Fair%27s%20Hollywood%20diversity%20cover%20fails%20to%20conceal%20industry%20prejudice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fwhat-does-vanity-fair-star-studded-hollywood-cover-say-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dc52e6fafdfa0ca0846d854ba0f9641067c4350%2F0_0_900_445%2F900.jpg>
 Photograph: Annie Leibovitz/Vanity Fair 
Firstly, the past year has been a successful one for Davis, without doubt – 
but not within film. Her risible revenge thriller Lila & Eve and turn in 
Michael Mann’s flopBlackhat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/19/blackhat-review-michael-mann> 
were forgettable, but it’s her work on the hit TV show How to Get Away with 
Murder that’s kept her in the spotlight.

Her inclusion in a shoot that highlights film talent is an unintentionally 
damning reflection of how cinema is still lagging behind TV with respect to 
diversity. While Nyong’o was part of 2015’s biggest film Star Wars: The Force 
Awakens,her role was reduced to a motion-capture character 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/12/lupita-nyongo-interview-star-wars>
 and, despite winning an Oscar for12 Years a Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/09/12-years-a-slave-review>, the 
actor herself hasn’t been seen on screen for two years.

Bi-racial British actor Mbatha-Raw is undoubtedly on the rise (anyone who saw 
her commanding turn inBeyond the Lights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/28/beyond-lights-force-majeure-it-follows-dvd-reviews>
 can certify her considerable talents) but a thankless role as Will Smith’s 
love interest in middling dramaConcussion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/11/concussion-review-will-smith-battles-nfl-in-hoary-but-well-meaning-drama>
 and a role in critically derided not-busterJupiter Ascending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/04/jupiter-ascending-review-wachowskis-mila-kunis-channing-tatum>
 are hardly signs of a banner year.

Oscars diversity: academy to double female and minority members by 2020
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/22/oscars-diversity-race-minority-members-academy-awards>
The pool of commercially successful older actors is similarily, depressingly 
small. Fonda’s inclusion on the main cover is a notable coup but her one big 
screen turn of the year was a glorified one-scene cameo in Paolo Sorrentino’s
Youth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/20/youth-review-cannes-film-festival-2015-michael-caine>
 and, like Davis, she is now known more for her TV work in Netflix sitcomGrace 
and Frankie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/08/grace-and-frankie-jane-fonda-lily-tomlin>
.

Diane Keaton, who appears on the far right wearing her own clothes 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/style/2016/02/diane-keaton-hollywood-cover>, had 
just one role in 2015: as the matriarch in forgettable festive comedyChristmas 
With the Coopers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/03/christmas-with-the-coopers-review-film-diane-keaton-john-goodman>
. Similarly, her next major turn is on the small screen, opposite Jude Law in 
the HBO dramaThe Young Pope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/28/diane-keaton-jude-law-the-young-pope-hbo-sky>
. Oscar nominee Charlotte Rampling is a worthy inclusion, with her role in45 
Years <https://www.theguardian.com/film/45-years> among the year’s best, but 
that performance is the actor’s first notable big screen role for a while, with 
her TV work inBroadchurch <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/broadchurch>
 andLondon Spy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/13/best-of-tv-2015-no-5-london-spy>
 dominating.

Helen Mirren remains an exception, rather like Meryl Streep, as she continues 
to find roles in film, after a year that saw her with two SAG nominations, for
Woman in Gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/09/woman-in-gold-review-helen-mirren-ryan-reynolds>
 andTrumbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/13/trumbo-review-bryan-cranston-toronto-tiff>
.

All the fun of the Vanity Fair cover and the Pope plays himself - the Dailies 
film podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2016/feb/02/all-the-fun-of-the-vanity-fair-cover-and-the-pope-plays-himself-the-dailies-film-podcast>
So, while the shoot gives the impression of diversity, it’s another telling 
sign of an industry that still favours young white women. Jennifer Lawrence’s 
year has seen her take the lead in a $651m blockbuster and pick up an Oscar 
nomination, while rising star Alicia Vikander has appeared in six films, and 
also received an Oscar nod.

 Vanity Fair has made a bold attempt to highlight a diverse range of actors, 
but the fact remains that no woman of colour is being given the opportunities 
that her white peers are handed, at least not on the big screen. And there’s no 
amount of crisply shot and finely Photoshopped designer dresses that can hide 
that.

See the full shoot in the March Hollywood issue of Vanity Fair, on sale Friday
 