
Ever since Marvel <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> burst on to the 
scene, carrying with it the crazy concept of comic-book movies featuring 
multiple superheroes and actual jokes, the question other Hollywood movers and 
shakers have been posing is quite how to mirror the Disney-owned studio’s 
extraordinary success. But what if the real trick, in an increasingly crowded 
marketplace, is to venture right off the map and into dangerously uncharted 
territory?

A gay superhero? Yes please! Just not Captain America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/27/gay-captain-america-female-bond-steve-rogers-marvel-civil-war-diversity>
That is surely the question facing 20th Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/20th-century-fox>, which finds itself at the 
centre of a perfect storm of opportunity over its own superhero “universe”, the 
one based on the studio’s rights to all those X-Men related comic-book titans 
that Marvel foolishly hawked to the highest bidder a few years back.

Fox has put out two superhero movies this year: the inexpensively produced, 
critically acclaimed, R-rated, $760m (£538m) blockbuster Deadpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/07/deadpool-review-marvel-ryan-reynolds-film-superhero>
, and thetedious, moany, X-Men: Apocalypse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/09/x-men-apocalypse-review-marvel-jennifer-lawrence-oscar-isaac>
, which will be lucky to hit $600m by the time it ends its run. This despite 
the benefit of a Chinese release and a ensemble cast that includes the world’s 
most popular female Hollywood star, Jennifer Lawrence.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fdeadpool-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F11%2F1455209010239%2FKP_1789782_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Deadpool%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fdeadpool-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Deadpool%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fdeadpool-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F11%2F1455209010239%2FKP_1789782_crop_640x360.jpg>
Deadpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/feb/11/deadpool-video-review> 
review 
Marvel and DC announce new wave of female-led titles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/feb/06/marvel-dc-comics-new-wave-of-female-titles>
At the same time, the clamour for superhero movies to modernise 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2016/05/31/watch-incredible-trailer-brings-gay-superheroes-to-life/>
 has never been louder, especially since Marvel and DC Comics have already led 
the way in print. The current comic-book Ms Marvel is a Muslim 
Pakistani-American, whileGail Simone’s bravura 2011 reboot of Batgirl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/13/batgirl-dc-comics-series-reboot> 
gave Barbara Gordon a transgender best mate. Meanwhile, several of the X-Men 
are gay in at least some versions of the comics. You’ll no doubt have seen the
Twitter campaign urging Captain America to be given a boyfriend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/27/gay-captain-america-female-bond-steve-rogers-marvel-civil-war-diversity>
 on the big screen: its point, I think, is that Hollywood’s superhero vision is 
inexcusably blander, hokier and tamer than what’s often seen in print.

Directors such as Guardians of the Galaxy’s James Gunn have warned against the 
idea of suddenly making every superhero movie an R-rated, “edgy” Deadpool 
rip-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/17/james-gunn-guardians-of-the-galaxy-director-warns-hollywood-not-to-copy-deadpool>
. But in the case of X-Men, delivering a more grown-up take seems like a 
natural progression, especially since the saga’s colourful mutants have always 
made the most sense as an oh-so-subtle metaphor for the existential struggle of 
the societal outsider.

Fox wouldn’t even need to transform its core X-Men series too radically, since 
it has already shown that Deadpool-style spin-offs can be far more successful. 
It seems unlikely that Lawrence will agree to sign up for another turn as 
shape-shifting Mystique afterApocalypse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/09/x-men-apocalypse-review-marvel-jennifer-lawrence-oscar-isaac>
’s critical travails, but what if the studio offered her the chance to make 
history as the first ever gay superhero to get their own movie?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Ftime-for-x-men-to-mutate-superhero-diversity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faba4f1598895dd6672ad5f77414d34e803c30427%2F0_0_6472_2699%2F6472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20it's%20time%20for%20the%20X-Men%20franchise%20to%20mutate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Ftime-for-x-men-to-mutate-superhero-diversity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20it%27s%20time%20for%20the%20X-Men%20franchise%20to%20mutate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Ftime-for-x-men-to-mutate-superhero-diversity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faba4f1598895dd6672ad5f77414d34e803c30427%2F0_0_6472_2699%2F6472.jpg>
 Margot Robbie as Harley Quinn in the forthcoming Suicide Squad. Photograph: 
Moviestore/Rex/Shutterstock 
Fox has the opportunity to make these changes now that it has been proven, 
thanks to Deadpool, that the most successful comic-book movies can be those 
that initially looked the hairiest. The Ryan Reynolds-led rompstands as the 
highest-grossing R-rated movie of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/29/deadpool-becomes-highest-grossing-r-rated-film-of-all-time-ryan-reynolds>
 despite its failure to secure a release in China, the world’s second-largest 
box office. It would never have been made at Marvel Studios,which goes out of 
its way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/26/doctor-strange-tilda-swinton-whitewashed-china>
 to keep prudish censors and audiences happy in the world’s most populous 
nation. We don’t yet know how far the fledgling Warner Bros’ rival DC universe 
will push the envelope, although the upcomingSuicide Squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jul/13/suicide-squad-trailer-officially-released-following-comic-con-leak>
 does look like just the kind of jagged little pill we’ve been waiting years to 
swallow.

DC Rebirth: Batman, Superman and Wonder Woman get rebooted … again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/25/dc-comics-reboot-batman-superman-wonder-woman>
A clue as to whether Fox really is thinking of moving in a spikier direction 
will come with the next Wolverine movie, which is currently filming.Shots of 
Hugh Jackman as the adamantium-clawed mutant 
<http://www.justjared.com/2016/06/10/hugh-jackman-films-wolverine-3-scenes-with-patrick-stewart/>
 suggest producers are plumping for a look influenced by Mark Millar’s offbeat 
2008 comic-book run Old Man Logan, which saw Wolverine come out of retirement 
for a battle with future supervillains. Visible alongside Jackman in one shot 
is a teenage girl who some are speculating might be the comics’ X-23, a female 
clone of Wolverine. Intriguingly,X-Men stalwart Bryan Singer has previously 
pitched 
<http://www.gamezone.com/news/bryan-singer-has-a-new-idea-for-the-next-wolverine-incarnation-3437344>
 the young mutant, also known as Laura Kinney, as a candidate to replace 
Jackman’s character, with the Australian actor set on making the new film his 
last hurrah in the role.

A female Wolverine? It’s already happened in the comics 
<http://www.cinemablend.com/celebrity/Wolverine-Now-Woman-OK-So-Cool-92897.html>
, and would be the perfect way for Fox to begin building a world of superheroes 
that truly stands out from the crowd.
 