
A US government request to trawl through the personal data of millions of 
users of the cryptocurrency exchange Coinbase signals the start of an effort to 
pull digital currencies like bitcoin into the mainstream, experts have said.

The “John Doe” summons, a broad order for data on all Coinbase users in 2013, 
2014 and 2015, was filed by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in a federal 
court inCalifornia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> on 17 
November.


In the summons, the IRS said that all of Coinbase’s users in that period “have 
not been or may not be complying with US internal revenue laws”.

Coinbase has said it will fight the request in court.

City banks plan to hoard bitcoins to help them pay cyber ransoms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/22/city-banks-plan-to-hoard-bitcoins-to-help-them-pay-cyber-ransoms>
Cryptocurrencies <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/cryptocurrencies> – 
digital assets which exist entirely online but are exchangeable for goods or 
services – have grown in popularity in recent years, in part because they grant 
a degree of user anonymity. Coinbase is the largest bitcoin exchange and its 
best-known brand.

But user confidentiality has also caused headaches for governments, who worry 
the currencies are being used for drug dealing, money laundering or tax 
evasion. Digital currencies are currently taxed as an asset like gold, with 
capital gains tax due when there is an appreciation in value.

However, the extent to which bitcoin users with US tax liabilities have been 
declaring such assets is unclear.

In documentation supporting its petition, the IRS referred to three anonymous 
cases of taxpayers who had used virtual currencies to evade tax, two of which 
were “corporate entities with annual revenues of several million dollars” which 
used Coinbase wallets and concealed bitcoin transactions as “technology 
expenses” on their tax returns.

Several experts in cryptocurrency said that the IRS was on a “fishing 
expedition”, and pointed out that it followed anexcoriating report by the US 
treasury’s inspector-general 
<https://www.treasury.gov/tigta/auditreports/2016reports/201630083fr.pdf> for 
taxation which said the IRS was not doing enough to regulate and investigate 
cryptocurrencies.


“The government has no idea that anybody has committed a crime,” said Jerry 
Brito, the executive director of Coin Center, a lobbying and research group 
focused on cryptocurrencies.

In a statement 
<https://blog.coinbase.com/2016/11/18/protecting-customer-privacy/>, Coinbase 
said: “Although Coinbase’s general practice is to cooperate with properly 
targeted law enforcement inquiries, we are extremely concerned with the 
indiscriminate breadth of the government’s request.”

It added: “In its current form, we will oppose the government’s petition in 
court.”

Some experts, though dismayed by what they saw as the overly broad and 
invasive nature of the request, said that more government scrutiny on 
cryptocurrencies was inevitable as they became more mainstream.

“It’s an indication of bitcoin’s growing adoption,” said Chris Burniske, an 
analyst at ARK Investment Management who focuses on bitcoin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fcoinbase-bitcoin-irs-government-summons-data-cryptocurrency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c952f403b56e1c2172c03d0ef14fe5b57391d0a%2F0_465_5304_3183%2F5304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20US%20government%20wants%20to%20bring%20cryptocurrency%20out%20of%20the%20shadows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fcoinbase-bitcoin-irs-government-summons-data-cryptocurrency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20US%20government%20wants%20to%20bring%20cryptocurrency%20out%20of%20the%20shadows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fcoinbase-bitcoin-irs-government-summons-data-cryptocurrency%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c952f403b56e1c2172c03d0ef14fe5b57391d0a%2F0_465_5304_3183%2F5304.jpg>
 A Bitcoin sign at a pub in Sydney, Australia. Cryptocurrencies have grown in 
popularity in recent years. Photograph: David Gray / Reuters/Reuters 
“As more people use it, it is going to grow in a way which affects national 
and global economies, so the IRS needs more clarity on how citizens are using 
it,” he said. “Globally, we’re seeing regulators grapple with how to regulate 
and tax [cryptocurrencies].”

Simon Denny: the artist explaining blockchain with Pokémon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/aug/26/simon-denny-artist-blockchain-pokemon>
 Others said that while they felt Coinbase was right to seek to narrow the 
scope of the request, some change was needed to bring bitcoin and its ilk out 
of the dark and into the world of mainstream finance.

“If bitcoin and other digital currencies are going to be viewed as legitimate 
financial instruments, there has to be some regulatory apparatus here,” said 
Kevin McIntyre, associate professor of economics at McDaniel College in 
Maryland.

“Certainly,” he added, “the tinfoil hat-wearing libertarian types who embrace 
the privacy of [bitcoin] are going to be very disappointed.”

Not all of them, however. Juan Llanos, an advisor in financial technology 
regulation and compliance, said he was seeing a lot of anger within the 
cryptocurrency industry at the IRS’s move, but also some schadenfreude from the 
more anarchistic parts of bitcoin’s user base.

“Coinbase has been attacked by ultra-anarchists from the beginning, because 
they are the closest to a digital bank there is,” he said. “Many anarchists – 
usually the early adopters of bitcoin – who are against the customs of Coinbase 
are celebrating,” he said.

This is not the first time the IRS has used blanket John Doe summonses as part 
of an investigation, though it is possible that the Coinbase request will be 
the largest of its kind.

In 2014, a federal judge approved similar summonses 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/robertwood/2014/12/20/irs-issues-john-doe-summons-to-fedex-dhl-ups-hsbc-in-massive-offshore-account-hunt/#54d451a72d71>
 for FedEx, DHL and UPS to produce information about taxpayers who use an 
offshore asset-management service called Sovereign Management & Legal, and in 
2015 a judge approvedanother summons 
<https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/court-authorizes-irs-issue-summonses-discover-us-taxpayers-offshore-bank-accounts-belize-ba-0>
 for US taxpayers with offshore accounts at Belize Bank International Limited.
 