
Ask a stranger aimlessly wandering the streets of your home town about their 
thoughts on the year of our Lord 2016 and chances are good that they will tell 
you that the last 12 months of human history are theworst on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/apparently-2016-was-the-worst-year-ever-but-was-it-really>
. Irreparable climate change, the rise of far-right governments all over the 
world, the deaths of beloved pop culture icons, the proliferation of domestic 
and international terrorism, the Syrian civil war and its accompanying refugee 
crisis, and the release ofBatman v Superman: Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/captain-america-deadpool-superman-2016-superhero-films>
 have all led to the labeling of 2016 as the absolute shits. Never mind the 
year when the bubonic plague was trending on whatever stone tablet people aired 
their grievances on before Twitter was invented – 2016 was way worse than that. 
Except it wasn’t.

The best TV soundtracks of 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/20/best-tv-soundtracks-2016-black-mirror-westworld>
You know what people did for fun while their bodies consumed themselves from 
the ravages of the Black Death? Yeah, I don’t either, probably because no one 
had had enough free time to devise the word “fun” yet. They were too busy 
losing all of their extremities to gangrene and pissing blood into a dry 
riverbed to worry about fun. This last year isn’t even in the top 20 worst 
years in human history.

For starters, my God, Netflix. Streaming services like Netflix, Hulu and 
Amazon came into their own in 2016 – further cementing their place at the 
daringly original programming table with HBO, FX and Showtime. Netflix released
Stranger Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/28/stranger-things-second-season-teaser-tca>
,Luke Cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/22/luke-cage-netflix-marvel-comics>
,13th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/06/13th-review-ava-duvernay-jailing-black-men-netflix-selma-13th-constitutional-amendment-slavery>
, and so many other fantastic works in 2016. Hulu brought back the little-seen 
but well-made sitcomsCasual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/31/casual-season-two-michaela-watkins-tommy-dewey>
 andDifficult People 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/05/difficult-people-julie-klausners-new-show-revels-in-cringe-comedy>
. Amazon stumbled a few times, most notably with the horrendous Woody Allen 
mini-seriesCrisis in Six Scenes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/05/woody-allen-tv-sitcom-crisis-in-six-scenes>
, butTransparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/26/transparent-review-the-best-thing-on-tv-at-the-moment>
’s incredible third season more than made up for those errors. In the 1300s, 
the only stream anyone cared about was the stream with all the dead bodies 
floating in it.

Film and TV casting also inched ever closer to something resembling national 
demographics. It’s far from perfect, but let’s stop to appreciate that 
mega-franchises like Star Wars and Marvel are even attempting to cast 
multi-ethnic movies. Sure, it’s crassly commercial pandering to global box 
office trends, but in the age of Trump, we might as well take our victories 
when we can get them while continuing to agitate for more. “The director of 
Wonder Woman is a woman” offers only a mild respite from the cavalcade of 
bummers, but at least we don’t try to treat serious medical problems with 
bloodlettings any more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fentertainment-film-music-tv-2016-oblivion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f13e43d7a13527e916111e6746482832b3f48cc%2F0_362_8495_5097%2F8495.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20entertainment%20may%20have%20saved%202016%20from%20oblivion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fentertainment-film-music-tv-2016-oblivion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20entertainment%20may%20have%20saved%202016%20from%20oblivion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fentertainment-film-music-tv-2016-oblivion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f13e43d7a13527e916111e6746482832b3f48cc%2F0_362_8495_5097%2F8495.jpg>
 Mahershala Ali … one of 2016’s many winners. Photograph: Robby Klein/Getty 
Images 
It’s not November any more, but I’m thankful for Ava DuVernay, Ryan Coogler 
and all the film-makers of color who might not be where they are in a different 
time. Certainly not in the dark ages, before the advent of electricity. The 
most emotionally affecting, beautiful film of 2016 for me was Barry Jenkins’s
Moonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/16/the-50-best-us-films-of-2016-no-1-moonlight>
, a meditation on black masculinity that deserves to be showered with every 
award possible. Mahershala Ali, who plays the introspective drug dealer Juan, 
might have had the single best year of any actor in 2016. From Moonlight to 
Luke Cage to House of Cards, every role he touched ended up being memorable in 
some way. An Oscar nod for best supporting actor seems inevitable.

‘It’s impossible to be vulnerable’: how Moonlight reflects being a black gay 
man in the US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/15/its-impossible-to-be-vulnerable-how-moonlight-reflects-being-a-black-gay-man-in-the-us>
And the tech. Oh, the tech. I purchased an Amazon Echo Dot this year, a handy 
little device that functions as a voice-activated personal assistant. It can 
manage a calendar, play music, offer weather and news reports, and answer 
trivia questions all through the magic of the cloud. You can even order 
Domino’s simply by asking Alexa, Amazon’s proprietary voice assistant, to 
please have someone deliver you a pizza. If you thought obesity was a problem 
in 2016, wait until 2020, when everything can be ordered with your voice. Sure, 
what you gain in button-popping convenience, you lose in privacy, since the
Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> Echo devices are 
constantly listening to you and can only truly be turned off if you disconnect 
them from the power source, but hey … Domino’s. Plug me into one of those pink 
goo baths from The Matrix. I’m ready.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDVkkYlQNmbc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDVkkYlQNmbc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDVkkYlQNmbc&media=>
Just make sure I have some of Apple’s irritating, overpriced new wireless 
headphones so that I can listen to the hours and hours of great music that was 
released in 2016. Chance the Rapper’s Coloring Book was nothing short of a 
triumph, both artistically and commercially. That he continues to blaze trails 
through the music industry without succumbing to the major label system proves 
that if your talent is generationally significant and undeniable, you can do 
anything you want. Though I would not advise that, say, J Cole drop his label 
and go out on his own, if you know what I mean. The blockbuster acts Rihanna, 
Beyoncé, Kanye, Drake and Lady Gaga all dropped albums this year. Plus, we were 
treated to splendid new work from more obscure artists such as Angel Olsen and 
Blood Orange. We lost musical greats including Prince, David Bowie and Leonard 
Cohen, but in Bowie and Cohen’s cases, they left us fresh work to enjoy before 
they passed away. In medieval times, the most popular form of music featured 
the playing of a lute, so I think we have them beat there too.

The state of the world could be much worse, but you could say that about any 
year since the dawn of time. Cavemen (and cavewomen. Cavepeople? After all, 
it’s 2016) probably sat around lamenting how much they missed the taste of 
saber-toothed tiger meat. “Remember when you could just go up to the guy at the 
campfire next to you and just club him on the head with a rock and take his 
wife? Those were the days,” a hypothetical cavemen’s rights activist might say. 
The true danger of human nature is to idealize anything that’s already 
happened, be it the repressive 1950s or fancy-free Clinton era. Our politics 
look backwards. The cinematic parade of remakes, reboots, sequels and 
reimaginings is more backward than a Kris Kross baseball jersey (or that joke). 
Hell, the very act of writing this article is backwards. The excitement of the 
Obama era came from the idea that there would be a future and it would be 
better than what came before it. Let’s mourn the failures of 2016, appreciate 
the successes, and move on. Please, please, please. Let’s move on.

Oh, who am I kidding? Next year is gonna suck, too.
 