
I have just spent three weeks in Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles>, home to a newspaper that is 
suffering from the familiar chronic problems engendered by the digital 
revolution’s continuing disruption.

The recent history of the Los Angeles Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/los-angeles-times> has been marked by 
changes of ownership, changes of editorship and regular culls of editorial 
staff against a background of falling sales and decreasing advertising revenue.

This sad spiral of decline is hardly a new story, nor is it one confined to 
the United States. We in Britain are witnessing newspapers in similar disarray.

But the LA Times’s dramas provide us with a valuable case study, not simply of 
the western world’s newsprint newspaper crisis but also of the existential 
crisis for a journalism dedicated to holding power to account.

It is regarded as America’s fourth most influential paper (after the New York 
Times,Washington Post <https://www.theguardian.com/media/washington-post> and 
Wall Street Journal) and fifth largest (after that trio, plus USA Today) in 
terms of editorial staffing (about 430 people currently).

As a regular visitor to Los Angeles since the mid-1970s, I have often 
appreciated its content while being intensely frustrated by its editorial 
style. (Although we British journalists may be criticised for the inflexible 
use of an inverted pyramid construction of news stories, at least we get 
readers to the point right away).

The LA Times has broken stories of genuine public merit, often involving 
meticulous investigative reporting. It may not have garnered as many accolades 
as its eastern counterparts, but it has counted all the same by picking up its 
fair share of Pulitzers, the prizes that mean so much in US journalism.

There is the historical context. Now for the new reality, as portrayed in a 
7,000-word article in the latest issue of the monthly Los Angeles Magazine,
What’s the matter with the LA Times? 
<http://www.lamag.com/culturefiles/whats-matter-los-angeles-times/>

Its author, Ed Leibowitz, paints a picture of editorial turmoil and low morale 
in the iconic building that houses the Times. His piece details allegations of 
overly cautious, and sometimes maverick, editing decisions under what can only 
be described as its controversial ownership.

Let’s deal with that ownership first. The Chandler family ceded control in 
2000 to the Tribune company, which was acquired in turn in 2007 by real estate 
billionaire Sam Zell. Within a year, he put Tribune into bankruptcy protection, 
where it stayed until 2012. The inevitable result: rounds of redundancies.

As so often, one tranche of staff cuts led to another. In November 2015, a 
series of redundancies saw the departure of six bureau chiefs, several key 
section editors and well-known columnists. It was described as“a watershed 
moment in the paper’s history.” 
<http://www.lamag.com/citythinkblog/theres-way-too-much-talent-leaving-the-building-in-the-latest-round-of-buyouts-at-the-los-angeles-times/>

The following February, Tribune fell into the hands of a Chicago tech 
investor, Michael Ferro Jr, who named himself as chairman andbizarrely renamed 
the company as “tronc” 
<http://www.poynter.org/2016/tribune-publishing-changes-its-name-to-reflect-strategic-pivot/414815/>
 (for Tribune Online Content).


Then, in what the Financial Times called “an unexpected twist” 
<https://www.ft.com/content/5bd8ea22-99ed-3736-bb85-0b2acf670fcf>, he sold a 
13% stake to health care billionaire Patrick Soon-Shiong, reputedly LA’s 
second-richest person, and gave him a seat on the board. The reasons remain 
unclear.

Now for the editorial leadership. At the end of 2011, the Trinidad-born Davan 
Maharaj was appointed as editor-in-chief. 
<https://www.poynter.org/2011/la-times-editor-russ-stanton-resigns/155987/> He 
had been with the paper since 1989, spending 15 years as a reporter and seven 
as a senior executive.

He was liked at the time. According to Leibowitz’s inside sources, however, 
his previous conviviality “was replaced by a grim determination to tighten his 
grip on power.”

That’s hardly unusual. The job of editorship has always been tough, and it has 
become tougher still in an environment of decline where commercial pressures 
continually intrude.

Indeed, those pressures became Maharaj’s responsibility in March last year 
when Ferrogave him the dual role of publisher and editor 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-maharaj-los-angeles-times-20160302-story.html>
. That, writes Leibowitz, was “an unusual move that breaks with journalistic 
tradition [in the US].”

Leibowitz devotes a great deal of his article to Maharaj’s alleged editorial 
failings, particularly in relation to a single investigation into Purdue 
Pharma, the manufacturer of America’s best-selling opiate drug, OxyContin.

I am not in a position to judge whether Leibowitz’s claims about Maharaj 
subjecting the publication of the resulting articles to “pointless delays” by 
making “ill defined and arbitrary” comments are correct.

But his detailed reportage of the delays, based on “multiple sources with 
knowledge of the situation”, certainly tends to support his argument.

The investigation was started in spring 2013 by one of the LA Times’s 
acknowledged star reporters, Scott Glover, and its veteran health care writer, 
Lisa Girion. Their three-part series, which revealed corporate complicity in a 
drug-dependency epidemic that had killed tens of thousands of Americans, was 
initially sent to Maharaj in spring 2014.

After months, and eventually years, of what Leibowiz calls “maddening 
obstacles”, the paper finally carried the first part of the investigation in 
May 2016,“You want a description of hell? OxyContin’s 12-hour problem” 
<http://www.latimes.com/projects/oxycontin-part1/>, which carried Glover and 
Girion’s bylines, plus that of Harriet Ryan.

By then, although the investigation was highly praised, two of the reporters 
had left the Times.Glover had joined CNN 
<http://www.capoliticalreview.com/capoliticalnewsandviews/la-times-downsizing-again-newspaper-as-thin-as-toilet-paper/>
 andGirion became an editor at Reuters 
<http://talkingbiznews.com/1/reuters-hires-two-from-la-times/>. They had become 
frustrated at the delay in their work being published.

The second instalment, on Purdue Pharma’s efforts to suppress evidence of the 
OxyContin drug ring <http://www.latimes.com/projects/la-me-oxycontin-part2/>, 
then ran in mid-July, with a promise of a third part.

Leibowitz concedes that an editor of a major newspaper has many 
responsibilities, but he writes that his sources - among both current and 
former staffers - “attributed Maharaj’s inaction to a chronically short 
attention span and a preoccupation with trivialities.”

Maybe. Amid more unflattering comments about the editor, he does praise the 
paper and, by implication Maharaj, for publishing “a lot of great journalism”.

He cites two recent “huge stories”: one about California national guard 
veterans being forced to pay back enlistment bonuses granted to them in error, 
and another about suspect campaign donations allegedly funnelled to local 
politicians by a developer seeking waivers to build an apartment complex.

And in December 2015, the Times’s coverage of the murder of 14 people in an 
Isis-inspired attack in San Bernardino 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2015_San_Bernardino_attack> won a Pulitzer.

Leibowitz could not persuade Maharaj to talk. However, hours before his 
article was due to go to press, he received an email on the editor’s behalf. It 
stated:

“We are in very challenging times in the newspaper business. My job is to make 
sure we produce quality journalism for our readers. Yes, that means I have to 
make difficult decisions.

Running a newspaper isn’t a popularity contest. We and I should be judged by 
the quality of our work, and by that standard the Los Angeles Times has done 
very well in the past five years. Our journalism speaks for itself, and it 
speaks loudly.”

Then came another surprising development. In his article, Leibowitz reported 
that “sources” had told him that the third part of the Glover-Girion-Ryan 
investigation, into Purdue Pharma’s global OxyContin sales strategy, “will 
appear sometime soon.”

And, lo and behold, it did. Eleven days after Leibowitz’s article was 
published online, on 7 December, the LA Times finally ran the piece,“OxyContin 
goes global — ‘We’re only just getting started’” 
<http://www.latimes.com/projects/la-me-oxycontin-part3/> under the bylines of 
Ryan, Glover and Girion.

The delay between the original reporting and its publication has been 
extraordinary. It means that it appeared 15 months after Glover’s departure and 
12 months after Girion’s departure. Is that some kind of record?

What it surely suggests is that the LA Times, for all its commercial problems, 
has quite separate editorial problems.
 