
A couple of months ago Frances Rafferty wrote 
<https://leftfootforward.org/2016/08/city-halls-corruption-or-racoon-cats-both-have-their-place-in-local-journalism/>
: “The newspaper industry is in crisis... The response of newspaper owners has 
been to cut staff and costs often at the expense of investing in quality 
journalism.”

You might well reply that since Rafferty is the communications officer for the 
National Union of Journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists> she would say 
that, wouldn’t she?

Sure, but that doesn’t mean her analysis, and her concern about journalism, is 
wrong. And the current situation at the south London division of 
Newsquest/Gannett, where a week-long NUJ strike is into its second day 
<https://www.nuj.org.uk/news/newsquest-strike-south-london-picket-line-update/>
, illustrates her point.

No-one can deny that the newspaper business - as a business - is in dire 
straits. No-one, if they are sensible, can deny that cost-savings by publishers 
are necessary.


But the point I have made time and again is that cutting too many people at 
the coal face, journalists, is counter-productive. I am not saying that there 
should be no loss of newsroom staff. My concern is about the increasing numbers 
being forced to leave.

Publishers are imposing redundancies that suit the bottom line, but without 
regard for the qualitative impact on their newspapers’ output.

Similarly, I am worried by the fact that the survivors of the regular culls 
are not being paid a reasonable wage and that their working conditions have 
deteriorated. This is making journalism a less attractive trade to enter, 
especially at local level.

The Newsquest <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsquest> situation is 
illustrative of journalism’s plight. Up to 11 jobs are set to go at its south 
London titles where 27 out of 29 staff have been put on notice of redundancy.

In such circumstances, this is surely a strike worth supporting. It’s not only 
about saving jobs, it’s also about saving journalism. About trying to preserve 
some semblance of an editorial service to the people who continue to read, 
whether in print or online, papers in Croydon, Richmond, Sutton, Wandsworth, 
Bromley, Dartford, Greenwich and places in between.

The NUJ has tabled a wage demand with Newsquest because most of its 
journalists have not had a pay rise since, would you believe it, 2008.

The package includes a basic 1.5% cost-of-living increase with an entry salary 
of £17,500, together with a 1% increase in company pension contributions. A 
reporter on a £20,000 might get £1,500, or 7.6%, more.

Consider those figures for a moment. They illustrate just how little Newsquest 
staff are currently receiving. It’s no wonder there is such support for the 
strikers,as reported by HoldTheFrontPage. 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2016/news/support-for-striking-newsquest-journalists-as-action-enters-second-day/>

I note that a Newsquest spokesman defended its “need to revisit its cost base” 
and the “regrettable... restructuring [that] puts a number of roles at risk of 
redundancy” in order to ensure that business “has a credible future.”

Here, of course, lies the problem. There is a distinction between the 
“business” having a credible future and journalism having a credible future.

I readily concede that both, historically, went hand in hand. What we need to 
explore is a future in which journalism, the original raison d’être for 
newspapers, can be preserved when an old-fashioned business enterprise is no 
more.

Sources: NUJ here 
<https://www.nuj.org.uk/news/newsquest-strike-south-london-picket-line-update/> 
andhere 
<https://www.nuj.org.uk/news/nuj-newsquest-staff-put-in-for-1500-pay-package/>
/Left Foot Forwardhere 
<https://leftfootforward.org/2016/08/city-halls-corruption-or-racoon-cats-both-have-their-place-in-local-journalism/>
 andhere 
<https://leftfootforward.org/2016/10/newsquest-reporters-strike-today-over-cutbacks-and-workload/>
/HoldTheFrontPage 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2016/news/support-for-striking-newsquest-journalists-as-action-enters-second-day/>
 