
An MP stood up in the commons on Wednesday and said she knew the names of men 
suspected of murdering six people. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-37298109>

Her remarks elicited a quasi-apology from the government for failings by the 
police in their attempts to bring the murderers to justice.


Did that exchange make any national newspaper front page? No. Did it get big 
headlines on any inside page? No. Did it get covered at all? Hardly.

Why? Because the murders took place in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and the London-based national 
press has a long record of ignoring what happens there.

So the readers of Britain’s national papers were not told of the statement by 
Margaret Ritchie, the SDLP MP for South Down, in which she revealed she knew 
the identity of the men suspected ofshooting six men to death in a bar in 
Loughinisland, in her constituency, in 1994. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/oct/15/northern-ireland-loyalist-shootings-loughinisland>

Nor did readers learn that Northern Ireland minister Kris Hopkins had said 
that the government “deeply regrets that the terrorists who committed these 
vicious attacks have never been brought to justice.”


Furthermore, readers were denied the chance to assess the prime minister’s 
response to a question from Ritchie about the murders.Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> described them as a “terrible 
evil” but said it was for the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) to 
pursue the case.

The whole point at issue is that the PSNI has not pursued the case despite a 
damning report published in June this year by the police ombudsman for Northern 
Ireland, Michael Maguire, in which he stated that he had “no hesitation” in 
concluding that police colluded with the killers.

In that report, which superseded and corrected a previous report by Maguire’s 
predecessor as ombudsman, he revealed both extensive police failings and clear 
evidence of collusion that enabled the killers to escape justice.

It got precious little coverage at the time. Apart from a detailed article in 
the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/09/loyalist-informers-smuggled-weapons-used-in-dozens-troubles-murders-report-loughinisland>
 anda page lead in the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/police-colluded-with-loughinisland-killers-zrq778gc0>
, it got two paragraphs in the Daily Telegraph, six pars in the Daily Mail and 
nothing in the other print titles.

But where were the follow-ups? This is just the kind of story, had it happened 
in England (or Scotland, or Wales), it would surely have stimulated a newspaper 
campaign.

The Maguire report exposed a scandal. It all but identified the presumed 
killers. It provided proof of a police cover-up. And, incidentally, it also 
revealed the existence of a police hero, a senior officer who was prepared to 
go against the grain.

In other words, it had all the elements that for a classic popular press 
campaign on behalf of the Loughinisland victims and their bereaved families.

Remember that superb Mail “Murderers” front page in 1997 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2080159/Stephen-Lawrence-case-How-killers-finally-brought-justice.html>
 because of police failures to bring the killers of Stephen Lawrence to 
justice? The power of the press, used properly in the public interest, was 
transformational.

It shone the spotlight on the police. It encouraged whistle-blowers to come 
forward. It galvanised politicians. Press pressure worked. The Lawrence family 
were understandably grateful.

The families of Adrian Rogan, Malcolm Jenkinson, Barney Greene, Daniel 
McCreanor, Patrick O’Hare and Eamon Byrne deserve similar support.

Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> based in Northern 
Ireland don’t have the power (and most, I’m afraid, don’t have the will) to do 
what the Mail did for Lawrence.

I commend my colleague Ian Cobain for his tireless work on the issue - examples
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/oct/15/northern-ireland-loyalist-shootings-loughinisland>
,here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/dec/20/northern-ireland-police-loughinisland-massacre-inquiry>
, andhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/oct/15/uk-arms-northern-ireland-loyalist-massacre>
 - but his has been a lone voice.


What is required is for London-based national papers – the ones that 
campaigned so earnestly for Northern Ireland to remain part of the UK – to 
start taking an interest in what happened during the conflict.

Taking up the case of the Loughinisland families would be an excellent start. 
Or am I being overly cynical in believing that the press’s failure to get 
involved is because of its tacit support for collusion?

If so, editors are guilty of condoning the mass murder of innocents. I really 
hope I am wrong about that.
 