
Jane Eyre <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/jane-eyre-68.html> by Charlotte 
Brontë was the first book my grandmother read out loud to me when I went to 
live with her at the age of 12. I expect she thought that reading about a girl 
who had also lost her parents might give me comfort. Because of my age, it was 
the young Jane with whom I identified, the Jane trapped in the haunted “red 
room,” the Jane forced to go to the horrible Lowood School.


I didn’t read the book as a teen. I wish I had. If I’d read it then, I might 
have identified with the restless, not-quite-formed Jane – the 18-year-old 
young adult who is the main character for most of the book.


 Countless young women have done so and found inspiration in the poor and 
plain governess who refuses to be overcome by a world that is constantly trying 
to subjugate and belittle her. Jane Eyre is a book about finding one’s identity 
in the face of such adversity; it is a book about coming of age; and for this 
reason I believe it fits perfectly into the category of a young adult novel. It 
is, after all, about the concerns of a young adult.

Becca Fitzpatrick: 'As a teen, I was in love with Heathcliff. As an adult, he 
terrifies me'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/30/becca-fitzpatrick-interview-dangerous-lies>
 But is Jane a young adult? some might ask. Wasn’t an 18-year-old fully an 
adult by the standards of the day? Charlotte Brontë writes of a character 
balanced between childhood and maturity. In fact, she uses the tension of this 
balance again and again to give her story energy.

 Right before she meets Mr Rochester, the man who will become her great love, 
Jane is on a secluded path when she is frightened by a sound:

Jane Eyre is a book about finding one’s identity in the face of such 
adversity; it is a book about coming of age

 “In those days I was young, and all sorts of fancies bright and dark tenanted 
my mind: the memories of nursery stories were there amongst other rubbish; and 
when they recurred, maturing youth added to them a vigour and vividness beyond 
what childhood could give.”

 The fact that Jane is a “maturing youth,” taking her first steps into a wider 
world, makes her story particularly resonant for young adult readers. Young 
adult writing is often about firsts –first sparks of love, first kisses, first 
great disappointments. Jane Eyre, who has never seen a city, who has barely 
spoken to a man, is the quintessential young adult in this regard; everything 
is new to her.

 I know that many people who don’t read YA will balk at the suggestion that 
Jane Eyre is a YA novel. After all, Jane Eyre is great literature! There is 
plenty of great literature on the YA shelf, I assure you, and I challenge 
anyone who doesn’t believe me to readThe Astonishing Life of Octavian Nothing, 
Traitor to the Nation 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/astonishing-life-of-octavian-nothing-traitor-to-the-nation.html>
by MT Anderson, or Exit, Pursued by a Bear by EK Johnston, or Midwinterblood  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/midwinterblood.html>by Marcus Sedgwick, to 
name a few in a list that could take up my entire word count for this article.

The 100 best novels: No 12 – Jane Eyre by Charlotte Brontë (1847)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/09/100-best-novels-jane-eyre> 
 However, I suspect an even stronger reason adults might object to calling 
Jane Eyre a YA novel is because it explores female desire so openly. Jane Eyre 
does not contain explicit sex, but it does have an earthiness that shocked its 
Victorian readers. Jane struggles to untangle feelings of lust from feelings of 
love. She wonders what it would be like to marry her cousin St John, a man who 
admires her, but does not have “a husband’s heart” to give her, and she frankly 
considers what it would mean to consummate a loveless marriage with him, 
ultimately finding the idea “monstrous”. There has been much discussion lately 
about how much sex is appropriate in YA, but I’d argue that fiction is the safe 
place young people need for exploring questions like the ones Charlotte Brontë 
poses about sex, attraction, and the true meaning of love.

 Of course, Brontë did not intend the book to be published for a teen 
audience. How could she? YA as a marketing category would not exist for another 
century. However, it’s hard to imagine she would have disapproved on the basis 
of its subject matter. She had been allowed to read widely as a young adult, 
and at 18 was herself enamoured with Byron and Shakespeare.

I know that many people who don’t read YA will balk at the suggestion that 
Jane Eyre is a YA novel

 In the end, the most important question in determining whether or not Jane 
Eyre is a YA novel is: What is the best age to read this book?

 Although I didn’t reread Jane Eyre as a teen, I did finally read it again as 
an adult, many times in fact, and I love it. The book can be enjoyed at any age 
— but the same can be said of YA literature in general.According to a 2012 study
 
<http://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/childrens/childrens-industry-news/article/53937-new-study-55-of-ya-books-bought-by-adults.html>
, more than half the buyers of YA books are over 18.

 Surely the best time to read Jane Eyre is as a young adult. When better to 
read a book preoccupied with deciding who one is going to be for the rest of 
one’s life? After that, there is nothing preventing a reader from enjoying it 
again… and again… and again.

Have you read Jane Eyre? What do you think: YA or not? Tweet us 
@GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 and let us know your thoughts!

Lena Coakley’s Worlds of Ink and Shadow 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/376535/> (A Novel of 
The Brontës) is available from the Guardian bookshop.
 