
Clearly this is far from fashionable, but among my most detested of modern 
words are “pampering” and the indefensibly atrocious “wellness”. I don’t 
imagine this will have the wellness brigade crying into their kale daiquiris, 
but the world can be easily divided into people who would use the term 
“wellness”, and people with whom I should care to spend a second of time.

I don’t think I’ll ever warm to “lifestyle”, either, which conjures up 
showhomes with bar-stooled breakfast nooks, artist’s impressions of “retail 
experiences” that have yet to be built, and generally ignores the filthy 
magnificence of human existence in favour of a narcotising consumer advert for 
which you’re the mark.The Ski Yoghurt family 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SQtyO13YTxc> – ask your parents, kids – had a 
definite lifestyle, and an advertising executive who had run the Ski account 
once explained to me that this was simply because they had to destroy the 
historically embedded idea that yoghurt was “a product only neurotic 
secretaries bought”.

MLS pre-season power rankings: Nos 8-14 – the outside bets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/02/mls-pre-season-power-rankings-portland-nycfc>
And so to Major League Soccer – once a product only Americans bought, like 
Twinkies or line-dancing records – but now on such an upward trajectory that
some wonder if it will eventually overtake Serie A 
<http://www.fourfourtwo.com/features/could-mls-overtake-serie#:VaQVM4w11NPNbA>. 
Before we go on, I should say that I am keen on MLS. I’ve been to several very 
enjoyable games, and have been lucky enough to meet some particularly wise and 
funny people who cover it, to say nothing of countless charming fans. I have 
even encountered some of the chaps involved with running it, and they are not 
what the likes of Ken Bates or Doug Ellis would call “football men”. There 
could scarcely be a better recommendation.

But I can’t help feeling that the glorious ascent of MLS will be delayed if 
its biggest signings continue to give the unfortunate impression that the 
league’s USP is everything that happens off the pitch. Consider the utterances 
of recent emigres from this septic isle. This week, theLA Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/losangelesgalaxy> captain Robbie Keane 
said he now constantly fielded calls from European players “really desperate to 
come over here”, because they can see how the league has improved “and because 
of the lifestyle too”.

Last year it was Keane’s team-mate, Steven Gerrard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/steven-gerrard>, who stated: “The 
attraction of America was the different lifestyle.” There was the New York Red 
Bulls’ Bradley Wright-Phillips, too, who explained: “A lot of people, they know 
that when you come to America you have a good lifestyle.” Asked to assess the 
future draw of MLS for Cristiano Ronaldo, Frank Lampard judged: “I think the 
lifestyle would suit him.” MLS is assessed as Holly Golightly judged Tiffany’s: 
nothing very bad could happen to you here.

Of course, you can hardly blame players for feeling this way, particularly at 
that stage of their careers at which they currently tend to be drawn to anMLS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mls> move. I know Samuel Johnson said 
that to be tired of hearing people wish your kid got cancer is to be tired of 
life – but we all get a bit tired in the end, don’t we, and there is little 
more amusingly one-eyed than those fans wondering furiously why a player would 
want to leave all this rain-sodden, spittle-flecked hurly-burly to see out his 
playing days in reach of palm trees and the Pacific Coast Highway. Or the 
Empire State building, or wherever.

Of MLS offers, Ashley Cole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/29/ashley-cole-la-galaxy-field-notes>
 once sniffed: “I didn’t want to sit on the beach just yet.” He made his debut 
three weeks ago (that’s his LA Galaxy debut – I imagine he’s already been to 
the beach a few times.) EvenNew York City FC’s Andrea Pirlo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/07/andrea-pirlo-mls-hipster-footballer>
 this week favourably contrasted “being able to go out to dinner at the 
trendiest restaurants” with being corralled in a Serie A dressing room half the 
night for safety reasons, and having the team bus tyres slashed. We have yet to 
really hear of players not “settling” in the States, whereas the list of those 
foreigners who found themselves immune to the charms of various English 
industrial towns is as long as it is poignant.

I remember being at the LA Galaxy ground on the morning David and Victoria 
Beckham stepped on to the pitch for the latter’sformal unveiling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/jul/13/newsstory.usa>. Victoria was 
wearing a fitted candy pink outfit and was perfectly described by the radio 
reporter Nigel Adderly as having come as anexact cross between Jackie Kennedy 
and Paris Hilton 
<http://www.polyvore.com/cgi/img-thing?.out=jpg&size=l&tid=3844341>. No idea 
whether she meant to. But then, consciously or otherwise, so many of us 
tourists to the US are keen to knit ourselves into the sort of Americana at 
which Europeans have gazed – in admiration, in horror, but always mesmerised – 
from these shores since at least the end of the second world war. And if you 
dispute that rare use of the journalistic “we”, then I must conclude you missed 
out on the American Century, and congratulate you on your piety, purity, and 
better-than-thattery. At the same time as offering my condolences that you 
missed almost EVERYTHING.

Still, if MLS is itself to get bigger and brasher and better, in the 
exhilarating American fashion, then the “lifestyle” stuff has to go. League 
bigwigs must have a stern word with the highest-profile signings, whose 
perpetual foregrounding of this aspect gives a very good impression that MLS is 
a bespoke kitchen island in the Hollywood Hills with a football contract 
attached. Furthermore, the frequent emphasis on the league’s “family friendly” 
qualities as a player destination does rather make it sound like a restaurant 
that provides crayons. A relief, certainly, but you’re not going for the food.
 