
This year has brought an endless barrage of increasingly hostile newspaper 
headlines, telling us that EU migrants want to take our jobs or that one in 
five Muslims sympathise with jihadists, or declaring high court judges “enemies 
of the people”. We’ve seen an MP killed after promoting tolerance during a 
campaign that divided – and continues to divide – the country, we’ve heard of 
businesses owned by non-British nationals being graffitied and damaged, and 
learned of a sharp increase in racially motivated attacks.

Recently, I’ve realised that while I speak out online against the way some 
newspapers use their platform to fan the flames of hatred and division, I 
haven’t done much else. Aside from donating to causes fighting intolerance, or 
publicly criticising hate speech, I hadn’t thought there was much more I could 
do.

Campaigners claim victory after Lego stops Daily Mail promotions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/12/lego-ends-daily-mail-links-campaigners-claim-victory>
Last week, however, Lego announced they would stop promoting their products in 
the Daily Mail, in response to theStop Funding Hate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/12/lego-ends-daily-mail-links-campaigners-claim-victory>
 campaign, which asks companies to stop advertising in newspapers that promote 
division and intolerance. Since Lego made its stand, other groups and companies 
have begun discussing what, if anything, their responses should be. As of 
Friday, students at City University of London havevoted to ban the Sun, Mail 
and Express on campus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/18/city-university-students-vote-for-campus-ban-sun-daily-mail-express>
.Waitrose said on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/waitrose/status/797410272172449792> that they “… wouldn’t 
make an editorial judgment on a particular newspaper”.

That’s a carefully crafted sentence, neither confirming nor denying there 
might even be cause to judge. Non-partisan, even. But I don’t believe, in a 
year as socially and politically fraught as 2016 has been, that being 
non-partisan cuts it anymore. I don’t think it’s right to sit on the fence 
while people are suffering because of what newspapers are printing and decide 
it’s not your fight, or your problem.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdaily-mail-sun-no-longer-submt-books-for-review-melinda-salisbury%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4213f96eaa184c51b70e6dbf5d70b52e8a6196f1%2F293_666_1189_1573%2F1189.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I%20will%20no%20longer%20submit%20my%20books%20for%20review%20by%20the%20Daily%20Mail%20or%20the%20Sun&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdaily-mail-sun-no-longer-submt-books-for-review-melinda-salisbury%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%20will%20no%20longer%20submit%20my%20books%20for%20review%20by%20the%20Daily%20Mail%20or%20the%20Sun&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdaily-mail-sun-no-longer-submt-books-for-review-melinda-salisbury%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4213f96eaa184c51b70e6dbf5d70b52e8a6196f1%2F293_666_1189_1573%2F1189.jpg>
 ‘I believe in a world that’s inclusive, and I need my professional presence to 
reflect that’ … author Melinda Salisbury 
Acknowledging there is a problem is usually the first step to solving it. For 
me, there is a problem with the messages some newspapers are sending. I have a 
problem with the way social, political and economic situations are framed and 
re-framed to fit the overarching message newspapers want to send, regardless of 
the damage that causes. I’m not talking about gloomy economic forecasts or 
predictions regarding trade and free movement – I’m talking about direct 
effects on lives, here, now. I’m talking about people being attacked, 
intimidated, threatened, victimised. I’m talking about the open championing of 
hate, without being held to account for it. So I need to acknowledge it, and my 
part in it. As a very clever man once said:“If I were to remain silent, I’d be 
guilty of complicity.” 
<http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/4466-if-i-were-to-remain-silent-i-d-be-guilty-of>

I met with my publisher and asked them to no longer submit my work for review 
to theDaily Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail>, the Mail on 
Sunday, the Daily Express, the Sunday Express or the Sun.
I want to make it clear I’m not making assumptions or accusations about the 
individual reviewers at these newspapers. I have no idea of their opinions, 
beliefs or views, and nor are they any of my business. But I believe in a world 
that’s universally inclusive, tolerant and respectful, on and off the page, and 
I need my personal and professional presence to reflect that. And as an author, 
I am in a position where I can make that happen.

My first novel centres on a young woman trying to decipher what’s real amid a 
barrage of propaganda; the second sees a different young woman befriending 
refugees, before pledging to join the fight against the dictator who has driven 
them from their homes. The third will have both of these characters – from 
different countries and backgrounds – coming together to try to defeat an 
oppressive regime once and for all. How can I write these books, which 
celebrate acceptance, international cooperation and tolerance, and also seek 
approval from organisations that promote the opposite?


Unlike Lego’s actions, my decision won’t hit these newspapers in the pocket. 
The only person who is likely to feel any effect from this is me. The 
newspapers in question are among the few that frequently print reviews of 
children’s and young adult books. They offer much-needed opportunity and 
exposure for children’s and YA authors, in an environment where visibility is 
often lacking. And I’ve now said I don’t want that support, or that particular 
spotlight. I’ve potentially cut myself off from new readers, and it’s likely 
I’ve made people angry too. There may be repercussions – I hope not. But I’ve 
drawn my line in the sand, and this is it. My actions need to be as loud as my 
words.
 