
Is the sky light or dark? asked Sir Philip Green at one point. From the point 
of view of BHS pensioners, it’s lighter than it was at the start of the 
session. Greenhas offered to do his best to find a solution to the pensions 
shortfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/bhs-pension-problems-can-be-solved-sir-philip-green-tells-mps>
. It’s a problem he regards as resolvable and he’s working on a proposal with 
the Pensions Regulator and Pension Protection Fund.

Jolly good, but there was no detail of what Green’s idea was, or how much it 
would cost him, or what sum might still fall on the PPF, which is funded by a 
levy on solvent defined-benefit schemes.

BHS pension problems can be solved, Sir Philip Green tells MPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/bhs-pension-problems-can-be-solved-sir-philip-green-tells-mps>
Would this offer have been forthcoming if Green hadn’t been hauled before 
parliament, or if the outside world had not picked over Green’s sale ofBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> last year for £1 to the 
thrice-bankrupt Dominic Chappell? Impossible to know, but Green’s stance is 
that he knew he would be responsible for the pension deficit. “We always knew 
ultimately that we would have to deal with it,” he said.

The puzzle, though, is why Green’s alarm over the pension situation arrived so 
late in his ownership of BHS. It was only in 2012 that he took a keen interest. 
Before that, he took a hands-off approach, relying on the pensions trustees and 
their expensive advisers to do their job.

“There has to be some responsibility on behalf of trustees,” said Green. True, 
but a sponsoring company is the one that has to write the cheques. One would 
have expected Green to be on top of a problem that could end up being very 
expensive for him.

The unanswered question – currently being investigated – is why Green regarded 
Chappell as a suitable owner of BHS. The answer, let’s hope, will be more 
enlightened than a morning session in which Green has spent as much time 
avoiding questions as answering them.
 