
Throughout her presidential campaign, Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> has said that she 
supports the second amendment rights of law-abiding gun owners.


But many gun rights advocates say they fear she will reopen the door for 
cities and states toban private ownership  
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/policies/constitution-and-second-amendment/>of 
handguns, pointing to her repeated comments questioning a key US supreme court 
decision on gun ownership. Even liberal second amendment experts have called 
some of Clinton’s explanations of her position “odd”.

As one law professor who supports gun rights put it, Clinton on guns is like a 
Republican politician who claims she supports abortion rights, even as she 
opposes Roe v Wade.

At the final presidential debate last week, Clinton reiterated her position 
that the supreme court was wrong in its 2008 decision in District of Columbia v 
Heller, which overturned Washington DC’s ban on handgun ownership, as well as a 
law that required other guns in homes to be “kept nonfunctional”.
Gun Nation 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/docs-4×3-card/embed.html> 
In a controversial 5-4 decision, the court ruled that Americans have a 
constitutional right to have and use firearms in their homes for self-defense.

Clinton had dodged giving a clear answer 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/DemocraticDebate/story?id=4670271&page=1> about 
her opinion of the ongoing case during a presidential primary debate in early 
2008, though she suggested that the supreme court would probably find a full 
ban on handguns unconstitutional. But in 2015, theWashington Free Beacon 
reported 
<http://freebeacon.com/politics/leaked-audio-clinton-says-supreme-court-is-wrong-on-second-amendment/>
, Clinton told an audience at a private event that “the supreme court is wrong 
on the second amendment. And I am going to make that case every chance I get.”


That’s an opinion that is shared by many people – including some of the 
liberal justices on the supreme court, whoargued 
<https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/07pdf/07-290.pdf> in their dissent that 
the second amendment was intended to protect the right of people in each state 
to form militias, not to limit lawmakers’ ability to regulate civilian gun 
ownership.

But that particular view is not one that is popular with the general public. A 
Gallup poll from 2008 found that73% of Americans 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/105721/public-believes-americans-right-own-guns.aspx>
 believed the second amendment “guarantees the rights of Americans to own guns”.

Publicly, Clinton has stopped short of calling for the supreme court to 
reverse itself – she told Fox News in July that shedid not want 
<http://www.foxnews.com/transcript/2016/07/31/hillary-clinton-on-tight-race-accusations-against-trump/>
 to see the Heller decision overturned. During last week’s debate, she said 
that she supports “an individual right to bear arms”.

But Clinton’s comments questioning Heller have given the National Rifle 
Association and Donald Trump continuing fuel for their argument that what she 
really wants to do is overturn Heller and re-open the door for cities and 
states to “ban private gun ownership”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fgun-control-reform-maine-hillary-clinton-nra&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20firearm-loving%20Maine%20could%20defeat%20the%20gun%20lobby%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fgun-control-reform-maine-hillary-clinton-nra>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20firearm-loving%20Maine%20could%20defeat%20the%20gun%20lobby%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fgun-control-reform-maine-hillary-clinton-nra&media=>
How firearm-loving Maine could defeat the gun lobby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/05/gun-control-reform-maine-hillary-clinton-nra>
The argument Clinton has made repeatedly – including at last week’s debate – 
is that she disagrees with the supreme court ruling because of her concern that 
it might undermine the ability of states and cities to pass safe storage laws 
to keep guns away from children, as well as other “reasonable regulation”.

“I disagreed with the way the court applied the second amendment in that case, 
because what the District of Columbia was trying to do was to protect toddlers 
from guns and so they wanted people with guns to safely store them,” Clinton 
said. “And the court didn’t accept that reasonable regulation.”

It’s an explanation that fits Clinton’s narrative of being a champion of 
children’s safety. But several attempts to challenge safe storage laws in court 
after the Heller decision have failed, most recently in California in 
2015,according to Adam Skaggs, the litigation director at the Law Center to 
Prevent Gun Violence.

That San Francisco safe storage law was very similar to DC’s previous storage 
requirements, but it included an explicit exemption for self-defense, Skaggs 
said.

Clinton’s other stated gun control priorities – including expanded background 
checks on gun sales, a federal ban on assault weapons, and tightening 
restrictions on gun ownership by domestic abusers – are not currently 
threatened by the Heller decision.

NRA to spend $15m on ads to defeat Hillary Clinton in key states
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/16/nra-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-gun-control>
Clinton’s campaign has not responded to repeated requests over the past six 
months to clarify whether or not she believes that cities and states should be 
allowed to ban handguns.

Her campaign has accused her rival, Donald Trump, of “conspiracy theories 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-05-20/hillary-clinton-believes-pivotal-gun-rights-ruling-was-wrong-adviser-says>
” and “peddling falsehoods” when he claimed that she wanted “abolish” the 
second amendment and “take your guns away”.

Since 2008, the country’s largest gun control groups have moved on from the 
fight over the controversial Heller decision, arguing that the “commonsense” 
gun laws they support are fully consistent with the supreme court’s ruling that 
Americans have the right to have guns in the home for self-defense.

Two of the largest national gun control groups, the Brady Campaign to Prevent 
Gun Violence and the Michael Bloomberg-backed Everytown for Gun Safety, both 
said in July that the Heller decision was completely compatible with the gun 
legislation they support.

“Everytown supports the right of law-abiding gun owners to have a gun in the 
home for self-defense, as articulated in Heller,” Everytown’s legal director, 
Elizabeth Avore, said in a statement in July. “Nothing in the decision is 
inconsistent with commonsense laws to prevent gun violence.”

While Heller was a crucial symbolic victory for gun rights advocates in terms 
of constitutional interpretation, it has had little impact on the country’s 
broader landscape of gun laws. Lower courts have upheld the vast majority of 
gun control laws challenged under Heller.

It’s not clear why Clinton has taken a more aggressive line in questioning 
Heller than mainstream gun control groups have done.

In May, one of Clinton’s senior policy advisers told Bloomberg Politics 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-05-20/hillary-clinton-believes-pivotal-gun-rights-ruling-was-wrong-adviser-says>
: “In overturning Washington DC’s safe storage law, Clinton worries that Heller 
may open the door to overturning thoughtful, common sense safety measures in 
the future,” Maya Harris said in an emailed statement to Bloomberg Politics.

Eugene Volokh, a UCLA law professor and prominent gun rights supporter, said 
Clinton may be “boxed in” by her previous statements about Heller.

“I think the arguments she’s making sound like ways to try to minimize the 
damage to her from past statements,” he said.

Volokh and Alan Gura, the attorney who successfully argued the Heller case in 
front of the supreme court, both said they doubted Clinton’s claim that she 
truly supports an individual right to gun ownership.

“If you were to say, ‘I support abortion rights, but I’m for overturning Roe v 
Wade and Planned Parenthood v Casey, then what kind of abortion rights are you 
supporting?” Volokh said.

Gura called Clinton’s endorsement of an individual right “meaningless”.

“You can regulate things out of existence and can still pretend that you 
support the underlying right.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fhillary-clinton-gun-rights-second-amendment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe046135a20b69696f185fc6f172e1afc843083ce%2F0_180_3578_2148%2F3578.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20gun%20rights%20advocates%20don't%20trust%20Clinton%20on%20the%20second%20amendment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fhillary-clinton-gun-rights-second-amendment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20gun%20rights%20advocates%20don%27t%20trust%20Clinton%20on%20the%20second%20amendment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fhillary-clinton-gun-rights-second-amendment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe046135a20b69696f185fc6f172e1afc843083ce%2F0_180_3578_2148%2F3578.jpg>
 The constitutional right of Americans to bear arms has become a flashpoint in 
the presidential contest between Clinton and Trump. Photograph: 
Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Saul Cornell, a legal historian and second amendment expert at Fordham 
University, said it was fair for gun rights advocates to question if Clinton 
wanted to ban handguns, but doubted that she would actually take such an 
extreme position.


“If that was, in fact, what she wanted, she is way out of line with the 
mainstream thinking on this question, both jurisprudentially and public 
policy-wise, which would be very odd for her,” Cornell said. Clinton tended to 
hew to mainstream liberal policy positions, not stake out bold stances, he said.

“The more likely explanation is there’s some confusion here.” 

But Clinton’s debate-night description of the Heller case as being about 
trying “to protect toddlers from guns” did not help her, Cornell said.

The candidate could have made plenty of valid critiques of Heller. 

Instead, Cornell said, “she went for what was the most focus-grouped, 
simplistic analysis, and that played right into the hands of people who were 
saying she was being disingenuous.”

Fact-checkers have largely given Clinton the benefit 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/may/11/donald-trump/donald-trump-falsely-claims-hillary-clinton-wants-/>
of the doubt 
<http://www.factcheck.org/2016/05/trump-distorts-clintons-gun-stance/> on her 
sometimes dodgy 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/06/05/hillary-clinton-wavers-on-second-amendment-right-to-bear-arms/>
 statements about the second amendment – a choice that may have helped fuel 
conservative perceptions that the media has been biased against Trump and for 
Clinton.

At the same time, the NRA has given the candidate no benefit of the doubt. 

“The gun rights community always needs somebody to vilify, and Hillary Clinton 
is the obvious candidate. In that respect, it doesn’t really matter what she 
says on the issue,” said Robert Spitzer, a political scientist who has written 
extensively on America’s gun debate.

The NRA has agued that the second amendment is on the ballot in 2016, since 
the next president will get to nominate a supreme court justice to replace 
Antonin Scalia, a gun rights champion and the author of the Heller decision, 
who died in February.

Asked about Clinton’s assertion that she believes in an individual right to 
own guns, an NRA spokeswoman said that “those words ring hollow” and that 
Clinton “can’t have it both ways”.

“She believes that the supreme court got it wrong on Heller, which means she 
does not believe you have an individual right to own a firearm in your home for 
self-protection,” Jennifer Baker said after last week’s debate.

Clinton’s opinion on the second amendment may ultimately be less consequential 
than gun rights advocates fear, or than liberals might hope. Among second 
amendment scholars, the most common opinion is that even a supreme court with 
several Clinton appointees is unlikely to overturn the Heller decision 
completely, though it might try to water down the full implications of the 
ruling.

Adam Winkler, a UCLA law professor who wrote a book on the Heller case, said 
earlier this year that it was lack of political support in Congress and in 
statehouses, not the supreme court’s Heller decision, that was standing in the 
way of progress on new gun laws.

“Overturning Heller would be a huge mistake. There’s a real possibility of a 
backlash,” he said. “The gun rights movement is very well organized in all 50 
states. If the court were to overturn Heller there would a very rapid response 
by the National Rifle Association for a constitutional amendment strengthening 
gun rights.”
 