
The dealmakers behind the proposed mega-merger of AT&T and Time Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/time-warner> have accomplished the 
impossible: uniting Hillary Clinton, Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders in their 
condemnation of the deal.


Trump, needless to say, has been the most vituperative. The merger would “
destroy democracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/23/trump-att-time-warner-deal-clinton-kaine>
”, he said. But pretty much everyone in Washington has publicly come out 
against it. Sanders, Clinton’s opponent for the Democratic nomination and now 
campaigning on her behalf, is alreadypreparing to battle a future Clinton 
administration 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2016/10/25/sanders-we-must-do-everything-possible-to-press-clinton-on-att-time-warner/>
 to ensure that anti-trust regulators turn thumbs-down on the deal. Lining up 
beside him? Powerhouse senator Elizabeth Warren.

The two companies and their bankers must feel that they have walked straight 
into a buzzsaw. The Senate will hold a hearing on it on 7 December, after the 
election. Will tempers have cooled by then? Maybe, maybe not.

So, what on earth drove Time Warner and AT&T to sprint to the altar during an 
election season in which populist politicians are dominating the airwaves and 
the debate? Insanity? Desperation? A sense that there was an opportunity that 
was just too good to pass up? Or simply an urge to annoy the politicians?


The word to bear in mind might simply be “panic”.

It’s no shock to anyone who keeps an eye on these worlds that companies that 
distribute all the content that we consume, and the companies that produce it 
(translation: AT&T as the party of the first part, and Time Warner as the party 
of the second part) have avested interest in forging alliances among themselves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/att-time-warner-acquisition-customer-service-impact>
. The closer and more seamless those alliances are, the faster and more 
creatively they can work on developing and delivering more of that content for 
all our devices, especially those smartphones and tablets from which we are 
unable to wean ourselves.

Those that get it right have captive audiences simply because they are 
delivering a growing proportion of that content. It’s an enticing prospect.

Analysts have been expecting that we’d see yet another wave of convergence – a 
buzzword in this media/telecommunications universe for the better part of two 
decades now, having been behind the merger that formed Time Warner itself in 
1995 – for several years.

This time, it’s happening in different ways, not always via mergers. Apple and 
Time Warner’s HBO have linked their brands already, with Apple distributing the 
HBO Now service. Imaginewhat might happen 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/stephen-rosa/apple-and-hbo-think-diffe_b_10279702.html>
 if Apple – with its cash mountain – decided to snap up HBO’s parent company, 
Time Warner, and pursue the myriad potential synergies between its own 
platforms and Time Warner’s content?

I suspect it’s safe to say that the folks at AT&T did just that – and panicked.

Or else they considered what might happen if another giant rival with the 
potential to build a mammoth platform and plenty of cash – like Google, which 
has already pushed into live-TV streaming – pre-empted them. Or they allowed 
companies like Amazon or Netflix to get further ahead with their own plans.

Facing that kind of strategic risk, a little bit of political risk may not 
look like anything terribly threatening. Sure, the politicians may indulge in a 
lot of saber rattling for the benefit of voters, especially since the deal was 
announced in the final days of the presidential election campaign. But it will 
be many months before regulators will rule on it – even if a deep-pocketed 
rival doesn’t muscle in and outbid AT&T for Time Warner.

Will the public outrage endure? The dealmakers and the board members at both 
companies seem to be making a calculated decision that the answer is “no”.

That seems optimistic. We already pay far more 
<http://www.pbs.org/newshour/updates/internet-u-s-compare-globally-hint-slower-expensive/>
 than citizens in most other parts of the world for basic broadband access, 
thanks to the fact that most communities offer very limited options to their 
citizens. Most telecommunications services are equally pricey, relative to 
those offered elsewhere, frommobile phones 
<https://www.billshark.com/u-s-mobile-plans-expensive/> to cable television 
services. The number ofcord-cutters 
<http://www.economist.com/news/business/21702177-television-last-having-its-digital-revolution-moment-cutting-cord>
 continue to grow.

What will AT&T's acquisition of Time Warner mean for customers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/att-time-warner-acquisition-customer-service-impact>
The two companies have an idea of what they’ll do to keep their own customers 
loyal. “Premium content always wins,” said Randall Stephenson, CEO and chairman 
of AT&T, in the company’s press release announcing the transaction. “We’ll have 
the world’s best premium content with the networks to deliver it to every 
screen. A big customer pain point is paying for content once but not being able 
to access it on any device, anywhere. Our goal is to solve that.”

At what price, though? Stephenson does refer to delivering “value” to 
customers, and certainly, you can expect to hear Time Warner and AT&T insist 
that because their proposed match is a “vertical” merger rather than a 
“horizontal” one, this should pose less of an antitrust threat. In other words, 
consumers won’t see prices soar as a result of reduced competition.

In a horizontal transaction, two companies that compete to provide roughly the 
same kind of services or goods (think, Cox Communications and Comcast), merge 
and become one, meaning that there are fewer entities involved in setting 
prices for content as purchasers, or for services as providers. In a vertical 
transaction, such as the proposed merger, companies that are in different parts 
of the business (in this case, content and distribution) join forces.

But in markets where competition is already restricted – such as, say, the 
internet – price increases could be a result of even vertical mergers. That’s 
the conclusion of studies by one economist, John Kwoka of Northeastern 
University, who found that of the 1,000 mergers of all kinds that he evaluated 
over the last two decades,at least a third generated price increases in excess 
of 10% <http://fortune.com/2016/10/25/att-time-warner-blocked/>. A remarkable 
80% of them raised prices to consumers to some degree; the average increase was 
about 7%.

Ponder that, antitrust regulators.

There are plenty of ways in which this could happen. For instance, all of the 
programming that Time Warner produces could suddenly become unavailable to 
competitors to the newly merged entity’s rival distributors, except at a much 
higher price. You have an AT&T smartphone and want to watch the latest episode 
of Game of Thrones? Congrats – you can do so on any device you own for half the 
price you’d pay if you have a Verizon phone and want to watch on your iPad.

It’s up to the politicians not just to be blowhards about the deal or threaten 
to axe it. Consumers may end up with great, efficiently delivered and fairly 
priced content as a result of mergers like the one that AT&T and Time Warner 
are proposing. The trick is to ensure how that potential is realized. Will the 
regulators do their job?

That’s why what happens in the weeks following the election is going to be so 
crucial. Who will the new president choose to advise her (or him) on issues 
like commerce and telecommunications? Who will (s)he tap for membership on the 
Federal Trade Commission (which governs antitrust issues) and the Federal 
Communications Commission (which oversees telecommunications policy, and of 
whichthe next president must name a new chairman 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/26/technology/chief-who-sharpened-fccs-teeth-faces-final-hurdles.html>
), two of the key regulators associated with this industry?

Regulators have the ability to lay down the law and make the deal much more 
consumer-friendly in any number of ways, demanding (for instance) that the new 
company make HBO shows available more readily via apps or streaming, meaning 
that we wouldn’t be forced to sign up for costly packages.

For once, all the heated political rhetoric might come in useful, if it 
ensures that the regulators keep their eye on the ball. I wish I was confident 
that the attention span of outraged politicians was as long as that of the 
strategic thinkers and panicky dealmakers – but I’m not.
 