
Adapting a book is a sure-fire way of discovering its strengths and 
weaknesses. Its plot must prove truly dramatic; dialogue must not only ring 
true but reveal character and advance the action. Robert Louis Stevenson’sSouth 
Sea Tales, broadcast this weekend starring David Tennant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/david-tennant>, are my 10th foray into 
adapting for Radio 4’sClassic Serial 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qfz6/episodes/player> slot – after novels 
byEdith Wharton <https://www.theguardian.com/books/edithwharton>, Dodie Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/may/31/featuresreviews.guardianreview25>
 andJohn Wyndham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/dec/20/john-wyndham-unread-bestseller>
 – and I have never felt more privileged to be let loose on another writer’s 
work.

Both The Beach at Falesá 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Beach_of_Fales%C3%A1> and The Ebb Tide 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ebb-Tide> (novellas, in fact, at 70 pages 
and 131 pages respectively) were written while Stevenson lived in Samoa, from 
1890-94, in the final years of his short life. He brought to them all the 
literary skills he had developed over his career as a bestselling writer, but 
beyond technique and confidence, these tales have a savage political and moral 
engagement, a real-world vision, and a black humour that is more distilled here 
than in anything else he wrote.

His attitudes to the indigenous people, who included cannibals, differed 
widely from that of most other white visitors

Stevenson and his wife, Fanny, set off for the South Seas in 1888, when he 
knew he was under sentence of death. He’d been suffering lung haemorrhages for 
years and doctors advised a warmer climate. Exploring the islands gave him a 
new energy and engaged his passionate curiosity about the islanders, both 
colonisers and colonised. From the start, his attitudes to the indigenous 
people, who included cannibals, differed widely from those of most other 
Europeans. In his journalism about his travels, he reveals that he found many 
resemblances between them and Scottish highlanders and islanders of the 18th 
century:
 In both cases an alien authority enforced, the clans disarmed, the chiefs 
deposed, new customs introduced, and chiefly that of regarding money as the 
means and object of existence … Hospitality, tact, natural fine manners and a 
touchy punctilio are common to both races: common to both tongues the trick of 
dropping medial consonants … 
Stevenson, Fanny and numerous relatives, visitors and Polynesians settled in 
an estate he named Vailima in 1890. He learned to read and speak the language. 
His increasing knowledge of, and involvement in, island politics, and 
his back-breaking work clearing paths through the jungle on the estate, fed 
into the fiction he wrote there. It was fiction so different fromKidnapped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/03/100-best-novels-kidnapped-robert-louis-stevenson>
 orDr Jekyll and Mr Hyde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/aug/16/ian-rankin-dr-jekyll-mr-hyde> 
that his fans were dismayed, and Oscar Wilde wrote: “I see that romantic 
surroundings are the worst surroundings possible for a romantic writer.”

The Beach at Falesá tells the story of trader, Wiltshire, who is welcomed by 
another white trader on the island, Case, and offered a native wife, Uma. Case 
organises a grotesque parody of a wedding between Wiltshire and Uma, and feigns 
ignorance when Wiltshire finds himself instantly tabooed. No one on the island 
will trade with him. Gradually the truth emerges. Case has driven other traders 
from the island and even helped to kill a couple of them; the natives are in 
thrall to him, convinced he has devilish powers. Blunt, racist, atheist 
Wiltshire is an unlikely hero, but he is revealed to be both decent and 
courageous, and he falls in love with Uma, who is herself extraordinarily 
brave. Stevenson’s depiction of a strong, intelligent native woman is based on 
observation; in his journalism he reports that power inSamoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/samoa> resided in rank, not gender.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwhy-robert-louis-stevensons-south-sea-tales-go-against-the-tides%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd420d2c274d3206d9b0682edc77fd8b795d63687%2F0_0_3733_2731%2F3733.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Robert%20Louis%20Stevenson%E2%80%99s%20South%20Sea%20Tales%20go%20against%20the%20tides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwhy-robert-louis-stevensons-south-sea-tales-go-against-the-tides%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Robert%20Louis%20Stevenson%E2%80%99s%20South%20Sea%20Tales%20go%20against%20the%20tides&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwhy-robert-louis-stevensons-south-sea-tales-go-against-the-tides%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd420d2c274d3206d9b0682edc77fd8b795d63687%2F0_0_3733_2731%2F3733.jpg>
 Real-world vision … Stevenson, seated centre, with the Vailima household. 
Photograph: Rischgitz/Getty Images 
It is Wiltshire who relates the story, opening with: “I saw that island first 
when it was neither night nor morning. The moon was to the west, setting, but 
still broad and bright. To the east, and right amidships of the dawn, which was 
all pink, the daystar sparkled like a diamond ...”, beautifully setting up the 
conflicts to come: night and day, dark and light, death and love. In a letter 
to his close friend Colvin, Stevenson called it “the first realistic South Seas 
story; I mean with real South Sea character and details of life”. It is 
fascinating to trace that realism back to actual events described in his and 
Fanny’s journals. In the Gilbert islands a native woman proudly displayed her 
marriage certificate to them. It stated that she was “married for one night” 
and that her white “husband was at liberty to send her to hell the next 
morning”. Uma’s marriage certificate, which she guards jealously, contains the 
same wording, and as Wiltshire falls in love with her it gnaws at his 
conscience sufficiently for him to request a proper marriage by a missionary. 
Similarly, Case’s “Devil-Church” in the bush terrifies natives with a glowing 
devil’s face, just as Fanny frightened thieves away nightly from her piglets by 
painting a hideous mask in luminous paint on a cask lid.

Attwater is the most villainous villain you are likely to meet this side of 
Kurtz

Stevenson’s letters record that The Ebb Tide, published two years later, was 
painfully difficult to write, and although it still contains glints of comedy, 
the story is dark indeed. Three down-and-outs are malingering on the beach at
Papeete <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Papeete>, scrounging food from 
Polynesian sailors. Davis is a disgraced US sea captain, Huish a thieving 
cockney, Herrick an Oxford-educated failure. Their fortunes are reversed when 
Davis is given captaincy of a schooner that no one else will touch because the 
captain and mate have died of smallpox. Our three desperadoes set sail with a 
Polynesian crew, and are soon tucking into the cargo of champagne and 
squabbling horribly. Their plans to steal the ship are thwarted by a shortage 
of stores, and they put in at a private island where they find a “huge, 
dangerous-looking fellow. His manners and movements, like fire in flint, 
betrayed his European ancestry”. He is Attwater, the most villainous villain 
you are likely to meet this side of Kurtz (I am not alone in thinking Joseph 
Conrad may owe the older and, at that time, more successful Stevenson something 
of a debt forHeart of Darkness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/28/100-best-novels-heart-of-darkness-joseph-conrad>
). Attwater has combined missionary zeal with ruthless efficiency in running a 
pearl fishery, and 29 of his 32 slaves have recently died of smallpox. The 
dinner to which he invites his three guests is a masterpiece of suspense, over 
which he presides with veiled menace. “A cat o fhuge growth sat on his shoulder 
purring, and occasionally, with a deft paw, capturing a morsel in the air.” (A 
prototype for Blofeld?) Here’s a morsel of dialogue from that dinner. The 
conversation has turned to Attwater’s method of slave-driving.
 “Wait a bit,” said the captain. “I’m out of my depth. How was this? Do you 
mean to say you did it single‑handed?”
“One did it single-handed,” said Attwater, “because there was nobody to help 
one.”
“’Ope you made ’em jump,” said Huish. 
“When it was necessary, Mr Whish, I made them jump.” 
Herrick, the Hamlet of the piece, paralysed by indecision, listens in silence. 
Note the captain’s drowning figure of speech, Attwater’s upper-crust “one”, and 
his insulting mispronunciation of Huish’s name. As for Huish, his accent is 
written in.

Snobbery, the greed and cruelty of white people, religious hypocrisy and the 
casual destruction of native cultures and lives are all grist to Stevenson’s 
mill. Yet he succeeds in exploring these dark themes in tales of high drama and 
suspense, with wicked humour and an infectious open-heartedness towards all his 
characters. They are exposed, but rarely judged.

• The Beach at Falesá <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0848rl2> is on Radio 4 
at 9pm on 10 December andThe Ebb Tide <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b084tl7z>
 at 3pm on 11 December. Jane Rogers’s latest novel is Conrad and Eleanor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/10/conrad-and-elanor-by-jane-rogers-review>
.
 