



Danny DeVito: ‘Do all you can to make sure Donald Trump doesn’t become 
president’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/30/danny-devito-on-todd-solondz-and-weiner-dog>
The funniest shot in Todd Solondz’s bleak comedy Wiener-Dog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/wiener-dog> comes early on: a lovingly 
confected tracking shot, reminiscent of similar ones throughout the work of 
Andrei Tarkovsky. Except that, instead of capturing a body of water containing 
meaningful bits of Tarkovskian detritus, Solondz’s cameraman Ed Lachman brings 
all his skill – and some exquisite Chopin-style piano – to bear on a lengthy 
trail of bright orange dachshund diarrhoea. Much as we might expect from the 
acerbic, pessimistic director of Welcome To The Dollhouse.

Cinematic snobs will also note Wiener-Dog’s structural affinities with Robert 
Bresson’s Au Hasard Balthazar, in which a Christ-like donkey endures the seven 
deadly sins and a lonely, very French-Catholic death on a hillside, surrounded 
by sheep. In Wiener-Dog, there is the same succession of indifferent, brutish 
or over-indulgent owners, with the titular hound as a more obvious 
pass-the-parcel narrative device – but with a far less exultant end for our 
beast of burden (dog-lovers are duly warned).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYQsob7h4uDA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYQsob7h4uDA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYQsob7h4uDA&media=>
Todd Solondz: ‘There may be a line I shouldn’t cross – I don’t know where it 
is’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/24/todd-solondz-interview-wiener-dog>
Solondz’s impassive, deadpan dachshund floats from one faux-family to another 
after we first meet her at her sad adoption shelter. She is variously named 
“Doo-doo” and “Cancer” by those owners – Greta Gerwig, Ellen Burstyn – who can 
be bothered. Her stoicism and dependency are set against the angry, broken 
people who adopt her, the usual carnival of Solondz weirdos, creeps, victims 
and losers. As she sits silently among them, they play their human power games, 
make each other miserable, use one another and ignore their pet-owning 
responsibilities.

“It’s a kind of civilising – so they act like humans,” says one character of 
the process of housebreaking the dog. Given how the humans in the movie behave, 
you have to see this as an abusive development, or simply as evidence that 
Solondz’s mordant misanthropy hasn’t faded one iota.

And that misanthropy, which often feels unearned, even faintly pornographic, 
is for me an abiding issue with Solondz’s work. He likes to press his thumb 
into all our freshest emotional bruises, with diminishing results as the movie 
rolls along – and perhaps likewise in his career as a whole. Here, his lightest 
touches are the most pleasing, from a witty Incredible Journey-style montage of 
a cross-country canine trudge during an audacious fake “Intermission” sequence, 
to the credits font lifted from John Waters’s Desperate Living.

But among the unhappy humans, Solondz seems trapped, wallowing in the same 
miserabilist whirlpool of his own devising, with no noticeable cinematic growth.



 