
Noor Salman, the widow of the gunman who killed 49 people at Pulse nightclub 
in Orlando, has been charged with aiding and abetting the attack and 
obstruction of justice.

Salman, wife of Omar Mateen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/14/orlando-shooter-omar-mateen-was-a-regular-at-nightclub>
, who was killed in a shootout with police during the 12 June 2016attack at the 
popular LGBT night club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/14/latino-hispanic-orlando-shooting-victims>
 in Florida, wasarrested in northern California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/pulse-nightclub-shooting-orlando-omar-mateen-wife-arrested>
 on Monday and appeared in court in Oakland on Tuesday morning.

Salman, who has claimed she had no knowledge of her husband’s plans, is 
accused of engaging in “misleading conduct” toward local officers and FBI 
agents, according to afederal indictment 
<https://www.justice.gov/usao-mdfl/press-release/file/926691/download> unsealed 
on Tuesday.

The grand jury charges, filed in US district court in Florida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida>, said she knowingly aided and 
abetted Mateen in his provision of “material support or resources” to Isis, 
“knowing that the organization was designated as a terrorist organization”.

Linda Moreno, Salman’s lawyer, disputed the charges in a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/pulse-nightclub-shooting-orlando-omar-mateen-wife-arrested>
 on Monday, saying she “had no foreknowledge nor could she predict what Omar 
Mateen intended to do that tragic night”.

Moreno added, “Noor has told her story of abuse at his hands. We believe it is 
misguided and wrong to prosecute her and that it dishonors the memories of the 
victims to punish an innocent person.”

Salman said <https://twitter.com/SButlerWFTV/status/821417405226176512> little 
during her appearance in Oakland, and outside of the courtroom, her uncletold 
reporters <https://twitter.com/mgafni/status/821417609404895233>, “She’s a very 
soft, sweet girl” who cared deeply about her son, adding: “I know she’s 
innocent.”

The FBI questioned Salman after the shooting, but did not file any charges. 
It’s unclear what new information officials have gathered seven months later.

Salman and Mateen, who were both born in the US, met on a dating website in 
2011, and Salman has said her husband was violent toward her. After the 
shooting,she told a reporter that Mateen had pulled her hair 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/02/us/politics/orlando-shooting-omar-mateen-noor-salman.html>
, choked her and threatened to kill her.

Immediately after the tragedy, considered the deadliest mass shooting in 
modern US history, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/12/orlando-nightclub-deadliest-mass-shooting-terrorism>
 there were questions aboutwhether Salman knew anything of Mateen’s plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/14/orlando-shooting-pulse-nightclub-omar-mateen-wife>
 to target Pulse, a club herhusband had allegedly visited before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/14/orlando-shooter-omar-mateen-was-a-regular-at-nightclub>
.

Mateen’s father said his son had strong anti-gay feelings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/orlando-gunmans-father-condemns-atrocity-but-says-punishment-for-gay-people-is-up-to-god>
, recounting an incident in which he became angry when he saw two men kissing 
in Miami while out with his wife and son.

Salman is the child of Palestinian immigrants and was born in San Pablo 
<http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-orlando-noor-salman-20160615-snap-story.html>
, a city in the Bay Area just north of Oakland.

In 911 calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/20/omar-mateen-911-calls-orlando-shooting-fbi-release-isis>
 recorded during the attack, Mateen, a security guard in Fort Pierce, said he 
was an “Islamic soldier”, but the CIA said it did not find anydirect link 
between the gunman and the terror organization 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/16/cia-orlando-shooter-omar-mateen-isis-pulse-nightclub-attack>
.

Mateen’s previous wife, Sitora Yusifiy, divorced him after four months and 
told reporters after the shooting that hebeat her and held her hostage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/orlando-massacre-omar-mateens-ex-wife-says-he-beat-her-and-held-her-hostage>
. She also said he had mental health issues and was “obviously disturbed, 
deeply, and traumatized”.

The shooting, which killed many queer people of color 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/18/orlando-latino-lgbt-media-whitewash>
 and left 53 people injured, reignited debates about firearms and national 
security in America, though subsequent efforts topass stricter gun laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/20/senate-gun-control-vote-orlando-shooting>
 were unsuccessful.
 