
Amber Rudd’s “new model” for the UK’s energy market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/18/energy-policy-shift-climate-change-amber-rudd-backburner>
 looks very like the old model. It is a mix of the legally necessary, the 
uncertain and the expensive.

At least it was served with an amusing garnish – the idea that government will 
one day be able to step back and let market forces supply the nation’s energy 
needs. Pull the other one. In the age of nuclear, renewables and 
internationally binding targets for reducing carbon dioxide emissions, energy 
infrastructure only gets built when the government agrees subsidies and sets 
economic incentives.Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> 
secretaries will be in the “reset” game for years.

The necessary part of Rudd’s policy was the headline-grabber: the closure of 
the UK’s fleet of coal-fired stations by 2025, with restricted running to 
operate from 2023.Coal <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coal> is a 
dirty fuel and stopping its use is the surest way for the government to meet 
its carbon-reduction targets without breaking the law. As Peter Atherton, 
analyst at Jefferies, pointed out, closure in the middle of the next decade has 
been assumed in government planning for years.

The uncertain – or, more generously, ambitious – element is building enough 
gas-fired power stations to replace coal and ensure security of supply. How 
will it happen? “We need to get the right signals in the electricity market,” 
said Rudd. “We are already consulting on how to improve the capacity market. 
And after this year’s auction we will take stock and ensure it delivers the gas 
we need.” Those vague sentences hint at many government interventions.

The capacity market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/04/mps-slam-capacity-market-scheme-for-raising-energy-costs>
 is the mechanism via which suppliers are paid to be there, regardless of 
whether their power is required (for example, on days when wind or solar are 
supplying more of the mix). The problem is that the current payments, and 
current wholesale power prices, are too low to prompt mass construction of 
gas-fired stations. A commitment to close coal stations should, as Rudd argued, 
encourage more investment in gas but it will not guarantee it. Higher capacity 
payments – and thus higher bills for consumers – will have to be agreed.

But that is not the most expensive part. That is nuclear. Hinkley Point in 
Somerset, as everybody knows by now,will be the most expensive power station 
built anywhere in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/29/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-station-cost-customers-4bn>
, with its output priced at twice the current wholesale price and linked to 
inflation for 35 years. One fears Hinkley has set a benchmark for the financing 
of all the other new nuclear power stations Rudd envisages. If her line about 
being “tough on subsidies” applies to nuclear, and not just renewables, it will 
be astonishing.

Ladbrokes merger isn’t everyone’s favourite

Dermot Desmond, the Irish billionaire, has left it very late – probably too 
late – to whip up a rebellion among fellow Ladbrokes shareholders against the 
proposed merger with Gala Coral.But he makes some excellent arguments for why 
this is “the wrong deal” for Ladbrokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/18/ladbrokes-coral-merger-wrong-deal-says-dermot-desmond>
.

First, both companies can’t know how much damage will be inflicted by the 
Competition and Markets Authority, whose predecessor body blocked the same 
transaction in 1998. The internet, and mobile apps, have changed the betting 
landscape since then butLadbrokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> and Coral are still the second 
and third largest players on the high street.

Thus there will be forced disposals of shops – Desmond quotes estimates of 
between 400 and 1,000 – and Ladbrokes will likely have to sell at less than the 
implied purchase price in the Coral deal. The buyers will be direct competitors.

Second, Coral brings £2.2bn of debt, which will bust Ladbrokes’ traditional 
borrowing thresholds. With some justification, Desmond says the real winners 
are Coral’s private equity owners. Third, the merger triggers a £75m payment to 
Playtech, partner for both companies’ digital operations. In one swipe, a 
year’s planned cost savings will be consumed, and Playtech gets to negotiate a 
new technology agreement.

The case for the defence is that greater size brings greater opportunity to 
invest, not least in Ladbrokes’ perennially misfiring online business. That’s 
one reason why the board will probably win next week’s vote. Another is that 
Desmond’s call for Ladbrokes to explore “strategic options ... in a very active 
mergers and acquisitions market” sounds too wishy-washy. During the long 
descent of Ladbrokes’ share price under chairman Peter Erskine and former chief 
executive Richard Glynn, no bidder emerged.

Yet, on the pure analysis on the deal, the market seems to share Desmond’s low 
opinion. A 16% drop in Ladbrokes’ share price since the merger announcement is 
damning.
 