
When the BBC brings Blandings Castle 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/comedy/2012/02/blandings-is-coming.shtml> and its 
inhabitants to the screen tomorrow, another skirmish in the Sunday night period 
drama ratings war with ITV, it will trespass on a much-loved suburb of paradise 
and almost certainly massacre some innocents.

The new show, directed by Paul Seed (Just William) 
<http://justwilliamonline.co.uk/page21.htm>, stars Timothy Spall and Jennifer 
Saunders; it has been written by Guy Andrews, whose credits includeLost in 
Austen <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RtMGODiaS7U> and Absolute Power 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/absolutepower/>, and it will adapt some treasured 
English comic prose for the first time in nearly 50 years, in fact sinceRalph 
Richardson starred in a Blandings series in 1967 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0154239/>. The task the new team faces is an 
almost impossible one: to capture the butterfly of Wodehousean comedy and 
translate it to a different genre without damaging its ethereal fragility.Fry 
and Laurie pulled this off withJeeves and Wooster 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Rt2HT0b62w>, but Blandings will be a far more 
delicate operation.

Blandings Castle is one of those pastoral shrines in English literature whose 
characters – Lord Emsworth, Galahad ("Uncle Gally") Threepwood, Lady Constance, 
the secretary Rupert Baxter, Beach the butler, and Angus McAllister, the Scots 
gardener – have never tasted the forbidden fruit (though they may have chucked 
a few flower pots). Yet more blameless and complicated, their domestic dramas 
revolve around the life and times of the Empress of Blandings, a prize pig.

In the comic imagination of PG Wodehouse <http://www.wodehouse.co.uk/>, who 
first created Blandings almost a hundred years ago in his novelSomething Fresh 
<http://www.amazon.com/Something-Fresh-Collectors-Wodehouse-P/dp/1585676586>, 
there is no turf more hallowed, no spot more perfect. To his friend and fellow 
novelist Evelyn Waugh, it was Eden. "The gardens of Blandings castle," wrote 
Waugh, "are that original garden from which we are all exiled."

Nowhere was Wodehouse, the writer, more blissfully at peace, or more happily 
at play. The gardens are never less than paradisal: "The morning sun descended 
like an amber shower-bath on Blandings Castle, lighting up with a heartening 
glow its ivied walls, its rolling parks, its gardens, outhouses, and messuages 
... It fell on green lawns and wide terraces, on noble trees and bright flower 
beds."

The castle is "huge, grey and majestic, adorned with turrets and battlements 
in great profusion".

But where is it ? Many grown men have devoted more energy than might be 
sensible to weighty questions such as the train route from Paddington to Market 
Blandings (admitted by Wodehouse to be based on Marlborough), or the 
topographical features of the castle itself. Norman Murphy, a leading Wodehouse 
scholar, has conducted the primary quest. The grounds, he believes, were 
inspired by Weston Court, in the Cotswolds, the infrastructure bySudeley Castle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/jun/02/art.homes> (ditto), and 
assorted features byCorsham Court, Wiltshire <http://www.corsham-court.co.uk/>, 
a place Wodehouse often visited as a boy.

The line (or the location), as Lady Bracknell would say, is immaterial. These 
are the blue remembered hills of youth. The spirit of Blandings itself was 
inspired by Wodehouse's abbreviated Shropshire childhood in the scattered 
hamlet of Stableford, near Bridgnorth, where, he wrote later, "I spent my 
happiest days as a boy."

On the map of an immemorial literary England, populated by butlers, pigs and – 
over the hills and far away – the Hobbit, Blandings is defined to the south by 
the Wyre Forest. North of its turrets, beyond Bridgnorth and the winding 
Severn, the plain rises up to the Wrekin. To the west, we're in Houseman 
country, Wenlock Edge and the dark, border hills of Wales.

But there's almost no darkness in Wodehouse, except in passing ("beneath even 
the beautiful things of life there is an underlying sadness"). In a 
characteristic sleight-of-hand, he describes what Lord Emsworth, who has lost 
his glasses yet again, could not see from the castle battlements. It's a vision 
of Albion: "Up from the river, rolling park land, mounting and dipping, surged 
in a green wave almost to the Castle walls, breaking on the terraces in a 
many-coloured flurry of flowers, while away in the blue distance wooded hills 
ran down to where the Severn gleamed like an unsheathed sword."

This is the setting for many of PG Wodehouse's finest plots, both in short 
stories and novels. These are not any old, hand-me-down imbroglios. When I say 
plots, I mean serials, yarns, cliff-hangers, romances and twisters. These are 
theOrmolu clocks 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/c/caring-for-your-gold-and-ormolu/> of 
plots, containing wheels within wheels, sub-plots and sub-sub plots engineered 
in perfect, almost musical harmony, whirring and chiming with an inevitability 
that leaves every other master craftsman of fiction speechless in admiration.

At the centre of these tales stands the figure of Clarence Rupert Rochester, 
9th Earl of Emsworth, who "so long as he had sunshine, regular meals, and 
complete freedom from the society of his younger son Frederick", was placidly 
content. This sublimely vague and "woollen-headed" peer was a character on whom 
Wodehouse doted, and whose foibles he explored in some ofhis finest work – 
Heavy Weather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/19/1000-novels-comedy-pg-wodehouse-mccrum>
,Summer Lightning <http://www.pgwodehousebooks.com/summer-lightning.htm>, Uncle 
Fred in the Springtime 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Uncle-Fred-Springtime-Sir-Wodehouse/dp/0099513846>, 
"Pig -hoo-o-o-o-ey!" <http://www.rbooks.co.uk/product.aspx?id=1448150949>, and 
"Lord Emsworth and the Girl Friend" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/04/pg-wodehouse-life-in-letters>. 
Rudyard Kipling, a stern critic, and master of short fiction, declared the 
latter to be "the perfect short story".

For Wodehouse, the Castle and its residents became a kind of literary 
affliction, the "least slackening of vigilance and the thing has gripped," he 
writes. "Before he knows where he is, he is down with a Saga, and no cure in 
sight." Wodehouse's addiction to Blandings is closely bound up with his 
fascination for Lord Emsworth. Perhaps this is because, from the massive span 
of the Wodehouse oeuvre, Emsworth stands out as the character closest to the 
writer himself. At the end of his long career, it was the manuscript of an 
unfinished Blandings novel that the writer took with him to hospital. After his 
death on Valentine's day, 1974, it was published asSunset at Blandings. 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Sunset-at-Blandings-Douglas-Adams/dp/0140284656>

Physically, Emsworth is a caricature of his creator. Wodehouse was an imposing 
figure, more than 6ft tall and in his day both a penetrating fast bowler and a 
useful addition to a rugby scrum. Emsworth is described as tall, scraggy and 
all the stringier from his penchant for draping himself over the rails of his 
prize pig's sty. Like Wodehouse he is myopic, utterly at a loss without his 
spectacles, projecting an air of distraction that was probably quite 
calculated. Wodehouse also likes to portray the 9th earl as "a fluffy-minded 
and amiable old gentleman", which was certainly adjacent to his own self-image. 
However, like Wodehouse, when his world was in focus, Emsworth is a sharp, even 
merciless, observer of the human race: "He adjusted his pince-nez, and with 
their assistance was able to perceive that a fatuous smile of self-satisfaction 
illumined the young man's face, giving him the appearance of a beaming sheep."

His lordship's personality is also a fairground mirror to Wodehouse's own, and 
fully displayed in "Lord Emsworth and the Girl Friend". He abhors conflict and 
dislikes house parties, village functions or any social obligations involving 
stiff collars, formality and top hats. Where Wodehouse was happiest in an old 
sweater, alone with a book or his Monarch typewriter, Emsworth likes to repair 
to the library with that classic volumeAugustus Whiffle on the Care of the Pig 
or, better still, to lose himself in the silent contemplation of the 
magnificent Berkshire sow who once took the silver medal in the Fat Pigs class 
at the 87th annual Shropshire Agricultural Show.

Emsworth's obsession – the word is hardly too strong – with Empress of 
Blandings is analogous at all points with Wodehouse's devotion to his craft. A 
true artist, he would nurture his prose in any season, rain or shine. The 
results, in books such asThe Code of the Woosters 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Code-Woosters-Sir-P-Wodehouse/dp/0099513757>, Joy in 
the Morning <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joy_in_the_Morning_(1946_novel)> and 
Pigs Have Wings 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Pigs-Have-Wings-Blandings-Castle/dp/0099513986>, were 
astonishing – comic writing elevated to a kind of poetry. Similarly, in her 
prime in the 1930s, the Empress "resembled a captive balloon with ears and a 
tail, and was as nearly circular as a pig can be without bursting". Wodehouse's 
own reputation at this time as a comic writer of rare genius was equally 
majestic. Long before the distractions of book prizes and bestseller lists, he 
was perhaps the most famous, popular and successful living writer in the 
English speaking world.

Wodehouse's popularity came at a singular moment in British social history. 
For the first time, the nation was almost universally literate, which gave 
special significance to the printed word in magazines and newspapers. 
Simultaneously, in the 1930s, a great age of class distinction, the 
universities were more than ever selective. Wodehouse's polished and seemingly 
effortless combination of the popular and the classical, matching compulsive 
storytelling with wonderfully allusive prose was, by chance, perfectly suited 
both to a mass audience and the elite Oxbridge readership within it. Writing in 
the Observer, the critic Gerald Gould expressed the balance of literary 
critical opinion: "In the most serious and exact sense of the word, [Wodehouse] 
is a great artist. He has founded a school, a tradition. He has made a language 
... He has explained a generation."

Beyond any fancy speculation, the novels and stories that Wodehouse set in 
Blandings Castle hold the key to his astounding grip on the literary 
imagination of the interwar reading public. Partly, they make an elegy for the 
lost world of Edwardian England in which Wodehouse came to maturity, an odd 
word for a writer who characterised his mental age as a "youngish" 18. 
Blandings continues to satisfy the English reader's nostalgia for the greenwood 
tree and the ancient certainties of the shires. Partly, Blandings mesmerises 
its audience through its benign atmosphere of lunatic irresponsibility (see, 
for instance, "The Crime Wave at Blandings"). This stuff is unfailingly funny 
from page to page.

And then again, among the hilarity, these stories contain tiny, heart-breaking 
moments of raw feeling, expressed by the laureate of denial in the simplest 
prose. The moment in "Lord Emsworth and the Girl Friend" when Gladys (aged 
nine) turns in extremis to her elderly knight is justly celebrated: "It was, in 
itself, quite a trivial thing, but it had an astoundingly stimulating effect 
on Lord Emsworth's morale. What happened was that Gladys, seeking further 
protection, slipped at this moment a small, hot hand into his."

Above all, Wodehouse's readers return to Blandings, as he did, as to a place 
where, once the comic mayhem has run its course, peace will resume in the 
butler's pantry, in the rose garden, and in the library. "The sweet air of the 
summer evening poured in through the open window," writes Wodehouse. "It was as 
if Nature had blown the All Clear. Blandings Castle was itself again."Television
 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> will have its work cut out to 
match such moments.

• Blandings begins on BBC1 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/mediapacks/blandings/> tomorrow at 6.30pm. 
The Blandings titles are being reissued by Everyman (£10.99). To order them for 
£8.79 each with free UK p&p call Guardian book service on 033 333 6846 or go to 
theguardian.com/bookshop
 