
The FTSE 100 index of Britain’s biggest stock market-listed companies has 
enjoyed its strongest year since 2009, jumping from 6,137 at the start of the 
year to touch nearly 7,000 this week. Wall Street’s S&P 500 has hit record 
highs, with British investors gaining even more in sterling terms because of 
the fall in the currency. This has meant that some of the biggest funds popular 
with small investors – such as M&G’s £6.3bn Global Dividend – have made gains 
of nearly 40% over the past year.

But not everyone has shared in the party. The single biggest fund in the UK, 
Standard Life’s £26.3bn Global Absolute Return Strategies, has managed to lose 
money when almost everyone else has been coining it. The fund is down 3.3% over 
the past 12 months, compared with the 17% gain made by UK index-tracking funds 
over the same period.

Star fund manager Neil Woodford has also had a poor year, making just 2.7% 
over the past 12 months for investors in his popular £9.2bn equity income fund.

The prize for the best performance of any fund in the UK goes to the 
little-known JFM Gold, which has given investors a return of 128% over the past 
year. Unfortunately, it’s only a £20m minnow, so we took a look at the big 
funds instead. M&G Global Dividend performed best, rising 39.4%, while 
Fundsmith Equity was up 28.2%. Both are heavily invested in Wall Street-listed 
stocks, which have rocketed in sterling terms. For example, Microsoft (a big 
holding in both funds) was trading at $54.80 at the start of the year and was 
$63.14 this week – a rise of 15%. But in sterling terms that translated into 
£37.27 at the beginning of the year, and £49 now – a rise of 31%. While the 
post-Brexit plunge in sterling will make holidays more expensive for everyone 
in 2017, it has turbo-charged returns for pension and Isa holders with 
investments in big US companies.

Billionaire Brexiter and hedge fund manager Crispin Odey reportedly made 
millions around the referendum, but investors who put money into his Odey 
Absolute Return fund won’t be smiling. It was the second worst performing fund 
of the year, losing 15.7% and beaten to the bottom only by an absolute return 
fund from Argonaut Partners. These hedge fund-style investments became popular 
a decade ago, but in 2016 almost everything with the words “absolute return” in 
their name turned into absolute rubbish. Sadly, we can assume their managers 
will still receive giant pay packets for their sterling performance.

So what will be the winning formula for 2017? We polled some of the leading 
managers and here’s what they think:

Stephanie Flanders, chief market strategist, UK and Europe, JP Morgan Asset 
Management
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Finvestment-funds-bumper-returns-ftse-100-2017-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd8af16580f0e35ff88b66b644b0cff9e8184ae%2F1189_3712_3352_3352%2F3352.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20it%20be%20a%20happy%20new%20year%20for%20your%20investment%20funds%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Finvestment-funds-bumper-returns-ftse-100-2017-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20it%20be%20a%20happy%20new%20year%20for%20your%20investment%20funds%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Finvestment-funds-bumper-returns-ftse-100-2017-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd8af16580f0e35ff88b66b644b0cff9e8184ae%2F1189_3712_3352_3352%2F3352.jpg>
 Photograph: Pal Hansen 
The former BBC economics correspondent reckons Donald Trump’s spending will 
boost the US economy in the near term, but US shares look fully priced, and 
Westminster has cloth ears about the Brexit issues facing London banks.

“Politics and policy are likely to dominate the headlines again in 2017. 
Voters have decided against business as usual and, increasingly, investors are 
also expecting a change. Whether either will be satisfied remains to be seen.

“The eurozone and Japan have come to the conclusion that when it comes to 
pushing down long-term interest rates, you can have too much of a good thing. 
So investors should not expect capital gains on bond holdings to compensate for 
low interest rates as they have in the past. People have been predicting a turn 
in the bond market for several years, only to see bond prices reach new highs. 
But in the past few years, inflation was heading down, not up. This time it 
really does look different.

“Eight years into a slow recovery marked by low productivity and weak 
investment, increased [Trump’s plans for] US public spending to support 
long-term potential growth could be positive for the global economy. But the 
policies Trump has suggested spending on are not those that economists would 
say are likely to give the highest return.

“In terms of the big picture, the S&P 500 has risen by 292% on a total return 
basis since early 2009, and a 50/50 portfolio of global bonds and equities has 
delivered an average annual return of 7.6%. That is higher than the 5.1% 
average annual return between 1998 and 2008, despite the weaker performance of 
the global economy.

“The most worrying thing [about Brexit] is how unrealistic the debate in the 
media and Westminster is compared with what anyone working in a major company 
or financial institution would tell you about the logistics involved – let 
alone trade negotiators and financial regulators, who think in terms of two- or 
three-year transition periods for even small demergers or regulatory reforms.

“The idea of having a transition is being read as a remainer plot to buy time 
to stay in the EU. That is the best way to have businesses in the UK and the EU 
planning for the worst. The transition deal we need is for both sides to agree 
upfront that whatever the outcome of the negotiations, nothing will happen on 
the ground for two years after that deal.” 

Terry Smith, chief executive, Fundsmith
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Finvestment-funds-bumper-returns-ftse-100-2017-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd361e69cd4006a6098430c5e56dccdab49155a78%2F792_54_1753_1753%2F1753.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20it%20be%20a%20happy%20new%20year%20for%20your%20investment%20funds%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Finvestment-funds-bumper-returns-ftse-100-2017-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20it%20be%20a%20happy%20new%20year%20for%20your%20investment%20funds%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Finvestment-funds-bumper-returns-ftse-100-2017-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd361e69cd4006a6098430c5e56dccdab49155a78%2F792_54_1753_1753%2F1753.jpg>
 Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA Archive/Press Association Ima 
Don’t even try to predict the future, says the manager of the £8.7bn Fundsmith 
Equity fund.

“I am amazed by how much time and effort people waste trying to guess what 
will happen in known unknowns, such as Brexit, China, commodities, interest 
rates, oil prices and the US presidential election. Then there is the problem 
of unknown unknowns: the event that may cause a major move in the market may be 
one that no one has even spotted.

“So what should investors focus on? I would suggest just three things: invest 
in the shares of good businesses, stick to investing in things you understand 
and don’t worry too much about valuations. If you are a long-term investor, 
buying shares in a good business is more important than valuations. If you are 
not a long-term investor, what are you doing investing in the stock market?”

Edward Bonham Carter, vice-chairman, Jupiter Asset Management
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Finvestment-funds-bumper-returns-ftse-100-2017-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01596c1bb5a6e241f2e25d323c194ff71718d905%2F422_0_2471_2472%2F2471.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20it%20be%20a%20happy%20new%20year%20for%20your%20investment%20funds%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Finvestment-funds-bumper-returns-ftse-100-2017-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20it%20be%20a%20happy%20new%20year%20for%20your%20investment%20funds%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Finvestment-funds-bumper-returns-ftse-100-2017-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01596c1bb5a6e241f2e25d323c194ff71718d905%2F422_0_2471_2472%2F2471.jpg>
On the watch list: a rise in inflation, greater volatility as politics takes 
centre stage and a possible end to the 35-year bond rally.

“Politics developed a nasty habit of gatecrashing the markets in 2016. The 
UK’s decision to leave the EU and Trump’s victory were, for some, like opening 
the door to an uninvited guest at a party that was going fine without them. 
Expect more of the same in 2017.

“While the first 100 days of Trump’s presidency will be scrutinised for policy 
initiatives, Europe is likely to move centre stage next year with elections in 
France, Germany and the Netherlands. The outcome of these may seal the victory 
of anti-establishment, anti-globalisation forces that have played a large part 
in the outcome of the EU referendum and Trump’s election.

“The implementation of protectionist policies would have only a limited impact 
in the dematerialised world we live in, where so much trade is in services and 
takes place online. Emerging economies may have more to fear, especially in 
light of Trump’s calls for 45% trade tariffs on Chinese goods, but even here 
there is hope, given over half of all Asian trade is done in the region.

“Trump’s plans to use tax cuts and increases in infrastructure spending to 
boost the US economy seems to be sending a clear signal that government fiscal 
stimulus and not central bank monetary policy should do the heavy lifting to 
galvanise the economy.

“Bond markets have reacted accordingly, with the expectation that all this 
stimulus will lead to greater inflation. The question remains whether the 
sell-off in the bond market marks the beginning of the end in the 35-year bond 
market rally.

“For stocks, inflation expectations are likely to influence outcomes in 2017. 
The return of inflation should benefit banks, which will earn more as central 
banks start to lift interest rates to keep a lid on rising prices, but also the 
metals, mining and energy sectors, as a pick-up in economic growth boosts 
demand for their products.”

Alex Tedder, head of global equities, Schroders
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Finvestment-funds-bumper-returns-ftse-100-2017-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F124f93371c4e9d4eb9c9136cccad988d21461743%2F10_353_2067_2066%2F2067.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20it%20be%20a%20happy%20new%20year%20for%20your%20investment%20funds%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Finvestment-funds-bumper-returns-ftse-100-2017-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20it%20be%20a%20happy%20new%20year%20for%20your%20investment%20funds%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Finvestment-funds-bumper-returns-ftse-100-2017-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F124f93371c4e9d4eb9c9136cccad988d21461743%2F10_353_2067_2066%2F2067.jpg>
Get ready for the Trump boom

“The global cyclical upswing looks set to run further into 2017, supported by 
proactive fiscal policies from the new US president. Trump’s aggressive 
infrastructure and tax-cutting agenda may yet be watered down in Congress, but 
we consider it likely that much of it will make it through, with material 
implications for US growth and earnings.

“The current momentum in the US economy, boosted by the proposed Trump agenda, 
could deliver double-digit earnings growth in both 2017 and 2018. A $600bn 
infrastructure package could add around 0.25% to US growth, while a cut in the 
corporate tax rate from 35% to 15% could add 10% to US earnings growth for 
2018.”

Do investment gurus really get it right?

Forecasts made by investment banks such as Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan and 
Barclays Capital are only marginally better than flipping a coin, and if you 
hold on to their “hot picks” longer than a few months you will almost certainly 
lose money, according to new research.

Intertrader, a spread betting firm, examined stock predictions from so-called 
(and highly paid) gurus at 16 investment banks, tracked them over the following 
12 months and compared them to the returns on just putting your money into a 
savings account or a stock market index such as the S&P 500 on Wall Street.

“Investment banks’ recommendations are only marginally better than a coin 
flip,” says Intertrader. “The banks we looked at only managed to predict the 
correct direction their hot picks would go 55% of the time. And that is 
actually the kindest we could be – holding their predictions for longer just 
meant worsening results.”

Investors who bought and sold an investment bank recommendation within 30 days 
on average made a gain of just 0.8%. If they held it for 90 days, it moved to a 
loss of 1.48%, while over a year the average loss from buying an investment 
bank recommendation was 4.79%.

“We found that if you put the money you would have invested in a 3% 
high-interest bank account instead, your returns would generally be higher,” 
says Intertrader, which has created a Gurudex index that analyses investment 
banks.

The firm says the findings serve as a reminder of Warren Buffett’s words of 
advice on the value of stock market forecasters: “We have long felt that the 
only value of stock forecasters is to make fortune-tellers look good. Even now, 
Charlie [Munger] and I continue to believe that short-term market forecasts are 
poison and should be kept locked up in a safe place, away from children and 
also from grownups who behave in the market like children.”
 