
The comic book writer Mark Millar tells a nice story about his part in 
transforming spymaster and all-around badass Nick Fury from a white 
cigar-chomping second world war veteran to the African-American version 
portrayed by Samuel L Jackson in the movies. While working on the 2002 
miniseries The Ultimates, Millar and artist Bryan Hitch co-opted Jackson’s 
appearance without asking for permission, only to discover later that the Pulp 
Fiction star took the swiping of his image rights as a giant compliment.

“Sam is famously the coolest man alive, and artist Bryan Hitch and I liberally 
used him without asking any kind of permission,”Millar said in an interview 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/samuel-l-jackson-thanks-mark-millar-2015-4> last 
year. “This was 2001 when we were putting it together. The idea that it might 
become a movie seemed preposterous, as Marvel was just climbing out of 
bankruptcy at the time.”

I hate it but it's true: Marvel's big-screen superheroes chomp up the 
competition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/may/03/marvels-superheroes-big-screen-showdown-dc-comics-captain-america-civil-war-batman-v-superman>
Millar apologised to Jackson after meeting the actor in 2014 on the set of 
Kingsman: The Secret Service, which is based on one of the Scottish writer’s 
comics. Jackson’s response? “Fuck, no, man. Thanks for the nine-picture deal!”

Fury will probably go down as one of the most successful transformations in 
comic book history, and it sparked a trend. Since Millar’s revisionist take 
first debuted, Spider-Man, the Hulk and Thor have been given new personas based 
on a diversity-first blueprint. The main wall-crawler in print is now the 
mixed-race Miles Morales, though Peter Parker still features in some comics, 
while Hulk is aKorean-American teenage genius named Amadeus Cho 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2015/09/04/marvel-amadeus-cho-totally-awesome-hulk> 
who, in contrast to his predecessor Bruce Banner, enjoys being the giant green 
meanie. Meanwhile, the current Thor is actually Jane Foster, the Son of Odin’s 
sometime squeeze.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fblack-iron-man-asian-hulk-female-thor-big-screen-marvel-diversity-casting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ecfe828fcb3589f5bfd05cb3f7db308dfee4363%2F0_209_814_1017%2F814.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20we%20ever%20see%20a%20black%20Iron%20Man%2C%20Asian%20Hulk%20or%20female%20Thor%20on%20the%20big%20screen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fblack-iron-man-asian-hulk-female-thor-big-screen-marvel-diversity-casting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20we%20ever%20see%20a%20black%20Iron%20Man%2C%20Asian%20Hulk%20or%20female%20Thor%20on%20the%20big%20screen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fblack-iron-man-asian-hulk-female-thor-big-screen-marvel-diversity-casting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ecfe828fcb3589f5bfd05cb3f7db308dfee4363%2F0_209_814_1017%2F814.jpg>
 Riri Williams will take on Iron Man’s mantle in the comics. Photograph: Marvel 
It doesn’t end there. This week, it’s being reported 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/marvel-new-iron-man-black-woman-riri-williams-1201809481/>
 that the new Iron Man in the comics will be a 15-year-old girl, Riri Williams, 
a science genius who builds her own version of Tony Stark’s suit in her 
dormitory room at MIT. Williams is due to take over from Stark full time at the 
end of the current Civil War II storyline.

On the big screen, Marvel <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> Studios 
won points for casting Idris Elba as Norse deity Heimdall in Kenneth Branagh’s 
Thor, and introduced its most famous black superhero, Black Panther, in Captain 
America: Civil War. Memorably portrayed by the excellent Chadwick Boseman, the 
newly crowned king of Wakanda will be getting his own movie in 2018.


But the main Avengers have largely retained their white origins. Tom Holland 
will play the Peter Parker version of the web-slinger in next year’s 
Spider-Man: Homecoming; Robert Downey Jr is clinging on as Tony Stark, Thor is 
still a bloke and the splendid Mark Ruffalo is firmly ensconced as the 
Hulk/Bruce Banner.

Samuel L Jackson: ‘I was a drug addict but I showed up on time and hit my 
marks’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/30/amuel--ackson--was-a-drug-addict-out-of-my-mind-but-showed-up-on-time-and-hit-my-marks>
Meanwhile, Marvel has also faced criticism for whitewashing Doctor Strange’s 
Asian mentor, the Ancient One, in Scott Derrickson’s forthcoming film. In a 
move thatone of the writers admitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/26/doctor-strange-tilda-swinton-whitewashed-china>
 was intended to avoid upsetting Chinese filmgoers, the character will be 
played (somewhat bizarrely) by Tilda Swinton. The original Ancient One, lest we 
forget, was from the fictional Himalayan kingdom of Kamar-Taj, which is often 
seen as a proxy for Tibet.

So does Marvel’s film-making offshoot have a duty to follow its comic book arm 
and begin to reflect greater diversity? The short answer is: not if this 
involves putting square pegs in round holes. But if the studio can use diverse 
Marvel comics superheroes to add colour and a satisfying sense of story 
development to its cinematic universe, that becomes an entirely different 
matter.

Holland, for instance, has just started his run as Spider-Man/Peter Parker, so 
the Miles Morales version might have to bide his time before getting a Marvel 
Cinematic Universe debut. Likewise, there’s a strong sense that we haven’t yet 
seen the best of Ruffalo’s Hulk, especially as the not-so-jolly green giant is 
due to team up with Chris Hemsworth’s god of thunder for a superhero buddy 
movie in next year’s Thor: Ragnarok. On the other hand, Downey Jr would be just 
as big a pull as a suitless Tony Stark, offering sarcastic advice to a new 
generation of heroes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fblack-iron-man-asian-hulk-female-thor-big-screen-marvel-diversity-casting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c66213367254c41ef51ac3283a8c8c3fb3795c1%2F426_0_1498_899%2F1498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20we%20ever%20see%20a%20black%20Iron%20Man%2C%20Asian%20Hulk%20or%20female%20Thor%20on%20the%20big%20screen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fblack-iron-man-asian-hulk-female-thor-big-screen-marvel-diversity-casting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20we%20ever%20see%20a%20black%20Iron%20Man%2C%20Asian%20Hulk%20or%20female%20Thor%20on%20the%20big%20screen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fblack-iron-man-asian-hulk-female-thor-big-screen-marvel-diversity-casting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c66213367254c41ef51ac3283a8c8c3fb3795c1%2F426_0_1498_899%2F1498.jpg>
 Chadwick Boseman as Black Panther, who takes the lead in 2018. Photograph: 
Allstar/Marvel Studios 
The dual nature of most superheroes and their alter egos gives Marvel more 
room for manoeuvre than the makers of James Bond or the Jason Bourne series 
might have. When Amadeus Cho became the new Hulk in the comics, Banner was not 
killed off or sidelined: rather, writer Greg Pak chose to explorehow the 
character might develop 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/finally-a-look-at-bruce-banner-s-new-life-without-the-1782430183>
 once freed from the green monster that’s been plaguing him for the best part 
of 50 years.

Downey Jr will be 54 by the time Infinity War rolls around in 2019; Ruffalo 
will be 51. Marvel Comics’ diversity push might provide templates for its 
studio counterpart to borrow from when its current crop of actors are ready for 
new challenges. And if that leads to a diverse big-screen lineup – instead of 
casting that, let’s face it, is based on a pretty narrow-minded, 
1960s-influenced reading of US demographics – so be it.

 