
All over the country, Agatha Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/16/guardian-book-club-sophie-hannah-agatha-christie-death-on-the-nile>
 fans are facing a festive dilemma: how to make sure their relatives go to bed 
before 9pm on Boxing Day ahead of the first episode ofThe Witness for the 
Prosecution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/15/kim-cattrall-toby-jones-bbc-agatha-christie-witness-for-the-prosecution>
, the BBC’s new version of Christie’s brilliant short story that she later 
rewrote as a play.

Why not watch it with one’s relatives, who might also be Christie fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/quiz/2009/sep/14/agatha-christie-quiz>? 
Don’t be daft! All true Christie fans know that even those family members who 
claim also to be fans might think it’s acceptable to chat, pass mince pies back 
and forth, or play whispered charades during the dialogue-free moments – and 
that simply won’t do.

Agatha Christie: getting away with murder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/01/agatha-christie-getting-away-with-murder>
Last year’s BBC Christie adaptation, And Then There Were None 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/29/and-then-there-were-none-christmas-boxing-day-ratings-bbc-agatha-christie>
,was an enormous seasonal success, watched by more than 10 million people and 
garnering considerable critical acclaim. The same creative team, including 
writer Sarah Phelps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/13/bbc-and-then-there-were-none-agatha-christie>
, have reunited forThe Witness for the Prosecution – starring Kim Cattrall, 
Toby Jones and Andrea Riseborough. It looks set to be every bit as compelling 
and chilling.

Despite its relatively humble origins as a short story, first entitled 
“Traitor Hands”, “The Witness for the Prosecution” can lay claim to being 
one of the queen of crime’s greatest creations. Leonard Vole is accused of 
killing a wealthy widow. He’s not worried at first because he’s sure his wife 
will confirm that she was with him at the time of the murder, but his 
confidence turns to horror when she suddenly decides she’s not quite so devoted 
to him after all …

Like some of Christie’s best full-length novels – The ABC Murders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/sep/15/top-10-agatha-christie-novels> 
andMurder on the Orient Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/23/kenneth-branagh-play-poirot-murder-on-the-orient-express-agatha-christie>
 – “Witness” has exceptionally strong bone structure. And, just as a face with 
strong bone structure is almost always photogenic, so a story with that same 
quality tends to be telegenic, and indeed movie-genic. “Witness” has already 
produced a classic feature-length film – directed by Billy Wilder in 1957, and 
starringMarlene Dietrich <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jun/22/1> and 
Tyrone Power. That version was based on Christie’s play, whereas this new 
BBC production takes its inspiration primarily from Christie’s original 
short story. Interestingly, Christie changed the ending for the stage version 
because she was convinced that theatre audiences wanted happy  endings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fagatha-christie-adaptation-witness-for-prosecution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6ea2c243674cef4be35ce2e180e15ee3fcde9f4%2F0_0_1883_2401%2F1883.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20the%20latest%20Agatha%20Christie%20adaptation%20be%20a%20Boxing%20Day%20hit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fagatha-christie-adaptation-witness-for-prosecution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20the%20latest%20Agatha%20Christie%20adaptation%20be%20a%20Boxing%20Day%20hit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fagatha-christie-adaptation-witness-for-prosecution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6ea2c243674cef4be35ce2e180e15ee3fcde9f4%2F0_0_1883_2401%2F1883.jpg>
 Tyrone Power and Marlene Dietrich in a publicity shot forWitness for the 
Prosecution (1957). Photograph: Cine Text/Allstar/Sportsphoto Ltd 
When a work of fiction has great bone structure, it’s possible to appreciate 
all the textures and nuances of the piece in the round, but it’s equally 
possible to summarise it to “first this happens, then this, then that, and then 
it has this amazing final twist: it turns out to bethat, not this!” Without 
having read the book, or watched the film, the person you’re talking to will 
say: “Oh, that’s clever! What a brilliant concept.”

“Witness”, like And Then There Were None, has a structure that is a perfectly 
engineered narrative machine. If stories were essential inventions in the 
history of the progress of humanity, “Witness” would be the wheel. The short 
story contains three gasp-inducing plot twists, and the stage play contains 
four. (For context, I should stress that most mysteries are lucky if they can 
produce one jagged and breathy gasp of that quality.)

Another sign that a story has great bone structure is that some of its 
finest moments are detachable. To make an electrical analogy, it’s the 
equivalent of an all-territories plug adaptor that enables your phone to work 
in any country. For instance, the solution in Murder on the Orient Express is 
a detachable device that needn’t be the ending of a mystery set on a train. It 
could just as easily be the solution to a crime plot set in a country house, or 
a factory, or a school. Whatever story you wanted to write, that structural 
conclusion would probably be brilliant – though obviously not as brilliant as 
when written byAgatha Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/agathachristie>.

Stories like this have an archetypal feel to them. It is so rare for a story 
to be perfectly formed; when we encounter ones that are, we feel as if they 
must be pre-ordained somehow – as if they’ve always existed in a hidden 
dimension, even before their writers wrote them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fagatha-christie-adaptation-witness-for-prosecution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57a2f01829552f35806802551db688c92c924666%2F0_32_2785_1670%2F2785.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20the%20latest%20Agatha%20Christie%20adaptation%20be%20a%20Boxing%20Day%20hit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fagatha-christie-adaptation-witness-for-prosecution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20the%20latest%20Agatha%20Christie%20adaptation%20be%20a%20Boxing%20Day%20hit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fagatha-christie-adaptation-witness-for-prosecution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57a2f01829552f35806802551db688c92c924666%2F0_32_2785_1670%2F2785.jpg>
 Agatha Christie’s plots work perfectly on film: Sidney Lumet’sMurder on the 
Orient Express (1974). Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/EMI 
It’s no wonder that Christie’s plots are so beloved by readers and viewers 
alike, and so frequently adapted and reinvented for the big and small screens. 
Christie, like most writers who sell millions of books, is a “story first” 
writer. Her prose is crisp and elegant and her grasp of human frailties is 
second to none, but telling the best possible story in the most exciting, 
unpredictable and ingenious way was always her top priority. As a result, her 
work must be a dream to adapt. The narrative is as readily graspable as an 
apple in a fruit bowl. By contrast, some stories are like crab legs – 
prospective adapters-to-screen might attempt to crack them open but it’s a 
messy and difficult process, and sometimes it turns out that, after all that 
effort, there’s a disappointingly small amount of story-meat to be had.

There are other reasons why the queen of crime is likely to be on our TV 
screens for a long time to come: the themes in her novels are as relevant today 
as they were when she published her first book,The Mysterious Affair at Styles, 
in the 1920s – love, hate, envy, grief, fear, guilt. She dispensed with all 
unnecessary packaging and distilled right down to the essence – of people, of 
psychological insight, of cause and effect. She fully understood how odd people 
are, and how peculiar life is, how jarringly unsettling. That she is sometimes 
mistaken for a “cosy” crime writer is bizarre; though her books have the 
feel-good factor in abundance, they are the opposite of cosy.

We love Christie’s stories because we love magic, and her plots read like 
literary magic tricks. Time and again she sets up a situation where the reader 
is provoked into concluding that what she is asking us to believe is simply not 
feasible. Something appears to be happening that cannot logically be the case – 
and yet here it is, unfolding before our eyes. And every time, Christie proves 
that she’s cleverer than we are, by resolving the apparently irreconcilable, by 
making sense of the senseless. There is nothing more uplifting than the 
realisation that the impossible is, after all, possible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fagatha-christie-adaptation-witness-for-prosecution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F323fc2e8555eb0199cd9e8e4a3e8b36bca781144%2F0_123_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20the%20latest%20Agatha%20Christie%20adaptation%20be%20a%20Boxing%20Day%20hit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fagatha-christie-adaptation-witness-for-prosecution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20the%20latest%20Agatha%20Christie%20adaptation%20be%20a%20Boxing%20Day%20hit%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fagatha-christie-adaptation-witness-for-prosecution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F323fc2e8555eb0199cd9e8e4a3e8b36bca781144%2F0_123_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Andrea Riseborough as Leonard Vole’s wife, Romaine, in the BBC’s The Witness 
for the Prosecution. Photograph: Robert Viglasky/BBC/Mammon Screen/Agatha 
Christie Productions 
She is still the bestselling novelist of all time, outsold only by the Bible 
and Shakespeare – but to refer to her always, or mainly, as popular and 
bestselling runs the risk of overlooking the fact that she was a literary 
writer in the truest sense. She thought a lot about the crime novel form, what 
it could be made to contain, how the genre could be expanded and enlarged while 
still offering all the familiar and expected satisfactions. She was a dedicated 
literary experimenter; “Witness” is not the only one of her works that she 
rewrote in a different form from the original. Her ingenuity and inventiveness 
seemed to know no bounds.

And nor should ours, fellow Christie fans, when we apply our minds to the 
problem of how to get those pesky relatives into bed by 9 o’clock on Boxing Day.

• The Witness for the Prosecution is on BBC1 at 9pm on 26 and 27 December. 
Sophie Hannah’s latest Poirot mysery isClosed Casket 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/closed-casket.html>.
 