
 Who doesn’t love a holiday? Apart from my husband, who thinks we should save 
the money in case our boiler packs up. But many people live for them – a time 
to recover from work and feel less tired and tense.A New York study of 
middle-aged men at high risk of heart disease 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11020089> found that the more vacations 
they took, the less likely they were to die over a period of nine years. But 
the reality of a holiday can be different from those adverts showing smiling 
families on blissful, empty beaches. Do they really make us healthier and 
happier?


The solution

Research generally shows that while workers return to their offices feeling 
happier and healthier, effects fade within two weeks.A study from Tilburg 
University <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12411765> found that (in a 
sample of 1,128 men and women) up to 4% of people get sick and bored on 
vacation or at weekends – a condition the researchers called “leisure 
sickness”. But Dr Jerome Nawijn, at NHTV Breda University of Applied Sciences, 
in the Netherlands, whohas done a lot of research into holidays 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jtr.756/abstract>, thinks there is 
a “happiness curve”. During the first 10% of their holiday, people are often in 
a lower mood (the travel phase), those in the next 70% are in a higher mood, 
followed by a dip between the 80th and 90th % and an upsurge in happiness at 
the end.

There is also some evidence that people anticipate and recall holidays as more 
enjoyable than they actually were – a “rosy glow” effect. Simon Kemp from the 
University of Canterbury in New Zealand,who interviewed 49 holidaymakers 
<https://thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/volume-24/edition-8/wish-you-were-here>, 
found that their most memorable or unusual 24 hours set the tone for the memory 
of the holiday. However, what constitutes memorable doesn’t have to be that 
dramatic.A study 
<https://thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/volume-24/edition-8/wish-you-were-here> 
from the University of Aalborgof German and Danish families 
<https://thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/volume-24/edition-8/wish-you-were-here> 
found that it could be as simple as everyone sitting down to enjoy an ice-cream.

The most restorative holidays tend to be ones 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15996454> that allow people to have time 
for themselves, choose activities they enjoy, sleep well, exercise and 
socialise in a warm climate.

In a review of the research, Jessica de Bloom, from Radbound University, The 
Netherlands, says that the vacation effects of feeling healthy and happier are 
very strong but shortlived, so take more holidays –a short break seems as good 
as a two-week one 
<http://www.vakantiestudie.nl/sites/default/files/De%20Bloom,%20Geurts%20%26%20Kompier,%20Gedrag%20%26%20Organisatie.pdf>
 (there isn’t research on anything longer). Prepare beforehand to avoid 
irritations such as disagreements about activities, or the car breaking down. 
Prevent a high workload when you get back, as this reduces the healthy effects 
of a vacation very quickly. Do pleasant things and relax. The effects may not 
last for long when you return, but at least you had them on holiday.
 