
Maybe one sign of a fully matured film industry is when it's capable of 
spewing out anOlympus Has Fallen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154314/olympus-has-fallen> and a White 
House Down <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154513/white-house-down> at 
the same time –coinciding films with identical subjects 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/mar/18/side-effects-silver-linings-playbook-same-film>
. One of those little zeitgeist clots that suggest creative minds running in 
parallel, in a highly evolved community driven by the relentless background hum 
of close competition – and also, all those scripts passing between studios, 
with ample opportunities for intellectual-property theft. Mostly, these weird 
convergences seem to come in pairs:Deep Impact 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/73160/deep-impact/review> and Armageddon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/68266/armageddon>, A Bug's Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/72916/bug.s.life> and Antz 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/34361/antz>, and so on.

So what does it say about the emerging Turkish industry 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2011/nov/22/turkey-cinema-scene-turkish-film>
 that it has six movies on the same subject either recently on release or 
imminent? The flood of films aboutGallipoli 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gallipoli_Campaign> – or the Battle of Çanakkale, 
as Turks more commonly call it – isn't precisely a coincidence, what with the 
centenary approaching in two years' time. But the extent of the clamour around 
the anniversary is still striking, with some directors opting to deploy their 
forces early for guerrilla strikes at the box office, before the commercial 
heavyweights of Turkish cinema can move in with their divisions.

Like the Gallipoli campaign itself, the early signs haven't been very 
promising.Çanakkale Cocuklari <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bp9cB7mkGdg> 
(Children of Çanakkale), released last September, hung the conflict on a story 
about an Australian-born Constantinople mother's fears about her two sons, who 
find themselves on opposite sides of the battle lines. Directed by industry 
bigwigSinan Çetin <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sinan_%C3%87etin>, starring his 
Australian wifeRebekka Haas <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0351995/>, it was 
"symbolism and reductionism galore",according to the Daily Zaman's Emine 
Yıldırım 
<http://www.todayszaman.com/newsDetail_getNewsById.action?newsId=293994>.

Next over the parapet in October was Çanakkale 1915 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Led7EJSbxMA>, Yeşim Sezgin's awful treatment of 
the Ottoman resistance to the Allied landing, which ladles on sentimental 
nationalism instead of bothering to find a proper dramatic focus. It's 
especially big on earnest men in uniform lifting heavy objects: one key moment 
is the recreation of artillery gunner Seyit Çabuk'slegendary feat of picking up 
three 275kg shells <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seyit_%C3%87abuk>, allowing 
his unit to continue firing during the initial naval battle. It might not be so 
comic if virtually the same orchestra-garlanded backslap wasn't given to 
another soldier who lugs his wounded commander back to base on his shoulder a 
few scenes later. "When did everyone become so patriotic and ready to provoke 
the masses into absolutist valour?"asks Yıldırım of Çanakkale 1915 
<http://www.todayszaman.com/newsDetail_getNewsById.action?newsId=295742>.

But things are looking up. The $5m-budgeted Çanakkale: Yolun Sonu 
<http://vimeo.com/60262730> (Çanakkale: End of the Road), which had some 
involvement from Warner's local-language brigade, looks a little sharper on its 
feet with itsEnemy at the Gates 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/87984/enemy.at.the.gates>-style plotline 
about an Ottoman sniper (played byGürkan Uygun 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1699178/> from the US-baiting Valley of the Wolves 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valley_of_the_Wolves> franchise). Released in 
Turkey in March and the UK in April, it earned a thumbs-up for its seriousness
from blogger Neil White at Every Film 
<http://everyfilmblog.blogspot.co.uk/2013/04/187-canakkale-yolun-sonu-gallipoli-end.html>
: "It addresses the dichotomy of those who are devoted to religion on one hand 
and are killing people on the other."

<
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsNcUrFHdzm8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsNcUrFHdzm8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsNcUrFHdzm8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sNcUrFHdzm8&feature=player_embedded" 
title="">Reading this on mobile? Click here for the Çanakkale: Yolun Sonu 
trailer
The real players are due to unleash their efforts between now and 2015. Faruk 
Aksoy <http://www.aksoyfilm.com.tr/>, director of Turkey's most expensive and 
successful film ever, last year's siege epicFetih 1453 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/apr/12/turkish-fetih-1453>, has Çanakkale 
Geçilmez (Çanakkale Shall Not Be Passed) en route – sure to be another 
monumental undertaking. Mahsun Kırmızıgül, the jack-of-all-trades singer, actor 
and producer responsible for international crossoverFive Minarets in New York 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fyvVVc0pDNc>, has also been saving up for the 
pyrotechnics kitty. He's promising a $20m budget, which would break Fetih 
1453's $17m record, for his 57'nci AlaY (57th Regiment) – about the outfit who 
benefited, prior to defending Anzac Cove, fromAtatürk's 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mustafa_Kemal_Atat%C3%BCrk> famously to-the-point 
pep talk: "I am not ordering you to attack. I am ordering you to die. In the 
time that it takes us to die, other forces and commanders will take our place."

And Çanakkale Içinde (In Çanakkale), from the veteran writer-director Serdar 
Akar <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0015091/> (who also seems to have contributed 
to Çanakkale Yolun Sonu), is hoping to bring things full circle by reportedly 
roping in Mel Gibson – star of Peter Weir's highly rated 1981Gallipoli 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/106599/gallipoli> – to play a British 
commander.

Six Gallipoli projects feels like about three too many. There are indications 
that campaign fatigue could be setting in already (Çanakkale: Yolun Sonu 
[$2.9m] has grossed less than Çanakkale 1915 [$4.2m]), and perhaps the weaker 
contenders would have been eliminated during the development process in a more 
seasoned film industry. On the other hand, the fact that Turkish cinema is 
going out all out for the anniversary is a credit to its unusual vigour and 
enthusiasm, which are still peaking.Eight of this year's top 10 films so far 
are homegrown <http://www.boxofficemojo.com/intl/turkey/yearly/>, which 
represents the kind of buy-local commitment very few countries can boast. When
Avatar <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/131170/avatar> spray-painted the 
global box office in late 2009/early 2010, it failed to get the No 1 spot in 
only two places: India and Turkey.

Local pride can easily tip over into nationalism, unfortunately, and the 
Çanakkale anniversary presents the perfect opportunity to cash in – as Sezgin's 
film does.Faruk Aksoy was criticised last year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2012/mar/28/turkey-film-constantinople-fetih-1453>
 for his soft-soaping treatment of Ottoman strongman Mehmed II in Fetih 1453 – 
and a bombastic Gallipoli film from him, if that's what it turns out to be, 
will give further grist to those who believe he's forging a career as some kind 
of cinematic town crier for a geopolitically resurgent Turkey. Hopefully one of 
the returns to Çanakkale will take on more than the obvious, flag-waving 
viewpoint; one in six isn't bad odds on that.

• Next week's After Hollywood looks at a new back-to-basics approach to films 
about the globalised world. Which global cinematic stories would you like to 
see covered in the column? Let us know in the comments below.
 