
It’s 98 degrees and William H Macy is melting. We’re in a cafe in Studio City, 
at the east end of California’s San Fernando Valley, and the actor is talking 
about coming towards the end of his yearly stint shootingShameless 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ITsirWLf-W8>, the US remake of the British show
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shameless>.

“Yesterday I was in Pasadena,” he says, “and it was 104 degrees. We did three 
exterior scenes in a row. I was wearing sneakers and jeans, thermal underwear, 
then a flannel shirt, then a hoodie, then my jacket, then my big giant 
fake-wool muffler, right? Because it was supposed to be Chicago in the winter. 
It was brutal. I have a $100 bet with some of the crew that when we do the 
other half of those scenes in actual Chicago, it’ll be the hottest day in 
Chicago history. So I’ll burn alive – twice!”

Macy looks well, though, much better than he did when I interviewed him in 
1998. Back then, he was still the clean-shaven, nervous, only newly famous and 
newly married guy who’d just played Jerry Lundegaard inFargo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EB4PmbfG4bw>, the role that catapulted him to 
fame after years on stage and TV. We somehow ate and drank for four hours. 
Today, he has the raggedy, hairy look of his Shameless character Frank 
Gallagher, and it suits him, strengthening the famously awkward, jowly face 
that got him cast as so many “beautiful losers” (avoid that term in his 
presence) in the 1990s and beyond. Wearing a crisp white shirt over a white 
T-shirt, he looks the very picture of a trim and healthy Californian in his 60s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fwilliam-h-macy-blood-father-shameless-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ebfa1844039f0519a2cb80963beab03f0391b14%2F959_1123_2326_1395%2F2326.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=William%20H%20Macy%3A%20'It%20was%20104%20degrees%20and%20I%20had%20on%20thermals%2C%20shirt%2C%20hoodie%2C%20jacket%20and%20muffler'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fwilliam-h-macy-blood-father-shameless-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=William%20H%20Macy%3A%20%27It%20was%20104%20degrees%20and%20I%20had%20on%20thermals%2C%20shirt%2C%20hoodie%2C%20jacket%20and%20muffler%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fwilliam-h-macy-blood-father-shameless-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ebfa1844039f0519a2cb80963beab03f0391b14%2F959_1123_2326_1395%2F2326.jpg>
 Macy in Blood Father. 
We’re here to talk about Blood Father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/21/blood-father-review-cannes-mel-gibson>
, a violentMel Gibson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/24/blood-father-star-mel-gibson-tattoo-video-interview>
 revenge drama in which Macy plays Mel’s trailer-park neighbour and Alcoholics 
Anonymous sponsor. Gibson is busy protecting his wayward daughter from 
gangsters she’s been associating with; there is, as one expects from a Gibson 
project, a good deal of bloodletting.


Gibson looks terrifying, I say, pumped up and fully bearded, like he’s just 
stepped out of a wild west wanted poster. “I had a start when I first saw him,” 
Macy says, with widening eyes. “He’s built like a tank – he’s in such great 
shape, his eyes, arms all buffed like … he’s Mel Gibson, man! He’s the best Mel 
Gibson I’ve ever seen.” He laughs. “And by a lot! Nobody does it better!”

Blood Father is a good, old-fashioned drive-in thriller and Gibson is amazing 
in it, raw, furious, burning with anger and vengeance. But he still manages to 
leave room for scene-stealer Macy, who has the kind of role that actors working 
in long-running TV dramas find they have to fight for during their down time. 
Macy has expressed disdain for serial character work in films: the chasing 
(though he has to do less of that these days) and just the sheer hassle of 
standing around miles from home, waiting an eternity for new camera set-ups and 
then delivering a few seconds of actual acting.

TV has been such a blessing. I'm pretty sure my family are happy to have me 
home. Uh, pretty sure

“I’m not so rabid about getting something going in each hiatus any more,” he 
says. “First of all, I’m always knackered. I’m gonna need a long lie down after 
shooting all of this. It’s not nothing, shooting a lot of TV in a very short 
time, and Shameless has lots of drama, farce and energy. But really, TV has 
been such a blessing for me. The aforementioned staying at home. I’m pretty 
sure my family are happy to have me home.” He chuckles. “Uh, pretty sure.”

He would even go as far as to say TV has been his salvation, especially at his 
age. Now 66, he’s been on Shameless since he was 58, and loves being able to 
drive his teenage kids to school every day. The uprooting process of heading to 
movie locations in different states, or even continents, is largely a thing of 
the past. He’s been married to fellow actorFelicity Huffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/mar/11/features.weekend> since 1997 and, 
every morning as he heads off to Shameless, she’s getting ready for her own TV 
show, American Crime, now shooting its third season (before that it was 
Desperate Housewives). Evidently, there is some serious life-work balance in 
the household.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fwilliam-h-macy-blood-father-shameless-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb572d598bb7b65b12fa9ed212bc5e134ffe4ca26%2F94_26_1598_959%2F1598.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=William%20H%20Macy%3A%20'It%20was%20104%20degrees%20and%20I%20had%20on%20thermals%2C%20shirt%2C%20hoodie%2C%20jacket%20and%20muffler'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fwilliam-h-macy-blood-father-shameless-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=William%20H%20Macy%3A%20%27It%20was%20104%20degrees%20and%20I%20had%20on%20thermals%2C%20shirt%2C%20hoodie%2C%20jacket%20and%20muffler%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fwilliam-h-macy-blood-father-shameless-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb572d598bb7b65b12fa9ed212bc5e134ffe4ca26%2F94_26_1598_959%2F1598.jpg>
 ‘He’s never really hurt anyone – well, not badly’ … as Frank Gallagher in the 
US Shameless. 
“I love the fact that I work every day,” he says, with that beatific look of 
his. “This may sound pretentious, but I am getting better at what I do every 
day. There is nothing like practice. In the feature film world, there’s so much 
waiting around and then it’s zero-to-60. Then you grind to a halt all, then 
it’s zero-to-60. But on TV I’m acting a lot, every day.”


I wonder what it’s like to live with a character for as long as he has lived 
with Frank Gallagher, an indefensible monster half the time, a wayward 
alcoholic conman and professional layabout. “Well, first of all, I don’t have 
to defend Frank. Second, define ‘monster’.” Suddenly Macy has shaken off the 
torpor.


“You see my drift? I could do this all day. I love him. He’s hard-working, 
let’s give him that. There’s a party wherever he goes. He’s never really hurt 
anyone badly – well, not too badly. He’s entrepreneurial, he’s living his 
passion. His raison d’être is tonot work. It hasn’t been easy over the years, 
but he’s learned, and he has never worked.” A slightly menacing tone, straight 
from one of Frank’s crueller hangovers, has emerged. “I fuckin’ love him. I’m 
his best friend. He doesn’t have many friends, just me.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhgl-xVubsjI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhgl-xVubsjI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhgl-xVubsjI&media=>
Watch the trailer for Blood Father <https://youtu.be/hgl-xVubsjI> 
We talk a while about the US election, how Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> and Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> – though very different – 
might have finally broken the tradition of mealy-mouthed, say-nothing political 
rhetoric. “Sanders was so straightforward,” says Macy. “Ask him a question, 
he’ll answer it. And give Trump his due: when he talks, he does, unlike most 
politicians, reveal some of himself. I mean, there’s not much thought behind 
what he says – and it’s horrifying what he’s revealing – but I pray this 
changes the bar for conventional politicians, because nothing annoys me more 
than obfuscating speech and not answering a question, not copping to it 
honestly. Maybe that’ll be different.”

Since Trump seems to wish upon us a return to some kind of an imaginary 
paradise from the past, I ask Macy, as we part, which era he would go back to. 
“I think 1971,” he says, and I expect him to mention his oldtheatre days 
<https://atlantictheater.org/explore-2/ensemble/william-h-macy/> with the likes 
of David Mamet and Joe Mantegna. But no, he doesn’t see the old gang much any 
more. “We’ve all gone our own ways,” he says. “For me, it would be all about 
what cars came out that year, no doubt about it.”


Then he lowers himself into his nifty vintage Porsche and, with that big Macy 
smile, drives off into the sun.


 * Blood Father is out now in the US, released in the UK on 7 October.  