
Up to 80% of us will get acne to some degree. A study of final-year medical 
students at Melbourne University <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15644386> 
found many believed that fatty and sugary foods were second only to stress in 
causing spots. As the researchers leading the study pointed out, these beliefs 
were not based on evidence.

Those silly medical students. Why didn’t they consult the British Association 
of Dermatologists’s patient leaflet 
<http://www.bad.org.uk/for-the-public/patient-information-leaflets> that says 
there is “little evidence that any foods cause acne, such as chocolate and fast 
food”? Yet a new book by two dermatologists –Perfectly Clear: The Perfect Guide 
to Clear Skin 
<http://www.drnicklowe.com/perfectly-clear-the-perfect-guide-to-clear-skin.html>
 – says that restricting refined processed carbohydrates (such as sugar, white 
flour and white pasta) can reduce acne. Research from theBritish Medical Journal
 <http://www.bmj.com/content/338/bmj.a2738> also shows that a diet high in 
dairy, particularly skimmed milk, can increase severity of acne. Greasy foods 
in general? Not so much.

Acne is caused by oil-producing glands in the skin getting blocked, leading to 
blackheads, redness and spots with pus where bacteria infiltrate the area. 
Production of oil (sebum) is increased by sex hormones, hence the appearance of 
acne at adolescence.Acne <https://www.theguardian.com/society/acne> is 
definitely not caused by dirty skin. However, diet may have a role, albeit a 
small one. So should you modify your diet if you get spots?

The solution


Milk may increase acne because cow feed includes sex hormones – these then 
stimulate sebum production and foster spot formation.

Since foods with a high glycemic index (HGI) – those that make blood glucose 
rise quickly – increase the release of sex hormones, it’s not clear why skimmed 
milk is a villain. Some researchers think thatdrinking it makes people eat more 
HGI foods <http://www.jaad.org/article/S0190-9622(12)00164-8/abstract> than if 
they drank a fattier variety.

The evidence overall is still underwhelming; it is often gathered from small 
groups of people and is observational in nature, so cannot attribute cause. It 
also often relies on people remembering what they ate many years ago.

But non-western diets are said to keep populations free of acne – a study of 
Inuit in 1971 <http://www.bmj.com/content/338/bmj.a2738> showed that only when 
they gave up their nomadic life and started eating refined sugar in settlements 
did they get spotty. Genetics, however, are also likely to play a role. The 
American Academy of Dermatologists now says “emerging data suggests that HGI 
diets may be associated with acne 
<https://www.aad.org/practice-tools/quality-care/clinical-guidelines/acne/role-of-diet-in-acne>
”. But it also says that the evidence is not strong enough to advise people to 
change their diets. Of course, you shouldn’t eat refined, processed 
carbohydrates anyway – because, regardless of spots,they make you fat and can 
give you diabetes <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17448569>. The students 
were right about stress, though – a study showed thatexams caused flareups of 
acne <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12873885>.
 