
As Joe Skelly remembers, it was a hot afternoon in early summer. The boys in 
the Holy Cross intermediate Gaelic football team were getting ready for the 
game when Mr Grogan called them over. Pat Grogan was their teacher and coach, a 
strong man with a quick sense of humour. The boys liked him. He made them feel 
like winners, not a bunch of awkward 11-year-olds. That afternoon they'd seen 
him hauling a large blue bag to the edge of the football field.

The boys were dressed in their usual exotic mix of jerseys, most of them 
hand-me-downs from older brothers, a frayed collage of different colours and 
sizes. A proper team kit was out of the question. In the Ardoyne of the late 
sixties, unemployment was endemic. The boys' families had more to worry about 
than football kits.

"Where do you think you lot are goin'?" asked Grogan. "We're goin' to play the 
match, sir," one of them replied. Grogan told them to stand where they were. He 
opened the big blue bag and reached inside. He began to pull out some football 
shirts. They were black and white, the colours of Holy Cross Primary school. 
Grogan handed the jerseys to the astonished youngsters.

"Well, yez can't play without a proper kit. Ye can't be winners if you don't 
look the part," he said. Thirty years later, sitting in the front room of his 
terraced house in Ardoyne, Joe Skelly's face lights up when he describes the 
moment.

We all looked at each other. You know, we were amazed. It was like putting an 
international shirt on your back. It was absolutely fantastic. We thought we 
were going to be the superstars of tomorrow, like we really had it in us to be 
winners. The teacher told us we had it in us." Grogan lined the boys up for a 
photograph in their new kit. For many it was their first experience of standing 
in front of a camera. Another teacher, Cyril Murray, took the photograph. Three 
decades on, we see them staring earnestly at the camera, mindful of their 
teacher's exhortation to look like winners and not a gang of giddy boys. But in 
a few short years, the team would be torn apart by the bitter realities of 
Northern Ireland's sectarian hatred.

May 1968, and the world is in turmoil. This is the year of revolution and 
murder, the time of the street-fighting man. Ulster's Catholics began to 
agitate for civil rights. After 40 years of discrimination and exclusion, they 
wanted a fair share of jobs and houses, an end to the gerrymandering of local 
government and reform of the police. But the boys of Holy Cross Primary were 
untouched.

Later that year they won the Belfast <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> 
Intermediate League. Winners! There was a cup. There were medals. The school 
went wild with excitement. The players were hailed as local heroes. "We were 
the boys that summer all right, we were the boys," says Joe Skelly. He 
remembers a team of fairly mixed talent.

There were a few real stars like Seamus Clarke and big Ciaran Murphy and 
Maurice Gilvarry. Tough boys on the field but relaxed and easy-going once the 
final whistle went.

Ciaran's older brother Pat was one of the best players in the district, an 
all-rounder who excelled at Gaelic football and soccer. He and Ciaran were 
inseparable. As Pat remembers, they were more best friends than brothers.

Being the older of the two, Pat was detailed to take care of his younger 
brother. Growing up in the two-bedroomed terraced house, they had shared the 
same bed. When Pat produces the family photograph album, you notice that he is 
never pictured without his smaller brother: the two boys dressed as cowboys; 
the two of them playing in the yard. "He was an original, you know, a big lump 
of a lad," recalls Pat.

The Murphys lived near and knew the Gilvarry family. With 12,000 people 
crammed into an area of barely half a square mile, chances are everybody will 
know everybody else. Pat remembers Maurice as a very quiet individual. He was a 
bit of a loner, he says. There were 11 Gilvarrys, crammed into a two-bedroomed 
house. This was not untypical of Catholic families of the period.

Ask Eamon about his brother and football and he smiles. Eamon played for the 
team as well, but was never good enough to make the final side. His brother 
Maurice, he says, was skilful but short-sighted. He was good around the field 
but could be disastrous near the goal. "God, it was funny," Eamon remembers. 
But the days of laughter were to disappear in the spring and summer of 1969. 
The boys still trained and played. Pat Grogan urged them on to greater glory. 
But as the civil rights agitation continued, sectarian tension escalated. Going 
to and from football training was becoming hazardous.

Ardoyne was largely surrounded by loyalist territory. To the west the Shankill 
Road, to the north and east the Upper Crumlin Road and Ballysillan. The pitch 
the boys used for training was smack in the heart of Ballysillan. Sectarian 
name-calling and skirmishing with the Protestants became a regular occurrence. 
And then in August 1969 the balloon went up, with Protestant mobs laying siege 
to Catholic ghettos in Belfast. There were pitched battles in Derry. Ardoyne 
came under attack with rows of houses burned down and hundreds of people forced 
to flee the district. Eamon Gilvarry remembes: "You just never slept. I mean 
you knew what was going on outside. There was a lot of shooting and I remember 
the taste of the CS gas. It didn't sink in, though, until you read the paper. I 
remember seeing that on the 14th or 15th of August a man sitting in his house 
here had been shot by the police. That's when it hit you, when you knew how 
serious it was." The neighbourhood organised its own defence. Buses were 
hijacked and placed across the narrow streets. Maurice and Eamon Gilvarry, Pat 
and Ciaran Murphy, Joe Skelly and Seamus Clarke - all joined in the rioting. 
Pat Murphy says that in the beginning they were caught up in the excitement and 
fear. Football had been overtaken by the more pressing need to defend the 
neighbourhood.

One of his strongest memories is of watching a group of young men running 
across waste ground while snipers were firing at them. The fleeing group were 
holding a piece of corrugated tin over their heads - useless if the snipers 
managed to find their range. Luckily the gunmen were bad shots. "It shows how 
naive we were about firearms and what they could do to you," he says.

Some of the football team moved away with their families. Others, like the 
Skellys and Clarkes and Gilvarrys, stayed. For a short time Ciaran Murphy and 
his mother emigrated to America. But the call of home proved too strong. It was 
a fateful return.

Pat Murphy still struggles with the memory of what happened to Ciaran. One 
night in 1974, the big footballer was walking home along Cliftonville Road, 
about 10 minutes from his home, when a car pulled up. There was a struggle and 
Ciaran was dragged inside.

The facts, barely adequate to describe the horror, come from police records: a 
young Catholic male stabbed repeatedly, shot several times in the face and 
body, then dumped in a bloody heap on the mountains overlooking Ardoyne. A 
random victim. The teacher who took the team photograph, Cyril Murray, was 
another, shot dead at his home by the UVF.

The nature of the conflict changed over the years. The Army came in. The IRA 
reappeared. Riots gave way to gun battles. Bombs were exploding all over the 
city. To the British army and police, Ardoyne was IRA territory, a place where 
soldiers were ambushed and killed.

Bitterness was deepening. Tom Dore, a soft-spoken teacher from County 
Limerick, remembers giving religious instruction classes to the boys from Holy 
Cross while the streets outside erupted. "They were young fellows on the 
threshold of life and had they been brought up anywhere else they would have 
gotten jobs or gone on to university. But their whole lives were restricted. 
They couldn't travel outside their own area. They had to survive. I tried to 
preach the gospel of forgiveness, but I often felt I was getting nowhere." Tom 
has fond memories of one member of the team, Seamus Clarke. "He was a fantastic 
fellow. If I had bet on anything it would have been that he might have become a 
bishop or something." Instead Seamus became a leading IRA man and is now living 
in the Irish Republic. He is still wanted in Northern Ireland to complete a 
sentence for terrorist offences.

Seamus Clarke wasn't the only team member to join the IRA. Sometime in the mid 
to late seventies, Maurice Gilvarry also joined up. He had been picked up by 
the Army during the sweeps that came with internment in 1971 and deposited in 
Long Kesh. At 16 he was one of the youngest internees.

After his release, Maurice became an active member of the Belfast IRA. Eamon 
Gilvarry remembers his brother seeming a great deal older when he came out of 
Long Kesh.

"In the beginning, around '68-'69, we didn't know who was in the IRA. Why did 
Maurice join up? To follow his mates? I never asked " In fact Eamon knew 
nothing of his brother's secret life. And then one weekend in winter 1981, 
Maurice went missing. Eamon spent he weekend going around the pubs and clubs of 
Ardoyne trying to track him down. The following Tuesday, he switched on the 
lunch-time news to hear that a body had been found on the border with the Irish 
Republic. The man had been shot in the head and was found with his hands tied 
behind his back. It was Maurice. The IRA issued a statement saying he had been 
executed as an informer.

Eamon's most painful memory is of the funeral. As the coffin was being carried 
up through Ardoyne, he noticed a group of local Republicans standing on the 
corner, laughing, deliberately and ostentatiously. "They laughed as we passed 
them with the coffin. I never laughed at anybody's death." And that is where 
the story of the boys of Holy Cross might end. Loss and grief and a certain 
amount of bitterness. But there is a postscript of hope. In the summer of 1998 
- 30 years after the photograph was taken - there is peace in Ardoyne. The 
rioting and gun battles are over. The Good Friday Agreement has been signed. 
Children are playing on the streets outside new houses.

Eamon Gilvarry tells me the peace is the best chance for a generation, that he 
feels hope in spite of his anger. A few streets away on the Gaelic football 
pitch, Pat Murphy is shouting instructions to a group of youngsters, the Holy 
Cross team of 1998. Pat is telling them they can be winners if they make the 
effort. It is up to them, he says. Up to them.

 The Boys Of Summer, the final part of Fergal Keane's Irish Journeys, is on 
BBC2 next Saturday at 7.30pm.
 