
The Open Data Incubator for Europe  <https://opendataincubator.eu/>(ODINE) has 
announced the nine businesses selected for its seventh cohort. The startups and 
SMEs come from the Netherlands, Germany, Spain, the UK, Austria and 
Switzerland. They provide solutions to pressing agricultural, environmental, 
medical and government transparency issues across the continent. Find out more 
about each company from the seventh cohort:

Netherlands

1848 <https://1848.nl/> is a company that opens up all political levels to 
improve government transparency.


Germany

ASK HELMUT <https://askhelmut.com/?locale=en> helps urbanites and tourists to 
discover the best events in town by combining technology with human curation.


green spin’s mofato <http://www.greenspin.de/de/mofato/> (modern farmer’s 
tool) is an open-data based and independent decision support tool to raise 
profitability and efficiency of large and mid-scale farms in Europe


Zumo <http://www.zumo.de/> is an agency for design and engineering 

Spain

Cropti <https://cropti.com/en/> is farm management software that enables helps 
agri-food players become more efficient through compliance of quality & 
traceability standards


UK

Environment Systems <http://www.envsys.co.uk/> offer freemium access to near 
real-time satellite derived core environmental data products, available over 
the web.


Land Insight <http://www.landinsight.io/> lets you find and assess off-market 
development land

Austria 

liimtec <http://www.liimtec.at/en/liimtec/> offers innovative solutions for 
modern health care

Switzerland

Zazuko aLOD <http://www.zazuko.com/> helps archival institutions to provide a 
more valuable catalog and increase its visibility by making it a well connected 
part of the growing Web of Linked Open Data.

The selected businesses receive up to €100,000 of equity-free grant funding 
from the ODINE programme, which supports European startups and SMEs in building 
sustainable businesses using open data.

In addition to funding, the businesses will have access to peer-networking, 
technology, datasets, mentorship, investors and media services throughout the 
six-months incubation period.

This advertisement feature is brought to you by ODINE 
<https://opendataincubator.eu/>, sponsors of the Guardian Media & Tech Network’s
Open Data Economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/open-data-economy> hub

 