
For seven decades BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 4’s 
Woman’s Hour has charted a social and political revolution in women’s lives – 
covering everything from backstreet abortions and the introduction of the pill 
to the fight for the Equal Pay Act.

70 years of Woman's Hour: ‘Our listeners like frank conversations about sex‘
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/08/70-years-of-womans-hour-radio-4-jenni-murray-jane-garvey-interview>
But not all aspects of women’s lives have changed – a poll to mark the show’s 
70th anniversary, published on Monday, has found that while the majority of 
female listeners are happier at work and in marriage than they were 40 years 
ago, many still worry about their appearance, as well as having concerns about 
health and money.

A special 70th anniversary programme of Woman’s Hour on Monday hosted by Jenni 
Murray <http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/womanshour/about/jenni_murray.shtml> and 
Jane Garvey 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/1rtmf0y9DWkzm3Pwb0cHP2g/jane-garvey>, 
will look at how the profile of its listeners has changed over the decades, 
with 60% of female respondents in employment today, compared with 31% in 1951.

Garvey, who has presented the show alongside Murray for nine years, told the 
Guardian that a glance at the script from the first ever show – which featured 
a section on how to “put your best face forward” – revealed the vast shift in 
women’s lives in the past 70 years. “It ends ‘a light dusting of powder can do 
wonders for your look and the family morale’, which I think shows that we have 
come a very long way,” she said. “Looking at the issues we talk about today you 
realise how much things have changed in the last 70 years, and the huge shift 
in our expectations compared with our grandmothers.”


But when Garvey joined the programme in 2007 she voiced some scepticism about 
its tone, saying: “One of my bugbears about it would be – and they know this – 
that there is too much about the negative side of being female and not enough 
about the many good factors.

“I would also like to have [fewer] middle-class ladies talking about cookery. 
Although there is nothing wrong with cookery, I think there is a massively 
middle-class bent to every programme onRadio 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4>.”

With 3.7 million listeners weekly, Woman’s Hour is now the second most popular 
daily podcast across BBC Radio – after The Archers – and a quarter of its 
listeners are under 35, while 40% are male.


“There simply isn’t anything else like it,” said Garvey. “The running order is 
such an incredible cocktail of things that everybody will find something they 
are interested in, something they want to know more about, or something they 
want to tell their mother, daughter or friend – that’s why it works.”


It survives, according to Murray, who has presented the programme for 29 
years, “because it’s endlessly interesting, completely trustworthy and always 
up to date on the often neglected interests and concerns of 52% of the 
population”.

Gwyneth Williams, controller of Radio 4, also lavished praise on the programme 
saying: “It is hard to imagine Radio 4 without Woman’s Hour. For 70 years the 
programme has been celebrating women and focusing on the issues that most 
affect their lives. It is part of our radical tradition and I am proud of the 
fresh voices, originality and alternative perspective that Woman’s Hour offers 
our listeners every day.” The show remains, according to guest presenter Emma 
Barnett, “the Rolls Royce of Radio 4 … It’s a programme that brings out the 
best in people as they know they have the space to share deep feelings with an 
incredibly engaged audience hanging on their every word,” she said. “Its 
listeners, male and female, trust it implicitly and the female gaze [through 
which] it reflects the world is invaluable and unique.”

The anniversary poll 
<http://survation.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/FTWET0710JN16WH.pdf> also 
found that women are also more positive about marriage in 2016 than 65 years 
ago, with 42% saying that men and women gave up equal amounts of freedom when 
married, compared to 25% of all respondents – female and male – who felt this 
way in 1951, according to a Gallup survey at the time.


Delving into the history of the show sheds light on the frustration many 
listeners felt when it launched on 7 October 1946. While the modern programme 
has explored taboo issues from the onset of menopause to female masturbation, 
the first Woman’s Hour was, in fact, presented by a man.

Aired at 2pm to coincide with the moment that busy housewives could briefly 
put their feet up before the children came home from school, BBC bosses hired 
Alan Ivimey, an ex-RAF-officer-turned-journalist who “specialised in writing 
for and talking to women” to present the radio show. A woman, they decided, 
risked being “resented” by her listeners.

The subjects covered included “mother’s midday meal” and “how to hang your 
husband’s suit” – much to the first listeners’ ire, according to Amanda 
Vickery, professor of early modern history at Queen Mary, University of London. 
“Citizen housewives were not be hectored by professional men or bossy matrons,” 
Vickery wrotein the Radio Times 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-10-07/womans-hour-was-launched-70-years-ago--but-the-bbc-almost-got-it-totally-wrong>
.

A doctor’s talk on “how to be a happy woman”, encouraging listeners to let go 
of “frustration”, lead one housewife to retort: “I should like him to do a hard 
day’s housework – bending over a sink washing, then shopping and queuing – then 
see if his backache is only frustration and not due to hard work.”


While listener Bridget Long, writing to The Daily Worker in 1946, complained: 
“The programme is much too patronising. What women want is a programme to 
compensate us for being tied to our domestic chores, to help us keep in touch 
with the world outside, whether it’s books, films, politics or other countries.”

Woman’s Hour’s popularity seems likely to endure into its eighth decade thanks 
to its “frank and honest” debate and “unique insight into women’s lives”, 
according to its editor, Alice Feinstein. But its most recent poll also 
suggests the need for a programme that challenges deeply rooted sexism.

In the 25-34 age bracket, only 27% of respondents considered themselves 
happier than their mothers were at their age, compared to 43% of those aged 65 
and over. And 70 years after those first make-up tips were broadcast on the 
first Woman’s Hour, 46% of younger listeners polled by the programme this year 
said they would consider having cosmetic surgery.

Woman’s Hour timeline

14 April 1948 The US first lady of the day, Eleanor Roosevelt, talks about 
women’s rights and being the driving force behind the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights. “Women should make their voices heard,” she says.

7 Oct 1956 Viscountess Nancy Astor, an American-born socialite and ardent 
supporter of social reforms for women and children, was the first woman to 
enter the Commons when she became MP for Plymouth in 1919.She talks to Mary 
Stocks about her early days in parliament 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01lfw2p> on the 80th anniversary of her 
maiden speech: “I wanted the world to get better and I knew it couldn’t get 
better if it was going to be ruled by men.”

19 September 1960 A ground-breaking programme about contraception, before the 
pill is introduced the following year.

13 January 1963 Enid Blyton, the celebrated author of children’s classics The 
Famous Five, Noddy and Malory Towers,reveals that her motivation is to inspire 
children <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01lg00v> to live moral and happy 
lives.

31 March 1971 Fashion designer Mary Quant talks about her creations 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01ngk5j>. The mini skirt became an iconic 
symbol of swinging London.

12 September 1979 Hollywood great Bette Davis talks about her long career 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01my519>, the often unconventional and 
unsympathetic characters she played, her awards and family.

27 December 1999 Woman’s Hour meets “that woman”. Monica Lewinsky gives her 
version of the story of her affair with American president Bill Clinton, which 
nearly brought him down and led to his impeachment.Jenni Murray dedicates the 
whole show to her interview. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01ldp4r>

20 December 2005 England’s first lesbian couple to have a civil partnership, 
Rev Debbie Gaston and Elaine Cook, appear on the show to discuss the landmark 
event.

2 February 2007 Former Dutch MP and human rights campaigner Ayaan Hirsi Ali 
discusses women in Islam and the death threats she has received 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01ld1tj> for questioning some aspects of her 
religion.

19 May 2011 Artist Tracey Emin on her latest exhibition, Love Is What You Want.
She asks Murray live on air if she masturbates 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0112y48>, paving the way for a later 
programme on the taboo subject of female masturbation.

15 November 2013 Oprah Winfrey opens up to Murray and talks about her memories 
of the civil rights movement <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03h7grl> in 
America.

3 July 2014 Hillary Clinton tells Murray that women in her position are 
treated as “honorary men” <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b048033v> and male 
politicians often see her fight for women’s rights as no more than a hobby 
horse. She adds: “I want to see a woman in the White House.”



The Woman’s Hour Collection <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01lhyz1>

Historical highlights from the Woman’s Hour archive since 1946 (click on the 
link and then scroll down to see list).

Additional reporting by Luc Torres



 