
If there are any female Guardian Money readers born on 5 March 1953, then 
congratulations (or commiserations): you officially reached state pension age 
on Wednesday 6 January, and can start claiming your basic state pension of up 
to £115.95 a week.

But if you are a woman born exactly one year later, on 5 March 1954, then you 
won’t hit state pension age until July 2019 – ie, not for another 
three-and-a-half years. By that time the woman born in 1953 will arguably be in 
a much stronger financial position because she will have received well in 
excess of £20,000 of basic state pension (assuming she is entitled to the full 
amount), purely because she happened to arrive in the world 12 months before 
you did.

If anyone is looking for reasons why many women are up in arms about “unfair” 
changes to the state pension age, then the weird quirk in the UK pension rules 
outlined above is just one.

However, it’s not just the alleged inequality in the system that has got 
people angry; it’s also the speed with which the changes were made and the poor 
way in which they were communicated. By Wednesday afternoona petition calling 
for a better deal <https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/110776> for all the 
women affected by this issue had attracted more than 106,000 signatures. On 
Thursday the SNP’s Mhairi Black – at 21 the UK’s youngest MP since the 17th 
century – led a Commons debate on the issue, telling MPs that women are being 
“shafted and short-changed”.

How did this issue arise? 

The situation relates to the planned equalisation of the state pension age 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/310231/spa-timetable.pdf>
 (SPA) for men and women to 65 by November 2018, followed by a further increase 
to 66 by October 2020.

There are growing calls for the government to take action following claims 
that several hundred thousand women born in the 1950s, particularly those born 
in 1954, have had their retirement plans “shattered”, campaigners say. Many say 
that for decades they had expected to receive their pension at 60, then 
subsequently discovered that their SPA had increased by perhaps four, five or 
even six years.

Most of those campaigning on this issue agree with equalisation, but say the 
way it has been handled has been a mess. The result, they say, is financial 
hardship for hundreds of thousands of women who now don’t have enough time to 
make alternative plans.

The result is financial hardship for hundreds of thousands of women who don’t 
have enough time to make alternative plans

What changes have been introduced?

From the 1940s until April 2010, the SPA was 60 for women and 65 for men. An 
increase in the SPA for women to 65, phased in between April 2010 and 2020, was 
included in thePensions <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pensions> Act 1995. 
However, in 2011 the coalition government pushed through a speeding-up of the 
latter part of this timetable so that women’s SPA will instead increase to 65 
between April 2016 and November 2018.

On top of that there were plans to raise the equalised age to 66 by April 
2020, though that was pushed back slightly to October 2020, following a public 
outcry.

So what does all this mean?

There are several scenarios as a result of the changes. These are:

• Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> born between 6 April 
1950 and 5 April 1953 have an SPA of between 60 and 63. They will reach SPA by 
March 2016.

• Women born between 6 April 1953 and 5 December 1953 have an SPA of between 
63 and 65. They will reach SPA by November 2018.

• Men and women born between 6 December 1953 and 5 April 1960 have an SPA of 
between 65 and 66. They will reach SPA by October 2020.

100,000 back call to compensate women caught out by state pension rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/04/100000-compensate-women-state-pension-rise>
Who are the biggest losers?

Millions of men and women will now have to wait longer before they can claim 
their state pension. However, arguably the biggest losers are the estimated 
500,000 women born between 6 October 1953 and 5 April 1955 whose SPA is being 
upped by more than a year. Of those, around 300,000 (those born between 
December 1953 and October 1954) will have their SPA whacked up by 18 months.

As highlighted above, there are a lot of quirks in the system. It is hard to 
see how anyone could defend a one-year difference in age resulting in a 
three-and-a-half year difference in state pension age. One woman who has given 
evidence to MPs on this issue is62-year-old Linda Edwards-Shea 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/work-and-pensions-committee/understanding-the-new-state-pension/written/25287.html>
, who says her two SPA increases “represent a financial loss of approximately 
£30,000 from my planned old age”. She reckons she would have to live into her 
mid-90s to recoup what she is set to lose. Edwards-Shea says she left 
employment in 2001 and retrained as a freelancer with the expectation that she 
would get her state pension on her 60th birthday in 2013, which is no longer 
the case.

The DWP’s communications around the state pension changes generally have been 
pretty poor
Tom McPhail 
Were people not told about the change?

Shockingly, the government didn’t write to any woman affected by the rise in 
the pension ages for nearly 14 years after the law was passed in 1995. The 
Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) started sending out letters from April 
2009 onwards.Responding to a Freedom of Information request 
<https://www.whatdotheyknow.com/request/292191/response/715260/attach/2/FoI%203902%20reply.pdf>
, the DWP revealed that some women did not find out until they were 59 that 
their SPA of 60 had been delayed.

“Women were given as little as one year’s notice of up to a six-year increase 
to their state pension age,” says the campaign groupWomen Against State Pension 
Inequality 
<https://www.facebook.com/WASPI-Women-Against-State-Pension-Inequality-Campaign-877054125688402/>
 (Waspi), adding: “Many women report receiving no letter ever. Others say 
letters were sent to the wrong address.”

Waspi also says it is still receiving reports of women who are just finding 
out about the changes, and claims the way in which the changes have been made 
“unfairly and disproportionately” impacts on many born in the 1950s. It says 
the government must make “fair transitional arrangements” for these people.

What do others say?

Tom McPhail at investment firm Hargreaves Lansdown says: “The DWP’s 
communications around the state pension changes generally have been pretty 
poor.” But he adds that one problem Waspi faces is that any concession by the 
government could quickly run into billions of pounds.

David Robbins at pensions advisory firm Willis Towers Watson points out that 
the women who will have to wait longer to claim will also get their state 
pension calculated under the new system. “Although the so-called ‘single tier’ 
pension will in the long term produce smaller pensions for men and women than 
the system it replaces, it will typically be more generous for this group of 
women approaching retirement.”

Mhairi Black, MP for Paisley and Renfrewshire South: why I’m fighting for a 
better deal
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstate-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50f67f4f858c707e6164ce1fa2277915bde1e064%2F747_426_4967_2980%2F4967.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Women%E2%80%99s%20state%20pension%20age%20rise%3A%20an%20unfair%20burden%20or%20a%20necessary%20reform%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstate-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Women%E2%80%99s%20state%20pension%20age%20rise%3A%20an%20unfair%20burden%20or%20a%20necessary%20reform%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstate-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50f67f4f858c707e6164ce1fa2277915bde1e064%2F747_426_4967_2980%2F4967.jpg>
 Mhairi Black MP. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
I initially became aware of this issue through constituents bringing it to my 
attention. Many women came forward to tell me they had not had any notification 
of changes to their state pension age (SPA), and those who had received 
information had found it conflicting and constantly changing.

In one case a woman was told she had paid enough national insurance 
contributions to receive her full state pension when she turned 60 (which was 
only a few months away), only to receive a further letter three weeks later 
telling her she would not be entitled to her pension until she was nearly 66.

Some women were told by MPs and ministers that they must have given the 
Department for Work and Pensions an incorrect address, and this is why they 
hadn’t received any notification – yet they had been living in these homes for 
up to 20 years.

Paying for the difference: the gender gap in pensions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/14/gender-gap-pensions-women-retirement-plans>
The persistent failure by the DWP to notify the women affected has left an 
unfair burden on them, and refused them the chance to prepare for the increase 
in the SPA. One of my constituents told me: ‘The coalition and this present 
government have stripped us of our pensions with no prior warning, and with no 
regard to the contract we all entered into when we were 17.’

I think that is the perfect way to describe the actions of the government. 
Women have been stripped of pensions they paid into for years and 
the government’s response has been: “The cost of prolonging this inequality 
[ie, continuing with a non-equalised state pension age] would be several 
billions of pounds.”

As always with this government, the cost of everything falls on those who 
struggle most in society. After going after people on low wages, and the 
disabled and women, they are now chasing pensioners. It is grossly unfair and 
not at all surprising that this government can find money for sending bombs 
overseas but decide it is too expensive to look after our pensions.

Shailesh Vara, parliamentary under secretary of state at the DWP: the 
government case
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstate-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac1c522ea8d601f33c28c97c3db9e308130b6221%2F344_287_2499_1498%2F2499.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Women%E2%80%99s%20state%20pension%20age%20rise%3A%20an%20unfair%20burden%20or%20a%20necessary%20reform%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstate-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Women%E2%80%99s%20state%20pension%20age%20rise%3A%20an%20unfair%20burden%20or%20a%20necessary%20reform%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Fstate-pension-inequality-cost-women-20000-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac1c522ea8d601f33c28c97c3db9e308130b6221%2F344_287_2499_1498%2F2499.jpg>
 Shailesh Vara MP. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
The makeup of the UK population has changed a great deal since the state 
pension age (SPA) was first set at 60 for women in 1940. People are living 
longer and healthier lives, and so the proportion of time spent in retirement 
has increased.

But the amount of time spent above SPA has differed substantially between men 
and women due to women both living longer, and reaching state pension age 
earlier. While women were eligible at 60, men had to wait until 65. This means 
that women reaching SPA in 2010 would spend on average 41% of their adult lives 
in receipt of the state pension, while men would spend only 31%.

Clearly there was a lack of fairness – so we equalised the SPA at 65 for men 
and women. As with any change in policy, one group will always be 
affected first. In this case, women born in 1950 were the first to see an 
increase in their SPA. Due to further sharp rises in life expectancy, we then 
had to make the difficult decision to speed up the rises to 65 and 66.

The government listened to concerns, and introduced a measure to ensure 
that the maximum change to SPA that anyone would face is 18 months rather than 
two years. This concession means that it will reach 66 by October 2020, rather 
than April 2020, and is worth more than £1bn.

It is important to remember that those affected by faster equalisation will 
reach state pension age after the introduction of the new state pension which 
will be more generous for many women. Forecasts show that 10 years after 
implementation, over 650,000 women will benefit – receiving on average £8 a 
week more.

Security in retirement is a key concern for this government, and I am proud of 
the reforms we’ve introduced. For us to keep providing this retirement income 
we need to ensure the state pension system is sustainable. Equalisation is an 
important part of this and will ensure that we can continue to provide support 
for the long term.
 