
World stock markets surged on Monday as investors grew increasingly confident 
that Hillary Clinton will win the US presidential election, after the FBI said 
itwould take no further action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email-investigation-criminal-james-comey>
 against the Democratic nominee over her use of a private email server.


The three main US indices all ended the day more than 2% higher, following 
strong gains in markets across the world. The US dollar also strengthened and 
the oil price ticked up by more than 1% in further signs of traders’ confidence 
in a Clinton victory.

Analysts fear 'volatile' economy – and perhaps recession – under Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/us-money-blog/2016/nov/07/investors-fear-president-donald-trump-economy-volatility-recession>
Investor anxiety that the Republican nominee, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, might secure the presidency 
on Tuesday had pushed Wall Street lower for the previous nine days – the 
longest losing streak in more than 35 years. Those fears were enhanced 
following the FBI’s announcement on 28 October that it was reviewing newly 
discovered Clinton emails.

However, on Sunday night FBI director James Comey told Congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email-investigation-criminal-james-comey>
 that a review of the new emails “had not changed our conclusions that we 
expressed in July with respect to secretary Clinton”.

Clinton’s campaign was also boosted by early voting results, especially in 
Florida, a key swing state where Hispanic turnout is said to be 86% higher than 
in 2012.

Four major polls on Monday showed Clinton leading the race for the White 
House. An ABC News/Washington Post poll put the Democratic nominee on 47% 
compared to Trump on 43%. The final Reuters/Ipsos poll before the election 
begins put Clinton’s chances of defeating Trump at 90%.

“It is certainly a relief rally for Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> – investors worldwide 
were concerned about the uncertainty surrounding Trump,” said Jack Ablin, chief 
investment officer at BMO Private Bank in Chicago. “The other, more subtle 
reason, is if they are ending this email controversy you are not going to have 
a cloud hanging over her administration, creating roadblocks to getting things 
done.”

The Dow Jones Industrial Average finished the day 371 points, or 2.1%, higher 
at 18,260 points. The S&P 500 increased by 2.22% to 2,132 and the Nasdaq added 
2.37% to 5,166.17. Earlier in the day the FTSE 100 in London had closed up 1.7% 
to 6,807 points – its biggest one-day rise since 2 September.

The US dollar gained 1% against the pound, sending the value of Sterling to 
$1.2390. The greenback also rose significantly against the yen and the euro.

The Mexican peso, which has recently become inversely linked to the 
probability of a Trump victory, jumped 2% against the dollar to 18.7 pesos to 
the dollar.

US crude oil gained 1.1% to $44.57 a barrel, while the price of gold – a safe 
haven in times of anxiety and uncertainty – fell by 1.5% to $1,285 an ounce.
 