
The Essendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> supplements scandal 
is set to continue for months after the World Anti-Doping Agency announced it 
will appeal the AFL anti-doping tribunal’s not guilty verdicts on current and 
former Bombers players.

 In March, 34 players were cleared of using the banned peptide Thymosin beta-4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/31/afl-essendon-players-cleared-anti-doping-tribunal>
 during the 2012 season, with the tribunal saying there was insufficient 
evidence of their guilt.

Last month the Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority opted not to appeal the 
decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/apr/21/asada-decision-mockery-doping-scandal-investigation>
, which followed a two-year joint investigation with the AFL. But Wada, based 
in the Canadian city of Montreal,announced on Tuesday morning 
<https://www.wada-ama.org/en/media/news/2015-05/wada-statement-on-afl-cases> 
its intentions to take the case to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, 
following a “thorough examination of the evidence”.

It is understood appeals to the CAS – of which Australian Olympic Committee 
head John Coates is president – are heard “de novo”, meaning the whole case 
will start fresh and will not be restricted to what has already been argued.

Wada’s decision means the protracted supplements saga will extend well into the
AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> season and Bombers players could 
once again face possible suspension.

Coach James Hird said the announcement will be a distraction to his team just 
as they thought they were done with the two-and-a-half year saga.

“They’ve gone through it once ... they believe they’ve done nothing wrong, 
they believe they haven’t taken anything illegal,” Hird told reporters in 
Melbourne. “We believe that, the AFL tribunal believes that. They’ve been 
proven innocent once, and they’ll be proven innocent again.”

Essendon chairman Paul Little had earlier told Triple M’s Hot Breakfast on 
Tuesday morning that the latest twist in the saga had taken the club by 
surprise.

“[It is] early days but I would have thought it probably could be heard 
reasonably quickly. Everyone involved has pretty much got their lives back ... 
but now it looks like we have to jump back on the horse.”

The move, which is sure to anger the AFL, was welcomed by Asada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/asada> chief executive Ben McDevitt, who 
remains convinced Bombers players took a banned substance as part of sports 
scientist Stephen Dank’s controversial program.

“Asada has handed over a comprehensive brief of evidence to assist Wada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> in its preparation for the CAS 
hearing,” McDevitt said.

 Former Asada boss Richard Ings described the move as “courageous”. 

In a separate judgment made last month, the AFL tribunal cleared Dank of 21 of 
31 charges while finding him guilty of multiple offences of trafficking banned 
substances. He has indicated he will appeal the findings against him.
 