
The Cheltenham Festival <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival> 
has become a crunch event in the life of the new Authorised Betting Partner 
policy adopted by horse racing. With two months remaining before jump racing’s 
biggest week the World Hurdle is technically unsponsored and its usual backer, 
Ladbrokes, remains outside the ABP tent.

Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> has sponsored the 
race, the feature contest on the Festival’s third day, for the past 10 years. 
Its deal has been renewed annually and both sides hope that it may be renewed 
once more.

The sticking point is that no deal can be completed until Ladbrokes achieves 
ABP status, which would require the firm to pay racing an agreed portion of the 
profits it makes from racing bets online. So far only Betfair, Bet365 and 32Red 
are ABPs. The Jockey Club, which ownsCheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham>, has pledged not to sign or 
extend sponsorship deals with non-ABP bookmakers.

“The ambition, the appetite and the budget are all firmly in place for us to 
sponsor the race this year,” said David Williams, director of media for 
Ladbrokes. “It is certainly our hope that we will sponsor the Ladbrokes World 
Hurdle.

Newmarket could be the big loser in new television rights deal with ITV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/04/newmarket-television-right-deal-itv>
“This is a race that we’ve worked hard with Cheltenham in recent years to 
develop from its former position as a shoulder race on Gold Cup day and we 
believe that both Cheltenham and Ladbrokes have benefited from those efforts.”

But an official at Cheltenham insisted no deal can be done unless Ladbrokes 
signs up for ABP status. Along with other major bookmakers, Ladbrokes has 
responded toracing’s ABP policy, announced in October,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/20/bookmakers-sponsorship-bha>with 
dismay.

Speaking in mid-December, the firm’s chief executive, Jim Mullen, said: “If it 
continues on the current path, we will be pushed into a corner and fight or 
flight will become the only option available to us. It is my belief that we all 
have a duty as leaders to be very, very careful that we avoid such scenarios 
because they will be damaging, perhaps even more than we currently realise.”

Not all racecourses have responded with enthusiasm to the ABP policy and, on 
Sunday, Ascot became the latest to offer only partial support, leaving open the 
possibility that the Queen’s track might yet do a deal with a non-ABP firm.

But Nick Rust, chief executive of the British Horseracing Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-horseracing-authority>, said on 
Monday he did not believe that Ascot’s officials intend to do any such thing.

“The proof is in what actually happens,” he said. “We haven’t seen one 
racecourse saying: ‘We will ignore this concept and vehemently disagree with 
it.’ Ascot want to be able to foster a positive relationship with betting 
operators, as do we. I think they want to work behind the scenes to make sure 
we get these people onside and York is the same. They very much want to be in a 
position where their major sponsors can come forward and reach a fair agreement 
with racing.”

Rust said it was too soon to judge the success or otherwise of the ABP scheme, 
which would be best assessed after a full year. “There’s no way in a sport 
that’s not vertically integrated, as racing is not, that individual commercial 
organisations would all sign up to something like this within three months. 
There is momentum to this and I’m quite confident it will succeed.”
 