
This is version 4.0 of the Dyer study, the Studium Scholasticum. I had the 
same deal - same desk, same paint, same shelves - in three previous places. 
It's at the top of the house, as all studies have to be: you know, the brains 
of the operation. Last year the roof started leaking and it was like having 
water on the brain, but that's fixed now.

There's an Arthur Koestler essay in which he says there are two kinds of 
writers: those whose desks offer a view from the window and those who like to 
face the wall. I'm of the latter persuasion, though I can't remember what kind 
of writer this makes me in the Koestlerian scheme of things. One who likes to 
have a shelf above his desk, I suppose.

I love efficiency. I would like to have a completely clean desk, but stuff 
mounts up. I always have a photo of Don Cherry taped above my desk (to the 
left), but it's not always the same picture. Whenever I come across a new 
picture of the Don, I replace the old one. There's also a photo of my dad in 
front of the council house where he grew up, looking like a member of the 
leisure class with his tennis racket and whites.

Apart from that there's nothing totemic, just stuff that's ended up here. (My 
wife is always fly-tipping stuff in my study. I once got back from America to 
find she'd dumped a huge chest of drawers up here.) Oh, I guess the red chair 
has ritualistic value: it's where I worship daily at the altar of the nap-god.

My real pride and joy is the electronic tampura (the little box to the left of 
the desk) which provides the drone in Indian classical music. I got the idea 
from Talvin Singh. We were staying in the same hotel in Varanasi and he said he 
kept one going the whole time. I'm writing a book half set in India, so it's 
not a complete indulgence. The idea is that, when it's playing, my head's in 
Varanasi.
 