
Increased infrastructure spending in the US and UK could boost business at 
consultancy groupWS Atkins, the company said, even as its profits were hit by 
tough markets for its oil and gas division.

Half year pretax profits fell 58% to £22.4m, partly due to a £23m write-down 
of North American oil and gas outlets.

But its UK and other US businesses performed well, and it has kept its outlook 
for the year unchanged. And it is looking forward to next week’s Autumn 
Statement, and more details on US president-elect Donald Trump’s spending 
plans. Chief executive Uwe Krueger told Reuters:

There is a strong intent by the governments, be it the new administration of 
president-elect Trump or be it here in the UK, to continue to be steadfast or 
even significantly increase investment into infrastructure...and that plays 
very much to our strengths.

However the profit fall has seen Atkins’ shares lose nearly 2% to £16.28. 
Analysts at Numis were still positive:

In-line interims and an unchanged outlook mean that we leave forecasts 
unchanged. As previously stated, the better performing businesses have 
continued to do well (UK, North America) while Middle East and oil & gas have 
faced headwinds. Looking medium term, management references government 
commitments and a need for infrastructure spending (UK, US), and we note strong 
recent peer group share prices, particularly post Trump... Applying a peer 
group 2017 multiple to our 2018 forecasts, we raise our target to 1900p from 
1710p.

Among the mid-caps, AA has accelerated 5.4p to 259.8p after it unveiled a bond 
exchange package which should reduce interest costs and enhance its credit 
profile. Liberum analysts said:

The cash interest saving may mitigate any potential increase in the pension 
deficit recovery payments from the current level of £14m as a result of the 
triennial review, which management expect to see shortly, with agreement 
expected before June 2017 (noting the £622m IAS 19 deficit at the interims). 
Management is looking at ways of mitigating any impact from the increase in 
deficit.

We leave our estimate unchanged at this stage... From a P&L perspective, we 
can see a £5m charge in 2017 and a £5m benefit from 2018 onwards. From a cash 
flow perspective there are £20m of up front costs, but £40m of interest savings 
over 5 years (£8m x5).

Lower down the market, eSports company Gfinity has jumped 8% to 11.25p after 
it launched a new eSports league format,Gfinity Elite Series 
<http://www.gfinityelite.com/>. Analyst David Johnson at its broker Allenby 
Capital said:

The series will generate sponsorship and broadcasting rights for Gfinity [and] 
represents a major investment for Gfinity and commercialisation is at a very 
early stage. As a result we are suspending our forecasts until proof points 
start to emerge.

Gfinity has demonstrated its ability to successfully stage high quality 
arena-based and smaller online events and built relationships with publishers, 
broadcasters, sponsors and players. The Elite Series represents the next level 
and enables Gfinity to capitalise on its reputation and a substantial 
opportunity.

Finally, another new entrant to the Aim market will make its debut at the end 
of the month.

Cosmetics group Warpaint London, whose flagship brand is W7, has raised £23m 
in a placing and is expected to join the market at 97p a share, valuing the 
business at £62.6m. The move will allow the company to raise its profile and 
get access to capital, as well as enabling it to use paper for potential 
acquisitions. The company is profitable, with half year earnings increasing 
from £2.6m to £3.3m.
 