
Yemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> is facing a food crisis of 
"catastrophic proportions", with almost half the population going hungry and a 
third of children in some areas severely malnourished, aid agencies have warned.

A coalition of seven humanitarian organisations – Care International 
<http://www.careinternational.org.uk>, International Medical Corps 
<http://www.internationalmedicalcorps.org.uk/>, Islamic Relief 
<http://www.islamic-relief.org.uk/index.aspx>, Mercy Corps 
<https://www.mercycorps.org/>, Merlin <http://www.merlin.org.uk/>, Oxfam 
<http://www.oxfam.org.uk/?pscid=ps_ggl_01-Brand-High+Vol> and Save the Children 
<http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/> – is urging the international community to 
step up aid before Yemen slides further into poverty and political instability.

The Middle Eastern country's already precarious state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/may/22/yemen-bombing-repair-north-south-divide>
 was highlighted on Monday whena suicide bomber attacked a military parade, 
killing more than 90 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/21/sanaa-suicide-bomb-attack> and 
wounding at least 220. The bombing, one of the deadliest in recent years, was a 
setback in Yemen's battle against al-Qaida-affiliated Islamists and has 
heightened concerns over a country in the frontline of the US global war on 
militants.

The aid agencies – which point out that the UN's humanitarian appeal 
<http://www.unocha.org/cap/appeals/humanitarian-response-plan-yemen-2012> has 
received only 43% of the funding it needs – are urging delegates at Wednesday's 
international Friends of Yemen conference to do more to tackle the food crisis.

The agencies say hunger in Yemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> has 
doubled since 2009 and was exacerbated by last year's political upheaval, which 
saw the dictator Ali Abdullah Saleh ousted from power after 33 years and 
replaced by President Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi.

Penny Lawrence, Oxfam's international director, said that although donors were 
concentrating on politics and security, they had to focus on more basic and 
pressing issues. "Yemeni families are at the brink and have exhausted their 
ways of coping with the crisis," she said.

"Failure to respond adequately to the humanitarian needs now will put more 
lives at risk, further entrench poverty and could undermine political 
transition in the country."

Her fears were echoed by Jerry Farrell, Save the Children's director in Yemen. 
"Political instability, conflict and high prices have left families across the 
country going hungry," he said. "We know that children always suffer the most 
when food is in short supply, and unless urgent humanitarian action is taken, 
Yemen will be plunged into a hunger crisis of catastrophic proportions."

Fighting in the north and south of the country has forced nearly 95,000 people 
to leave their homes over the last two months, bringing the total number of 
those displaced in the country to close to half a million.

UN estimates, meanwhile, put the number of children facing life-threatening 
levels of malnutrition at 267,000. Oxfam has also reported an increase in early 
marriage as families marry off their daughters young in order to ease the 
burden of the crisis.

Although the UN has so far asked for $447m [£283m] of aid, it is thought it 
will increase its appeal substantially next month as the situation in Yemen 
worsens.

"The hungry of Yemen cannot wait," said Hashem Awnallah, country director of 
Islamic Relief Yemen. "Donors need to heed the lessons of the Horn of Africa 
and respond now before the crisis further deepens."

Britain, which will co-chair the Friends of Yemen conference in Riyadh, has 
promised £28m of aid to the country, but warned that Monday's suicide bombing 
underlined the severity of the situation in Yemen.

The international development minister, Alan Duncan 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/About-us/Our-organisation/Ministers/Alan-Duncan/>, said 
the aid – which will be delivered through agencies – would provide both 
immediate help and a "foundation for progress". But Duncan, who will be among 
those at the meeting, said that Yemen was still in a very fragile state. "The 
new government of Yemen has been in place for a matter of months and has 
already taken important steps," he said. "But yesterday's terrible suicide 
bombing reminds us that the country still faces huge challenges.

"If progress is to be maintained then the international community must back 
the government. Without that support, the alternative is a slide towards state 
failure and an increased threat from international terrorism."

Dfid officials said the aid could mean emergency food for up to a quarter of a 
million people as well as safe water sources, shelter and healthcare for those 
fleeing the violence.

It could also help fund education for 60,000 children in conflict zones and 
pay for goods and labour to support 35,000 adults.

Speaking at the Nato summit in Chicago on Monday, Barack Obama <> also 
expressed concern over extremist activity in Yemen and pledged more aid to 
counter it.

"That's important for US safety," he said. "It's also important for the 
stability of Yemen and the region."

Obama's counter-terrorism adviser, John Brennan, telephoned Hadi to offer US 
help in the investigation into Monday's bombing, adding that it "would stand by 
Yemen's side at this difficult time".

Washington is increasing its support for Hadi's government but the US 
military's drone attacks targeting militants in Yemen have frequently killed 
civilians and are deeply resented by Yemenis, even the many who abhor al-Qaida.
 