
Willie Mullins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins> bagged his 
sixth Grade One in the space of a week when Yorkhill won the Tolworth Hurdle, 
sauntering through the race to a late stage before being made to work by O O 
Seven on the run-in. Underfoot conditions were extremely testing, so an 
effortless victory was not to be expected but Yorkhill travelled with 
surprising smoothness for most of this and will be some talent if, as 
connections claim, he can be better again on a sounder surface.

“The pace they went and the way he finished, I was very impressed,” Mullins 
said. “The second is no slouch. They were all winners last time out. I’m going 
to take it at Grade One value. I was worried, being by Presenting, that he 
mightn’t handle the ground. He would prefer better ground and Nicky Henderson’s 
horse is by Flemensfirth, which would be soft ground regulars. But I think he 
even surprised me how well he did it.

Lizzie Kelly: The only person who really believed in me was me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/02/lizzie-kelly-tea-for-two-boxing-day->
“Ruby [Walsh] arrived a little early, I thought, with plenty in hand. Andrew 
Tinkler [on O O Seven] was pressing from the bottom turn to make sure it was a 
staying contest, trying to get our fella off it, but he just kept going. Very 
pleased with him.”

Yorkhill was clipped a few points for two races at the Cheltenham Festival in 
March, Mullins indicating that his instinct is to go for the Supreme Novice 
Hurdle. He also trains the favourite for that race, the 3-1 shot Min, while 
Yorkhill is third in most lists at 9-1. The alternative would be the longer 
Neptune, for which he is 8-1 second-favourite. Bellshill, the Mullins-trained 
favourite for that race, runs at Naas on Sunday.

“I’ve always had a belief that he’s fast enough, that he has plenty of pace,” 
Mullins said. “We know he stays three miles from a point-to-point and from 
winning his maiden the last day. But he’s always shown us plenty of speed at 
home and the Supreme Novice is certainly not out of the equation at this stage.”

Mullins also reflected a little further on the question of a Festival target 
for hisVautour, narrowly beaten in the King George VI Chase on Boxing Day. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/26/cue-card-wins-king-george-vi-chase>
 The way the horse tired that day suggests to many that the longer Gold Cup 
would be beyond him but Mullins’s instinctive preference is to go for that race.

Asked if he would run both Vautour and the favourite, Djakadam, who is in the 
same ownership, in the Festival’s highlight, Mullins replied: “We could, you 
know. If you’ve a Gold Cup horse … I haven’t been lucky enough to win one, so 
I’ll try and take all I can.

“They’ll all have another run, I imagine, before the Festival. We’ll see 
what’s there. I’ve no doubt our fella’s way better at Cheltenham than he is 
anywhere else. Every year, he’s improved his form by about a stone from the 
middle of winter to March.”

Mullins, who had a winner at Taunton in midweek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/30/willie-mullins-myska-taunton-ruby-walsh>
, said he expected to continue running more horses in Britain than has been his 
wont, a consequence of having so many talented animals and not enough races in 
Ireland. “I imagine we will, the way the thing is going, to try and get runs 
into them,” he said.
 