
The Yorkshire Garden 
<http://www.yorkshire.com/mediacentre/press-releases/people-power-sees-yorkshire-garden-make-chelsea-history>
 has been an eyecatcher at the Chelsea Flower Show for the last three years, 
always winning an award but not yet the elusive gold medal.

Yorkshire people like to come first, so this is a niggle. Next month, the 
county will be back with another attempt at top prize, this time based on its 
most famous writers.

Charlotte, Emily and Anne 
<http://www.haworth-village.org.uk/brontes/bronte_story/bronte_story.asp>, 
natch. The garden's organisers have teamed up with the Bronte Parsonage Museum 
<http://www.bronte.info> at Haworth to create a microcosm of the wild Pennine 
moors which surrounded the sisters. They wrote of them often, and not always in 
the wuthering terms which have created a worldwide image of bleak grandeur that 
is actually only part of the whole.
 Not gardening but writing; the talented sisters. Photograph: Jon Jones/Jon 
Jones/Sygma/Corbis 
But were they actually competent gardeners themselves? To their surprise, the 
organisers of the project have come to the conclusion: No. Busy with their 
writing and preferring to tramp the narrow cloughs and wide-open moortops above 
the village, the Brontes seem to have let the parsonage garden go to seed.

The garden's designer Tracy Foster <http://www.tracyfostergardendesign.co.uk> 
notes the absence of any detailed references to gardening in Charlotte's 
letters to friends – the most informative part of theBronte Society 
<http://www.bronte.info>'s archive. Andrew Denton of Welcome to Yorkshire  
<http://www.yorkshire.com>says: 

She did not discuss gardening or the garden with her lifelong friend Ellen 
Nussey <http://mick-armitage.staff.shef.ac.uk/anne/ellen.html> – and she would 
have done if it was a part of her life which had strong meaning. It is 
fascinating, given the sisters' love of the landscape that surrounded them and 
which provided so much escape and inspiration. Charlotte was a very adept 
painter of flowers too, but it seems she took little interest in trying to grow 
her own.

One passage in Nussey's Reminiscences of 1871, reprinted in Early Visitors to 
Haworth also goes further than the negative evidence of gardening failing to 
feature in the sisters' papers.

The Parsonage is quite another habitation now from the Parsonage of earlier 
days. The garden which was nearly all grass and posessing only a few stunted 
thorns and shrubs and a few currant bushes which Emily and Anne treasured as 
their bit of fruit garden, is now a perfect arcadia of floral culture and 
beauty.


She goes on:

The Brontes did not live 'in' their house except for its uses of eating, 
drinking and resting. They lived in the free expanse of hill moorland, its 
purple heather, its dells and glens and brooks.
 Just room for blackcurrants: the Bronte parsonage museum from the churchyard 
at Haworth. Photograph: Alamy 
It is these which Foster and her helpers are hoping to re-imagine in the cosy, 
cluttered world of the flower show. It's quite a touch call to summon up the 
sough of the wind or the cry of the curlew in London SW3, but optimism reigns. 
Foster says:

I've taken inspiration from the unique Yorkshire landscape that also inspired 
the Brontës. It has a captivating tension between beauty and bleakness and I'm 
trying to reflect. I hope to convey the emotional essence of the place that 
inspired the girls to write such wonderful works of literature, and also to 
encourage more people to rediscover Haworth, the Brontës and Yorkshire for 
themselves.

The latter notion is dear to the heart of Welcome to Yorkshire's chief 
executive Gary Verity, who says:

The Brontës' Yorkshire Garden will showcase to the world the wild and 
wonderful landscape of Yorkshire as a source of inspiration for some of the 
finest literary works of fiction. We hope it will encourage more people to 
rediscover this area of Yorkshire for themselves as well as seeing more of our 
county's wonderful gardens.

Last year, Chris Thomond and I made a series of three films about the 
Yorkshire garden 2011 which was on the theme of the Art of Yorkshire - 
Hepworth, Hockney and Moore in particular. They're here, if you have time for a 
look.

The garden's main model is the 'Bronte bridge' 
<http://www.haworth-village.org.uk/brontes/places/bronte_falls.asp>, a clapper 
stone crossing of the beck on the walk - complete with signpost in Japanese and 
English - up toTop Withens, the ruined farm 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/the-northerner/2011/dec/16/emilybronte-yorkshire-topwithens-pennines>
 which is always said to have been Emily's inspiration for Wuthering Heights.

Let's hope it wins the gold, as well a hat-trick of the People's Choice awards 
which went last year to theArt of Yorkshire garden 
<http://www.harrogate-news.co.uk/2011/05/24/art-of-yorkshire-scoops-silver-at-chelsea/>
 and to theRhubarb Crumble and Custard garden 
<http://www.yorkshire.com/rhs-chelsea-flower-show-award-winning-garden> in 2010.
 