
The most unpleasant aspect of The Apprentice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/apprentice> – worse than the 
boasting, the repetition or the intergalactic levels of rock-hard stupidity – 
has always been its response to humility. Year after year, the boardroom will 
always pounce on anyone foolish enough to own up to their mistakes. The 
smallest honest admission always ends in a firing. But if you can lie, and 
bluster, and cheat, and roar an engine jet of bullshit accusations at the 
fat-tied stooge to your left, chances are you’ll succeed. Everyone will know 
that you’re frantically saving your skin, but they’ll give you a pass anyway. 
This is what happened in America this week.

You might think that it isn’t. You might think that the rise of 
president-elect Trump is down to sexism, or social media filter bubbles, or a 
country’s ability to put partisan politics ahead of personal judgment, or the 
dying roar of a frightened white majority. But it isn’t. It’s because of 
The Apprentice.

The Apprentice, which favours aggression over thoughtfulness. The Apprentice, 
which teaches you to always turn on your teammates. The Apprentice, which 
mistakes 10 heavily edited minutes of pre-written insults with actual 
leadership. The Apprentice, whose witless win-at-all-costs aggression helped to 
cause the banking crisis a decade ago and still wasn’t hauled off air. The 
Apprentice. The bloody Apprentice.

Before The Apprentice, Donald Trump was just a cartoon blowhard, a broken 
1980s throwback, a joke. It wasThe Apprentice 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Apprentice_%28U.S._TV_series%29>, arguably 
more thanThe Art of The Deal 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trump:_The_Art_of_the_Deal>, that put forward 
the idea that he was any sort of leader. Go back and watch any of his episodes. 
He’s no leader. He struts into a room at the start, barks “Go sell cookies” at 
the assembled array of sharp-suited cannibals, then disappears. An hour later, 
once they’ve torn themselves apart in a heartbreaking effort to win his 
approval, he’s given a bulletpoint list of who did what and then sacks someone. 
That’s all he does. That isn’t leadership. It’s empty hype and swagger 
masquerading as leadership. It’s Pin The Tail On The Donkey.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftrump-the-apprentice-president-elect-reality-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d5c7210a75809a570fff40ed38b77e90737d6aa%2F0_104_3134_1880%2F3134.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%E2%80%99re%20hired%3A%20how%20The%20Apprentice%20led%20to%20President%20Trump%20%7C%20Stuart%20Heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftrump-the-apprentice-president-elect-reality-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%E2%80%99re%20hired%3A%20how%20The%20Apprentice%20led%20to%20President%20Trump%20%7C%20Stuart%20Heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftrump-the-apprentice-president-elect-reality-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d5c7210a75809a570fff40ed38b77e90737d6aa%2F0_104_3134_1880%2F3134.jpg>
 Donald Trump and Omarosa Manigault, ‘one of his most ubiquitous campaign 
surrogates’. Photograph: Carlo Allegri/Reuters 
And it fitted him. Look at any Apprentice candidate, breaking their neck to 
spit out the most self-aggrandising Trump-style word salad imaginable. They’re 
like sharks, they say. They talk the talk and dance the dance. They’re going to 
win so hard it hurts. Trump was the figurehead everyone aspired to be. They 
couldn’t have aped him any harder if they’d swan-dived into a barrel of Cheeto 
dust before entering the boardroom. The thrill of The Apprentice was getting to 
watch people climb the greasy ladder. The trouble is, it was so thrilling that 
people never worried about what would happen when anyone associated with it 
reached the top.

The stench of The Apprentice will permeate every aspect of the Trump 
presidency. It already permeated his campaign. He filled the thing with the 
candidates – the reality-show contestants – who proved most willing to 
prostrate themselves before him.

One of his most ubiquitous campaign surrogates was Omarosa Manigault 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/OMAROSA?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, shipped into any number of zero-sum TV debates to deploy her trademarked 
pro-Trump villainy. Another was Andrew Dean Litinsky, whose biggest 
post-Apprentice achievement involved publicly defending the man who punched a 
black septuagenarian during a Trump rally. One of the very few celebrities 
willing to openly endorse Trump was Stephen Baldwin, former Celebrity 
Apprentice candidate most notable for directing a 2004 Christian-themed 
skateboarding DVD called Livin’ It.

Another, and one of the first people to tweet their congratulations to Trump 
yesterday, was Piers Morgan; winner of Celebrity Apprentice 2008 and a man who –
to paraphrase Gary Lineker 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/796057618439663616> for a moment 
– lives so up Trump’s behind that he probably stinks of semi-digested taco 
bowls.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftrump-the-apprentice-president-elect-reality-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa45add01be047a6d7f24d624fe382b814ca54d90%2F0_97_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%E2%80%99re%20hired%3A%20how%20The%20Apprentice%20led%20to%20President%20Trump%20%7C%20Stuart%20Heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftrump-the-apprentice-president-elect-reality-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%E2%80%99re%20hired%3A%20how%20The%20Apprentice%20led%20to%20President%20Trump%20%7C%20Stuart%20Heritage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ftrump-the-apprentice-president-elect-reality-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa45add01be047a6d7f24d624fe382b814ca54d90%2F0_97_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Piers Morgan: ‘A man who … lives up Trump’s behind.’ Photograph: Alberto E. 
Rodriguez/Getty Images 
Worse, though, Trump has inhabited the entire Apprentice aesthetic. It was 
less a campaign and more a cash grab for ratings. The more eyes on him the 
better, whatever it took. Unless he performs a drastic 180-degree turn on 
setting foot in the Oval Office, the big risk is that he’ll continue to treat 
the greatest country on Earth as the greatest show on Earth.

Be calm: Trump is not the worst and won’t go unchallenged | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-will-not-go-unchallenged>
This is the legacy of The Apprentice. This is what we’ve got for the next four 
years. A culture where volume is mistaken for decisiveness. A culture where 
culpability is never an option. A culture where everything is binary, and the 
only way to win is to choose the least bad option. A culture where you can get 
away with anything, so long as it has the surface sheen of spectacle. A culture 
propelled by an all-encompassing fear of being found out. A culture where the 
best anyone can hope to achieve is a career sitting at the knee of a godawful 
billionaire, feeding from whatever KFC scraps happen to fall from his 
permanently open mouth.

For a while, back when Trump was simply a figure of amused curiosity, 
television was flooded with Apprentice ripoffs. My favourite of these wasMy Big 
Fat Obnoxious Boss <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/My_Big_Fat_Obnoxious_Boss>. A 
short-lived parody, it tricked hungry young businesspeople into undergoing 
ridiculous tasks like selling hot soup in the summer or making adverts for 
breast milk, before one of them was arbitrarily fired by an unseen boss called 
Mr N Paul Todd. In the final episode, Mr N Paul Todd – an anagram of Donald 
Trump – wasrevealed to be a chimpanzee 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DiCZzKpwJ38&t=37m41s> who made all his 
decisions by spinning a wheel. It seemed funnier at the time.
 