
Wearing a black T-shirt with the words Power of Freedom emblazoned in red, 
rapperJerreh Badjie 
<http://www.ingambia.com/chambaii-spotlight-on-retsam-artist-entrepreneur/> 
(stage name Retsam), is part of a tight circle of young Gambian dissidents 
pushing for an end to the country’s totalitarian regime. It has been 22 years 
since President Yahya Jammeh took office, but unprecedented levels of protest 
in recent months signal that he may be losing his iron grip on power. Badjie 
says the 2016 presidential election on 1 December is the first real chance 
young Gambians have had to vote for change.

“People are starting to see if they don’t express themselves now, their lives 
and their children’s lives are at risk. They have to face the situation and 
talk now. If we have the same leader for another 20 years there won’t be any 
change – that means Gambia has no future,” he says, sitting on a beach in the 
Senegal capital, Dakar, where henow lives in exile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/23/gambia-rapper-ali-cham-flees-country-song-death-threats>
.


President Yahya Jammeh has ruled the Gambia since seizing power in a military 
coup in 1994.He is standing for a fifth term in office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/16/three-journalists-arrested-in-gambia-ahead-of-election>
, but faces stronger opposition than ever before.

Gambian migrants who risk death find life less than sweet in Italy | Louise 
Hunt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/06/gambian-migrants-who-risk-death-find-life-less-than-sweet-in-italy>
The election comes at the end of a transformative year for the small west 
African country. In April and May there were civiluprisings that revealed the 
extent of discontent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/04/gambia-yahya-jammeh-protests-uprising-solo-sandeng>
 with Jammeh’s rule. These protests resulted in the alleged torturing to death 
incustody of opposition activist Solo Sandeng 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/04/gambia-yahya-jammeh-protests-uprising-solo-sandeng>
 and thejailing for three years 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/07/gambia-prison-sentences-for-opposition-leaders-continues-downward-spiral-for-human-rights/>
 of most of the members of the main opposition party, including its leader, 
Ousainou Darboe.

But out of this adversity, previously fractured opposition parties realised 
their only chance was to unite and form the Gambia’s first coalition, which is 
giving many young people hope for a breakthrough.

Well known for his politically critical lyrics – Power of Freedom is the title 
of his election song, which demands “Jammeh must go” – Badjie fled across the 
border to Senegal fearing arrest after being part of one of the violently 
halted protests. Dakar has become a hub for Gambian activism, and Badjie is 
part of a group trying to inform and motivate peers in the Gambia through a 
social media revolution.

Young people make up the majority of the country’s population (approximately 
65% are aged under 30), but they have also tended to be disenchanted during 
elections, distrustful of fragmented party politics and raised in a culture of 
self-censorship.

But a lot has changed since the last election in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/23/gambia-presidential-election-yaya-jammeh>
, says Badjie. “In previous elections, youths didn’t vote that much – the 
situation wasn’t that drastic … Five years later they are realising.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fyoung-gambians-ready-to-vote-out-dictatorial-yahya-jammeh-regime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F998da8284ee79b86d08fed915858f04b687bebce%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Young%20Gambians%20ready%20to%20vote%20out%20dictatorial%20Yahya%20Jammeh%20regime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fyoung-gambians-ready-to-vote-out-dictatorial-yahya-jammeh-regime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Young%20Gambians%20ready%20to%20vote%20out%20dictatorial%20Yahya%20Jammeh%20regime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fyoung-gambians-ready-to-vote-out-dictatorial-yahya-jammeh-regime%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F998da8284ee79b86d08fed915858f04b687bebce%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Fatoumatta Sendeng, daughter of the murdered Gambian opposition activist Solo 
Sendeng, went into exile in Senegal with her family following democracy 
protests in April. Photograph: Jason Florio 
Youth unemployment stands at 38% 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/gambia/gambia-2016-humanitarian-response-plan-january-december-2016>
, exacerbated by the failing agricultural sector and a lack of job 
opportunities in urban areas, which Gambians complain is because large 
international investors are deterred by high taxes and the government’s 
unpredictable meddling with the private sector.

For Alhagie Touray*, 27, who has a college diploma in IT but could only find 
work as a low-paid security guard, the election is the time to call for big 
changes. Speaking from his home near Banjul, he says: “We are hoping that it 
will give us a new president who can really move the country forward. There are 
a lot of people not working and the economy is totally falling down. We need a 
government that can encourage foreign investors; if people have work they will 
not go the back way [leave].”

In addition to the scarcity of jobs, the lack of freedom of expression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/16/three-journalists-arrested-in-gambia-ahead-of-election>
 suppresses people’s potential, says Badjie’s fellow hip-hop activist Ali Cham 
(Killa Ace), who is also in exile in Dakar. “If you are restricted from doing 
certain things you cannot show who you really are, and that gives a limit to 
what you really can be, especially as a youth.”

In this environment, many young people believe the only option is to take the 
increasingly risky route to Europe. The Gambia has a population of 2 million, 
yet its people made upa fifth of those arriving in Italy via the Mediterranean 
<https://www.iom.int/news/mediterranean-migrant-arrivals-reach-345440-deaths-sea-4655>
 this year.

“People are dying or having very hard experiences – almost every family has 
gone through that and it’s so devastating,” says Fatoumatta Sandeng, 22, 
daughter of Solo Sandeng, who had been a passionate youth advocate for the 
opposition United Democratic Party (UDP). “We need a government that invests in 
the youth to give them employment and a stable life. And if that’s not 
happening you devastate the youth and make them do things they would not have 
imagined doing.” She and her family are now in hiding in Senegal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fyoung-gambians-ready-to-vote-out-dictatorial-yahya-jammeh-regime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c03d444ad24fff001c8fae5ca964684b07189f8%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Young%20Gambians%20ready%20to%20vote%20out%20dictatorial%20Yahya%20Jammeh%20regime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fyoung-gambians-ready-to-vote-out-dictatorial-yahya-jammeh-regime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Young%20Gambians%20ready%20to%20vote%20out%20dictatorial%20Yahya%20Jammeh%20regime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fyoung-gambians-ready-to-vote-out-dictatorial-yahya-jammeh-regime%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c03d444ad24fff001c8fae5ca964684b07189f8%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 The Gambian rapper Ali Cham, known by his stage name Killa Ace, says he fled 
the Gambia after receiving threats. Photograph: Jason Florio 
There are signs that young people are beginning to speak up more vociferously 
against the government. In November 2015, young people living in a coastal area 
called Kartong formed a human shield toprevent further destructive sand mining 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2015/11/gambia-release-peaceful-protestors-and-community-members-arbitrarily-detained/>
 by a company believed to have been owned by the president’s brother.

But organised, radical demonstrations are rare, and Ali Cham laments that the 
Gambia lacks the youth leadership for protests to spread on the scale that 
proved so effective in Burkina Faso against there-election of Blaise Compaoré 
as president in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/31/burkina-faso-president-blaise-compaore-ousted-says-army>
.

“Unfortunately, there isn’t a youth movement that’s structured to social 
awareness. If that were available, it would be like the movement in Burkina 
Faso, where people spoke up as one force. But if you speak up individually, it 
won’t work,” says Cham. “Before you mobilise people it needs to be based on 
knowledge of what they’re getting into, and right now there’s a low rate of 
civic education in the Gambia.”

The Gambia faces battle to deter its young people from migrating abroad | 
Louise Hunt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/11/the-gambia-migration-livelihood-empowerment-agricultural-project-concern-universal>
Cham, 31, and Badjie, are collaborating on a project called Team Gom sa bopa 
(Believe in yourself) that they hope will become a social-media driven movement 
for raising social and political awareness among young people.

While revolution may not be taking place on the streets, young people in the 
Gambia are becoming emboldened on social media. “After the death of Solo 
Sandeng, lots of people changed their Facebook profiles to black or the Gambian 
flag in solidarity – his death was an awakening for us because we felt the 
reality hit close to home,” says Lamin Manneh*, a young writer based near 
Banjul.

He adds that social media is helping young Gambians to overcome their fears. 
“This is not an age where you can stop people from communicating – you can 
secure your internet with VPN so everybody is getting more information than 
before,” he says

Nobody expects change to come easily in the Gambia, and the clear message from 
all the dissidents is for young people to use their votes. “This is a do-or-die 
situation. We cannot live in this hell forever,” says Badjie. “Young people are 
tired of going the back way. We would rather change the situation of the state 
than leave the state.”

* Names changed to protect identities 



 