
Some young people in Britain have used drugs for dementia and other conditions 
to boost their mental performance, a major survey suggests.

Medicines normally prescribed for Alzheimer's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/alzheimers> disease and attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) were taken by 1% of 14 to 18-year-olds to improve 
their focus, concentration or memory, the report found. The independent survey 
carried out by Ipsos Mori for the Wellcome Trust, Britain's largest biomedical 
research charity, drew on responses from more than 1,000 adults and 460 young 
people chosen as representative of the UK general public.

In the survey, nine young people claimed to have taken drugs for conditions 
like ADHD or dementia, but of these, only two could name specific drugs, such 
as Ritalin, Donepezil, Provigil or Aderall.

If the 1% figure is accurate and representative of the UK population, then 
around 38,000 young people have tried off-label drugs to boost their cognitive 
performance. Two per cent of adults queried in the survey said they used the 
drugs.

The figures, compiled for the Wellcome Trust Monitor 
<http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/About-us/Publications/Reports/Public-engagement/WTX058859.htm>
, give the first accurate picture of how widespread the use of cognitive 
enhancing drugs is among the general public in Britain. Previous surveys, by 
Nature magazine and New Scientist, have surveyed readers online, and found much 
higher drug use. TheNature survey 
<http://www.nature.com/news/2008/080409/full/452674a.html> found one in five 
had used drugs like ritalin and provigil to sharpen their minds, while 38% 
admitted to using the drugs in theNew Scientist survey 
<http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn21157-the-dope-on-mental-enhancement.html>
.
 