
Older people <https://www.theguardian.com/society/older-people> have saddled 
the younger generation with an excessive bill for state pensions while grabbing 
an ever-greater share of NHS spending, according to a report that calls for 
intergenerational rebalancing.

The report from the Intergenerational Foundation (IF) <http://www.if.org.uk/> 
said spending promises on state and public sector pensions are “overwhelming 
young people’s prospects”.

The thinktank is calling on the prime minister, Theresa May, to abandon triple 
lock protection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/31/triple-lock-pension-protection-to-stay-downing-street-ros-altmann>
, which promises that the state pension will rise each year by whatever is 
highest out of inflation measured by the consumer price index, average earnings 
growth or 2.5%.

The former pensions minister Ros Altmann has called for the triple lock to be 
scrapped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/30/state-pension-triple-clock-doubts>
. The Department for Work and Pensions has declined to rule out a review of the 
“totemic” policy in the coming months.

The report estimates that workers are paying £2,846 a year each to cover the 
cost of paying state pensions. Public sector pension liabilities, for schemes 
such as retired civil servants, have risen by 12% to nearly £44,000 per worker, 
with total liabilities at £1.4tn, it added.

Angus Hanton, the co-founder of IF, said: “Public sector pensions represent 
one of the largest unfunded burdens for younger taxpayers, who will not retire 
at the same age, or on the same terms, while having to contribute more to their 
own pensions.

“Increasing retirement ages and moving to career average pensions will not be 
enough to stall the pension burden avalanche that is bearing down on the young. 
Auto-enrolment is an apparent success, except that it leaves young people 
paying twice, saving for their own pensions while also paying for the pensions 
of older generations through taxation.”

But charity Age UK said the vast majority of pensioners have contributed 
throughout their life to the state pension, which remains lower than the amount 
paid in many other western countries.

Caroline Abrahams, the charity director at Age UK, pointed out that 1.6 
million older people live in poverty in the UK. “A strong pensions system that 
provides a decent quality of life in retirement is central to a civilised 
society and in the best interests of us all,” she said.

“‎In fact, you could say it is all the more important for young people to know 
they have a reasonable state pension to look forward to, given the uncertainty 
they face over jobs and housing, and given that the value of future private 
pensions will largely depend on investment growth, which is not guaranteed.”

IF, which compiles an annual index that attempts to measure the balance, or 
lack thereof, between generations, saidyounger people have lost out 
significantly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/10/budget-2015-how-young-people-lose-out>
 since the the millennium, not just on pensions, but also on health and housing.


Writing in the Sunday Times, Andy Haldane, the chief economist at the Bank of 
England, highlighted anintergenerational “faultine” in the UK economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/07/revealed-30-year-economic-betrayal-dragging-down-generation-y-income>
.

“Since 2007, the real disposal income of pensioners has risen by almost 10%. 
Those over the age of 65 have harvested fully two-thirds of that £2.7tn 
increase in national wealth. By contrast, since 2007, working-age households 
with children have achieved income gains of only about 3%, while the incomes of 
those without children have fallen by 3%,” he said.

The IF index charts a widening disparity on healthcare spending, mirroring 
Britain’s ageing population. In 2000, the NHS carried out 0.8 treatments on the 
over 60s, compared with one treatment for those aged between 14 and 59. This 
has risen to 1.2 treatments for the over 60s, an increase of 50%.

“This provides a snapshot of the extent to which older people are 
disproportionately using NHS hospital services, compared to younger ones,” the 
report said.
 