
An enormous, curvy, mushroom-like pavilion designed by the late architect Dame 
Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/31/star-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65>
 has been installed in the grounds of one of Britain’s grandest stately homes.

For the last two weeks, workers have been unpacking and erecting the 23m-long 
structure, called Lilas, on the south lawn ofChatsworth House, the Derbyshire 
home of the Duke and Duchess of Devonshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/12/michael-craig-martin-chatsworth-house>
.

It is a highlight of the annual Beyond Limits sculpture exhibition organised 
by Sotheby’s at Chatsworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2008/sep/08/beyond.limits.chatsworth>
 and is for sale – although buyers without a substantial parcel of land might 
need to think twice.

Simon Stock, the Sotheby’s specialist curating the show, said the pavilion and 
the historic backdrop were clearly very different, but “they don’t clash, they 
complement in a way the pyramid does at the Louvre. It is a very beguiling 
structure, it draws you in, it is an extraordinary thing”.

The pavilion was an unexpected addition to the roster of temporary pavilions 
commissioned each year by the Serpentine Gallery in London. When rising steel 
prices meant the 2007 pavilion coming from artist Olafur Eliasson and architect 
Kjetil Thorsen was delayed, Hadid offered to step in with a stopgap
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fzaha-hadid-lilas-pavilion-erected-chatsworth-house-sculpture-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c5bb24a760f7879854f5b1f6e7eb54d61113397%2F0_195_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%20pavilion%20erected%20at%20Chatsworth%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fzaha-hadid-lilas-pavilion-erected-chatsworth-house-sculpture-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%20pavilion%20erected%20at%20Chatsworth%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fzaha-hadid-lilas-pavilion-erected-chatsworth-house-sculpture-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c5bb24a760f7879854f5b1f6e7eb54d61113397%2F0_195_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 The Lilas pavilion was created for the Serpentine Gallery’s summer party in 
2007. Photograph: Sothebys 
Julia Peyton-Jones, the former Serpentine director who introduced the annual 
pavilion idea in 2000, recalled being thrilled.


“It was one of those little miracles,” she said. “It was uncomfortable to be 
in the position of not having a pavilion on time that year – [but] stuff 
happens and it is how you deal with it that is the major issue.

“As a result we had this gorgeous project that was unexpected and it was an 
absolute little gem… so typical in its simplicity and so relevant to her work.”

It is now, rightly, recognised as an important Hadid work, said Peyton-Jones.

The pavilion was designed, built and erected at breakneck speed, hosted the 
gallery’s summer party, and within a few weeks was gone – sold on to a private 
individual who is now selling it through the auction house.

Stock said the plan to exhibit at Chatsworth was hatched before Hadid’s 
unexpected death, aged 65, in March. But the timing undoubtedly added emotion 
to its exhibition.

“It is very poignant,” said Peyton-Jones. “But all the more marvellous that 
this master work should be presented to remind us what an extraordinary 
contribution she made.”

Stock said Chatsworth was an appropriate venue because of a historic precedent 
in the remarkable great conservatory that was built there in 1840 by the 
architect Joseph Paxton.

It was in effect a vast greenhouse, 84m long, 37m wide and 19m high, and was 
the largest glass building in England until Paxton went further and created the 
Crystal Palace in London in 1851.

Paxton’s conservatory, created when architects were using metal structures for 
the first time, was cutting edge; as was Hadid’s Lilas, a metalwork frame with 
a tensile fabric stretched over it.

The conservatory lasted until the first world war, when a lack of coal meant 
it could not be heated and many plants died. It was demolished in 1920.

Stock said installing Lilas had taken about two weeks and had been a 
challenge. “This is certainly the most complex undertaking we have done at 
Chatsworth, it is also one of the most imposing and beautiful.”

He said there were many ways to describe Lilas and it was probably best to let 
visitors decide. “Is it principally sculptural? Is it a piece of architecture 
... do you see it as a building, in other words? Do you see it as something 
organic that has grown out of the ground? It is all of those things combined.”

It will be for sale, although Sotheby’s is not publicly saying for how much. 
If previous Serpentine pavilions are anything to go by, the price could be 
upwards of £500,000. That was the figure for which the gallery reportedlysold 
its 2013 pavilion designed by Sou Fujimoto, and Smiljan Radic’s 2014 pavilion 
was sold to the Hauser & Wirth gallery at Bruton in Somerset 
<http://www.bdonline.co.uk/serpentine-gallery-lost-%C2%A3430k-on-2014-pavilion/5081040.article>
 for £450,000.

• This article was amended on 30 August 2016 to correct the size of the 
pavillion.
 