
In 1978, in the inaugural issue of the short-lived art magazine Viz (not to be 
confused with the scatological comic of the same name), an image of Zaha Hadid 
appeared alongside fellow members of the Office of Metropolitan Architecture, 
the two architect-artist couplesRem Koolhaas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/rem-koolhaas> and Madelon 
Vriesendorp, and Elia and Zoe Zenghelis. This “influential and controversial” 
group, reported the writer, “develop mutant forms of urbanism … which accept 
the megalopolitan condition with enthusiasm.”

“I would hate,” he concluded, “to live with their buildings. I would run 
screaming from among their barrack-like walls and their prison-like cages: I 
would look anxiously upwards to see whether their absurd sculpted heads are 
going to shout slogans at me. So, if the office does start to build, I hope – 
despite my prejudices – that the viciousness is retained, the spirit is 
retained, the spirit is turned into awesome, upsetting flesh.”

Almost 40 years later the same author, architect and architectural teacher 
Peter Cook, wrote thecitation 
<http://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/home/peter-cooks-royal-gold-medal-citation-for-zaha-hadid/8689403.article?blocktitle=News&contentID=16149>
 for Hadid’s royal gold medal for architecture. Its admiration is much less 
qualified: “surely her work is special. For three decades now, she has ventured 
where few would dare: if Paul Klee took a line for a walk, then Zaha took the 
surfaces that were driven by that line out for a virtual dance and then deftly 
folded them over and then took them out for a journey into space … those of us 
lucky enough to see theHeydar Aliyev Center in Baku 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/30/zaha-hadid-architecture> 
in the flesh can surely never have been in such a dream-like space, with its 
totality, its enormous internal ramp and dart-like lights seeming to have come 
from a vocabulary that lies so far beyond the normal architecture that we 
assess or rationalise.” In the first case, to be sure, Cook is describing the 
style of the whole group, of which Hadid was a junior and lightly attached 
member, but the two statements together nonetheless exemplify her ability to 
divide opinions, even within a single person, while never failing to provoke or 
fascinate. For, in her person and her work, one feeling that Hadid rarely 
elicited was indifference.

Even those who criticise her might sometimes wield an angled or hovering plane 
that wouldn’t be there if not for Hadid

Born on 31 October 1950, she died last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/31/star-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65>
, shockingly and much too soon, aged 65. Had she, however, barely reached half 
that age, she would still have a place in architectural history. In 1982-3 she 
produced her competition-winning designs for the Peak 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/works/202?locale=en>, a leisure club in Hong 
Kong, with a project of breathtaking confidence, daring and individuality. It 
was a series of angular planes, without visible means of support, which 
translated the geology of the mountain on which they were sited into seemingly 
airborne geometry. They were represented with drawings and paintings which were 
themselves mesmerising, and made the congested city, the landscape and her 
proposal into a single dynamic, semi-abstract composition. The young architect 
(not indeed quite an architect, as she hadn’t completed her professional 
qualifications) had created an extraordinary consistency and originality of 
intent, design and representation.

It had a clear and acknowledged debt to the paintings and architecture of 
Russian constructivism but was also very much her own, and it opened up the 
formal repertoire of building in ways many other architects have been 
exploiting ever since. Even those who criticise her might sometimes wield an 
angled or hovering plane that wouldn’t be there if it were not for Hadid.

The Peak came at a nervous time for architecture, when the profession was on 
the brink of a collective nervous breakdown, self-flagellating for the 
perceived and actual failings of the modern movement. In Britain Prince Charles 
was about to emerge as the influential spokesman for a new conservatism. At the 
Architectural Association (AA) in London, where Hadid studied and then taught, 
it had been fashionable to abandon building in favour of farming in Wales. The 
Peak was magnificently oblivious of such uncertainty, asserting instead the 
liberating power of inventing new forms and spaces. It also expressed a love of 
city life, of its density, dynamism and congestion, that reversed the 
tendencies of earlier modernists. Le Corbusier, for example, had wanted to 
replace teeming streets with expanses of verdure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fzaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F260499ffc6178315b14b0f0dd601264ac11e0cd6%2F184_0_4964_2980%2F4964.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%2C%201950-2016%3A%20an%20appreciation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fzaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%2C%201950-2016%3A%20an%20appreciation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fzaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F260499ffc6178315b14b0f0dd601264ac11e0cd6%2F184_0_4964_2980%2F4964.jpg>
 ‘Dreamlike space’: Zaha Hadid’s Heydar Alijev Center in Baku, Azerbaijan, 
completed in 2012. Photograph: Alamy 
The Peak proposed a new kind of space for a new kind of world – international 
but still diversified, in which old hierarchies of west and east vanish – that 
Hadid herself inhabited. Her own education was a bizarre combination of a 
Catholic school in Baghdad, a boarding school in Switzerland, Berkhamsted 
school for girls, the American University in Beirut, and the AA. Her work 
reached places previously untouched by famous architecture. She based her 
career in London but was often frustrated by it. She loved Miami, the city 
where she died, for its hedonism and modernity.

The Peak project was cancelled, and for the next two decades she became known 
as the famous architect who never got anything built. This wasn’t quite 
accurate: she realised afire station 
<http://www.archdaily.com/112681/ad-classics-vitra-fire-station-zaha-hadid> for 
the factory of the German furniture company Vitra, a block of flats in Berlin 
and some smaller works, a portfolio with which other young-ish practices might 
be satisfied, but the finished output didn’t match her ambition and reputation. 
She notoriously failed to realise her designs for theCardiff Bay opera house 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/zaha-hadid-hits-out-prejudice-2996109>
, despite twice winning competitions to do so. Some civic leaders in the city 
simply didn’t want her work – something they might now regret: they could have 
had the first major work by a world-famous architect; they could have outdone 
Bilbao, with its Guggenheim, in the game of building city-changing icons, but 
they didn’t.

Her fortunes changed in the first decade of this century, as the idea of 
“iconic” buildings, designed by “starchitects” took hold. Hadid, as remarkable 
in her person and her personality as in her designs, was perfect for the role. 
Her office, in an old schoolhouse in Clerkenwell, London, expanded into a 
warren of adjoining and connected spaces, the number of her employees 
increasing into the hundreds. She started creating cultural palaces in 
Azerbaijan and South Korea, a stadium for the World Cup in Qatar, a condominium 
in Miami, a tower in Marseille, a retail complex in Beijing, a contemporary art 
museum in Rome, an opera house in Guangzhou, an oligarchic’s villa in Russia. 
In her adopted but not always welcoming home of Britain she realised a cancer 
centre in Kirkcaldy, a transport museum in Glasgow, a library in Oxford, an 
academy school in south London, theSerpentine Sackler Gallery 
<http://www.archdaily.com/433507/the-serpentine-sackler-gallery-zaha-hadid-architects>
, and theAquatics Centre 
<http://www.archdaily.com/161116/london-aquatics-centre-for-2012-summer-olympics-zaha-hadid-architects>
, the most dramatic of the buildings created for the London 2012 Olympics.

Her style changed, from the acute angles of the earlier work to complex 
curving forms, although the emphasis on dynamic spaces and on defying gravity 
remained. Developments in digital technology helped. Back in the 90s it had 
been widely assumed that her complex designs and images could only be 
computer-assisted, and she was called cold and mechanical as a result. In fact, 
everything was hand-drawn and her office IT consisted of nothing more advanced 
than some Amstrad PCW 9512 word processors. In the last years she and her 
right-hand man Patrik Schumacher exploited to the full the ability of advanced 
software to conceive and describe shapes beyond the grasp of the human mind and 
hand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fzaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b9a7ada1ab5107583c5ad744091ed6ec4385c0c%2F0_0_4713_3544%2F4713.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%2C%201950-2016%3A%20an%20appreciation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fzaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%2C%201950-2016%3A%20an%20appreciation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fzaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b9a7ada1ab5107583c5ad744091ed6ec4385c0c%2F0_0_4713_3544%2F4713.jpg>
 ‘Complex, curving forms’: the Roca London Gallery, Zaha Hadid, 2011. 
Photograph: Rex 
Controversy didn’t go away. She was removed from the job of designing Tokyo’s 
Olympic stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/17/japan-scraps-zaha-hadids-tokyo-olympic-stadium-design>
 on the grounds – denied by her – of cost overruns. The Aquatics Centre was at 
one point nearly cancelled, also on cost grounds. That theHeydar Aliyev Center 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/30/zaha-hadid-architecture> 
was named after the brutal former dictator of Azerbaijan, and commissioned by 
his son, the country’s current brutal dictator, led to accusations of collusion 
with tyranny. She was criticised for damaging the historic fabric of Beijing. 
Last September she cut shortan interview on the Today programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ng-interactive/2015/sep/24/zaha-hadid-radio-4-interview-sarah-montague-qatar>
 when Sarah Montague repeated untrue accusations that her Qatar stadium project 
had led to large numbers of deaths in construction.

Hadid herself, as she recently said on Desert Island Discs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0713rtr>, attributed these problems to a 
“triple whammy: I’m a woman and that’s a problem for some people, I’m a 
foreigner, and I do work which is not normative, not what they expect.” A 
bizarre moment in the Cardiff controversy would tend to confirm this when the 
local MP and future first minister of Wales, Rhodri Morgan, expressed the fear 
that her design would bring down a fatwa on the city, like that issued against 
Salman Rushdie, on the grounds that it resembled a heretical version of the 
Kaaba in Mecca. If Norman Foster had been the architect, the question would not 
have arisen.

At the same time, as I know from my own experiences of working with her on 
building projects, her designs do indeed tend to be expensive and hard to 
achieve, and push to the limits of buildability and practicality, and sometimes 
beyond. She, and her work, were demanding of clients, builders, engineers, her 
own staff and their eventual users, sometimes to the point of impossibility. In 
candid moments, when she was not minimising accusations of spiralling budgets, 
she would admit this. Her argument was that buildings are around for a long 
time, and it is therefore worth spending more on something exceptional.

Her eventual success came when her celebrity meant that clients had to accept 
her on her own terms: either give what it takes to realise a Hadid or go 
elsewhere. Which was a fulfilment of something always central to her character, 
that you take her as she is. Stories abound of her uncompromising behaviour: at 
the AA she expressed her displeasure at the level of the fees by paying them 
with bags of loose change. Although she learned to drive in her native Iraq, 
she was told she must retake her test in Britain. On her first lesson she 
disagreed with her instructor and never had another. Thereafter she employed a 
driver, for years in a former London black taxi.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fzaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc78a04146ca8a8eb0f582bdc4f1c86222c2d4dd%2F0_0_2756_4134%2F2756.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%2C%201950-2016%3A%20an%20appreciation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fzaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%2C%201950-2016%3A%20an%20appreciation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fzaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc78a04146ca8a8eb0f582bdc4f1c86222c2d4dd%2F0_0_2756_4134%2F2756.jpg>
 ‘Her looks were striking…’: Zaha Hadid photographed by David Levene for the 
Guardian in 2013. 
She loved giving staff and associates nicknames – Potato, Licky, RawMan, 
Clinton, the last something to do with interns. She raged, laughed and, in her 
earlier years, cried. Rem Koolhaas, her teacher and mentor at the AA and 
afterwards, said her tears were like bullets, not falling but firing at you out 
of her eyes. Her looks were striking – a curvaceous body surmounted by a strong 
face, big-lipped, big-nosed and big-haired – and she did everything she could 
to make them more so. She wore figure-hugging black surmounted by flowing 
Miyake capes. Madelon Vriesendorp recalls a trip with students to communist 
Moscow, in which “a whole line of people followed her with their mouths open 
like crazy dogs, all staring at her like she was a cloud. With those lips and 
eyes. They were raving about her: finally, a real woman.”

Less expectedly, Vriesendorp recalls her great diffidence as a student. “She 
was very shy, not forceful.” She would present her extraordinary drawings 
half-crumpled and scattered on the floor. For some reason she chose to burn 
them at the edges. “She was embarrassed. If you show your work, it’s like 
undressing in front of people. The more you believe in something the more you 
are embarrassed.” It required considerable efforts by Koolhaas and others to 
persuade her that “you are really incredibly good at this”. As Hadid hinted on
Desert Island Discs, her apparent toughness was partly a protection of this 
shyness.

Like others, Vriesendorp stresses Hadid’s generosity and warmth. “She was a 
very, very warm-hearted person who loved people. She had too much empathy, not 
too little. She had a lot of belief in people, but when someone didn’t fulfil 
their promise it was incredibly painful.” She never had children of her own, 
but she was “always worried about other people and their families. Children 
loved her.”

There was a time when she would say 'am I bovvered?', in emulation of 
Catherine Tate

Hadid had a vast interest in the world beyond architecture, and a prodigious 
intellect and memory. If she liked a film or a piece of music, she would play 
it over and over again –Midnight Cowboy, for example, and she could remember 
Richard Gere’s every move inAmerica Gigolo. After meeting the 
architecture-loving Brad Pitt, she was eloquent on his masculine beauty. There 
was a time when she would say “am I bovvered?”, in emulation of Catherine Tate.

The daughter of a politician, she was herself politically aware and astute, 
although she was relatively reticent on the tragedy of her native country, 
which she recalled as a place in the 1950s of enlightenment and progress, where 
religious affiliation mattered little and girls were expected to become 
professionals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fzaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe4fe5d457e1515a8c01a6894be458d563211497%2F0_0_3509_2550%2F3509.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%2C%201950-2016%3A%20an%20appreciation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fzaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%2C%201950-2016%3A%20an%20appreciation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fzaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe4fe5d457e1515a8c01a6894be458d563211497%2F0_0_3509_2550%2F3509.jpg>
 Zaha Hadid (standing) with Rem Koolhaas, Elia and Zoe Zenghelis, and Madelon 
Vriesendorp in the 1978 inaugural edition of the art magazine Viz. 
Vriesendorp believes that her switch in style, from angles to curves, matched 
a change in mood, from “sharp and pointy and edgy” to “warps and waves, softer 
and more flowy”. Recognition and success caused her confidence to go up, though 
she also suffered from the classic trials of celebrity: isolation, sycophancy, 
exploitation. At the opening of the Aquatic Centre, Vriesendorp recalls “even 
her friends were having their photos taken with her. I thought ‘What are you 
doing? You’re just making her into a photo opportunity. It’s so alienating’.”

Among architects and critics, some of us also felt that scale, budgets and 
marketing surrounding her later work tipped a balance. There had always been a 
struggle in her work between the creating of spectacular forms for the sheer 
egocentric sake of doing so and her claim that they served to make public and 
urban spaces in which new relationships and liberating dynamics would be 
possible, for example between the audience and performers of an opera house, 
and passersby in the city outside. Projects like theQatar stadium 
<http://www.archdaily.com/449922/zaha-hadid-s-2022-qatar-world-cup-stadium-unveiled>
 look very like pure, form-making bombast.

Be that as it may, the last word on Hadid should be Koolhaas’s assessment of 
her as her tutor at the AA: “Zaha’s performance during the fourth and fifth 
years was like that of a rocket that took off slowly to describe a constantly 
accelerating trajectory. Now she is a PLANET in her own inimitable orbit. That 
status has its own rewards and difficulties: due to the flamboyance and 
intensity of her work, it will be impossible [for her] to have a conventional 
career. She owes it to her talent to refine and develop over the next few 
years.”
 