
Abolish social housing, scrap prescriptive planning regulations and usher in 
the wholesale privatisation of our streets, squares and parks.That was the 
message delivered by Patrik Schumacher 
<https://www.dezeen.com/2016/11/18/patrik-schumacher-social-housing-public-space-scrapped-london-world-architecture-festival-2016/>
, director of Zaha Hadid Architects, to a stunned audience of architects and 
developers at a conference in Berlin last week, provoking a flood of 
impassioned responses online – with both opponents and supporters declaring him 
to be “the Trump of architecture”.

The late Hadid’s work might have long been a source of astonishment, for its 
sci-fi forms and gravity-defying structural feats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/31/zaha-hadid-maverick-architect-designer-appreciation>
, but now she’s gone, her practice is prompting incredulity for a very 
different reason. The queen of the curve has been supplanted by the king of 
free-market libertarianism. And he’s not holding back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8072b30b9e62a75919eb05ccbcb66b4331ac2e94%2F930_709_5021_3921%2F5021.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid's%20successor%3A%20scrap%20art%20schools%2C%20privatise%20cities%20and%20bin%20social%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%27s%20successor%3A%20scrap%20art%20schools%2C%20privatise%20cities%20and%20bin%20social%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8072b30b9e62a75919eb05ccbcb66b4331ac2e94%2F930_709_5021_3921%2F5021.jpg>
 Schumacher wearing the parametric tuxedo he designed himself. Photograph: 
Martin Slivka 
In lengthy Facebook posts <https://www.facebook.com/patrik.schumacher.10>, 
peppered with capital letters and exclamation marks, Schumacher – who worked 
alongside Hadid from 1988 and now heads her practice – has railed against 
everything from state-funded art schools (“an indefensible anachronism 
<https://www.dezeen.com/2015/02/25/stop-public-funding-arts-schools-patrik-schumacher-facebook/>
”) to the “PC takeover” of architecture (“trying to paralyse us with bad 
conscience 
<https://www.dezeen.com/2014/03/18/architecture-not-art-patrik-schumacher-venice-architecturebiennale-rant/>
”).

Schumacher is a regular at panel discussions, if not on stage then sitting in 
the front row, first with his hand raised to admonish the speakers for being 
part of the lefty liberal conspiracy. But his hour-long keynote speech at 
Berlin’s WorldArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> festival went further 
in expounding his radical worldview than he had ever yet dared.

Raging against the “social engineering” of housing design guides and the 
“intellectually bankrupt” idea of land use plans, he set out his Urban Policy 
Manifesto, which rambled from scrapping housing space standards to abolishing 
all forms of rent control and tenancy regulation. He welcomed London’s influx 
of overseas investors and defended the “buy to leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/20/gulf-investors-buy-to-leave-london-property-survey>
” culture, arguing that “even if these global entrepreneurs are only here for a 
few weeks, they throw some key parties and these are amazing multiplying 
events”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe061bf9e17d4e53aeebf538072b3a0891477e9c6%2F33_646_3812_2287%2F3812.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid's%20successor%3A%20scrap%20art%20schools%2C%20privatise%20cities%20and%20bin%20social%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%27s%20successor%3A%20scrap%20art%20schools%2C%20privatise%20cities%20and%20bin%20social%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe061bf9e17d4e53aeebf538072b3a0891477e9c6%2F33_646_3812_2287%2F3812.jpg>
 Hyde Park … build a city over it, says Schumacher. Photograph: Tom Shaw/Getty 
Images 
His uncompromising position on social housing estates provoked particularly 
audible disgust. “When socially renting tenants are asked to move and offered a 
new place somewhere else, they are given these new houses for free,” he 
thundered. “What a tragedy for them.” City-centre locations should instead be 
used to house “the most economically potent and most productive users who serve 
us most effectively,” he said, concluding with the suggestion that we should 
build a new city on Hyde Park. “How much are you actually using it?” he asked 
Londoners in the audience. “We need to know what it costs us!”

A few days later, sitting at a transparent acrylic table in the firm’s 
Clerkenwell gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/may/23/zaha-hadid-design-gallery>
, surrounded by plinths displaying experimental furniture anddaring cutlery 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BNFez2ag6AW/>, the 55-year-old German architect 
seems a little more sheepish than he did while booming on stage. “I’m not yet 
regretting it fully,” he says. “But I didn’t realise the lecture would be 
live-streamed. I must emphasise that these comments are made wearing my hat as 
an intellectual, theorist and polemicist, which needs to be distinguished from 
what the practice is doing. I wouldn’t want to tar the firm with the same 
brush.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1668bf771d60a107366f31a06a6a6e1baf597f2c%2F987_994_1234_1199%2F1234.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid's%20successor%3A%20scrap%20art%20schools%2C%20privatise%20cities%20and%20bin%20social%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%27s%20successor%3A%20scrap%20art%20schools%2C%20privatise%20cities%20and%20bin%20social%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1668bf771d60a107366f31a06a6a6e1baf597f2c%2F987_994_1234_1199%2F1234.jpg>
 Zaha Hadid and Patrik Schumacher in 2011. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty 
Juggling the demands of leading a 400-strong global architecture firm with 
being a political agitator is new territory for Schumacher, and you sense that 
the practice might not be too keen on his increasingly vocal role as a 
self-styled contrarian. He has only unleashed the full tar-laden potential of 
his brush since theuntimely death of Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/31/star-architect-zaha-hadid-dies-aged-65>
, who would often poke fun at his propensity to drift off into the realms of 
arcane theorising and mock his political earnestness.

Hadid, who died in March, jokingly dismissed his theories (set out in the 
two-volume, Bible-thickAutopoiesis of Architecture 
<http://eu.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-0470772999.html> and in 
essays with such titles as Advancing Social Functionality via Agent-Based 
Parametric Semiology) as “Patrik-metricism 
<http://www.wmagazine.com/story/how-patrik-schumacher-will-keep-zaha-hadids-name-on-top>
”. Never politically outspoken, Hadid was happy to work forregimes of all 
different shades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/30/zaha-hadid-architecture>. 
But did she share Schumacher’s extreme views? “No,” he laughs. “She was a 
Guardian reader all her life. Even if the articles about our work did sometimes 
make her cry.”

When Schumacher joined the firm in the 1980s, the two were closer politically. 
Like a number of fellow rightwing libertarians, he was a former Marxist who had 
become disillusioned. He was finally jolted out of his “mainstream political 
slumber” by the 2008 financial crisis, when he discovered the writings of 
Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich Hayek,the godfathers of neoliberalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
, along withMurray Rothbard’s ideas of anarcho-capitalism 
<https://mises.org/library/why-i-am-anarcho-capitalist>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b2367606e207fecd654ab41434fe456aafa3d2c%2F0_1131_6078_2921%2F6078.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid's%20successor%3A%20scrap%20art%20schools%2C%20privatise%20cities%20and%20bin%20social%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%27s%20successor%3A%20scrap%20art%20schools%2C%20privatise%20cities%20and%20bin%20social%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b2367606e207fecd654ab41434fe456aafa3d2c%2F0_1131_6078_2921%2F6078.jpg>
 The Heydar Aliyev Centre in Baku, Azerbaijan, which won the Design Museum’s 
award for Schumacher and Hadid in 2014. 
“It’s about loosening the reins and rolling back the nanny state,” he says. 
“We must unleash entrepreneurial creativity and individual empowerment for 
greater prosperity and freedom for all.” Since his recent awakening, he has 
devoured a heady cocktail of writers from the Austrian school of economic 
thought (based on individualism and limiting state interference in the market), 
including Meltdown author Thomas Woods, Republican stockbrokerPeter Schiff 
<http://www.schiffradio.com/> and ex-Reagan budget director David Stockman. 

Schumacher refuses labels, but his position is founded on a fundamental faith 
in the power of the pure unbridled market to solve everything, from housing 
provision to employment regulation, imagining a world where privatisation is 
extended to streets, city management and possibly even legal systems. “Instead 
of calling for the state with every problem,” he says, “why not see it as an 
entrepreneurial opportunity?”

In his mind, only entrepreneurs can discover and invent the “co-locational 
synergies” of the city, while urban vitality cannot be determined by “faceless 
bureaucrats” in planning offices. He sees glimmers of hope in ventures like
Pocket Living 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2013/dec/19/pocket-size-flats-young-first-time-buyer>
, a London-based development company run by a former investment banker who 
successfully lobbied the former mayor Boris Johnson to introduce a smaller 
minimum space standard for one-bed flats.

I am on a steep learning curve. I’m not certain about what I’m saying
Patrik Schumacher 
He is also a fan of the Collective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/27/corporate-answer-to-flatsharing-london-collective>
, a “co-living” developer that provides tiny bedrooms (10 sq m) with access to 
big communal living spaces. Both are justified on grounds of affordability, but 
they have also been criticised as paving the way for ever-smaller dwellings in 
a country that already hasthe meanest-sized homes in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/02/rabbit-hutch-homes-should-be-thing-of-the-past-say-architects>
. Schumacher is in discussions with both companies about potential projects.

“They are a response to market demand,” he says, “a welcome rebuke to the 
stifling one-fits-all approach. Loopholes allow the invention of new products. 
If we did away with space standards, we could let a thousand flowers bloom.” He 
is full of praise for Airbnb, the “productivity engine” of Google and the 
potentials ofblockchain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/07/blockchain-answer-life-universe-everything-bitcoin-technology>
, identifying with the free-spirited Silicon Valley mindset, the “post-hippy 
milieu”, for which he thinks his fluid, networked conception of architecture is 
the true representative style. (Sadly,Google didn’t agree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/27/googles-new-headquarters-upgradable-futuristic-greenhouse>
, awarding the design of its new campus to BIG and Thomas Heatherwick instead).

Schumacher’s stance might be anathema to the generally centre-left-leaning 
architecture world, but he is not a lone voice. He has found plenty of allies 
in the Institute of Ideas, a thinktank run byClaire Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/nov/19/comment.radio>, former publisher 
of Living Marxism, which spawned a network of agitators who, as Guardian 
columnistGeorge Monbiot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2003/dec/09/highereducation.uk2> puts 
it, have drifted from “the most distant fringes of the left to the extremities 
of the pro-corporate, libertarian right”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf4f4ef62538ca2c17d39d751404b58f1a03940e%2F0_180_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid's%20successor%3A%20scrap%20art%20schools%2C%20privatise%20cities%20and%20bin%20social%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%27s%20successor%3A%20scrap%20art%20schools%2C%20privatise%20cities%20and%20bin%20social%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf4f4ef62538ca2c17d39d751404b58f1a03940e%2F0_180_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Elites and ghettoes … the privately run city Gurgaon in India. Photograph: 
Gurinder Osan/AP 
They have long been embedded in the architectural arena, from the Future 
Cities Project, to the British Council to the former incarnation of Blueprint 
magazine. Through these circles, Schumacher has become involved with plans for 
the experimental libertarian state ofLiberland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/24/liberland-hundreds-of-thousands-apply-to-live-in-worlds-newest-country>
, helping to run and judge an (unrealised) architectural competition for a 
sliver of land on the west bank of the Danube, and he is currently excited by 
the idea of “free private cities <http://freeprivatecities.com/>”. 

The brainchild of Monaco-based entrepreneur Titus Gebel, it envisages a world 
of micro-states run by private companies, where citizens pay a corporate 
service provider to provide a utopian world of “guaranteed security, limitless 
innovation and no more social strife”. Schumacher says: “I think governance as 
a business offering is an interesting idea to pursue.” He cites the privately 
run Indian city ofGurgaon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/04/gurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google>
 as a promising example – a place where residents prosper at the expense of the 
surrounding area, their sewage dumped in rivers, the groundwater depleted by 
private boreholes, with citizens segregated in elite colonies and high-rise 
ghettos. “Equality is an aspiration,” he adds, “but it should not be a priority 
over economic progress.”

Throughout our conversation, and the various lectures of his I have attended, 
it is often hard to tell whether he actually believes in what he is saying, or 
if he is merely playing the provocateur. There are occasional glimmers of 
humility, as if he can see the absurdity of some of his pronouncements, which 
he sometimes suggests are merely “thought experiments”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F046c3afb72d1954eb925a6a5c8035eb5bac1bc39%2F0_277_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid's%20successor%3A%20scrap%20art%20schools%2C%20privatise%20cities%20and%20bin%20social%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%27s%20successor%3A%20scrap%20art%20schools%2C%20privatise%20cities%20and%20bin%20social%20housing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fzaha-hadid-successor-patrik-schumacher-art-schools-social-housing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F046c3afb72d1954eb925a6a5c8035eb5bac1bc39%2F0_277_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Part of the 550-bed scheme by The Collective, with whom Schumacher is in 
talks. Photograph: purplepr.com 
Another Facebook post 
<https://www.facebook.com/patrik.schumacher.10/posts/10209888414919963?pnref=story>
 appears the morning after our conversation, reassuring his followers that Zaha 
Hadid Architects would not refuse a social housing project; that he accepts the 
current political framework in which their projects must operate; that his 
comments do not reflect the position of the firm. But the two cannot be so 
neatly separated. He is actively pursing avenues of work with like-minded 
clients and is using his position as the figurehead of a globally recognised 
firm to propagate his personal views, sounding off on topics of which he often 
appears to have little grasp. “I am on a steep learning curve,” he admits. “I’m 
not certain about what I’m saying, but I think these arguments are worth 
floating.”

It is healthy for the left to be given a shake, to be wrenched from the fuzzy 
echo-chamber, but much of Schumacher’s rhetoric verges on“post-truth” territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/post-truth-named-word-of-the-year-by-oxford-dictionaries>
. When challenged on specifics, he fumbles and flounders, with no answer to why 
Britain’s housebuilders are sitting on600,000 plots of land with planning 
permission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/30/revealed-housebuilders-sitting-on-450000-plots-of-undeveloped-land>
 while their profits soar, no appreciation that the housing market doesn’t 
simply behave according to the pure logic of supply and demand.

Let his ideas be thrashed out and interrogated, but I’m inclined to agree with 
Noam Chomsky’s take on anarcho-capitalism <https://chomsky.info/19961223/>: “A 
sick joke, perhaps worth some moments in an academic seminar … but nowhere 
else.” It is a doctrine, Chomsky concludes, that “if ever implemented, would 
lead to forms of tyranny and oppression that have few counterparts in human 
history”.

• This article was amended on 25 November 2016. An earlier version said 
incorrectly that David Stockman was recently indicted on six counts of fraud. 
He wasindicted in 2007 
<https://www.ft.com/content/e216d77a-dbe7-11db-9233-000b5df10621>, but the 
charges were dropped in 2009 
<http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2009-01-10/news/0901090241_1_david-stockman-aikman-corp-elkan-abramowitz>
. The article was further amended on 29 November 2016 to clarify a reference to 
Pocket Living and the minimum space standard.
 