
Patrik Schumacher <http://www.zaha-hadid.com/people/patrik-schumacher/> is an 
architect who thinks the world needs more unfettered capitalism, not less. He 
loves Brexit and the escape it offers from “the paralysing embrace of the EU’s 
interventionist regulatory overreach”. He wants allpublic funding of art schools
 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2015/02/25/stop-public-funding-arts-schools-patrik-schumacher-facebook/>
 to be stopped because “contemporary art is not justifiable by argument”. He is 
unapologetic about working for dictatorships and has attacked a list of 
“moralising critics” of which I am proud to be one. In short he delights in 
taking the opposite position to the centre-left consensus of much of his 
profession. He is also the high priest ofparametricism 
<http://www.patrikschumacher.com/Texts/Parametricism%20-%20A%20New%20Global%20Style%20for%20Architecture%20and%20Urban%20Design.html>
, a style or philosophy of architecture whose “rationality” and “obvious 
superiority” means, he believes, that it should and will supplant all 
alternatives. Among its adherents, parametricism inspires devotion; others view 
it with mistrust, not to say fear and loathing. But unlike many architects he 
is game for a good argument, for which reason I was pleased to spend the best 
part of two hours hearing his views and occasionally offering my own.

As a practice we miss Zaha's indefatigable and infectious passion for 
architecture, her relentless drive for perfection

Born in Bonn in 1961, Schumacher worked with Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/03/zaha-hadid-observer-appreciation-rowan-moore>
 in her London office from 1988 until her death earlier this year, and rose to 
become her right-hand man. The projects that appeared under her name, 
especially in the later years, were strongly influenced by his ideas and are 
the main evidence of what parametric architecture might look like. Now 
Schumacher is in charge of the 400-strong practice, with the daunting task of 
continuing without the impetus that came with her fame and charisma. They have 
on their books projects such as the Beijing airport new terminal building, due 
for completion in 2018, a colossal splayed, curvaceous sea creature of a 
structure that will eventually handle 72 million passengers a year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F274ebbd5779233a4d5050ffd5aac0f145cd92fba%2F0_0_4601_2215%2F4601.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%E2%80%99s%20successor%3A%20my%20blueprint%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%E2%80%99s%20successor%3A%20my%20blueprint%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F274ebbd5779233a4d5050ffd5aac0f145cd92fba%2F0_0_4601_2215%2F4601.jpg>
 Zaha Hadid Architects’ parametric design for the new Beijing Airport terminal 
‘will guide you and tell you where you are’. Photograph: Render by Methanoia © 
Zaha Hadid Architects 
“I very much miss Zaha’s caring friendship, her energy, her probing humour, 
and much more,” he now says. “As a practice we miss her indefatigable and 
infectious passion for architecture and her relentless drive for perfection. 
However, we have pulled together and we are in good spirits, and I discovered 
that my own drive and passion for architecture and for the progress of our 
discipline – together with the enthusiasm and commitment of our staff – can 
propel us forward without loss of momentum.”

So the mission to spread the parametric word continues unabated, at which 
point in the story it might be helpful to say what it actually is. This is not 
easy, as Schumacher is given to explaining it in impressive but impenetrable 
strings of polysyllables, but essentially it describes a way of designing 
buildings in such a way that every element can change in response to the 
multiple parameters – the way people might move through it, for example, their 
frequency of encounter, their dwell times – to which it is subjected. It 
exploits the ability of computers both to process complex information and to 
conceive complex architectural shapes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1668bf771d60a107366f31a06a6a6e1baf597f2c%2F0_0_3000_2193%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%E2%80%99s%20successor%3A%20my%20blueprint%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%E2%80%99s%20successor%3A%20my%20blueprint%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1668bf771d60a107366f31a06a6a6e1baf597f2c%2F0_0_3000_2193%2F3000.jpg>
 Patrik Schumacher with Zaha Hadid in front of their installation entitled Lila 
at the Serpentine Gallery, London in 2007. Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty 
Images 
The dream is that you might feed every imaginable factor into a computer, 
which would then help you deliver a building that harmoniously reflects and 
responds to all these factors. In this way architecture might base itself on 
scientific data rather than the intuitive judgments on which it usually relies. 
All architects, he believes, should accept the “dominant paradigm” of 
parametricism. At present a proliferation of approaches has left architecture 
“in disarray”.

An example of what he means might be theBeijing airport project 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2015/02/05/zaha-hadid-unveils-designs-worlds-largest-airport-passenger-terminal-beijing-china/>
, which is even vaster than thevast terminal 
<http://www.fosterandpartners.com/projects/beijing-airport/> Foster + Partners 
has already built in the city. What will this structure do that Foster’s 
non-parametric design doesn’t, I ask. “It will guide you and tell you where you 
are,” says Schumacher. “It will use slopes to direct you to something.”

Parametricism promises to do away with the maddening doubtfulness of 
architecture and indeed art

He sees parametricism as the architectural style of capitalism, to which he is 
a relatively recent convert. “My early heroes were Marx, Lenin and Trotsky, 
people who wanted to make an impact”, but he now believes that free enterprise 
is the best means of the “human development of prosperity and freedom”. The 
innate logic of parametricism means that, in a truly free market, with “freer 
utilisation of land”, it would eventually triumph.

It also extends beyond buildings into products and clothes, for which reason 
he is taking part in an exhibition called The Extraordinary Process at a new 
London gallery,Maison Mais Non. <http://www.maisonmaisnon.com/> The show is 
about “innovative technologies” in fashion design, a discipline that Schumacher 
says is “still behind the curve. It should learn from the sports industry and 
use gradient fabrics that keep shifting their porosity.” He has created two 
dinner jackets for himself, “elegant, but subverting the norm”. They use 
“zippers, and leather in particular zones, and lightness and perforations in 
zones where you might perspire more”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F265a55631a6def792bd6acb7b70a9b185039661d%2F0_0_7087_4540%2F7087.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%E2%80%99s%20successor%3A%20my%20blueprint%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%E2%80%99s%20successor%3A%20my%20blueprint%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F265a55631a6def792bd6acb7b70a9b185039661d%2F0_0_7087_4540%2F7087.jpg>
 Sketches for a Patrik Schumacher suit. Photograph: Patrik Schumacher 
The attraction of parametricism is that it promises to do away with the 
maddening doubtfulness of architecture and indeed art, the impossibility of 
proving anything conclusively, the feeling that there’s nothing there but whim 
and taste. It offers instead the comforting certainty of apparently objective 
processes, combined with unity of appearance: parametric designs, whether for 
an airport, a cultural centre or a chaise longue, have an uncanny knack of 
looking like each other – curvy, complex, often shiny or seamless.

But, for something so keen to base itself on scientific information, 
parametricism is short of evidence that it actually works. It rests on the 
unproven belief that it is possible to mould architectural forms perfectly to 
the complex and unpredictable uses they will contain. It is supposed to be 
adaptable, fluid, responsive and connective with its surroundings, but most 
parametric buildings so far tend to be the opposite. Zaha Hadid’sRiverside 
Museum in Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jun/12/zaha-hadid-glasgow-architecture-review>
, for example, is an isolated and expensive monument that accommodates its 
intended use awkwardly and is hard to adapt. Nor are they always easy to 
navigate. Their strongest quality is their visual impact, which puts them in 
the realm of the art works from which Schumacher is keen to escape.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa17b9d1cf3563b12f6e748c9d31d6b6f8880110%2F0_0_2500_1607%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%E2%80%99s%20successor%3A%20my%20blueprint%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%E2%80%99s%20successor%3A%20my%20blueprint%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa17b9d1cf3563b12f6e748c9d31d6b6f8880110%2F0_0_2500_1607%2F2500.jpg>
 ‘Isolated and expensive’: Zaha Hadid’s Riverside Museum in Glasgow. 
Photograph: Moment Editorial/Getty Images 
Perhaps for these reasons the world of competitive capital has yet to embrace 
parametricism as Schumacher hopes, the style’s main line of business being in 
singular trophies for governments and individuals. I give him an elevator test: 
if I were a venture capitalist, looking to invest in your product, how would 
you convince me? “It’s not an easy one, you can’t nail it,” he replies. (Ding! 
Test failed.) He also cites inconclusive evaluations of completed buildings and 
“fragmentary student-based or illustrative projects”. So how can he be so sure 
of parametricism’s “obvious” superiority? “To the extent that architecture 
matters and makes a difference,” he replies, parametricism means that “what 
used to be ineffable and intuitive becomes finally more scientifically 
tractable and computationally modellable.” Which still isn’t really evidence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0d2e864fd20ae4699a7d885f6688271d876a575%2F0_0_6888_3384%2F6888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zaha%20Hadid%E2%80%99s%20successor%3A%20my%20blueprint%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zaha%20Hadid%E2%80%99s%20successor%3A%20my%20blueprint%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fzaha-hadid-architects-patrik-schumacher-blueprint-future-parametricism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0d2e864fd20ae4699a7d885f6688271d876a575%2F0_0_6888_3384%2F6888.jpg>
 Look, no corners… Zaha Hadid Architects’ Galaxy Soho complex in Beijing. 
Photograph: Hufton + Crow 
The style’s grand non sequitur is the assumption that, just because computers 
have the ability both to process complex information and to conceive complex 
shapes, one should lead to the other. Schumacher is right that information 
technology creates new possibilities, but there is no inevitability about the 
forms it takes. There might, for example, be a reason why such an advanced 
piece of technology as a smartphone tends to be flat and rectangular: given the 
richness of the content, it helps to have a simple form.

In the art deco period, before the second world war, there was a fondness for 
giving buildings the streamlined shapes of planes and cars. It didn’t make much 
sense, as buildings don’t usually have the same issues of wind resistance as 
fast-moving vehicles, but it could lead to visually engaging results. On the 
available evidence parametricism is something similar – a technophile aesthetic 
with shaky technical justification. Which is not enough to grant it the world 
domination Schumacher thinks it deserves.

• The Extraordinary Process is at Maison Mais Non 
<http://www.maisonmaisnon.com/>, 14 Greek Street, London W1 from 16 September 
until 16 November
 