
The title of Alex Gibney’s new documentary about cyberwar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/cyberwar> has something apocalyptic 
about it: a digital version of the Book of Revelations, perhaps. It’s actually 
a technical term relating to malware developed in the last decade by the US and 
Israeli security services. Analysts nicknamed it “Stuxnet”, though the 
intelligence officers themselves gave their baby the creepy codename “Olympic 
Games”.

In 2010, the Americans succeeded in installing this device at Natanz, an 
Iranian nuclear plant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/01/obama-sped-up-cyberattack-iran>, 
causing centrifuges to spin out of control. But the Iranians had cyberwarriors 
on their own payroll and hit back with malware attacks on Bank of America, 
among other American institutions. The malware itself grew like a toxic worm, 
infecting other systems all over the world. As one interviewee puts it, there 
is a “whiff of August 1945” about the Natanz attack – the first chapter in a 
new history of warfare.


Related: Alex Gibney on Stuxnet film Zero Days: 'We need laws for cyberweapons'
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/08/alex-gibney-zero-days-cyberweapons-stuxnet>

Gibney argues that cyber-attacks are the next big thing in war, and, despite 
official denials, it is not just a matter of “hacking” or “spying” but complete 
offensive capability. And, as in nuclear war, the experts emphasise the 
American football distinctions between defence and offence. What Zero Days does 
is make the case that cyber-aggression of nation states is a new form of 
dangerous geopolitical dysfunction. Unlike nuclear or chemical weapons, which 
have some kind of internationally enforceable inspection arrangements and 
balances of power, cyberweapons are deniable and denied, protected by a new 
kind of macho-geekery and silence.

Zero Days is an intriguing, disturbing watch. And to return to the title, 
there is another echo – of Lucy Walker’s nuclear weapons documentaryCountdown 
to Zero <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jun/23/countdown-to-zero-review>
. We need some kind of cyber-nonproliferation treaty.
 