
Monday night, Stockholm. A tall figure with a ponytail and a goatee makes his 
way on to the stage and prepares to start his acceptance speech. If there is a 
sense of history repeating itself, it is no surprise. Historyis repeating 
itself. It’s Groundhog Day.Zlatan Ibrahimovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/zlatan-ibrahimovic> has just become 
Sweden’s footballer of the year for a ninth consecutive year. It is his 10th
Guldboll in total.

Anyone in that position could be forgiven for becoming a bit jaded. Not 
Zlatan. He has a line. Zlatan always has a line. This time he talks about when 
he was playing for one of Malmo FF’s youth teams. “Last year I promised to come 
back here to pick up my 10th Guldboll,” he says. “I don’t know if I can promise 
the same thing for next year. But this one has got me thinking about my time at 
Malmo when I was a young boy. I was sitting in the dressing room, had a look 
around and thought: ‘In order to be successful I need to be 10 times as good as 
everyone else here.’”

Nicklas Bendtner hits back at media, warning ‘this tiger will fight till the 
end’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/20/nicklas-bendtner-this-tiger-will-fight>
Zlatan, of course, became 10 times as good as anyone in that team and one 
senses that he, even now, still thinks he is 10 times better than most players 
he comes up against. And sometimes he probably is.

On Saturday night Zlatan will experience that odd sensation of coming up 
against someone just as confident as himself. Nicklas Bendtner and Denmark 
stand in Sweden’s way in the Euro 2016 play-offs with the first leg at Friends 
Arena in Stockholm. It’s Zlatan v Lord Bendtner. Battle of the egos, battle of 
Scandinavia. Friends Arena has sold out and the two countries’ media have been 
ramping up the rhetoric before the game,Denmark’s channel Five producing an 
advert <https://www.facebook.com/kanal5dk/videos/905518829517399/> where a 
young girl menacingly cuts Pippi Longstocking’s bunches, Ikea furniture is 
thrown out of a house and Abba records and CDs are burned.

Everything will focus on the two strikers despite both of them trying to 
downplay the clash earlier in the week. “It is your job to write,” Bendtner, 
who has had a stomach bug but should still start, told journalists. “It is your 
job to get me to talk about this. I can’t do much about that but I can’t see 
why we should be compared to each other. I think he’s great. A good player and 
a good person. I know you really want me to talk a lot about this … but I 
won’t.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fzlatan-bendtner-sweden-denmark-euro-2016-play-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd1686c941af74687da68b3d1b1413b8312491e8%2F0_256_3936_2363%2F3936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zlatan%20v%20Lord%20Bendtner%3A%20big%20egos%20clash%20as%20Sweden%20take%20on%20Denmark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fzlatan-bendtner-sweden-denmark-euro-2016-play-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zlatan%20v%20Lord%20Bendtner%3A%20big%20egos%20clash%20as%20Sweden%20take%20on%20Denmark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fzlatan-bendtner-sweden-denmark-euro-2016-play-offs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd1686c941af74687da68b3d1b1413b8312491e8%2F0_256_3936_2363%2F3936.jpg>
 Zlatan Ibrahimovic with his 10th Guldbollen. Photograph: IBL/Rex Shutterstock 
Move on, nothing to see here. It was reminiscent of the time Bendtner 
interrupted a journalist and said “No” before he had even heard the question. 
“You don’t even know what I was going to ask,” complained the journalist. “I 
could hear it was a stupid question,” came Bendtner’s reply.

It is a remark Zlatan would have been proud of and the similarities between 
the two are obvious: the extraordinary self-belief, the one-liners, their 
playing positions and their stature as their countries’ most famous footballers 
for the last decade. They have, however, had wildly different careers and even 
if you disregard the fact that Zlatan is a more naturally gifted player there 
seems to be one thing that sets Zlatan and Bendtner apart: their mentalities. 
Neither, it must be said, act like a grown-up – although they have both 
mellowed since becoming fathers – but whereas Zlatan comes in the shape of a 
sulky teenager, Bendtner resembles an angry five-year-old constantly on the 
brink of a tantrum.

Throughout his career, when Zlatan has suffered a setback he has gone home, 
got angry, thought about what to improve, and come back determined to prove 
everyone wrong. Bendtner, on the other hand, appears to self-destruct andsmash 
up a gym 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/football/news/arsenal-striker-nicklas-bendtner-arrested-2851576>
 orrub his genitals on a taxi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/13/nicklas-bendtner-accused-dropped-pants-taxi-driver-arsenal>
 if something has gone against him.

There is a passage in Zlatan’s book, I am Zlatan, when he talks about his 
first full season at Ajax. Things were not going according to plan. Co 
Adriaanse, first, and then Ronald Koeman, kept him on the bench, preferring the 
Greek striker Nikos Machlas.

Zlatan writes: “I am really not a person who walks around being satisfied: ‘I 
am Zlatan, wow!’ Rather the contrary it is like a film that is on repeat and I 
am thinking all the time: should I have done that or that? What can I improve? 
I always – always – take something home with me from games and matches and that 
is quite hard of course. I am never really satisfied, not even when I should 
be.”

It is difficult imagining Bendtner saying something similar. That season ended 
with Ajax winning the league and Ibrahimovic coming off the bench in the 78th 
minute to score the winning goal in extra time in the cup final against 
Utrecht. He never looked back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fzlatan-bendtner-sweden-denmark-euro-2016-play-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0fa82315b230031268cb0b5ecf8ba58617ec7c5%2F0_237_2176_1301%2F2176.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zlatan%20v%20Lord%20Bendtner%3A%20big%20egos%20clash%20as%20Sweden%20take%20on%20Denmark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fzlatan-bendtner-sweden-denmark-euro-2016-play-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zlatan%20v%20Lord%20Bendtner%3A%20big%20egos%20clash%20as%20Sweden%20take%20on%20Denmark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fzlatan-bendtner-sweden-denmark-euro-2016-play-offs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0fa82315b230031268cb0b5ecf8ba58617ec7c5%2F0_237_2176_1301%2F2176.jpg>
 Nicklas Bendtner in the O2 Arena crowd during UFC Fight Night in 2014. 
Photograph: Josh Hedges/Zuffa LLC via Getty Images 
That was in 2002, 13 years ago. Since then he has won 11 league titles in 
three different countries (even though Juventus were stripped of two titles 
because of theCalciopoli scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/jun/16/italy-match-fixing-giuseppe-signori?INTCMP=SRCH>
). He has played in four major tournaments for Sweden, broken hiscountry’s 
goalscoring record <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/football/29073051> and will 
retire a contented player.

Zlatan Ibrahimovic tells journalist: ‘I get a kick out of doing things that 
hurt you’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/02/zlatan-ibrahimovic-sweden-journalist-kick-hurt-you>
During the same time Bendtner has won a Serie A title, the FA Cup and the 
German Cup although he has not been a key player in either of the three 
triumphs.There have been times when Bendtner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/15/nicklas-bendtner-wolfsburg-early-training-last-to-leave>
 has threatened to play to his potential, but those moments have been too few 
and far between.

As a snapshot of the Dane’s career, it is worth going back to October 2013 and 
Denmark’s World Cup qualifier against Italy in Copenhagen. Bendtner was back in 
the Danish team after an enforced break and when the stadium announcer got to 
the striker, the crowd bellowed out his name so loudly it was surely heard 
across the water and all the way toSweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sweden>. This was a comeback, almost a 
love reunion. Six months earlier a pale and shocked Bendtner had stood on the 
steps of Copenhagen city court and explained it was “the worst day of his 
life”. He had been fined £80,000 and banned from driving for three years after 
being caught drink-driving, more than three times over the legal limit.

Denmark’s coach, Morten Olsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/17/denmark-morten-olsen-euro-2016>
, immediately said he would not pick Bendtner for the next six months to give 
the striker “time to reflect”. And reflect he did. By the time he was lining up 
to face the Italians he literally looked like a new man. His appearance had 
always been immaculate but now he stood there with a full beard and his 
newly-long hair tied up in a top-knot.

He had not played regularly for Arsenal or Juventus, where he had been on 
loan, for more than a year but on that night he was immense. He played like a 
striker obsessed, fuelled by the adrenaline of being back in red and white. He 
beat Gianluigi Buffon with two headers the Italian could do nothing about.

Zlatan Ibrahimovic told to leave France by Front National leader Marine Le Pen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/16/zlatan-ibrahimovic-comments-investigated-french-league-psg-marine-le-pen>
Denmark were winning 2-1 and Bendtner was about to celebrate the most 
eye-catching night of his career … and then, in the 91st minute, Alberto 
Aquilani equalised. It was so Bendtner. Almost there, but not quite.Denmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/denmark> didn’t make it to the World Cup.

The crowd’s enormous tribute before that game, and the Danish fans’ response 
to his drink-driving ban, sums up their relationship to the striker. He is not 
mocked in Denmark in the way he is abroad. He is liked back home but it also a 
marriage of convenience. Bendtner gives them something that no other striker 
seems capable of: goals. He has scored 29 international goals, many of them 
very important, and a look at his rivals for the position up front shows why 
the Danes are willing to forgive and forget so often. His backup for the Sweden 
games is Morten “Duncan” Rasmussen, who failed to make it at Celtic, and in 
previous years it has been Simon Makienok Christoffersen, who is currently on 
loan at Charlton from Palermo. Zlatan’s position in the Sweden team is similar. 
There is no one who comes close to his quality up front. John Guidetti, Ola 
Toivonen and Marcus Berg are Erik Hamren’s options against Denmark. Enough 
said. Equally, Zlatan’s relationship with the Swedes has been a tempestuous 
affair but in recent years he has become much morefolkkär, more appreciated by 
the public.

And while he has collected Guldbollen 10 times he has won Jerringpriset, an 
award where the public votes for the best sportsman of the year, only once. And 
he still doesn’t sing the national anthem before games (although he does seem 
to like his own version of it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/12/zlatan-ibrahimovic-swedish-national-anthem-streamed-three-million-times>
).

His demeanour has been a problem as well. Swedes, like Danes, are not 
naturally boisterous and there have been times when Zlatan’s un-Swedishness 
(read cockiness) has troubled the Swedes, made them feel uncomfortable.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fsweden-coach-denmark-fighting-sibling-football-euro-2016-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F13%2F1447432347760%2FKP_595760_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Playing%20against%20Denmark%20like%20fighting%20your%20sibling%2C%20says%20Sweden%20coach%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fsweden-coach-denmark-fighting-sibling-football-euro-2016-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Playing%20against%20Denmark%20like%20fighting%20your%20sibling%2C%20says%20Sweden%20coach%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fsweden-coach-denmark-fighting-sibling-football-euro-2016-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F13%2F1447432347760%2FKP_595760_crop_640x480.jpg>
Playing against Denmark like fighting your sibling, says Sweden coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/nov/13/sweden-coach-denmark-fighting-sibling-football-euro-2016-video>
. 
Despite this, he is a national hero now. There is now a warmth towards Zlatan 
that there was not before.

He is also respected in the Swedish dressing room with players talking about 
“a different Zlatan” behind closed doors. “He is a person who cares about 
others,” the debutantGustav Svensson told Aftonbladet this week 
<http://www.aftonbladet.se/sportbladet/fotboll/landslagsfotboll/herrlandslaget/article21737476.ab>
. “He contributes a lot. He carries with him a lot of respect and that is very 
important for the team as a whole. He is humble and puts the team first.

“When he shouts it is for the team’s best and everyone listens. He likes to 
joke and make sure that there is a good atmosphere. The Danes have taken a lot 
of shit this week.”

Zlatan is desperate to play in one more major tournament and only Denmark 
stand in his way. He once said that “everyone who stands in my way loses” but 
that is clearly not true. Zlatan may think he is 10 times better than anyone 
else – and maybe 20 times better than Bendtner – but in the end it will not 
come down to that. It is a team game after all and, while the main protagonists 
may not agree, the tie could just as well be settled by a Christian Eriksen 
free-kick or an Erkan Zengin screamer.

But one thing is for sure. If Zlatan and Sweden are eliminated by Bendtner and 
Denmark, the scars will take a long time to heal, especially for Sweden’s 
leader and captain. A defeat could very well spell the end of his international 
career and it is perhaps only then everyone in Sweden will realise just how 
lucky they have been.
 