
A Disney creature-feature doubling as a pointed lesson in identity politics 
and institutionally enforced prejudice? Sounds perilously worthy at best or 
smugly mirthless at worst. Miraculously,Zootropolis (Disney, PG), the Mouse 
House’s best full-length animation since the similarly fur-coatedThe Lion King, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/dec/20/artsfeatures3> is none of 
these things. A bounding, popping fusion of fuzzily fantastical escapade and 
straight-to-the-bone satire, it’s conceived and structured like an 
adult-oriented mystery, but never aims snarkily over the heads of its young 
audience. Instead, it’s the rare family film that trusts children with subtext.

There’s certainly enough of it to go around in the sprawlingly imagined urban 
animal kingdom of the title, where predator and prey have evolved to a state of 
peaceful coexistence, one threatened by a spate of inexplicable rogue attacks. 
It’s up to diminutive bunny cop Judy Hopps to investigate, reluctantly assisted 
by devious hustler fox Nick Wilde (marvellously voiced byJason Bateman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/09/jason-bateman-my-dirty-secret-playing-the-straight-man-because-he-gets-to-be-in-every-scene>
) in what turns out to be a surprisingly knotty noir pretzel.

This is storytelling that works splendidly enough at face value, but is 
deepened and distinguished by wry, sly allusions to media outrage culture, 
diversity awareness and even (with the most delicate of touches) theBlack Lives 
Matter <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement>
movement. Younger kids needn’t get its every political nuance, as they’ll see 
the (lusciously illustrated) rainforest for the trees: a smart, sharp plea for 
recognising difference, not separation. All that and Shakira as a singing 
gazelle – it would be churlish to ask for more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fzootropolis-disorder-10-cloverfield-land-stranger-things-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc097b349daed40cc3c947c45b5fe6fd7a17bb4b1%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zootropolis%3B%20Disorder%3B%2010%20Cloverfield%20Lane%3B%20The%20End%20of%20the%20Tour%3B%20Stranger%20Things%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fzootropolis-disorder-10-cloverfield-land-stranger-things-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zootropolis%3B%20Disorder%3B%2010%20Cloverfield%20Lane%3B%20The%20End%20of%20the%20Tour%3B%20Stranger%20Things%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fzootropolis-disorder-10-cloverfield-land-stranger-things-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc097b349daed40cc3c947c45b5fe6fd7a17bb4b1%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Matthias Schoenaerts gets down to action in Disorder. 
I’d call Zootropolis the week’s best thriller if that didn’t sound like an 
undue slight to French director Alice Winocour’s very fineDisorder (Soda, 15), 
a crisp, close-shaved tension exercise starring Matthias Schoenaerts in the 
mode that suits him best – brutish brooder with something behind the eyes – as 
a PTSD-affected soldier turned bodyguard to Diane Kruger’s endangered trophy 
wife. It’s not especially fresh material, but Winocour directs it like a dream: 
all curt, coiled suspense until a battering action breakdown. Hollywood should 
snap her up: I’d love to see what continental cool she’d bring to a neat genre 
runaround such as10 Cloverfield Lane (Paramount, 12). Building loosely and 
cleverly on 2008’s found-footage horrorCloverfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/feb/01/actionandadventure.drama>, this 
shadow-strewn chamber piece benefits chiefly from the jangling performances of 
Mary Elizabeth Winstead and John Goodman as agitated strangers sharing an 
underground bunker after what may or may not have been a chemical apocalypse. 
Its charcoal atmospherics are both effective and a bit impersonal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fzootropolis-disorder-10-cloverfield-land-stranger-things-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa2cee18af4d2629ec7ebe7a85ba2801bc506c2c%2F0_106_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zootropolis%3B%20Disorder%3B%2010%20Cloverfield%20Lane%3B%20The%20End%20of%20the%20Tour%3B%20Stranger%20Things%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fzootropolis-disorder-10-cloverfield-land-stranger-things-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zootropolis%3B%20Disorder%3B%2010%20Cloverfield%20Lane%3B%20The%20End%20of%20the%20Tour%3B%20Stranger%20Things%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fzootropolis-disorder-10-cloverfield-land-stranger-things-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa2cee18af4d2629ec7ebe7a85ba2801bc506c2c%2F0_106_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 He’s behind you: Mary Elizabeth Winstead and John Goodman in 10 Cloverfield 
Lane. Photograph: Paramount 
Slipping quietly and undeservedly straight to DVD, James Ponsoldt’s sweetly 
mournfulThe End of the Tour (Soda, 15) is certainly a niche proposition: a 
gentle, conversational account of a five-day encounter betweenRolling Stone 
journalist David Lipsky and the late novelistDavid Foster Wallace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-foster-wallace>, set 12 years before 
the latter’s suicide, but imbued with longing for lost ideas. You don’t need to 
have been a Wallace acolyte, however, to be moved by the film’s thoughtful 
articulation of the burden of creativity or by Jason Segel’s unexpectedly 
crinkled, compassionate inhabitation of the man himself.

Also on the unsung indie end of the shelf, British novelist-turned-director 
Helen Walsh’s teen-focused class-clash dramaThe Violators (Bulldog Film, 15) 
meshes lyricism and urban realism with some chin-thrusting flair, despite an 
overblown final act.

It’s a bumper week for classic reissues: new, high-sheen editions of Andrei 
Tarkovsky <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrei-tarkovsky>’s pristine, 
ribbon-like dream poemMirror (Curzon Artificial Eye, U), Stanley Kubrick’s 
eternally absurd political ruckusDr Strangelove (Criterion, PG) and Ken Loach’s 
form-setting social-portrait essayPoor Cow (Studiocanal, 15) all merit 
purchase. But the rare, revelatory treat in the pile isThe Complete Buster 
Keaton Short Films 1917-1923 (Eureka, U), compiling 32 of the deadpan wonder’s 
comic shorts across four discs and 12 hours, with a feast of extras and 
academic materials. A few of the shorts are strictly curios, but most still 
play as purest comedy gold.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fzootropolis-disorder-10-cloverfield-land-stranger-things-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd71e6efdc738d2192bf4b406c5a84d72a87759b7%2F0_91_4240_2545%2F4240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zootropolis%3B%20Disorder%3B%2010%20Cloverfield%20Lane%3B%20The%20End%20of%20the%20Tour%3B%20Stranger%20Things%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fzootropolis-disorder-10-cloverfield-land-stranger-things-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zootropolis%3B%20Disorder%3B%2010%20Cloverfield%20Lane%3B%20The%20End%20of%20the%20Tour%3B%20Stranger%20Things%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F24%2Fzootropolis-disorder-10-cloverfield-land-stranger-things-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd71e6efdc738d2192bf4b406c5a84d72a87759b7%2F0_91_4240_2545%2F4240.jpg>
 Winona Ryder in Netflix’s Stranger Things. Photograph: Curtis Baker/Netflix 
Finally, the latest talk of the streaming world has been Netflix’s new series 
Stranger Things <https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80057281>, a retro-kitsch 
sci-fi exercise that I confess I’m munching through as I would a packet of 
original cheese Nik Naks. Its hodgepodge of 1980s popcorn inspirations, from 
Spielberg toStephen King <https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking> to Joe 
Dante, is as compulsive as it is nutritionally modest. This midwestern 
missing-person saga, electrified with a jolt of telekinesis, minesa decade that 
has already been pretty comprehensively plundered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/09/the-ghostbusters-reboot-and-nostalgia-in-pop-culture>
 by nostalgia-hunters, such as JJ Abrams’sSuper 8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/super-8>, and its wistfulness for the Formica 
blandness of Reagan’s middle America seems a little phoney. But it’s easy and 
greasy and gives a cannily castWinona Ryder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/18/winona-ryder-comeback-stranger-things-netflix>
 something to chew on. I’m sticking around for things to get stranger.
 