
1 Starship Trooper <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DKftiJS30Cs>

Yes released a couple of albums prior to guitarist Steve Howe joining the 
band, but it was having him in the lineup that turned them into a world-class 
act. The music became far more ambitious, and their third LP,The Yes Album 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/the-yes-album-mw0000592609>, proved to be their 
commercial and critical breakthrough. At almost 10 minutes long, and with three 
"movements" building up to an instrumental climax, Starship Trooper set the 
template for much of prog-rock for the 70s and beyond.

2 Roundabout <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Tdu4uKSZ3M>

Yes went up another gear when Rick Wakeman joined in 1971, and his virtuoso 
playing provided a worthy foil for Steve Howe's guitar. The opener from the 
fourth album,Fragile <http://www.allmusic.com/album/fragile-mw0000391610>, 
propelled by Chris Squire's distinctive sing-song Rickenbacker bass, has always 
been one of the band's standards. There's a huge energy in the interplay 
between Wakeman's Hammond organ, Howe's guitar and Squire's bass as the three 
of them bounce off one another in the instrumental break towards the end of the 
song.

3 Heart of the Sunrise <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oDqG9agd5wc>

The frenetic instrumental first half of Fragile's closing number was quite 
unlike anything they did before or since, anticipating the territoryKing 
Crimson would explore a couple of years later with Red 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LTbBjVHQxiU>. Jon Anderson's distinctive 
choirboy-on-acid vocals don't come in until halfway through the song, and 
rather than being the typical rock frontman, his voice becomes another lead 
instrument in the band. His stream-of-consciousness lyrics are never easy to 
interpret, but if you imagine him in his pre-Yes day job as a milkman, they 
almost make sense.

4 And You And I <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FZcGc-nbLco>

Eight out of 10 Yes fans whose cats expressed a preference cite the band's 
fifth album,Close to the Edge 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/close-to-the-edge-mw0000692219>, as the pinnacle 
of their career. While the peerless title track is rightly revered, the two 
songs that made up the second side of the LP shouldn't be overlooked. This one 
starts out as a semi-acoustic ballad, but what stands out is the majestic 
Mellotron and slide guitar theme that comes in mid-way. Here Yes demonstrate 
just how a five-piece electric rock band can approach the depth and power of a 
symphony orchestra.

5 The Gates of Delirium <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OI9ZGTO9eVc>

By 1974 Rick Wakeman had left the band, disillusioned with the direction the 
band took on the infamous four-track double albumTales from Topographic Oceans 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/tales-from-topographic-oceans-mw0000315535>, to 
be replaced onRelayer <http://www.allmusic.com/album/relayer-mw0000321905> by 
Patrick Moraz. The last time in the vinyl LP era that Yes would take up an 
entire side of an album with a single song, it's an attempt, in heroic prog 
tradition, to set Tolstoy's War and Peace to music. The lengthy instrumental 
battle sequence sounds as though the battle is being fought in outer space, and 
the closing Soon section is one of the most sublimely beautiful moments in 
Yes's career, one of Anderson's best ever vocal performances.

Reading on mobile? Listen to this Yes playlist here 
<http://open.spotify.com/user/guardianmusic/playlist/0sfMUXI3wqiz0Wbv1lgm2J>

6 Parallels <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ncAk15x0l8Y>

By 1977 Wakeman was back in the band on the eighth album, Going for the One, 
and they stepped back from the jazz-rock direction that had prompted his 
departure in the first place. Parallels is one of the few tracks on which Yes 
ever rocked out, and one of the few tracks on which anybody has rocked out 
using a massive church organ as the lead instrument. Wakeman's titanic organ 
riff drives the whole thing, supported by Howe's amazing rippling guitar, and 
another of Squire's propulsive basslines.

7 Don't Kill the Whale <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8NO8h_uTkdU>

By 1978 punk had happened, and Yes turned away from LP side-long epics and 
were trying to write short and succinct songs in an attempt to storm the 
singles chart. It was only a minor hit, but the interplay between Anderson's 
vocal and Howe's melodic guitar lines makes this four-minute song one gem from 
the otherwise patchy and directionlessTormato 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/tormato-mw0000202014> album.

8 Machine Messiah <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kHFbzaf8FX8>

There was wailing and gnashing of teeth from the faithful when it was 
announced that Anderson and Wakeman were to be replaced by Trevor Horn and 
Geoff Downes ofBuggles <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iwuy4hHO3YQ>. The 
resulting album,Drama <http://www.allmusic.com/album/drama-mw0000205702>, 
confounded expectations, a bold, hard-edged rock album closer in spirit to 
1971's Fragile than to Buggles' pop hits. The opening number, with its 
symphonic structure, recurring motifs and caustic guitars, was the most 
musically ambitious on the record and managed to create a template for 
prog-metal more than a decade before its time. It's true Horn was no Jon 
Anderson on vocals, but he acquitted himself well enough here to have won over 
many of the sceptics.

9 Changes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=omhNnvX3Sx0>

It would be fair to say the 1980s incarnation of Yes with the South African 
guitaristTrevor Rabin <http://www.allmusic.com/artist/trevor-rabin-mn0000017518>
 on guitar remains controversial. There are those who still refer to it as 
their "No" period, and the sleek and polished AOR of the era was a far cry from 
their adventurous and experimental music of the 70s. Approached on its own 
terms, though, 1983's90125 <http://www.allmusic.com/album/90125-mw0000196430> 
is a superb album. Trevor Horn handed the microphone back to Jon Anderson, but 
stayed in the producer's seat, and his rich 1980s production is very much of 
its time. It's difficult to pick out a single song, but this is one of the many 
highlights, with its spiralling intro oddly reminiscent of contemporary King 
Crimson, and with Rabin and Anderson sharing lead vocals.

10 Mind Drive <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zvBknHFa8PQ>

Yes's output became increasingly patchy, in the 90s and onwards, as the band's 
membership became a revolving door. But when the classic 
Anderson/Wakeman/Howe/Squire/White lineup regrouped in 1996 to record the 
part-live, part studio quadruple albumKeys to Ascension 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/keys-to-ascension-mw0000079384>, in 1997's Keys 
to Ascension 2 <http://www.allmusic.com/album/keys-to-ascension-2-mw0000223650> 
they managed to add one more absolute classic to their canon. At 18 minutes 
long, Mind Drive is a return to the multi-part long-form style of their heyday, 
with some superb acoustic playing from Howe.

• What do you think of Tim's choices? Nominate the songs he should have 
included – and say why – and we'll do an alternative 10 of the Best for Yes on 
Friday
 