
This year Formula One has had not one silly season but two. The British Grand 
Prix was followed by a three-week break because ofthe cancellation of the race 
in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/20/fia-german-grand-prix-dropped-calendar>
 and another four-week recess ensued after the last race in Hungary at the end 
of July.

F1, however, returns in Spa this weekend and nine races will be packed into 14 
weeks, ending with the final round in Abu Dhabi on 29 November. This is how the 
teams fared through the first half of the season, in order of their world 
championship standing.

Williams like the rain as much as a barbecue

Mercedes

Constructors’ championship 1st 383pts

Drivers’ championship

Lewis Hamilton 1st 202pts

Nico Rosberg 2nd 181pts

The team will romp to both world championships after winning eight of the 10 
races so far. They deserve their success, too, because they are a class apart 
but they have also shown that they can wobble under pressure. It is a shame 
that no other team has been capable of harassing them on a consistent basis. 
Williams and Ferrari punished their poor starts in the last two races,at 
Silverstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jul/05/f1-british-grand-prix-live-lewis-hamilton>
 andin Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jul/26/f1-hungarian-grand-prix-live-lewis-hamilton>
, when they moved off the line like tractors. Lewis Hamilton’s 21-point lead 
over his team-mate Nico Rosberg is not a fair reflection of his total 
dominance; he has led for 340 laps in 2015 and scored 81% of the maximum 250 
points available.

Ferrari

Constructors’ championship 2nd 236pts

Drivers’ championship

Sebastian Vettel 3rd 160pts

Kimi Raikkonen 5th 76pts

The best of the rest but are still more than half a second off Mercedes’ pace 
– and that’s a big gap inFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>. Significant improvements have 
been made to the engine but they still have a lot of work to do on the chassis.

Sebastian Vettel, with wins in Malaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/29/sebastian-vettel-wins-malaysia-f1-lewis-hamilton-second>
 andHungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/26/ferrari-sebastian-vettel-wins-hungarian-grand-prix-mercedes-lewis-hamilton>
, has shown that he is capable of producing results but Kimi Raikkonen’s future 
continues to attract speculation. Raikkonen has scored 84 fewer points than his 
team-mate and needs to finish with a flourish if he is to retain his lucrative 
seat.

Williams

Constructors’ championship 3rd 151pts

Drivers’ championship

Valtteri Bottas 4th 77pts

Felipe Massa 6th 74pts

They continue to impress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/25/claire-williams-f1-hungarian-grand-prix>
, especially when you look at their modest level of funding beside the 
big-budget teams, with whom they rub wheels. They have consolidated, however, 
rather than kicked on from their magnificent 2014, when they were third with 
320 points, putting behind them their annus horribilis of the previous year; 
ninth with five points.

They like the rain as much as a barbecue, however. For Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams>, it looks like acid rain and they 
melted away at Silverstone once the weather turned. Silverstone also showed us 
that they will have to brush up on their strategy in the weeks ahead. Valtteri 
Bottas, who has not had everything his own way against Felipe Massa, might have 
won the British Grand Prix with a better call from the pit wall.

Red Bull

Constructors’ championship 4th 96pts

Drivers’ championship 

Daniel Ricciardo 7th 51pts

Daniil Kyvat 8th 45pts

The team goes into the second half of the season encouraged by their double 
podium finish in the last race in Budapest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/27/five-things-hungarian-grand-prix-formula-one>
. They have improved their chassis, which didn’t look as good as Toro Rosso’s 
at the beginning but their dud Renault engine still resembles something they 
found in Exchange and Mart, despite upgrades at Silverstone.

Daniel Ricciardo, a revelation in 2014, has been frustrated by the car’s lack 
of competitiveness. His team-mate Daniil Kvyat has improved after a dodgy start 
and impressed in Monaco, and also in Hungary, where his podium finish was a 
maiden one.

Force India

Constructors’ championship 5th 39pts

Drivers’ championship

Nico Hülkenberg 9th 24pts

Sergio Pérez 13th 15pts

They have succeeded in punching above their middleweight division in recent 
years and are doing so once again after bringing in their B-spec car at 
Silverstone. They started the season slowly because of budget worries and were 
basically running last year’s car.

The form of their drivers will also give them confidence in the second half of 
the season. Nico Hülkenberg has looked a stronger driversince winning Le Mans 
in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/14/porsche-win-le-mans-24-hours-race-nico-hulkenberg>
 and reallycaught the eye in Austria later that month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jun/21/f1-austrian-grand-prix-live>
. Sergio Pérez, who appeared the stronger driver a few months ago, now looks 
second best.

Lotus

Constructors’ championship 6th 35pts

Drivers’ championship 

Romain Grosjean 10th 23pts

Pastor Maldonado 14th 12pts

Lotus have been boosted by their switch to a Mercedes power unit but money is 
short and speculation thatRenault <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/renault> 
might take them over means they go to Spa feeling unsettled.

They have had reliability issues and Pastor Maldonado continues to drive 
erratically. His team-mate Romain Grosjean has often been terrific in 
qualifying but less consistent on race days.

Toro Rosso

Constructors’ championship 7th 31pts

Drivers’ championship

Max Verstappen 11th 22pts

Carlos Sainz Jr 16th 9pts

The most interesting of the smaller teams. In the early races they often 
looked a stronger – particularly in qualifying – outfit thanRed Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull>, their senior team, although they 
have suffered reliability issues.

Max Verstappen, the most eye-catching young driver out there, was fourth in 
the Hungarian Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/27/max-verstappen-to-sit-driving-test-f1>
 and has had team followers talking about their days with Sebastian Vettel. He 
also looked very good in China but his team-mate Carlos Sainz Jr, although 
overshadowed, has also been impressive.

Sauber

Constructors’ championship 8th 22pts

Drivers’ championship

Felipe Nasr 12th 16pts

Marcus Ericsson 18th 6pts

Better than last year, both with their Ferrari engine and their aero, but they 
have fallen back in recent months and face a challenging second half. Marcus 
Ericsson and Felipe Nasr – who wasa wonderful fifth on his debut drive in 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/15/f1-australian-grand-prix-race-report>
 – have both been solid. They badly need the upgrades and the new technical 
director, Mark Smith, is going to be a busy man.

Manor have struggled to keep up, even with McLaren

McLaren

Constructors’ championship 9th 17pts

Drivers’ championship

Fernando Alonso 15th 11pts

Jenson Button 17th 6pts

Kevin Magnussen 21st 0pts*
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F2015-f1-season-how-teams-rated-mercedes-ferrari-williams-mclaren%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13706f9fff181238ef4be55f3c3e012be6e90153%2F13_67_2812_1688%2F2812.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2015%20F1%20season%3A%20how%20the%20teams%20have%20rated%20so%20far%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F2015-f1-season-how-teams-rated-mercedes-ferrari-williams-mclaren%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2015%20F1%20season%3A%20how%20the%20teams%20have%20rated%20so%20far%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2F2015-f1-season-how-teams-rated-mercedes-ferrari-williams-mclaren%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13706f9fff181238ef4be55f3c3e012be6e90153%2F13_67_2812_1688%2F2812.jpg>
 Track marshals help McLaren’s Fernando Alonso push his car after it broke down 
during qualifying for the Hungarian Grand Prix. Photograph: Ronald Zak/AP 
So far, they have failed to live up to their modest expectations. They knew 
life would be difficult with the new engine suppliers, Honda – but not this 
hard. Even their “success” in the last race in Hungary, where both drivers 
finished among the points, may be a false dawn because Spa and Monza will 
punish their lack of power. The sight of Fernando Alonso pushing his car in 
qualifying in Hungary will be one of the abiding images of the year. Only 
twice, in China and Hungary, have Alonso and Jenson Button both finished.

*Magnussen stood in for Alonso in Australia

Manor

Constructors’ championship 10th 0pts

Drivers’ championship

Roberto Merhi 19th 0pts

Will Stevens 20th 0pts

Manor Marussia have struggled to keep up, even with McLaren. Their 2014 car 
has simply not been competitive and a lack of money means they go into the 
second phase of the season with no real hope of doing any better. Merely 
remaining in the sport is commendable after last season, when they nearly went 
under and when Jules Bianchi sufferedwhat proved to be fatal injuries in Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/17/f1-driver-jules-bianchi-dies-from-injuries-sustained-in-crash-at-japanese-grand-prix>
. Will Stevens has generally had the better of Roberto Merhi, although neither 
have scored any points.
 