
More than half a million Britons a year will be diagnosed with cancer by 2035, 
making it hard for NHS services to cope with the extra demand for testing and 
treatment,Cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Research UK 
(CRUK) has warned.

The number of people across the UK found to have cancer every year is expected 
to rise from 352,000 to an estimated 514,000 in less than 20 years – more than 
160,000 extra cases annually – according to research in the British Journal of 
Cancer.

Cervical cancer: gap between screenings ‘can be increased to 10 years’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/04/cervical-cancer-gap-screenings-increased-to-10-years-research>
The vast majority of the expected 162,000 additional cases – 141,000 – will be 
caused by the ageing and growing population. However, another 12,600 will be 
the result of a combination of lifestyle factors, such as smoking, alcohol or 
poor diet, and also improved screening for the disease.

In 1993, 127,000 men and 128,000 women were diagnosed with the disease. By 
2014, the numbers had risen to 173,000 and 179,000 respectively. This future 
trends analysis, based on examining cancer data going back to 1979, predicts 
that 244,000 women and more than 270,000 men will be diagnosed in 2035.

Those big rises mean there is an “urgent need to plan for the future of NHS 
cancer services, which arealready stretched to the limit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/nhs-groups-cancer-care-ratings-ccgs-england>
 as they struggle to cope with a growing and ageing population”, CRUK said.

“The number of people getting cancer in the UK will incerease sharply in the 
next two decades. This is mostly the result of an ageing and growing population 
but, for women, lifestyle factors are playing an increasingly important role”, 
said Dr Rebecca Smittenaar, the study’s lead author and CRUK’s statistics 
manager.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcancer-research-uk-britain-increase-diagnosed-2035-nhs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ea6cd73de385548b307e8e3596882a999f6f2a1%2F0_341_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=500%2C000%20Britons%20a%20year%20will%20be%20diagnosed%20with%20cancer%20by%202035%2C%20study%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcancer-research-uk-britain-increase-diagnosed-2035-nhs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=500%2C000%20Britons%20a%20year%20will%20be%20diagnosed%20with%20cancer%20by%202035%2C%20study%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fcancer-research-uk-britain-increase-diagnosed-2035-nhs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ea6cd73de385548b307e8e3596882a999f6f2a1%2F0_341_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 Part of the predicted increase in cancer rates has been attributed to improved 
screening for the disease. Photograph: Getty/Caiaimage 
People’s risk of developing cancer will also rise in actual terms, separate to 
the growing numbers diagnosed, due to increased life expectancy and population 
expansion.

Cancer incidence rates have risen for both sexes in an almost unbroken way 
since records began in 1979, though they have recently begun edging downwards 
for men. Men have always been more likely than women to be diagnosed.

Thousands of breast cancer patients missing out on 43p-a-day drug
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/22/thousands-of-breast-cancer-patients-missing-out-on-43p-a-day-drug>
In 1993, 783 f every 100,000 men aged 15 or over were diagnosed with cancer. 
That rose to 808 per 100,000 in 2014 and is predicted to increase again, albeit 
slightly, to 812 per 100,000 in 2035.

The number of women in that age group who developed cancer rose from 564 per 
100,000 people in 1993 to 664 per 100,000 in 2014. It is due to hit 685 by 
2035, according to the study.

CRUK last year revised its prediction for the number of people who would 
develop cancer at some point in their lives from one in three to one in two.

Sir Harpal Kumar, the charity’s chief executive, said the expected increases 
in cancer cases were “shocking”. However, four in 10 cancers could be prevented 
if people drank less, did not smoke, ate a healthy diet and took more exercise, 
he said.
 