
Puzzle No 23,126 last month (April 26) marked a very considerable milestone. 
Crispa is both our oldest and our longest serving compiler and the puzzle 
marked 50 years of unbroken compiling for the paper, starting in 1954 for the 
Manchester Guardian. Ruth Crisp was born on New Year's Day 1918 in 
Middlesbrough and during the war was at one point the youngest GPO Telegraphs 
supervisor in the country. She now lives in Essex at Westcliff-on-Sea, where 
she is an active Mensa member.

Her family name, Crisp, has an unusual history, being what might be described 
as a back-formation. When my predecessor as the paper's crossword editor, John 
Perkin, had the inspired notion in 1970 of giving cryptic compilers noms de 
plume so that you, the solvers, would know who you were up against, Ruth chose 
Crispa, the feminine form of the Latin adjective crispus, meaning curly or 
curly-headed, which she was. Later she wanted to change her name by deed poll 
and, having developed a liking for her nom de plume, duly became Ruth Crisp. 
She has written many fine clues, but perhaps none better than this one, which 
is recorded in Geoffrey Taylor's Changing Faces: a history of The Guardian 
1956-88: "Men's my one failing" (mother of nine) (9).*

_____________

As a child and young man I used to play a lot of golf, not very well. The main 
problem was the putting. I could get to the green quite regularly in the par 
number of strokes, but then always multi-putted and lost the hole. So I gave 
the game up more than 45 years ago in favour of other outdoor activities. But, 
in my playing days, my golf bag certainly contained a spoon, a (wooden-shafted) 
mashie and a (wry-necked) niblick. Today, I suspect, these quaint clubs live on 
only in the memory bags of crossword compilers and their followers.

Certainly, I have yet to meet a golfer under the age of 35 who knows that a 
spoon was a wood (equivalent to about the modern No 3 wood) with which one 
could hit a ball a long way from the fairway or from a favourable lie in the 
light rough; or that a mashie was the equivalent of the modern No 5 or 6 iron 
and the niblick of the modern No 9. Even I am not old enough to have ever 
called my No 1 or No 2 iron a cleek. All these clubs can still be found in 
Chambers and Collins. But, if they are unknown to today's golf-playing 
crossword solvers (who probably are also unaware that for their grandparents 
gutta-percha was a word once virtually synonymous with a golf ball), how much 
longer should they be allowed to appear in puzzles without the addition of 
words like "ancient" and "former"? They are, after all, the sporting equivalent 
of still calling Salisbury the capital of Rhodesia.

_____________

These are examples of once commonly used words that are slipping peacefully 
away. (Niblick is the only one of them that still appears in the Chambers 21st 
Century Dictionary, for example.) But there is one rare example of the reverse 
process - an old word that may find its way into the Oxford English Dictionary 
as a result of having appeared in a Guardian quick crossword.

In September 1999 (puzzle No 9,161) we ran a clue: "Name of flower - or fish 
(5)". The answer was Wanda. There was clearly no problem with the "fish" bit of 
the clue, because of A Fish Called Wanda. And, as the puzzle in question had 
been set by a compiler who knew his horticulture, I did not even think to check 
the "flower" bit.

But one of our most assiduous solvers, Dermod Quirke, searched all his 
dictionaries and botanical and gardening encyclopaedias without finding it. On 
further investigation, it seemed that many gardeners over the age of 60 knew 
perfectly well that a wanda is a kind of purplish primula. The matter was 
referred to the Oxford English Dictionary with a view to the wanda being 
included in its database, citing Guardian quick crossword No 9,161 as the 
authority for its current use.

_____________

* Mnemosyne, mother of the Muses
 