
Two years ago, the choreographer Jonathan Burrows 
<http://www.jonathanburrows.info/> and composer Matteo Fargion 
<http://www.jonathanburrows.info/#/text/?id=7&t=content> created The Elders 
Project <http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/the-elders-project-91597>, a 
small gem of a work that celebrated the experience, wisdom and grace 
encapsulated in the bodies and the memories of older dancers. With a cast 
ranging in age from 54 to 70, The Elders Project revolved around a series of 
solos in which each dancer performed a highly personal and concentrated 
sequence of movements, accompanied by songs whose lyrics had been taken from 
the performers’ stories about their lives and careers.

The success of those idiosyncratic snapshots has inspired Burrows and Fargion 
to expand the concept into52 Portraits <http://52portraits.co.uk>, a series of 
brief solos filmed byHugo Glendinning <http://www.hugoglendinning.com/> and 
produced by Sadler’s Wells, which are being posted weekly online throughout 
2016. Two of the original subjects, Betsy Gregory and Namron, return to the 
project; the others range from the 29-year-old dance-makerAlexandrina Hemsley 
<http://www.acontemporarystruggle.com/#!about/c1qdj> to the 91-year-old 
choreographerRobert Cohan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/may/18/dance-robert-cohan>, and from 
performance artistHetain Patel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/may/15/hetain-patel-american-boy-spiderman-blog>
 to Royal Ballet principalZenaida Yanowsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jun/27/ballet-yanowsky-yury-zenaida-nadia>
.

Deeply poignant is the way Yanowsky introduces a vestigial rippling of 'swan 
wings' into her outspread arms

Burrows has collaborated closely with each subject, editing their individual 
dance gestures and body language into a choreographed portrait, while Fargion, 
as for The Elders Project, has used their words as the basis for his 
accompanying songs. At their best, these portraits capture something unique, 
even mysterious about each dance artist; but they also create an 
impressionistic portrait of the profession – highlighting the mix of 
inspiration, fear, delight and freedom the art form engenders, as well as the 
darker worries about injury, bad performances and money that stalk every 
career. It is significant, perhaps, that one of the younger subjects, Eleanor 
Sikorski, weaves the issue of student debt intoher own verbal meditation on the 
world she inhabits <http://52portraits.co.uk/home/2016/4/11/eleanor-sikorski>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2F52-portraits-dancers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9f8fd5d66a3c9674d8279bceecb2158f8d6bf5c%2F238_85_1507_904%2F1507.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=52%20Portraits%3A%20a%20year%20of%20solos%20capturing%20dancers'%20fears%20and%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2F52-portraits-dancers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=52%20Portraits%3A%20a%20year%20of%20solos%20capturing%20dancers%27%20fears%20and%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2F52-portraits-dancers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9f8fd5d66a3c9674d8279bceecb2158f8d6bf5c%2F238_85_1507_904%2F1507.jpg>
 Vestigial rippling … ballerina Zenaida Yanowsky in 52 Portraits. Photograph: 
Hugo Glendinning 
The intensity with which we encounter each subject has been honed by the 
stylised format of these portraits: the performers begin and end their solos 
seated behind a table, looking directly at the camera. Their dancing is mostly 
restricted to movements above the waist and is concentrated especially in their 
face and hands. It’s often in the tiny variables, within each snapshot, that 
the most penetrating information is revealed. The sheer weight of history in
Cohan’s story is lightly handled 
<http://52portraits.co.uk/home/2016/2/1/robert-cohan>. In the opening line of 
his accompanying song, we’re told that the gestures he’s making are taken from 
a solo he first danced in 1946, when he was a member of the Martha Graham 
company; it was one he inherited fromMerce Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mercecunningham>. But those gestures – 
putting his hands over his eyes, cupping his chin with his hands – come alive 
when we’re told that Cohan has always liked to keep his eyes closed as he 
choreographs, creating the movement that he sees inside his head. “When I 
dance, it’s like the inside coming outside.” And as Cohan, with simple, lucid 
dignity, starts to count out the rhythm of a phrase and draw the outline of 
that rhythm with his hands, it is as if he’s sketching the frame for the dance 
pictures in his imagination.

Siobhan Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/may/15/siobhan-davies-portrait-artist>
 was an early protege of Cohan’s after he became artistic director ofLondon 
Contemporary Dance Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/may/11/contemporary-dance-the-place>, 
and her solo dwells on the paradox that while, as a dancer, she used to be 
fired up by the freedom and power of making big movements – “pushing the air 
about”. As a choreographer, she now prefers to work on a small scale. When
Davies spreads her arms wide and angles back her body 
<http://52portraits.co.uk/home/2016/3/18/siobhan-davi>, we can see her younger 
self, her movements recalling the magnificent, rangy strength with which she 
once commanded the stage; but when she balls her hands into a fist or places 
her palms very precisely on to the table, we glimpse how much force has been 
channelled into her decision to focus her work on the small detail.

Yanowsky is as tall and commanding a presence on stage as Davies was, yet it’s 
inthe sensitive electricity of her hand movements 
<http://52portraits.co.uk/home/2016/6/20/zenaida-yanowsky> that we register her 
emotions as the lyrics of her song muse on the highs and lows of being a 
dancer, and on the issue of her approaching retirement. Deeply poignant, to 
anyone who has seenYanowsky’s interpretation of Odette in Swan Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jan/25/swan-lake-review>, is the way 
she introduces a vestigial rippling of “swan wings” into her outspread arms, 
while the accompanying lyrics refer to how “shit ” she can feel when she gives 
a bad performance, even though the freedom she experiences when she dances is 
like nothing else in her life. The character of Odette, the enchanted Swan 
Princess, is doomed to spend her life in the shape of a bird, yet paradoxically 
she can appear to be more alive, more liberated than any of the ballet’s human 
characters. In this portrait, Yanowsky delicately hints at the parallels 
between Odette’s fate and that of a ballerina’s – to be committed to an art 
form that is simultaneously more punishing, more exhilarating than almost any 
other.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2F52-portraits-dancers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc82a6bfba2129c8b67e53514a72f5635fed5150c%2F304_230_1252_751%2F1252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=52%20Portraits%3A%20a%20year%20of%20solos%20capturing%20dancers'%20fears%20and%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2F52-portraits-dancers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=52%20Portraits%3A%20a%20year%20of%20solos%20capturing%20dancers%27%20fears%20and%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2F52-portraits-dancers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc82a6bfba2129c8b67e53514a72f5635fed5150c%2F304_230_1252_751%2F1252.jpg>
 Wry efficiency … Wendy Houstoun in 52 Portraits. Photograph: Hugo Glendinning 
Wendy Houstoun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/26/wendy-houstoun-interview-dance-flame-nigel-charnock-pact>
 alsomuses on the unforgiving nature of her career 
<http://52portraits.co.uk/home/2016/5/9/wendy-houstoun>; on the difference that 
a single performance can make to her feelings of being either crap, or 
emancipated; on the fact that even in middle age she’s financially struggling. 
The short, sharp dance sequence she performs to camera is, she says, an outline 
or “fast forward” of the piece she’s currently working on. The wry efficiency 
of her movements coupled with a sense of emotion held in careful reserve makes 
this solo one of the most quietly expressive of all of the films.

Clinkard dances with a recording of his mother’s last-ever phone message 
playing through his earphones

The range of body language across these portraits is as fascinating as you’d 
expect given the spread of their subjects.Jonzi D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/dec/10/jonzi-d-letter-broken-lineage-review>
, the UK’s spokesman for hip-hop and the noisy, affable host ofBreakin’ 
Convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/02/breakin-convention-review-hip-hop-dance-festival>
, compresses a startling dark rage intohis short repeated dance sequence 
<http://52portraits.co.uk/home/2016/5/16/jonzi-d>. In one of the very few duets 
in the series Hemsley dances with her 76-year-old dad, and their busy, 
affectionate hand jives tell us so much about their easy, accommodating 
relationship with each other.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2F52-portraits-dancers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd13ec9d1ccccdb196fb952d0d47aba8b662d5855%2F307_138_1499_899%2F1499.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=52%20Portraits%3A%20a%20year%20of%20solos%20capturing%20dancers'%20fears%20and%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2F52-portraits-dancers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=52%20Portraits%3A%20a%20year%20of%20solos%20capturing%20dancers%27%20fears%20and%20freedom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2F52-portraits-dancers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd13ec9d1ccccdb196fb952d0d47aba8b662d5855%2F307_138_1499_899%2F1499.jpg>
 Portrait through a portrait … Theo Clinkard in 52 Portraits. Photograph: Hugo 
Glendinning 
Theo Clinkard <http://www.theoclinkard.com>, on the other hand, seems to court 
a deliberate obscurity in his solo 
<http://52portraits.co.uk/home/2016/6/27/theo-clinkard>. He dances with a 
recording of his mother’s last-ever phone message playing through his 
earphones, and his movements are intended to be a portrait of her as well as 
himself. As he angles away from the camera, his body concentrates into a 
ducking, jerking, swinging sketch of a dance that is hard to read. Yet the 
lyrics keep urging us to look closer, reminding us that “this a portrait 
through a portrait; can you see, can you see?” Fundamentally, Clinkard’s solo 
appears to be less about himself than the relationship between viewer and 
performer, about the act of imagination we have to invest whenever we watch a 
work of dance.

Inevitably, we respond more to some of the portraits and personalities than to 
others: certain moves and lyrics have the knack of compressing more accessible 
information. But taken as a whole, this is a lovely project – simple in format, 
rich in potential. And with just over three months and almost 20 more portraits 
to go, its possibilities feel very far from exhausted.
 