
Charlotte Josephine


I’d not read the play before and couldn’t believe how long ago it was written. 
It felt very fresh. I mean: if you go online today, you can shop for someone to 
fuck. You can search through and pick someone to have sex with. It can be that 
cold, exactly the kind of emotionless transaction that one of the characters, 
Mark, is exploring in the play.
 Charlotte Josephine: ‘Capitalism fuels that sense of shame that we’re not 
already enough’ 
It made me think a lot about the difference between want and need. We’re 
living in a selfish age and we’re all falling victim to the belief that “I’ll 
be happy when ...”. I’ll be happy when I get those trainers and that boyfriend 
and that amount of money in my bank account and that postcode and that number 
of likes on Facebook. We’re chasing the want but not fully knowing what we 
need. And that can so easily get ugly because of all the things you might do in 
the pursuit of happiness.

I was reminded of something someone once said to me: capitalism needs shame in 
the same way that politics needs fear. It made me think about the primal, human 
need to be part of the tribe. Shame is the fear that you’re not worthy of love 
and connection. Capitalism is preying on that idea – buy this and you’ll feel 
good, wear this and you’ll feel good. It fuels that sense of shame that we’re 
not already enough. It’s so dangerous on a worldwide level.

I like theatre that makes me feel like I’m part of the conversation – so I 
loved the way that Sean Holmes makes us become complicit in the show. But I 
didn’t feel any sense of hope coming away from it. I didn’t feel changed by the 
experience of having seen it, if I’m honest. But it did make me want to work 
harder at kindness, empathy and love – especially amid all the madness caused 
by the Tories and Trump.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fyoung-playwrights-on-shopping-and-fucking-mark-ravenhill-lyric-hammersmith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ec2037112ad585030c01bcc3478ed0fdb6a6e43%2F0_0_2125_1453%2F2125.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20huge%2C%20giddy%20pastiche%20of%20the%2090s'%3A%20young%20playwrights%20on%20Shopping%20and%20Fucking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fyoung-playwrights-on-shopping-and-fucking-mark-ravenhill-lyric-hammersmith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20huge%2C%20giddy%20pastiche%20of%20the%2090s%27%3A%20young%20playwrights%20on%20Shopping%20and%20Fucking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fyoung-playwrights-on-shopping-and-fucking-mark-ravenhill-lyric-hammersmith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ec2037112ad585030c01bcc3478ed0fdb6a6e43%2F0_0_2125_1453%2F2125.jpg>
 Andrew Clover as Robbie and Kate Ashfield as Lulu in Shopping and Fucking when 
it premiered at the Royal Court in 1996. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
Brad Birch


You have to embrace a title like Shopping and Fucking. It’s a three-word poem. 
You could write essays on that title alone. It does what titles don’t always 
do, in that it really is part of the piece of art – literally so in the 
production, as it’s a slogan on T-shirts worn by the actors and it appears on 
the TV screens on the stage.
 Brad Birch: ‘You have to embrace a title like that. It’s a three-word poem’ 
I first heard of Mark Ravenhill through his Guardian columns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/markravenhill>. I knew him more as a 
cultural figure before I read his plays. Watching the Lyric’s revival, I had 
similar feelings to going to see their production ofEdward Bond’s Saved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/14/saved-review>, another 
controversial play that comes with its own myths attached.

The production really takes you back to the 90s with music like the Shamen’s 
Ebeneezer Goode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/mar/05/ebeneezer-goode-shamen>. It 
felt like it played nostalgically to that but its themes are still really 
modern. If it was 1996 and you went to see a play from 1976, I think the gap 
would feel much bigger than the gap between now and 1996. That’s because they 
were the nascent days of the era we’re in, when consuming is so closely linked 
to our identity. The set captures the empty, warehouse feel of a shopping 
channel studio. That made sense because if these characters were living in 
London now, the chances are they’d be living in a converted warehouse.

I found myself thinking of the time between Shopping and Fucking and now: the 
wild west nature of new technologies and the internet. There was the dotcom 
boom, all those start-ups, and then the way corporatism swallowed up the 
counterculture, as charted inThomas Frank 
<http://www.salon.com/2013/12/22/ad_absurdum_and_the_conquest_of_cool_canned_flattery_for_corporate_america/>
’s The Conquest of Cool. Mark Zuckerberg is a child of that generation, where 
cool and counterculture and rave culture were all appropriated by business. In 
one scene, two of the characters are operating sex chatlines – the message is 
really about the commoditisation of the self. That’s quite normal now. The 
characters sell their bodies; we all sell our personalities. This all feels 
embryonically there in the world of Shopping and Fucking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fyoung-playwrights-on-shopping-and-fucking-mark-ravenhill-lyric-hammersmith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F547cb96f1f4305c5a7d51e2982c3167652e6f4db%2F0_348_4849_2911%2F4849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20huge%2C%20giddy%20pastiche%20of%20the%2090s'%3A%20young%20playwrights%20on%20Shopping%20and%20Fucking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fyoung-playwrights-on-shopping-and-fucking-mark-ravenhill-lyric-hammersmith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20huge%2C%20giddy%20pastiche%20of%20the%2090s%27%3A%20young%20playwrights%20on%20Shopping%20and%20Fucking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fyoung-playwrights-on-shopping-and-fucking-mark-ravenhill-lyric-hammersmith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F547cb96f1f4305c5a7d51e2982c3167652e6f4db%2F0_348_4849_2911%2F4849.jpg>
 Sophie Wu as Lulu and Ashley McGuire as Brian in the Lyric’s revival. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Sam Steiner


I had no knowledge of the play beforehand apart from the vague notion that it 
had shocked a load of people in the 90s. For that reason, I think I almost 
wanted to dislike it. I don’t think “shock” on its own works as well in theatre 
as it used to. The internet has made us so used to being bombarded with 
“shocking” images, so desensitised to it all that we don’t gain as much from 
seeing it on stage as perhaps we used to. The brilliant thing about the Lyric’s 
production is that it knows this.
 Sam Steiner: ‘The production becomes about how we fell for the myth of late 
capitalism’ 
Under Sean Holmes’s direction, it becomes a hyper-period piece. A huge, giddy 
pastiche of the 90s. There are bumbags and DayGlo suits and bad green-screen 
backdrops and impassioned karaoke renditions ofStay Another Day. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0mg7ok8dmDU> The actors (fixed with wide, 
Shopping Channel grins) make asides to the audience that feel less like 
soliloquies and more like The Price Is Right. At the start of the show two 
“luxury” onstage seats are auctioned off. When the two winners are chosen we 
cheer and applaud them as if they were genuinely about to spin a wheel for a 
chance to win a holiday in the Maldives.

This willing silliness and cheese underpins many of the play’s most ostensibly 
shocking moments. When Lulu is forced to strip off as she performs an audition 
monologue, the projected backdrop behind her morphs into tacky clip-art-esque 
landscapes of the location she’s describing. A funny camera angle on Gary’s 
face during an explicit sex act makes an act of underage prostitution seem 
farcical.


Shopping and Fucking review – Mark Ravenhill's fearless play clicks into 
Amazon age
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/13/shopping-and-fucking-review-mark-ravenhill-sean-holmes-revival>
This feels like the point. The production becomes about how we fell for the 
myth of late capitalism and how we continue to do so. It’s about how a culture 
that treats people like things and connections between them like transactions 
is made to seem silly, fun, exciting and harmless. This becomes most telling at 
the end when, after a horrible piece of violence, another audience member is 
invited on to the stage to read the play’s final monologue. When she’s done 
we’re cheering and whooping her again. Everyone is slow-dancing to I Want You 
Back for Good. The crowd are swaying. A choir is singing. This is how it 
happens. We gloss over all of these personal tragedies because we’re distracted 
by a consumerist pantomime that feels exciting and feels fun and feels like 
love.


The more I think about it, the more the play becomes an attempt to fit moments 
of tenderness and genuine connection into a world that doesn’t quite support 
it. Like trying to run a PC program on a Mac. And yes, that feels prophetic on 
Ravenhill’s part. But to say he was prescient or ahead of his time doesn’t feel 
useful. I’m reminded of what Chuck Palahniuk said of Fight Club’s success, that 
he was “just rewriting The Great Gatsby, updated a little”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fyoung-playwrights-on-shopping-and-fucking-mark-ravenhill-lyric-hammersmith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ab45d009be9198b0c288c72bb60e7f762cb91c6%2F153_0_4862_2916%2F4862.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20huge%2C%20giddy%20pastiche%20of%20the%2090s'%3A%20young%20playwrights%20on%20Shopping%20and%20Fucking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fyoung-playwrights-on-shopping-and-fucking-mark-ravenhill-lyric-hammersmith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20huge%2C%20giddy%20pastiche%20of%20the%2090s%27%3A%20young%20playwrights%20on%20Shopping%20and%20Fucking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fyoung-playwrights-on-shopping-and-fucking-mark-ravenhill-lyric-hammersmith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ab45d009be9198b0c288c72bb60e7f762cb91c6%2F153_0_4862_2916%2F4862.jpg>
 David Moorst as Gary and Sam Spruell as Mark in Shopping and Fucking at the 
Lyric. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Theresa Ikoko

There were bright lights, neon colours, lots of screens and the audience were 
hyped: whoops, singalongs, hands in the air. It was fun, but I’m easily 
distracted so with all that going on I struggled to connect with the characters 
a little and sometimes found it hard to pick out the thread of the story. But 
what was clear was the potential relevance, to today’s twentysomethings, of the 
cultural references and commentary: we do everything so hard, so fast, and we 
want things quickly and easily.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fyoung-playwrights-on-shopping-and-fucking-mark-ravenhill-lyric-hammersmith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8b3eafdb637e7763d016b033bfa0a6072830034%2F0_0_806_1008%2F806.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20huge%2C%20giddy%20pastiche%20of%20the%2090s'%3A%20young%20playwrights%20on%20Shopping%20and%20Fucking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fyoung-playwrights-on-shopping-and-fucking-mark-ravenhill-lyric-hammersmith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20huge%2C%20giddy%20pastiche%20of%20the%2090s%27%3A%20young%20playwrights%20on%20Shopping%20and%20Fucking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fyoung-playwrights-on-shopping-and-fucking-mark-ravenhill-lyric-hammersmith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8b3eafdb637e7763d016b033bfa0a6072830034%2F0_0_806_1008%2F806.jpg>
 Theresa Ikoko: ‘Suddenly I was hit by all this empathy and compassion’ 
I saw it alongside a group from a theatre school and they were having the 
absolute time of their lives. But the cheers and laughter and how easy it was 
for the people around me to, literally, get up and dance after we just saw Mark 
lick blood out of Gary’s anus, made me a little uncomfortable. I’m not sure if 
it was the shock of that moment, the East 17 song the people behind me were 
screaming along to, or the fact that the latter so quickly and easily followed 
the former but I felt a bit – there’s definitely a better word for it – but 
I’ll say empty.

I’ve thought about this. I thought about the idea that we are supposed to be a 
desensitised, insensitive generation. Maybe we are a little. Or maybe the 
lights and music on the stage amplified the shock and turned down my ability to 
connect. There were a lot of those moments for me, moments of simultaneous 
shock and disconnect – a sort of self-preservation perhaps. On reflection, 
maybe that’s the idea: a comment on how easily we disconnect, how easily we get 
high and dance away trauma, how we reduce everything down so simply until we 
don’t feel anything deeper than basic human instinct.

But, right at the end, there’s a moment: Robbie has a look on his face. I’m 
not sure if it was the actor or the character I connected with, but suddenly I 
got hit by all of this empathy and compassion, feelings I hadn’t had the whole 
way through. I felt sad, and a little hopeful. Maybe because it turns out that 
I’m more sensitive than I thought, and maybe I cared about Robbie all along and 
maybe that means we all care a little more than we think we do.

(Oh and: Mark, Robbie, Gary, Lulu … Relight My Fire … Take That! Didn’t clock 
that the characters were named after them at all! Ha. Good song.)

 * Shopping and Fucking is at the Lyric, Hammersmith, until 5 November 
<http://www.lyric.co.uk/whats-on/production/shopping-and-fing/>. Box office: 
020-8741 6850.  