
A neatly dressed girl is sitting alone in a cafe, wondering aloud about the 
size of her arsehole. She spent the previous night with a man friend, drunkenly 
exploring certain sexual possibilities, and now is concerned that she might be 
unusually accommodating. This is the scene that kickstarts Fleabag, Phoebe 
Waller-Bridge’s newBBC3 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc3> comedy about 
the pains and perils of the twentysomething experience. As well as creating the 
show, she plays the title role, a character who, while happy to reveal her most 
intimate details, never divulges her real name.

Fleabag, as she is known, is a young woman who lives in London, runs a cafe 
with her only friend, attends feminist lectures with her sister, and has 
recently split up with her boyfriend. Dead mother, cold father, smiling 
assassin for a stepmum: she doesn’t sound like she’d be much fun on paper. But 
under the tightly buttoned trenchcoat and tidily asymmetric hair is a 
porn-addled, grief-stricken mess seeking some sort of connection. If you spent 
your 20s sleeping with randoms and not taking care of your heart, you’ll 
recognise her instantly.

Phoebe Waller-Bridge: sex, laughs and a packet of Wotsits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/16/phoebe-waller-bridge-sex-laughs-wotsits>
The end credits reveal that most of the supporting cast aren’t afforded proper 
names either, instead called things like Bus Rodent or Arsehole Guy. “She 
doesn’t name anybody,” explains Waller-Bridge over a peppermint tea in a 
different London cafe. It’s one of those Edison-bulbed places with low lights 
and high benches; her tea is actually a glass stuffed with soggy mint leaves 
that flop out over the brim. “She doesn’t imbue anyone with anything more than 
how she sees them,” she adds.

This antihero cares only about herself, lives alone (people in sitcoms can 
afford to do this in London), masturbates to Obama on the news, and employs 
duplicity almost constantly to project the image she wants others to have of 
her. She is full of questions and devoid of answers, much like her creator says 
she was as she waded through her 20s. “Am I still a feminist if I watch porn, 
or if I want to change my body to make me feel more sexually attractive?” 
ponders Waller-Bridge, remembering the confusion of her own early womanhood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe8b94a7c6ebb433a4ecd96f0eb412727927a257%2F44_0_1330_798%2F1330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Am%20I%20still%20a%20feminist%20if%20I%20watch%20porn%3F'%20Meet%20Phoebe%20Waller-Bridge%2C%20the%20British%20Lena%20Dunham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Am%20I%20still%20a%20feminist%20if%20I%20watch%20porn%3F%27%20Meet%20Phoebe%20Waller-Bridge%2C%20the%20British%20Lena%20Dunham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe8b94a7c6ebb433a4ecd96f0eb412727927a257%2F44_0_1330_798%2F1330.jpg>
 A porn-addled, grief-stricken mess … Fleabag. Photograph: BBC 
This conflicted character of Fleabag burst out of her one day when a friend 
asked her to fill a 10-minute slot in her storytelling night. While the idea of 
standup made her recoil in horror, she told herself: “I’m being a pussy. I’ve 
got to do it”. Ten minutes quickly snowballed into a one-woman Edinburgh show, 
critical acclaim and a transfer to London’s Soho Theatre. Waller-Bridge is now 
30 and says the character emerged from a mix of feminist anger and wild 
frustration at the limitations put on young women before they can decide who 
and what they really are.

“When I meet girls who are like, 23, 24, I just want to hug them now,” she 
says, before remarking on her own 20s: “I felt very aware of my sexuality and 
very aware of what that meant in terms of my worth.” She swills the warm water 
around the leaves. “As long as you were skinny and hot first, then you were 
allowed to get on with the rest of your life. The injustice of that.” She’s 
laughing now but says it drove her mad at the time. And this coming from a 
woman who looks like a 1930s soap advert, every bit as pristine as her 
on-screen character.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8e666004f326aed97790798e1776cdb80c3ec32%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Am%20I%20still%20a%20feminist%20if%20I%20watch%20porn%3F'%20Meet%20Phoebe%20Waller-Bridge%2C%20the%20British%20Lena%20Dunham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Am%20I%20still%20a%20feminist%20if%20I%20watch%20porn%3F%27%20Meet%20Phoebe%20Waller-Bridge%2C%20the%20British%20Lena%20Dunham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8e666004f326aed97790798e1776cdb80c3ec32%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Despite echoes of Carrie Bradshaw or Sharon Horgan in Catastrophe, Fleabag’s 
closest pop-cultural cousin is Ferris Bueller … Waller-Bridge in Fleabag. 
Photograph: BBC 
On top of the anger, there was the guilt. Waller-Bridge watched porn for a 
time in her early 20s and wondered if that made her a “bad feminist” as she 
read about the numbing effect it seemed to be having on her generation; all 
that hairless expectation and loveless, colliding flesh. “I just felt like it 
was really wearing me down a bit,” she says, looking out of the cafe door. She 
adds “a bit” to a lot of her answers, perhaps not wanting to seem too 
unequivocal about anything.

What is without doubt is that Waller-Bridge is on the rise. Since graduating 
from Rada in 2006, she’s gradually become a familiar face on primetime TV. You 
might last have seen her as Marianne Jean-Baptiste’s legal sidekick in 
Broadchurch 2 or Lulu in E4’s Crashing, her very modern flatshare comedy set in 
a disused hospital, which politely pushed the boundaries of taste and zinged 
with verbal sparklers. Waller-Bridge wrote it and played one of the 
twentysomething co-dwellers, living, pooing and shagging their way through life 
with a frankness that bordered on sociopathic.

When Crashing aired, some hailed her as the British Lena Dunham, but her 
aesthetic is nothing like as deliberately grubby or exposing. While they do 
have in common a lack of answers, Fleabag would never strip off and talk you 
through her tattoos the way Hannah does.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02e82d77c38bce7e380030f3b42850732fc62b46%2F0_60_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Am%20I%20still%20a%20feminist%20if%20I%20watch%20porn%3F'%20Meet%20Phoebe%20Waller-Bridge%2C%20the%20British%20Lena%20Dunham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Am%20I%20still%20a%20feminist%20if%20I%20watch%20porn%3F%27%20Meet%20Phoebe%20Waller-Bridge%2C%20the%20British%20Lena%20Dunham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02e82d77c38bce7e380030f3b42850732fc62b46%2F0_60_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Politely pushing the boundaries of taste … Waller-Bridge in Crashing. 
Photograph: Mark Johnson 
“She is so controlled,” says Waller-Bridge. “The clothes that she wears, she’s 
constantly got this red lipstick on, her hair’s perfect, she looks pristine and 
clean. The fleabagginess of her is her subtext.” As so many of us do, with our 
carefully edited social media presence to the fore, she wears it on the inside. 
Those who saw Waller-Bridge’s stage version of Fleabag in Edinburgh or its 
London transfer described it as “filthy” and “shocking”, but it’s the verbal 
power she wields that socks you in the jaw.

Crashing review: frank, filthy, sad and weird – a millennial flat-share comedy 
with edge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/19/crashing-review-frank-filthy-sad-and-weird-a-millennial-flat-share-comedy-with-edge>
Despite echoes of Carrie Bradshaw or Sharon Horgan in Catastrophe, Fleabag’s 
closest pop-cultural cousins, with her fourth-wall-busting asides to camera, 
are probably Ferris Bueller or Michael Caine’s Alfie. Waller-Bridge says it was 
important from the off to invite audience complicity for her hero’s 
increasingly bad behaviour. In the opening shot, she is just about to open the 
door to a late-night booty call when she turns to camera and explains the 
extensive preparation she’s had to engage in to be ready for this seemingly 
casual encounter.

It could be a moment of pure clunk but instead she grabs us by the lapels and 
we go with her unquestioningly. Mid-shag she looks at us and tells us that her 
one-night friend is edging towards her anus but she’s drunk so she might as 
well let him. The next morning, she tells us she is strangely moved by his 
gratitude at being allowed to “up the bum” her. These asides act as an 
effective coping strategy, as well as a hugely watchable dramatic technique. 
While she’s looking at us, and essentially in her own head, she doesn’t have to 
deal with the real world in any way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bddb59f8b54a02319d13c78d221986f7e355291%2F0_142_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Am%20I%20still%20a%20feminist%20if%20I%20watch%20porn%3F'%20Meet%20Phoebe%20Waller-Bridge%2C%20the%20British%20Lena%20Dunham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Am%20I%20still%20a%20feminist%20if%20I%20watch%20porn%3F%27%20Meet%20Phoebe%20Waller-Bridge%2C%20the%20British%20Lena%20Dunham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bddb59f8b54a02319d13c78d221986f7e355291%2F0_142_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘Filthy, shocking and with a verbal power that socks you in the jaw’ … Phoebe 
Waller-Bridge performing Fleabag at London’s Soho Theatre. Photograph: Jane 
Hobson/REX 
For a relatively young writer, Waller-Bridge has assembled a supporting cast 
most comedy veterans would chew their elbows off for. Olivia Colman plays her 
spiteful, bohemian step mother with a devastating line in insults tucked away 
behind polite smiles. And Bill Patterson is the chilly, unavailable patriarch 
who keeps his daughters at arm’s length. Waller-Bridge’s own family sound like 
a much happier unit – she mentions a brother, sister “the love of my life” and 
her mum, not an actor, actually appears in episode one. She plays a feminist 
lecturer with surprisingly on-point comic timing. “I suppose the idea of losing 
my mum is my biggest fear ever,” she says. When I remind her that she will 
definitely die one day, she grins nervously, clenching her fists. “She’s not, 
she’s not. I’m not going to let it happen.”

That callow unwillingness to recognise life’s unpleasant certainties is there 
for all to see; in Fleabag, a character who (in the words of Britney) is “not a 
girl, not yet a woman”. But just when you think you’ve sussed out this rather 
selfish, often wretchedly childish character, a big reveal during a chat with a 
cab driver changes everything. The first episode ends with a snippet of 
backstory that is barely hinted at until that moment and, suddenly, you find 
yourself wanting to hug her, too.

“She has a heart,” says Waller-Bridge protectively. “It’s just broken.” 

Fleabag is available on BBC3 from 21 July. 
 