
Ahir, age 25 Hey mate. How are the gigs going?

Ahir, age 50 Oh, I don’t do that sort of thing any more.

25 Ah, of course: technological advances mean we probably live on Mars now, 
right? On the upside: we’re at the vanguard of humanity becoming a 
multi-planetary species. On the downside: no comedy clubs.

50 No, we haven’t been to Mars yet. They’re still only taking astrophysicists.

25 That’s...

50 Some next-level bullshit, I know. There are loads of robots nowadays, 
though; that’s cool. All that stuff you thought about machines taking the jobs, 
the hyperconcentration of the means of production, that all came true.

25 So we’ve got freedom from work? Basic income? Fully automated luxury 
communism?

50 No, but the rich people have become really rich.

25 Oh.

50 But we’re rich, so it’s fine.

25 Good to know my leftism doesn’t diminish with age. How come we’ve got so 
many pounds?

50 We don’t have loads of pounds, as such. We’ve got loads of rupees.

25 What?

50 We live in Ahmedabad now. We work for the Indian government. We moved here 
after the 2020 general election.

25 Why?

50 Socially, economically, culturally ... the UK was a sinking ship. You 
remember how you felt when you started seeing thoseheadlines about hate crimes 
in the aftermath of the EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/hate-surged-after-eu-referendum-police-figures-show>
?

25 Like Britain was a different place.

[The older man waits]

25 Ok, that it was the place it always had been, but I’d not wanted to see.

50 That didn’t go away. It got cemented. Brexit was hard – in both senses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/11/hard-brexit-treasury-66bn-eu-single-market>
 – but that was just the beginning. Over the next few years it felt like the 
continent released this pent-up reaction, to excise everything you thought made 
it beautiful. We had front-row tickets to watch the world commit a protracted 
suicide. The far right controlled British politics. Xenophobia was normalised 
across the continent. Lives became solitary, poor, brutish, shorter. People 
were happy.

25 You’re less funny than I am.

50 You remember that Gramsci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/feb/11/featuresreviews.guardianreview25>
 line? “The old is dead, the new cannot be born…”

25 “…and in that interregnum, many morbid symptoms appear.”

50 We were kidding ourselves. The morbid symptoms weren’t the interregnum. 
They were the new. We just didn’t want to believe it because it was ugly.

25 So we left?

50 We left. Asia is doing well. I manage the team that handles India’s foreign 
aid to Europe.

25 …are we married?

50 We were, then we weren’t. Then were again, then weren’t again. The kids are 
smart. You’d like them.

25 That sounds nice.

50 They don’t like you.

25 But... we’re an all right guy, aren’t we?

50 We were, then we weren’t.

Ahir Shah: Machines is at Swindon Arts Centre on 16 October; touring to 20 
November <http://ahirshah.com>
 