
FC Copenhagen

The reigning Danish champions have won their domestic league, the Superligaen, 
11 times and are on course for another league title this season. They are 
competing in this season’sChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>.

“It’s a drastic but interesting idea, as it will get more and more difficult 
to qualify for the Champions League in the future. My club feels we belong at 
the top level of European competition on a regular basis. Playing in the 
Champions League is a big thing for Scandinavian clubs. They get covered 
extensively in the Scandinavian press, not just in domestic newspapers.


A breakaway league would not be good for the Danish Superliga unfortunately. 
Uefa should consider whether it’s the right strategy to make it so difficult 
for champions of smaller European leagues like the Danish one to qualify for 
their tournaments.”Benjamin
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67292ca1627577a1b201296e4620369a24f12bad%2F0_0_3768_2934%2F3768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67292ca1627577a1b201296e4620369a24f12bad%2F0_0_3768_2934%2F3768.jpg>
 FC Copenhagen’s Andreas Cornelius jumps for the ball during the recent 
Champions League match against Club Brugge. Photograph: Jens Dresling/AP 
Brondby IF

Brondby IF have won the Danish Superliga 10 times, but their last success was 
back in the 2004-05 season. They reached the quarter-finals of the European Cup 
in 1986-87,but have not qualified for the Champions League since finishing 
bottom of theirgroup in 1997-98. They were UEFA Cup semi-finalists in 1991, but 
haven’t qualified for the competition since back in 2003/04.

“The economic benefits from competing in the Champions League for a Danish 
club are huge. It can secure the club budget for several years if a club 
qualify for the group stage and, of course, attract more supporters to stadium. 
By minimising the chance of participation in the Champions League, there could 
be a risk of even fewer supporters in stadiums and even less reason for 
domestic players to play in the domestic leagues.

It makes perfect sense for the likes of FC Copenhagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fccopenhagen> and Norwegian champions 
Rosenborg to pursue this idea because of the obvious commercial benefits it 
would bring for the clubs. But the opposing point of view would be wanting to 
develop Danish football overall rather than make the bigger clubs even richer. 
We already have a huge problem of retaining Danish profiles in our own domestic 
league and even a move to a Championship side or Bundesliga 2 side would seem 
more interesting than playing for a mid-table Superliga club.

For the last 10 years FC Copenhagen have dominated domestic club football in 
Denmark. A breakaway league could tighten the domestic top flight of course, 
and add much needed drama to the last rounds of the season.”William Kaarsberg 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb05b519cb3768cf463226a0df65fd8099da36f87%2F0_0_2401_1624%2F2401.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb05b519cb3768cf463226a0df65fd8099da36f87%2F0_0_2401_1624%2F2401.jpg>
 Brondby’s Daniel Agger in heated discussion during a Danish Superliga match 
against rivals FC Copenhagen. Photograph: Lars Ronbog/FrontzoneSport via Getty 
Images 
Malmo FF

Malmo have been crowned Swedish champions 21 times in their history. They were 
beaten finalists in theEuropean Cup in the 1978-79 season.

“An Atlantic league pools together the resources of smaller countries and may 
enable their clubs to be more competitive. As aMalmo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/malmo> fan I’m reasonably confident that 
my team would be included in any Atlantic league, however the effect on the 
domestic Allsvenskan would be a real concern. A play-off every year between the 
bottom Swedish team in the breakaway league against the winner of Allsvenskan 
could be a good compromise.

The effect on national leagues is an issue worthy of concern, but to me it 
seems that we need to compare the weakening of Swedish, Danish and Dutch 
leagues against a ‘European’ competition where only teams from three or four 
countries can realistically compete.

The Champions League peaked in the late 90s and early 00s, when there was a 
fine mix between ensuring multiple big teams from Italy, Spain and England - 
while still allowing a representation of teams such as Dynamo Kiev, Porto, PSV, 
Lyon, Olympiakos and Galatasaray. Since Porto’s 2004 win, Lyon and PSV have 
been the only clubs outside the big four leagues to threaten reaching a final. 
The current situation is so skewed towards Bayern Munich and the Spanish 
duopoly. But I don’t believe that a proposed Super League will ever happen. The 
likes of PSG, Real Madrid, Barcelona and Bayern will not want to risk competing 
in a league in which they could credibly finish last.”Sam
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70914b8af9a6aca8adc9081b0480ff60c37a9815%2F0_0_2211_1399%2F2211.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70914b8af9a6aca8adc9081b0480ff60c37a9815%2F0_0_2211_1399%2F2211.jpg>
 Malmo forward Markus Rosenberg celebrates after scoring against Shakhtar 
Donetsk in the Champions League in 2015. Photograph: Andreasw 
Hillergren/AFP/Getty Images 
Osters IF


Osters have won the Allsvenskan four times but have not had any silverware 
since the 1981 season. They currently play in the third tier of the Swedish 
league.

“The proposed Atlantic League is a result of the proposals for the changed 
Champions League format. Both are killing football as we know it and should be 
opposed as fervently as possible. Uefa is too weak on this, but what else could 
you expect. It’s an organisation in turmoil. European football is moving 
towards American sports where there is no relegation battle, no promotion and 
only the winner counts. Where’s the joy in that? Let’s be honest, the 
Allsvenskan is a terribly weak league as it is today. Take the least bad side 
out of it and it will only get worse.”ExileInSthlm

Valerenga

Five times winners of the Norwegian top flight, but their last success was 
over a decade a go with their 2005 Tippeligaen title.

“It’s an interesting idea but needs to be thought through and administered 
correctly. The failedRoyal League <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Royal_League> 
experiment showed that it isn’t easy to create a new competition out of thin 
air. One major consideration is that it would have to be a spring/summer 
competition as the weather in Norway and Sweden during the winter months is not 
conducive to football outdoors.

I fear for domestic Norwegian football should this happen. Rosenborg have 
dominated for many years – getting richer while the rest of the Tippeligaen 
gets poorer. There are clubs here that are on the verge of bankruptcy – and 
many times the Rosenborg home fixtures are a financial anchor.

If Rosenborg withdraw fully from the Tippeligaen to join an Atlantic League - 
would that free up the Norwegian European Places – or would it simply mean that 
they monopolise the spot normally given to our champions? – thereby cutting off 
vital prize money and Uefa money for our clubs should they somehow (as Molde 
and Strømsgodset did a few years ago) manage to win the Tippeligaen?”Krister 
Halvorsen
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4f96145ab5dfc7458b1629a0f49f93d75a33f58%2F0_0_720_540%2Fmaster%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4f96145ab5dfc7458b1629a0f49f93d75a33f58%2F0_0_720_540%2Fmaster%2F720.jpg>
 Fans of Norwegian Premier League side Valerenga display the Norwegian flag 
prior to a league match. Photograph: KristerHalvorsen/GuardianWitness 
Celtic

Celtic have amassed 47 league titles but their only European success remains 
as winners of the European Cup in 1966-67.

“It’s a shame that it has to come to this but, if the proposed changes to the 
Champions League are made, the difference in quality between the so called 
“bigger clubs” compared to the teams from the smaller leagues will continue to 
increase. Quality and money is decreasing in these leagues and perhaps a new 
league is the only way to get more money back into domestic football. As aCeltic
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> fan I want to see European 
football every year. If that can’t be in the Champions League, we’ll need it 
from elsewhere. Also the current state of Scottish club football is not very 
competitive which is resulting in less and less interest.

A breakaway league could mean two things for domestic football in Scotland - 
either less money is put into the league, with less interest from Celtic and 
Rangers, or the league becomes more competitive amongst the other teams and in 
turn becomes more interesting. Uefa is ensuring that the already huge gulf in 
money between Europe’s largest and smallest clubs is only going to get wider 
making it harder for clubs such as Celtic andRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> to ever catch up.” Rameez Mahmood
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51de7a248a3fc11ec18cc59ad546a4d50f635f95%2F0_0_4012_2708%2F4012.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51de7a248a3fc11ec18cc59ad546a4d50f635f95%2F0_0_4012_2708%2F4012.jpg>
 Celtic players clap their fans after a 7-0 defeat to Barcelona. Photograph: 
Alejandro Garcia/EPA 
Rangers

Rangers have won the Scottish first division 54 times. Winning the 1971-72 
European Cup Winners’ Cup remains their finest hour in European competitions.

“It’s probably worth trying, or at least looking at. But there’s plenty of 
details that need to be considered carefully. Would there be promotion and 
relegation from the domestic leagues? What Scottish clubs would be involved? As 
a Rangers fan, we might not be in the top 10 teams from those countries in 
terms of our current side, but we’re a huge club and would want to be involved, 
hopefully on merit and not just because of our size and commercial appeal.

Potential loss of TV revenue would have an effect on the Scottish league, but 
there’s a positive as well: if you take the old firm out of the SPFL it 
suddenly becomes a very competitive league. Motherwell, Hearts, Aberdeen and 
Dundee United could all have won titles in the last ten years and plenty of 
other clubs would be in with a shout. I would hope it would lead to a league 
reconstruction as well – a 16- or 18-team top flight, minus the Old Firm, would 
accommodate most of the full time clubs in the country.”Greg
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3623f21233e9598d550c2cd3cc2bcc66630a66f5%2F0_0_3500_2380%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3623f21233e9598d550c2cd3cc2bcc66630a66f5%2F0_0_3500_2380%2F3500.jpg>
 Rangers fans watching their team in the early evening sunlight at Ibrox 
Stadium, Glasgow. Photograph: Mark Runnacles/PA 
St Johnstone

St Johnstone’s finest domestic success was winning the Scottish Cup in 2014.

“I’m afraid cash is king in modern football, and a breakaway league looks to 
be the only way the big clubs in these leagues mentioned would be able to stay 
vaguely competitive with the big clubs from the main European leagues. Right 
now it’s too much to ask for them to switch from easy wins against their 
domestic rivals to competing against top class opposition.

In Scottish domestic football you’d be looking at a situation where a team 
like Celtic either leaves the league altogether, and everyone feels they have a 
better chance of winning, or they develop their youngsters in a B team in the 
domestic league, which potentially strengthens the national team in the long 
run, as young players are getting competitive games at a decent level.”Fraser

PSV Eindhoven

PSV won the domestic Dutch league 23 times, while winning the European Cup in 
1987/88 and the Uefa Cup in 1977/78.

“I understand why the clubs want it as there would be more competitive games 
and more money. But all it would do is entrench the current positions - protect 
the status of the big teams and make it harder for smaller sides to rise up in 
the future. Do Celtic fans want to come to Eindhoven? Sure yes, but one time 
every three or four years rather than two times a year surely. And is it really 
a step up for PSV orAjax <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> to play FC 
Copenhagen or Rosenborg on a regular basis?

An ‘Atlantic league’ would hurt our domestic Eredivisie terribly. The TV money 
would disappear and fewer people would be interested. A reform of existing cups 
is a better idea in my opinion.”Jan Bettle
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13728333ad29d9fc2061d692f7dbb540b98747a9%2F0_0_3500_2463%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13728333ad29d9fc2061d692f7dbb540b98747a9%2F0_0_3500_2463%2F3500.jpg>
 PSV Eindhoven’s players acknowledge supporters after the recent Champions 
League match against FC Rostov. Photograph: Maxim Zmeyev/Reuters 
AZ Alkmaar

Have won the Eredivisie twice, last title back in 2008/09, while their 
runners-up spot in the 1980/81 Uefa Cup remains their best performance in 
European football.

“This would be a bad idea for Danish, Norwegian and Swedish teams. The Dutch, 
Scottish and Belgian top flights are so much stronger and earn way more in any 
marketing and TV deals. So it would soon get lopsided. I’m not keen on our top 
Eredivisie teams leaving the domestic league. Things would get boring very 
quickly. There must be a better alternative.”Brendan Ringenoldus
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F502f12f7b57cb0648a6014ee6742ccba74723a71%2F0_0_3400_2572%2F3400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F502f12f7b57cb0648a6014ee6742ccba74723a71%2F0_0_3400_2572%2F3400.jpg>
 AZ Alkmaar celebrate winning the league in 2009. Photograph: Ed 
Oudenaarden/AFP/Getty Images 
SC Heerenveen

They finished as runners-up in the 1999-00 Eredivisie season, with KNVB Cup 
final success in 2008-09.

“As a supporter of my local club, this sounds disastrous. But as a supporter 
of Dutch football it sounds more promising. Ajax, PSV andFeyenoord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/feyenoord> have rich European-competition 
histories but none can realistically hope to win a European cup again the way 
things are progressing now - there’s not enough money or glamour in our 
domestic league to keep hold of the best players. I think we can all see the 
writing on the wall for football as we know it, and there will inevitably be 
some major changes to the structure of the leagues and competitions.

My local Dutch team is SC Heerenveen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/heerenveen>. It’s a club that is known 
for finding and producing talent. Quite a few well known players have passed 
through the club but apart from one disastrous season in the Champions League, 
and a few Dutch Cup final appearances with only one success to show for it, 
there have been no domestic league titles - though we are apparently the most 
financially secure club in the Eredivisie. This Atlantic League means our 
league would lose the little quality and star attraction that it arguably still 
has. If those clubs would then also be permitted to play B Squads in the 
national league, then that would kill any chance of attracting or keeping the 
best players for the smaller clubs. This is also assuming the Atlantic League 
would eschew promotion and relegation, which one imagines would be a 
prerogative of these breakaway clubs. Revenue sharing will of course always be 
the fly in the ointment, whatever the system, and small clubs and countries wll 
always be at a disadvantage.”Hearrenfeanboy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4341459b55c8c2f4d1c51c8170a4914ea9e23567%2F0_0_3543_2362%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4341459b55c8c2f4d1c51c8170a4914ea9e23567%2F0_0_3543_2362%2F3543.jpg>
 Heerenveen’s Daley Sinkgraven, now playing for Ajax, scores the winning goal 
in a Eredivisie match between SC Heerenveen and PSV Eindhoven on 28 September 
2014. Heerenveen won 1-0. Photograph: Jasper Ruhe/EPA 
Ajax

Have been crowned Eredivisie champions 33 times with their last title in 
2013/14. They have won the European Cup four times, the Cup Winners’ Cup once, 
the Uefa Cup back in 1991/92 and the Uefa Super Cup twice.

“It’s a great idea and a well overdue attempt at countering the influence of 
ridiculous sums of money. It’ll hopefully allow for some of the larger teams in 
Europe’s smaller domestic leagues to more regularly measure themselves against 
higher quality opponents than are available in their domestic leagues. Ajax 
would be a stronger team for being able to play against the likes of FC 
Copenhagen orClub Brugge <https://www.theguardian.com/football/clubbrugge> over 
the likes of Willem II or De Graafschap.

The Dutch Eredivisie continues its slow decline in terms of quality - both in 
terms of the football being played and the players representing the clubs. In 
years past the top clubs in Holland, and presumably Belgium and Denmark, would 
be able to enjoy the fruits of their youth systems for a number of seasons 
before they were tempted away by big money contracts in larger European 
leagues. We’re now seeing our best and brightest pilfered from the academies 
before they’ve played a single game for the first team. The result is less 
quality, less viewers and less sponsorship interest in our domestic competition 
and a waning ability to attract quality players to our clubs. The slow downward 
spiral of quality means less automatic qualification places in competitions 
like the Champions League and Europa League. The gulf between the big clubs in 
smaller competitions and any club in a larger competition seems certain to grow 
with the current systems in place.

UEFA clearly has little regard for the development or health of club football 
across Europe’s smaller nations. I think the breakaway league is a bold 
initiative to give clubs and supporters a better level of competition in which 
to measure themselves. It will give supporters and sponsors a better quality of 
football and will hopefully go some way to redress the ever increasing levels 
of disparity between European footballing haves and the have-nots.”Martyn
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9531f34afca3fcc21939cb1dcd59131a2e82b879%2F0_0_5568_3712%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9531f34afca3fcc21939cb1dcd59131a2e82b879%2F0_0_5568_3712%2F5568.jpg>
 Ajax players celebrate after scoring a goal against Utrecht in October. 2016 
Photograph: Olaf Kraak/AFP/Getty Images 
Feyenoord

Crowned Eredivisie champions 14 times in their history with their last success 
back in 1998-99. They won the European Cup back in 1969/70 with the second of 
their two Uefa Cup triumphs the most recent in the 2001/02 season.

“I think this league will give a lot of medium sized clubs in Europe a chance 
to gain more money and compete with big clubs like Real Madrid or Barcelona. 
This will give much more resources to the top flight clubs in the Netherlands 
and they will get more chances of signing big players or upgrading their youth 
academy.”Thijs Wen
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c006a438e5124bc2f432fda2d9b4c0fa2b1683a%2F0_0_3543_2364%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c006a438e5124bc2f432fda2d9b4c0fa2b1683a%2F0_0_3543_2364%2F3543.jpg>
 Feyenoord’s Renato Tapia celebrates scoring against Willem II in Tilburg, The 
Netherlands, 2 October 2016. Photograph: Toin Damen/EPA 
Club Brugge

Have won the Belgian first division 14 times and are reigning champions. Were 
losing finalists in the 1977-78 European Champion Clubs’ Cup final and runners 
up in the 1975-76 Uefa Cup. Currently competing in the Champions League group 
stage.

“It’s an interesting idea but I don’t think it will happen. There will be 
teams who feel left out from every league and will not let it happen. And do 
they take the clubs with the biggest fan base or go with the best record of the 
last five or ten years? Clubs like Feyenoord or Rangers should be in but they 
haven’t won the league for so long.

There’s no doubt that the Belgian Pro League would suffer as a result, and the 
reaction to the breakaway league is therefore very negative overall. TV revenue 
would drop and smaller clubs would find themselves in all sorts of trouble.”
Stefaan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb04d2bd5f95088d6083e82cea9875fe24a767969%2F0_0_2434_1573%2F2434.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb04d2bd5f95088d6083e82cea9875fe24a767969%2F0_0_2434_1573%2F2434.jpg>
 Club Brugge’s Abdoulay Diaby celebrates after scoring during the Jupiler Pro 
League match between Club Brugge and RSC Anderlecht, in Brugge, on May 15, 
2016. Photograph: Virginie Lefour/AFP/Getty Images 
Anderlecht

Winners of the Belgian first division 33 times, twice winners of the European 
Cup Winners’ Cup in the late 1970s, with one Uefa Cup and two Uefa Super Cup 
trophies added in the early 1980s.

“I have mixed feelings about this. On one hand the idea of playing top teams 
from various European leagues is quite an interesting one, but on the other we 
need to protect Belgian domestic football that has had a recent boost. The 
Belgian league has become a little stronger after the introduction of a playoff 
system, where at the end of the season the top six teams play home and away 
games against each other after having the points they’ve accumulated throughout 
the season cut in half before the start to the playoffs, resulting in a few 
weeks of exiting football madness. It would be a shame to lose all that 
excitement, especially for the neutral football fan. I also have my doubts 
about the practicality of such a formula. Teams would have to fly back and 
forth every week which might have a negative impact on the physical condition 
of the players.

The gap between the top and and smaller Belgian teams has narrowed quite a bit 
due to a much more professional approach by these so-called smaller teams. In 
the last few years new stadiums have been built for the likes of Gent, Zulte 
Waregem, Oostende and KV Mechelen. All the efforts to revitalise the domestic 
league would go right down the drain. Do we really want that to happen?

I would be more in favour of a BeNe-League with the top 10 teams of Belgium 
and Holland competing for the title. It’s an idea the top teams of both 
countries have been playing with for quite some time but it never got off the 
drawing board.”Johan De Coninck
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fcd6b48e76a5d2cad435ca8566d18f88fb4ec90%2F0_0_1812_1137%2F1812.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fcd6b48e76a5d2cad435ca8566d18f88fb4ec90%2F0_0_1812_1137%2F1812.jpg>
 Anderlecht’s Youri Tielemans and Leander Dendoncker celebrate after scoring 
against St Etienne in the Europa League. Photograph: Robert Pratta/Reuters 
Gent

Winners of the 2013-14 Belgian First Division title.

“It was only last season that KAA Gent took Europe by storm, when we became 
only the second Belgian side in history to advance to the Champions League 
round of 16. It infuriates me to see these so-called “small European clubs” 
maligned and marginalised, despite excellent form and dominance in their 
respective leagues. We draw immense talent from the Scandinavian and European 
leagues and fully deserve to be on the European centre stage with English, 
Spanish and Italian teams. A breakaway league is always controversial but if it 
promotes excellence and gives those teams a chance for European glory then so 
be it.”Joseph Wedgwood
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3be709b60f3a23ae48aebc2732947d14073e614%2F0_0_4000_2667%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football'%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20'Atlantic%20league'%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Cash%20is%20king%20in%20modern%20football%27%20%E2%80%93%20fans%20react%20to%20the%20%27Atlantic%20league%27%20proposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fatlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3be709b60f3a23ae48aebc2732947d14073e614%2F0_0_4000_2667%2F4000.jpg>
 Gent’s Kenneth Saief celebrates with his teammates after scoring during 
against Turkish club Atiker Konyaspor in the Europa League group stage. 
Photograph: Bruno Fahy/AFP/Getty Images 
Ferencvaros

Winners of the Hungarian First Division 29 times and runners-up in the 
European Cup Winners’ Cup back in 1974-75.

“I like this idea. I’ve believed for a long time that the Central European 
countries – Hungary, Czech Republic, Slovakia etc – would benefit from such an 
arrangement. It would allow the strongest regional teams to compete and become 
stronger still. All too often the domestic competition beyond the top two four 
teams is weak, holding back overall development. This new league would be good 
for strong domestic sides, slightly worse for the weaker ones, but something 
for everyone to aim at.

Why not have regional competitons to supplement domestic leagues? Scrap the 
Europa League and break it down to the Champions League and then regional 
competitions (North Atlantic, Southen Europe, Central Europe) to run alongside 
that.”Rob Gallo
 