
It takes eight hours of travel on asphalt, dirt roads and grass tracks to get 
from Freetown, the capital ofSierra Leone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sierraleone>, to the remote village of 
Kpondu, where, among some of the world’s poorest children, a group of charity 
workers from the UK have helped open the Kate Gross Community School.

It was in Kpondu, in a densely forested area of Sierra Leone, known for its 
abundance of cocoa and coffee plants, that Finda Nyume, a local faith healer, 
became the first person in the country to be struck with Ebola in 2014.

“Kate really empathised with any child whose parents died of Ebola because she 
could think of her own sons being without their mum,” Kate’s mother, Jean 
Gross, tells me when I meet her at Kate’s former home in Cambridge.

This Christmas will mark two years since Kate, the former aide to Tony Blair 
and Gordon Brown, and CEO of Blair’s charity the Africa Governance Initiative 
<http://www.africagovernance.org/>, died following a battle with colon cancer. 
She was 36, and left behind her husband Billy and twins Oscar and Isaac, then 
five years old.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-is-about-sharing-love-kate-would-be-so-proud-of-her-african-school%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01d19f32ded94f1593055eac0b180be69900b37e%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Christmas%20is%20about%20sharing%20love%20%E2%80%93%20Kate%20would%20be%20so%20proud%20of%20her%20African%20school'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-is-about-sharing-love-kate-would-be-so-proud-of-her-african-school%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Christmas%20is%20about%20sharing%20love%20%E2%80%93%20Kate%20would%20be%20so%20proud%20of%20her%20African%20school%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-is-about-sharing-love-kate-would-be-so-proud-of-her-african-school%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01d19f32ded94f1593055eac0b180be69900b37e%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Kate Gross at home in Cambridge. Photograph: John Lawrence 
During her long and difficult illness, Kate requested that on her death, 
instead of sending flowers, donations be made toStreet Child 
<https://www.street-child.co.uk/>, an NGO whose work with children she admired. 
At her behest, a total of £43,019 wasraised by family and friends 
<http://uk.virginmoneygiving.com/fundraiser-web/fundraiser/displaySomeoneSpecialPage.action?pageUrl=kate-gross>
 and put towards the new school in Sierra Leone with the aim of helping to 
reduce the chance of future disease outbreaks and prevent child orphans of 
Ebola – many the same age as Kate’s sons – from becoming a lost generation.

With the funds, which far exceeded expectations, Street Child has been able to 
build a permanent school that will cater to 130 African children a year from 
eight different villages, as well as put money into teacher training and 
equipment.

Farewell to my daughter Kate, who died on Christmas day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/10/farewell-to-my-daughter-kate-who-died-on-christmas-day>
“People did the most amazing things,” Gross says. “The headteacher at the 
boys’ school ran a half marathon, a waiter gave all her tips from one evening, 
the school’s Irish dancing club stayed up late to tour parts of the city and 
raise money. Street Child has still got to build a well and a couple of other 
things. Altogether it’s been very powerful.”

Kate died at 6.29am on Christmas Day 2014. Her mother has previously written 
about those few hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/10/farewell-to-my-daughter-kate-who-died-on-christmas-day>
, which she called “the blackest of black comedy”, involving watching stockings 
being unwrapped, phoning the GP and undertakers, while cooking a turkey for her 
grandsons. “Grief is a funny thing, it isn’t a smooth course of getting 
better,” she says with glassy eyes. “Although broadly on the whole I’d say 
we’re all feeling better, it’s still a big blip, and December is a big blip for 
us.

“Christmas and the weeks leading up to it are about finding things that will 
make the people you love happy, it is about giving, buying and getting 
presents, dressing the tree, making everything feel warm and smelling 
beautiful. It’s about sharing love in a concrete way. With Kate not here I 
can’t share my love with her.”

During the festive season, Gross adds, almost everybody will be meeting 
someone who has been bereaved. “It is easy for other people to think you’ve 
moved on, and actually when you’ve lost someone you’ve never quite moved on. 
Instead of just writing Christmas cards saying ‘have a lovely Christmas’, it’s 
better just to say ‘we’re thinking of you thisChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>, we know it’s hard’. 
People do want you to be tidied up so they don’t have to be worried about you 
any more, but it’s lonely.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-is-about-sharing-love-kate-would-be-so-proud-of-her-african-school%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75a0caa0d0e8ad341bb4a0d7d0e26a76edb8379b%2F0_97_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Christmas%20is%20about%20sharing%20love%20%E2%80%93%20Kate%20would%20be%20so%20proud%20of%20her%20African%20school'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-is-about-sharing-love-kate-would-be-so-proud-of-her-african-school%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Christmas%20is%20about%20sharing%20love%20%E2%80%93%20Kate%20would%20be%20so%20proud%20of%20her%20African%20school%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-is-about-sharing-love-kate-would-be-so-proud-of-her-african-school%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75a0caa0d0e8ad341bb4a0d7d0e26a76edb8379b%2F0_97_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Victoria Topay and her children at home in West Point, Monrovia, Liberia, 
March 2016. The empty chairs are a symbol of Victoria’s late husband and family 
members who died during the Ebola outbreak. Photograph: Ahmed Jallanzo/EPA 
 For the family, it is particularly significant that Kate’s death will have 
led to something positive. Nyume’s funeral is thought to have directly resulted 
in the death of 350 people from Ebola, a major cause being a lack of education 
and information on contagion. “Literacy saves lives, good healthcare in the 
developing world depends on education,” Gross says. “Education also wipes out 
some of the superstitious practices, like there was a period where children who 
lost their families to Ebola were shunned by their community.”

In the home where Billy and the twins still live, an elegant Christmas tree 
reaches to the ceiling, with immaculately wrapped presents underneath. On the 
wall are pictures of the family, as well as one of a big group of people 
waving. In the middle are Tony and Cherie Blair, and Kate stands smiling nearby.


AGI, which Kate headed and was awarded an OBE for, was founded by Blair in 
2008 to provide advice on leadership and political reform inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. Its successes include working 
alongside Rwandan public servants to unlock access to electricity for over a 
million Rwandans, assisting the delivery of an economic plan which led to a new 
railway connecting two of Nigeria’s biggest cities, Kano and Lagos, working 
with President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf to train Liberian civil servants, and 
supporting a scheme in Sierra Leone to double rice crops in parts of the 
country and improve farmers’ access to markets.

 “We all want to help those suffering and feel totally powerless when we 
can’t, like in Aleppo now,” Gross says. “Most of us don’t have the right 
skills, we can only give donations. I think Kate was proud of working for AGI 
and pleased she could apply practical skills. Most of the countries that she 
worked with were emerging through the most dreadful civil wars and atrocities, 
and have very little in the way of infrastructure.

 “What she talked about most was the recovery, the hope that it’s possible. 
Also of hair-raising experiences, like when you go to Sierra Leone it takes 
hours to get from the airport to the capital because there’s water in between 
and no bridge. The things we take for granted in this country take a lot of 
thinking about elsewhere.”

If Kate saw the world now she would feel devastated, according to her mother, 
both at the destruction and loss of war and the prominence of populism. “She 
would feel that 2016 has been very sad. She would be heartbroken at what is 
going in Syria, at what is going on with migrants crossing the Mediterranean.


“She would also be talking about Brexit. Kate was a really global person, she 
wanted Oscar and Isaac to grow up as global citizens. She wanted them to think 
about going to university overseas, to work internationally. It seems to me 
eminently sensible that Blair is now trying to bring people together around 
this issue. Her thinking now would be ‘how you move the world on is not by 
pulling up the drawbridge’.”

Gross currently works as an education consultant, but she used to be a 
psychologist and before that a teacher. Her mother was a teacher, and her other 
daughter, Jo, is also a teacher, in Hackney. “Education is a really important 
thing to all my family,” she says. “Kate would be so happy about the school in 
Kpondu, she would feel that something positive had happened. But she’d want to 
do more, she was a real doer, she’d say ‘OK, we’ve got one school, let’s do 
another one’.”

While this December has proved more difficult than anticipated, she takes 
pleasure in the company of her grandchildren, to whom she tells stories of 
their mother.

One of the things that most touches her, she adds, is that another woman’s 
grandchildren, thousands of miles away, will now be able to go to a school.

“My grandchildren are very lucky, they go to a lovely school, they have a good 
life really, despite losing their mother. It’s nice to know that Finda Nyume, 
if she were alive, would see her grandchildren have a better future.

“And it’s bizarre, that in the middle of an African bush, eight hours from 
anywhere, there is now a school with Kate’s name on it.”
 