
When I heard Diana Rigg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/09/diana-rigg-game-of-thrones-getting-older>
 was going to be Martha in Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? at the Almeida I was 
on the phone to my agent like a shot. They usually cast Martha first and then 
try to find a George. I was desperate to play him – and had been ever since I’d 
queued for hours to seeBen Gazzara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/04/ben-gazzara> in the role on 
Broadway,opposite Colleen Dewhurst’s Martha 
<http://digitalcollections.nypl.org/items/510d47e4-6d2f-a3d9-e040-e00a18064a99>
, in 1976.

Edward Albee obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/18/edward-albee-obituary> 
The Almeida’s revival was to be directed by Howard Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/oct/18/howard-davies-director>. 
Fortunately, I’d worked with Howard at the Royal Shakespeare Company in the 
70s, and I also knewJonathan Kent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/feb/01/theatre.arts> – who was now running 
the Almeida – from his acting days. They were on my side, but they had to pass 
it by Edward Albee. He had final approval. Howard and Jonathan had to convince 
him that, first and foremost, I was a theatre actor who had happened to get a 
lucky break on televisionas Poirot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/nov/10/david-suchet-poirot-and-me>
. I’d done many years of repertory theatre before doing any TV, and I’d just 
appeared in David Mamet’s Oleanna at the Royal Court, directed by Harold 
Pinter, which I think swayed it. Edward said yes.

The first read-through with the producers was one of the most terrifying of my 
life. I went away and thought: I don’t know how I’m going to do this. It was a 
major London production and everyone was hoping it would move straight into the 
West End.


The more I studied the role, the more I got a handle on George. I realised 
that he does what he does because he is desperately in love with his wife. He 
wants to save his marriage. Terrible things are said and done throughout the 
play – there are awful arguments and fights – but I came to see it all as a 
love story. Diana made a very vulnerable Martha, which worked well alongside my 
interpretation. Although George plies everyone else with drinks, I think he 
fills his own glass just once. I suddenly realised that he’s a puppeteer, 
getting everyone else hammered.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fdavid-suchet-edward-albee-playwright-whos-afraid-of-virginia-woolf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a4b8f32c2491646b950b598539d76b589207ee7%2F0_459_4849_2910%2F4849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='David%20Suchet%2C%20I%20want%20a%20word%20with%20you'%3A%20the%20actor%20recalls%20meeting%20Edward%20Albee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fdavid-suchet-edward-albee-playwright-whos-afraid-of-virginia-woolf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27David%20Suchet%2C%20I%20want%20a%20word%20with%20you%27%3A%20the%20actor%20recalls%20meeting%20Edward%20Albee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fdavid-suchet-edward-albee-playwright-whos-afraid-of-virginia-woolf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a4b8f32c2491646b950b598539d76b589207ee7%2F0_459_4849_2910%2F4849.jpg>
 Desperate measures … Rigg and Suchet at the Almeida. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
It’s a long, draining play – it runs to around three hours, and we did it with 
two intervals. That was the first time I had to say to a producer that I 
couldn’t do a midweek matinee and a Saturday one. I didn’t think I’d have the 
voice for it.


Edward came to rehearsals and confessed to me that he was angry and sad that 
he’d be remembered for this play and not all the others. After watching our 
version, he told me: “I never knew I wrote so much humour for George. I like 
it!” But Edward must have been the quietest writer I’ve ever seen in 
rehearsals. During the first few days, he hardly said a word, just watched us 
and then talked to Howard. At one of the final run-throughs, he looked at me 
and said: “David Suchet, I want a word with you.” I thought: Oh my gosh. What 
is this?

He took me right to the far corner of the rehearsal room. “Why are you playing 
George like that?” he asked, not looking at me. I stammered the reasons. I 
said: “I believe you’ve written a love story. However cruel George is being, 
he’s trying to save his marriage.” There was a huge pause. Then he looked at me 
and said: “That’s what I wrote.”

And off he walked.

 