
All hail Éderzito António Macedo Lopes, the improbable king of Europe. How 
fitting that a tournament where the underdog prospered ended with the most 
unexpected of heroes. A man who spent his formative years in care and was 
largely derided as a footballer until now scored the winning goal with such 
poise and power in equal measures it almost made the dour fare that preceded it 
immediately evaporate from consciousness.

Portugal’s only striker, sprung from the bench for the tiring Renato Sanches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/09/renato-sanches-bulo-portugal-euro-2016>
 late in normal time, not only provided his country with its greatest sporting 
moment but, by evading France’s Laurent Koscielny and sticking the ball past 
Hugo Lloris with one swing of his right boot, simultaneously proved a legion of 
doubters wrong.

Portugal greeted by thousands of fans after flying home to Lisbon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/11/portugal-fly-home-lisbon-european-championship>
It is some turnaround for a player who began 2016 shivering on the bench at 
the Kassam Stadium, while his Swansea team werebeing battered by League Two 
Oxford United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/oxford-united-swansea-city-fa-cup-match-report>
 in the FA Cup. He left South Wales soon after, joining Lille on loan for the 
rest of the season with a total of two starts, 11 appearances and zero shots on 
target in English football.

Éder scored on his full debut in Ligue 1 before injuring a knee but his 
subsequent form was just about enough to secure a permanent move to the Stade 
Pierre Mauroy at the end of the season. A so-called flop and journeyman kept 
plodding on fruitlessly.

Until Sunday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
, when everything came good for a team described by their own manager, Fernando 
Santos, as ugly ducklings. Perhaps tThe most ugly of all became, according to 
Santos, a “beautiful swan” with a solitary brilliant moment.

Of the 552 players to participate in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/jun/01/euro-2016-the-complete-guide-to-every-squad-and-every-player-in-france>
, few could have had a more challenging upbringing than Éder. Born in 
Guinea-Bissau, his family moved to Lisbon in search of a better life when he 
was two years old but they could not afford to look after him. He was sent to 
Lar O Girassol, a state-run care facility on the outskirts of Coimbra, and 
remained there until he started playing professional for Académica in 2008. 
Before that he spent time at semi-professional Tourizense in the Portuguese 
third tier, a feeder club for Académica based about 40 miles north-east of 
Coimbra.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feder-euro-2016-final-portugal-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F058b32d782b9b75718a7eb5738891533ea8103c6%2F0_0_5568_3712%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%C3%89der%E2%80%99s%20piece%20of%20outsider%20art%20caps%20journey%20from%20care%20home%20to%20Euro%202016%20glory%20%7C%20Alan%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feder-euro-2016-final-portugal-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%C3%89der%E2%80%99s%20piece%20of%20outsider%20art%20caps%20journey%20from%20care%20home%20to%20Euro%202016%20glory%20%7C%20Alan%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feder-euro-2016-final-portugal-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F058b32d782b9b75718a7eb5738891533ea8103c6%2F0_0_5568_3712%2F5568.jpg>
 Éder celebrates his extra-time goal in the Euro 2016 final. Photograph: Miguel 
Medina/AFP/Getty Images 
He led a regimented life, obeying a strict timetable set by the Catholic 
priests in charge of the facility, but remained close to his family throughout. 
Apparently Éder gave his first pay packet of €400 to his mother, his father now 
lives in London and he has a sister at university in Wolverhampton. Football 
was his escape – he would play on the streets outside the care home at every 
possible moment, attempting to emulate his hero, the Brazilian Ronaldo.

“It helped me to grow into the man that I have become and aided my football 
career,” Éder said last year of his time at Lar O Girassol, which roughly 
translates to The Sunflower. “Of course, at times it was a little bit tough, 
which is normal, but I enjoyed it a lot. I met so many of my friends there, and 
it was good to have that life experience.”

Euro 2016: Guardian writers pick their highs and lows from France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/11/euro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows>
It perhaps makes the centre-half José Fonte’s claim amid the celebrations at 
the Stade de France that his unique double of the Football League Trophy and 
European Championship was fit for Hollywood seem a tad less appealing to 
scriptwriters compared to Éder’s stunning plot twist. In footballing terms, the 
gangly striker may have become accustomed to being unloved. His international 
record before Sunday’s final read 28 caps and three goals, all in friendlies. 
It took 18 appearances for him to find the net forSeleção das Quinas, in a 
friendly against Italy 13 months ago, and his place in this squad was 
questioned before and during the tournament.

There was almost an element of tokenism about his inclusion – the only genuine 
striker in a system where wingers were preferred up front. His impact before 
the final was six minutes off the bench against Iceland and seven against 
Austria in a group stage wherePortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> benefited from the tournament’s 
expansion, allowing them to scrape through in third position.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fthousands-greet-portugal-after-euro-2016-victory-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thousands%20greet%20Portugal%20after%20Euro%202016%20victory%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fthousands-greet-portugal-after-euro-2016-victory-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thousands%20greet%20Portugal%20after%20Euro%202016%20victory%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fthousands-greet-portugal-after-euro-2016-victory-video&media=>
Thousands greet Portugal after Euro 2016 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jul/11/thousands-greet-portugal-after-euro-2016-victory-video>
But for a team that have become renowned for lacking a focal point in attack 
for more than a generation and have siphoned through a number of distinctly 
average strikers, it is weirdly apposite that the player to finally earn 
silverware for a nation that always appeared destined to be the bridesmaid 
would indeed be the latest of ineffective target men.

He has been subject to Cristiano Ronaldo’s thousand yard stare more than most. 
Yet for his evident deficiencies and regular dry spells, the 28-year-old’s 
enthusiasm and drive has never wavered. That partially explains the white 
glove, which was hidden down his left sock, that he put on after scoring. “It 
makes me feel good, it’s a motivation,” he says of the celebration, which 
started at Lille and is a nod to the belligerent naysayers that have long said 
he was not good enough for the biggest stage.

Éder’s moment was a lesson to keep believing in the face of adversity. It will 
become a tale of inspiration for future generations, his legend will be 
recalled from Braga to Faro for decades to come and he will immediately join 
illustrious names such as Figo, Ronaldo and Eusébio in the pantheon of 
Portuguese footballers. Éder may not have the skills and storied club careers 
of those greats, but he can say with some certainty he is the only one to have 
won an international tournament for a nation used to falling just short.
 