
Harry Potter and the Cursed Child: the West End extravaganza – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2016/jul/26/harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-in-pictures>
With the production emerging from its lengthy previews period, the reviews of 
Harry Potter and the Cursed Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child> are out – 
and overwhelmingly positive. In the two-part stage production, written by Jack 
Thorne from a story by him, director John Tiffany, and JK Rowling herself, 
Harry’s son Albus befriends the son of his father’s enemy Draco Malfoy, as he 
too sets off on a path of wizardry. Here’s what the critics made of it.

Michael Billington, the Guardian (four stars) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/26/harry-potter-cursed-child-review-palace-theatre-london>

[Tiffany] has masterminded a thrilling theatrical spectacle … Thorne, like 
Rowling, knits together a series of mythical strands. There is the quest motif, 
which is as old as Arthurian legend. There is the idea of time travel, which 
has been a standard part of sci-fi from HG Wells to Doctor Who. On top of that 
you have a Manichean world in which good and evil are locked in perpetual 
combat. Underlying all that is a mix of white magic and Christian theology that 
leads Harry to say, at one point, ‘A child died to save the world’ … while it 
helps to be a paid-up Potterhead, Tiffany and his team stage the piece with 
such dazzling assurance that I finally began to see the point of being wild 
about Harry.

Dominic Cavendish, the Telegraph (five stars) 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/theatre/what-to-see/harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-is-pure-magic---review/>

It’s a triumph. Not an unqualified one – there are some quibbles – but in all 
key respects, it grips, it stirs, it delights … The twists and turns of the 
time-travelling plot, which sees outcomes messily altered (one vision of 
Hogwarts as dystopian as it gets) and a journey back to the beginning of the 
Potter story, make some of the more convoluted episodes of Doctor Who look 
almost Blyton-esque. Yet you can’t stop watching … There are reservations, as 
I’ve implied (for one thing, the male roles are far better fleshed out than the 
female ones; we see too little, for instance, of Ron and Hermione’s daughter 
Rose), but to labour those failings would be to miss the point. The big news is 
that this is just what was needed, will raise the benchmark for family 
entertainment for years to come and may even usher in a whole cycle of 
Potter-world stories.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-reviews-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff778582150e24d0d3333520ca69fa467d1ac45c5%2F0_0_4405_2932%2F4405.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Dickens%20with%20magic'%3A%20Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%20reviews%20roundup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-reviews-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Dickens%20with%20magic%27%3A%20Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%20reviews%20roundup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-reviews-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff778582150e24d0d3333520ca69fa467d1ac45c5%2F0_0_4405_2932%2F4405.jpg>
 The set for Harry Potter and the Cursed Child. Photograph: Manuel Harlan 
Ann Treneman, the Times (four and three quarter stars) 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/astounding-wizardry-of-harry-potters-new-chapter-will-leave-you-spellbound-cl226kl2b>

It’s not so much a play as a weekend mini-break, a theatrical experience that 
lasts longer than some relationships. I am a mere Muggle, of course, which is 
Potter-speak for those of us without magical powers, but that doesn’t mean I 
can’t spot wizardry when I see it … As I watched the rapt faces round me, I 
realised that the complexity of this story (there are mazes that are more 
straightforward) is key. Rowling never treats her audience as dolts. So this is 
Dickens, with magic. It’s a raunchless Game of Thrones with heart. Crucially, 
it’s authentic Potter but, most importantly, it’s new. It’s not the movie of 
the book. It’s the real deal, live in front of you, so much better than any 
film could be.

Ben Brantley, New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/26/theater/review-harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-casts-a-spell-onstage.html?_r=0>

Like the novels that preceded it, The Cursed Child is stuffed with 
arcana-filled plots that defy diagrams and baldly wrought sentimental life 
lessons, along with anguished dives into the earnest, tortured solipsism of 
adolescence. By rights, such a combination should try the patience of any 
grown-up. But like Ms Rowling’s books, the play vanquishes resistance … This 
production captures Ms Rowling’s sensibility even more persuasively than did 
the special-effects-driven films … The word for these imaginative leaps of 
faith is empathy. That’s the magic practiced so affectingly and entertainingly 
in The Cursed Child, and it turns everyone in the audience into a sorcerer’s 
apprentice.

Kate Maltby, Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-parts-one-and-two-review-the-spell-of-friendship-1469487661>

A nostalgic reverie for the Potter generation, devoid of Ms Rowling’s sharpest 
metaphysical logic … Yet thanks to the presence of some of Britain’s most 
talented theatre makers, including Mr Tiffany, and a bevy of heartfelt 
performances, the latest addition to the Potter canon makes a surprising case 
for the restorative power of theatre … we sometimes feel we’re at a theme park 
ride rather than an artistic performance. But strip away the smoke and mirrors 
andHarry Potter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> and the Cursed 
Child is, like all Ms Rowling’s narratives, a soul-salving celebration of 
friendship and loyalty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-reviews-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe53ef31069a5feb5e44c593e3e48e3f214c2f25d%2F0_0_1437_2155%2F1437.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Dickens%20with%20magic'%3A%20Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%20reviews%20roundup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-reviews-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Dickens%20with%20magic%27%3A%20Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%20reviews%20roundup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-reviews-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe53ef31069a5feb5e44c593e3e48e3f214c2f25d%2F0_0_1437_2155%2F1437.jpg>
 New fan favourites … Anthony Boyle (Scorpius Malfoy) and Alex Price (Draco 
Malfoy). Photograph: Manuel Harlan 
Henry Hitchings, Evening Standard (five stars) 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/goingout/theatre/harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-review-a-magical-experience-a3304191.html>

A feast for fans, packed with pathos, dazzling choreography and moments of 
pure enchantment … Occasionally the script works too hard to avert the 
nitpicking of the books’ most fanatical admirers. Yet if explaining the story’s 
more ticklish details sometimes stalls its momentum, the characterisation is 
richly convincing … of all the performances the most layered and absorbing 
comes from relative newcomer Anthony Boyle as Scorpius, who’s surely set to be 
a fan favourite.

Sarah Hemming, Financial Times (five stars) 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/1b428836-524a-11e6-befd-2fc0c26b3c60.html#axzz4FUtQ20uA>

Gripping, dark, wittily acted and often visually dazzling. Above all, though, 
it succeeds because the team has put transformation right at the heart of the 
story, both structurally and emotionally … There are echoes of Back to the 
Future here, and one could take a dim view of so much recycled material. But 
it’s purposefully done, raises topical political questions about the way forks 
in the road lead to different futures and the main thrust is personal and 
ultimately immensely poignant.

Jack Shepherd, the Independent (five stars) 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/reviews/harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-review-palace-theatre-a-magical-experience-tailor-made-for-the-a7155381.html>

JK Rowling, Jack Thorne, and John Tiffany have created a theatre production of 
immense wonder, one that is highly referential to Harry Potter stories past and 
is, above all, truly magical … Anthony Boyle [as Scorpius Malfoy] shows 
spectacular comic timing, as does Paul Thornley who plays the always amusing, 
somewhat underused, Ron Weasley … it’s a spectacle for the theatre, one that is 
filled to the brim with fan service and magical imagery that will amaze.

Matt Trueman, Variety 
<http://variety.com/2016/legit/reviews/harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-review-play-london-1201822087/>

It is, quite simply, spellbinding: The Show That Lived Up to Expectations – 
and Then Some … A captivating story given a spectacular staging and – Rowling’s 
specialty – a big, big heart. Twenty years ago, Harry Potter turned a 
generation on to reading. The Cursed Child could do the same for theatre. Its 
secret is simple: Rowling’s fantastical world is realised not with high-tech 
wizardry, but through the rough magic of theatre. Broomsticks hop into their 
owners’ hands. Wands spit green jets of fire, blasting wizards 10 feet into the 
air. Bodies vanish, balloon and transfigure. Ears shoot steam. Objects levitate 
… Beneath the surface, Cursed Child is absolutely contemporary. It shows a 
generation that has known only peace and certainty on the cusp of chaos; its 
villain isn’t an overlord with an army at hand, but a lone terrorist acting in 
and out of isolation.

Quentin Letts, Daily Mail (four stars) 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3707819/It-s-Harry-Potter-grown-Stage-version-magic-cushion-says-QUENTIN-LETTS.html>

Galloping goblins, it’s long. The Harry Potter stage show, watched with breaks 
in one, bot-rotting day, is an eight-hour marathon memorable mainly for its 
special effects … Potter enthusiasts will not mind how long the experience 
lasts but it seems artistically self-indulgent, and hard on families in terms 
of time and money, to split the experience into two parts. Hard-nosed editing 
could surely reduce the content to a single performance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-reviews-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcee907ef2f2719dac3809f989be66e5d098d580%2F0_325_4870_2922%2F4870.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Dickens%20with%20magic'%3A%20Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%20reviews%20roundup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-reviews-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Dickens%20with%20magic%27%3A%20Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%20reviews%20roundup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-reviews-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcee907ef2f2719dac3809f989be66e5d098d580%2F0_325_4870_2922%2F4870.jpg>
 Beware the Dementors … the show continues. Photograph: Manuel Harlan 
James Hibberd, Entertainment Weekly 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/07/25/harry-potter-cursed-child-review>

A production that’s as spectacular as it is ambitious, stuffed with special 
effects and twists that had a preview audience gasping … Part One in particular 
seems a bit overstuffed – with some lengthy exchanges and a couple unnecessary 
scenes that could be cut altogether. The production needs more moments to let 
the actors take a breath and play their roles rather than speeding through 
pages of script faster than Harry on his Firebolt. “You talk too much,” one 
character declares, but the same could be said for nearly everybody. Yet 
there’s something comfortably familiar about the excess too … The performances 
are naturally the most work-in-progress aspect. There are shouted deliveries 
that recall Rowlings’ Order of Phoenix-era tendency to floor her caps-lock to 
prove characters are REALLY UPSET.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-reviews-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa52aad2035a5511c835b7f5932162566ec09a4b1%2F0_0_3351_5027%2F3351.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Dickens%20with%20magic'%3A%20Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%20reviews%20roundup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-reviews-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Dickens%20with%20magic%27%3A%20Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%20reviews%20roundup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-reviews-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa52aad2035a5511c835b7f5932162566ec09a4b1%2F0_0_3351_5027%2F3351.jpg>
 Jamie Parker as Harry Potter. Photograph: Manuel Harlan 
Kasia Delgado, Radio Times 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-07-26/harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-as-reviewed-by-a-90s-kid-who-adores-the-books>

The stagecraft is mind-bogglingly clever and creative and the audience gasped 
and clapped as characters vanished through Platform 9 3/4, sweets made ears 
smoke, props were whooshed away under cloaks and broomsticks levitated above 
the ground … The time-turner narrative that fuels the action may feel like 
cheesy Harry Potter fan fiction but that doesn’t make the overall storyline any 
less poignant.

Theo Bosanquet, Time 
<http://time.com/4422192/harry-potter-cursed-child-play-review/>

It’s a fiendishly complex narrative, and moves at a lick; the first two years 
of Albus’s time at Hogwarts are told in the first 15 minutes … Cursed Child is 
really about the next generation, and it’s the younger cast that steal the 
show, especially Sam Clemmett as Albus and Anthony Boyle as Scorpius … This 
enchantment will turn even the most doubting Muggles into true believers.

Neil Norman, Daily Express (five stars) 
<http://www.express.co.uk/entertainment/theatre/693295/Harry-Potter-and-the-Cursed-child-theatre-review-Palace-Theatre-London>

If the opening is a bit hard to follow it soon settles down to the business of 
Good v Evil, Magic v Muggles, friendships won, lost and found again and the 
all-important relationship between fathers and sons … As for the soul-sucking 
Dementors that fly around the stage and into the audience, I admit I ducked 
along with everyone else. Amazing and very, very scary.

Leslie Felperin, The Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/review/harry-potter-cursed-child-parts-914055>

Surprisingly, it turns out that the medium of theatre is a better fit for the 
material than film, because in a theatre magic tricks really look, well, 
magical … when this production uses a simple lighting trick to suggest a ripple 
in the fabric of time, or makes someone disappear in a phone box (almost 
literally the oldest magic trick in the book), these dusty theatrical sleights 
actually draw gasps and applause from the audience.

Mark Shenton, The Stage 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/reviews/2016/harry-potter-cursed-child-review-palace-theatre-london/>

This is a major work in its own right, with an entirely distinctive theatrical 
life and shape. It earns its place on the stage, feeling distinct from both the 
books and the screen adaptations. By turns playful and gripping, disturbing and 
detailed, poignant and powerful, it is superb family entertainment.
 