
This, if you’re reading the physical paper – which, of course, you are not – 
is my last edition as editor. In just over 20 years we have put nearly 7,500 
papers “to bed”, as almost no one says nowadays. At some point in the 24-hour, 
seamlessly rolling digital news cycle, you’ll have a new editor. I will have 
slipped away andmy successor, Katharine Viner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/20/guardian-appoints-katharine-viner-new-editor-in-chief>
, will have materialised at the helm.

Since 1821 there have been just 10 editors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/11/1> of the Guardian – or 11 
if you count Russell Scott Taylor, the 18-year-old who helped edit for a brief 
period in the 1840s. The greatest of them, CP Scott, managed 57 years in the 
hot seat. His son, Ted, drowned on Windermere only three years into his stint. 
Twenty years is, give or take, about the average.

The paper I joined in 1979 felt in some ways like a family firm, and in a 
sense, it still is. I started on the same July Monday asNick Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nickdavies>, who went on to become one of 
the finest reporters of his generation. His career led him into investigations, 
mine initially into descriptive reporting, columns and features. From the day I 
arrived, the Guardian felt like a warm bath – a place of sanctuary for free 
thought and writing.

Enter Katharine Viner at the Guardian: new editor, old hand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/22/katharine-viner-new-editor-guardian>
And I was very firmly a writer: it never occurred to me that I would ever edit 
any bit of the Guardian, let alone be let loose on the whole thing. I even left 
at one point, to take my writing elsewhere. But in late 1988 the Guardian badly 
needed a Weekend magazine to answer the rather brilliant Saturday glossy that 
had just been launched by the Independent. For some reason, Peter Preston, the 
Guardian’s then editor, asked me to do it.

I had been diverted down a different journalistic path – one that would lead 
me, via the launch of G2 in 1992, to take over the editor’s chair on 13 January 
1995. I knew enough of the Guardian’s history to feel utterly overawed by the 
responsibility. Please, please let me not drop the vase.

But, of course, the Guardian is much bigger than any one editor. A rival 
kindly took me out to lunch soon after I started and reassured me: “If I take a 
day off, there are six assistant editors who have a completely different view 
of what my paper should be. If you take the day off, the building itself would 
produce the Guardian.”

He was right. There is – through a combination of cultural osmosis, ownership 
and watchful readers – an incredibly strong shared idea of what the Guardian 
is, even if the job is to reinterpret it for each generation, “in the same 
spirit as heretofore”.

History of the Guardian
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/1> 
My first edition appeared the following day, as if nothing had happened, with 
the splash headline: “EU moves to tighten frontiers”. Plus ca change.

During the first 170-odd years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/1> of the Guardian’s life 
there were, of course, enormous challenges and changes, not least the 
transformative decision to move from Manchester to London in 1964. But the 
essentials of newspaper life were the same in 1995, when I took over from Peter 
Preston, as they had been in 1821, when the paper was launched in response to 
the Peterloo Massacre of 1819.

Stories were told in words and (more recently) pictures – still black and 
white, the “proper” medium for news 20 years ago. The rhythm of the day built 
up to one main deadline, around 9.30pm. We knew the cost of paper, ink, 
printing and distribution, and could flex the price of advertising, and of the 
newspaper itself. The readership was overwhelmingly in the UK, and if they ever 
wanted to get in touch, they did so by phone or letter. It was a world of known 
knowns.

Twenty years later, we swim in unknown unknowns. We still tell stories in text 
and pictures, but the words are as likely to be in the form of live blogs as 
stories. We have learned to use moving pictures as well as stills. We work in 
audio, interactives, data, graphics and any combination of the above. We 
distribute our journalism across multiple channels, platforms and devices, 
including live discussion and debate. We’re on the iWatch; we’re in bed with 
Facebook; we’re still in the corner shop.

Two thirds of our readership is now outside of the UK: we publish 
continuously. Virtually all our readers can themselves now be publishers and 
can connect with one another, and anyone else, as well as us. They contribute 
to the Guardian in ways that were unimaginable even 15 years ago.

On top of all that, we still produce a newspaper. Or, more precisely, two. The 
Observer, 30 years older than the Guardian, is in really good health under John 
Mulholland.

The economic model of what we now do is still in its infancy. Twenty years 
ago, no one asked a newspaper editor about their business model. Now it’s one 
of the first questions. And, of course, the Guardian – though extremely 
financially secure today compared with many periods in its past – is no more 
immune than any of its rivals to the need to find a sustainable basis for what 
it does.

Some publishers have decided to erect walls around their digital content and 
insist on payment. The polar opposites are represented by the Guardian and the 
Times of London, the latter of which today claims a daily digital audience of 
around 281,000. In April the Guardian was read by more than 7 million unique 
browsers a day. On an equal accounting basis, we’re losing (or investing) about 
the same amount of money. You’ll have to come back in 10 or even 20 years time 
to find out who judged the future best. But the Guardian – still the 
eighth-biggest newspaper in the UK – is now vying with the New York Times for 
the mantle of largest serious English-language newspaper website in the world.

Libel and a life online
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432895838983%2F21bee6e5-20fe-4555-b255-e91e7cc264cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Farewell%2C%20readers%E2%80%99%3A%20Alan%20Rusbridger%20on%20leaving%20the%20Guardian%20after%20two%20decades%20at%20the%20helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Farewell%2C%20readers%E2%80%99%3A%20Alan%20Rusbridger%20on%20leaving%20the%20Guardian%20after%20two%20decades%20at%20the%20helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432895838983%2F21bee6e5-20fe-4555-b255-e91e7cc264cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alan Rusbridger and Peter Preston at the High Court in London during the 
Aitken libel trial in 1997. Photograph: Martin Godwin 
So much for the numbers. While sorting through 20 years’ worth of assorted 
papers in recent weeks – I’m a hoarder rather than a chucker – I made mental 
divisions for the past two decades. First came the Libel Years, during which it 
felt as if the Guardian was never out of one court or another. Almost as soon 
as I took over, there was a procession of MPs, cabinet ministers, lobbyists, 
cult-busters, quack doctors, corporations, police officers, banks and rich 
playboys queuing up to injunct or sue us.

There is – thank goodness – much less libel around these days, but those 
battles were often epic, costly and immensely time-consuming. If you won –
which, mostly, we did <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/1999/jun/08/uk> – 
they could even be fun. Mostly, they were nerve-racking and exhausting. I’m not 
sorry to see the slow decline of the London libel industry, and hope that we, 
alongside other newspapers and free-speech organisations, played a small part 
in helping to finish it off. And a big thank you to all m’learned friends from 
over the years. You were expensive. But good.

History of the Guardian website
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/guardian-website-timeline>



Then came the first Internet Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/guardian-website-timeline>, during 
which – under Ian Katz’s leadership – we created a website that didn’t fall 
into the trap of simply replicating online what we did in print. Ian and his 
team saw early on that this was a medium that was, in many important respects, 
quite different from print, and created a digital Guardian Unlimited that 
played by the new rules of the game.

Then there was an interlude with the print Format Wars – a response to the 
bold move by the Independent and Times to switch from broadsheet publishing to 
tabloid. The Indie even announced that it would henceforth be a “viewspaper”, 
not a newspaper – a startling declaration of intent that got lost in the 
excitement about size.

For various reasons – not least the amount of classified advertising we still 
took in print at that point – tabloid didn’t really work for us. We needed new 
presses anyway – the cost of any format was neutral – and opted forthe European 
Berliner size <https://www.theguardian.com/gpc/berliner-format>.
 Guardian Editor Alan Rusbridger with the first copy of the new Guardian 
Berliner newspaper in September 2005. Photograph: Dan Chung 
The paper that took shape in the hands of designer Mark Porter and deputy 
editor Paul Johnson (and, at the Observer, with former editor Roger Alton) was 
a thing of beauty and flexibility. But, even as we installed the new Man Roland 
presses, we knew they were likely to be the last we ever bought. In retrospect, 
it’s not clear that the changes in printed format transformed the fortunes of 
anyone – big, little or medium.

What Comment is free means to you: in celebration of its late founding editor, 
Georgina Henry | Open thread
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/10/comment-is-free-georgina-henry-open-thread>
The next phase was the Social Web, or Web 2.0, as it was first called. Emily 
Bell, by then editing our digital output and our resident seer, quickly 
pronounced this to be as important as the web itself. There was a fork in the 
road, she warned us: we could fence ourselves off from this social, economic, 
cultural and publishing revolution, or we could embrace it wholeheartedly. Open 
or closed? We went for open.

An early experiment was Comment Is Free, launched by Georgina Henry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/10/comment-is-free-georgina-henry-open-thread>
 in 2006 as a way of immensely broadening and diversifying the pool of Guardian 
commentary – not just the “above the line” writers, but the hundreds of 
thousands of you who flooded in to debate and argue in a way that had never 
previously been possible.

We had to devise new rules and conventions. A new breed of journalist – 
comment moderators – was born in order to handle the avalanche of opinion. We 
had created a new democracy of expression, which was sometimes uncomfortable, 
but mostly rich and absorbing, and sometimes even exhilarating.Our most recent 
design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/insideguardian/2015/jan/28/welcome-to-the-new-guardian-website>
, overseen by our head of digital strategy Wolfgang Blau, took this journey 
still further.

Breaking news
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432896054188%2F5c9e3a14-dc97-45ab-99c1-1dbc7825d880-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Farewell%2C%20readers%E2%80%99%3A%20Alan%20Rusbridger%20on%20leaving%20the%20Guardian%20after%20two%20decades%20at%20the%20helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Farewell%2C%20readers%E2%80%99%3A%20Alan%20Rusbridger%20on%20leaving%20the%20Guardian%20after%20two%20decades%20at%20the%20helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432896054188%2F5c9e3a14-dc97-45ab-99c1-1dbc7825d880-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Edward Snowden being interviewed by Alan Rusbridger and Ewen Macaskill in 
Russia in 2014. Photograph: Alex Healey 
And, finally, there were the stories: about crooked bungs; politicians on the 
take; corporations dodging tax; toxic spills; unethical policing; lethal 
policing; torture and rendition; female mutilation; drugs; food production; 
pill-peddlers and much more.

Wikileaks, in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/28/us-embassy-cable-leak-diplomacy-crisis>
, felt, and was, enormous: the biggest leak of diplomatic and intelligence 
cables the world had then seen. But then camephone-hacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jul/04/milly-dowler-voicemail-hacked-news-of-world>
 – Nick Davies’s extraordinary seven-year slog of reporting gradually shone a 
light on the crimes, evasions and deceptions of the most powerful news company 
in the world.

NSA files decoded: Edward Snowden's surveillance revelations explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/nov/01/snowden-nsa-files-surveillance-revelations-decoded>
Davies’s reporting stopped a vast, ruthless media monopoly from effectively 
doubling in size – with all the consequences for power, democracy, regulation 
and even policing that went with that. The best defence that the Murdochs – 
son, father and associates – could muster was that it was out of control. Any 
other response would have been too corporately apocalyptic to contemplate.

British journalism as an occasionally thoughtless bloodsport has as a result, 
I think, been checked a little, though I know not all my fellow editors either 
agree or approve.

And then came Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/the-nsa-files>, with his astonishing 
insights into the way the surveillance business had been industrialised since 
9/11, so that – without any kind of meaningful informed consent - countless 
millions of people the world over have had their data scooped up, stored and 
analysed.

Judges, congressmen, lawyers, presidents, legislators, internet giants and 
academics around the world pored over the Guardian stories, so surely edited by 
US editor Janine Gibson. Only this monththe US phone dragnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international> that had secretly violated the 
privacy of millions of Americans every day since October 2001 was shut down. 
This was perhaps inevitable after the programme’s overwhelming rejection by 
Congress, and after a US court of appeal ruled that the bulk collection of 
telephone metadata revealed by Snowden was unlawful.

The Pulitzer prize for public service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/14/guardian-washington-post-pulitzer-nsa-revelations>
 was our reward. Snowden, who made the kind of sacrifice most of us would find 
hard even to contemplate, must, alas, wait for his own form of absolution and 
just recognition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432896247520%2F422709c3-5709-4ccc-a818-8c06cb7af97f-2060x1333.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Farewell%2C%20readers%E2%80%99%3A%20Alan%20Rusbridger%20on%20leaving%20the%20Guardian%20after%20two%20decades%20at%20the%20helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Farewell%2C%20readers%E2%80%99%3A%20Alan%20Rusbridger%20on%20leaving%20the%20Guardian%20after%20two%20decades%20at%20the%20helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432896247520%2F422709c3-5709-4ccc-a818-8c06cb7af97f-2060x1333.jpeg>
 Alan Rusbridger addresses staff in the news room at the Guardian’s office in 
Kings Cross in London after the paper was awarded a Pulitzer prize for public 
service in 2014. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
There have been other recent successes – deputy editor Katharine Viner’s 
brilliant launch ofGuardian Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/au> – as 
part of our international expansion; Rob Evans’s long, dogged campaign to drag
Prince Charles’s political correspondence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/release-of-prince-charles-letters-point-of-freedom-of-information-black-spider-memos>
 into the open; our recent campaign to treat climate change withthe gravity and 
impact it deserves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/series/keep-it-in-the-ground>; Maggie 
O’Kane’s forceful crusade againstfemale genital mutilation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2015/mar/13/anti-fgm-campaign-new-york-video>
 … and much more.

Independent in perpetuity

As I’ve cleared my shelves and sorted through fading ephemera, I have, of 
course, reflected on what the Guardian is – and what it is to be an editor.

The pervasive power of Rupert Murdoch: an extract from Hack Attack by Nick 
Davies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/25/-sp-rupert-murdoch-passive-power-hack-attack-nick-davies>
When John Scott, one of the sons of CP, decided to place the Manchester 
Guardian into a trust, he consulted Churchill’s future lord chancellor, Gavin 
Simonds, who told him: “It seems to me that you are trying to do something very 
repugnant to the law of England. You are trying to divest yourself of a 
property right.”

That was precisely what Scott was trying to do. Sir William Haley, later 
editor of the Times, said: “He could have been a rich man; he chose a spartan 
existence. And, when he made up his mind to divest himself of all beneficial 
interest [in the Guardian], he did so with as little display of emotion as if 
he has been solving an algebraical problem. Most men making so large a 
sacrifice would have exacted at least the price of an attitude.”

The decision of the Scott family to give up all financial interest in the 
Guardian must rank high among the great historic acts of public-minded 
philanthropy. In doing so, they created an ownership structure with only two 
purposes: to secure the future of the Guardian in perpetuity, and to protect 
its independence in all situations, at all costs and against all comers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432896499078%2F9ba0b3c5-30dd-4e45-bc19-f1b327904663-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Farewell%2C%20readers%E2%80%99%3A%20Alan%20Rusbridger%20on%20leaving%20the%20Guardian%20after%20two%20decades%20at%20the%20helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Farewell%2C%20readers%E2%80%99%3A%20Alan%20Rusbridger%20on%20leaving%20the%20Guardian%20after%20two%20decades%20at%20the%20helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432896499078%2F9ba0b3c5-30dd-4e45-bc19-f1b327904663-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Russell Brand and Alan Rusbridger at the Guardian’s morning conference in 
August 2013. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
The perpetuity bit is, of course, always a work in progress – though building 
an endowment of around £1bn is certainly a strong foundation for the future. 
The role of the Guardian Media Group – the “commercial” wing of the operation – 
has been crucial.

The independence given to us by the trust manifests itself in a hundred ways. 
Before the recent general election, 200 of us sat in a room one lunchtime to 
decide which party, if any, to endorse. There was no message filtering down 
from above, explicit or implicit. Rightly, or wrongly, the decision was ours 
alone.

The same spirit is there every morning, when anyone on staff can come to the 
morning conference – to listen, to contribute, to challenge or to absorb. It 
was there when the insurers in the Aitken libel action urged our co-defendants, 
Granada TV, to surrender – while the Scott Trust told us to fight on. It was 
there when the state and assorted politicians came knocking to get them to pull 
the plug on the Snowden stories. The trust had the absolute answer: we can’t.

Guardian and Washington Post win Pulitzer prize for NSA revelations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/14/guardian-washington-post-pulitzer-nsa-revelations>
It was there every time this editor needed advice from those wisest of owls, 
Hugo Young <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/nov/15/politics> and Liz 
Forgan. It’s there in the words of the centenary essay penned by Scott in 1921, 
in which he wrote of the balance between the material and moral existence of a 
newspaper – between profit and power. There was never any question for him 
which mattered more.

Power over profit. But even that, in a modern context, makes me a little 
uneasy. I end with a confession about editing, and a nagging anxiety about this 
business of power.

An editor, if he or she chooses, can be a very powerful figure indeed. Editors 
can make or break people. They dictate who gets a voice, and who remains 
voiceless. They can, if they want, bully and frighten whom they choose. They 
can impose their views on a newspaper and, through the paper, on a country and 
the lives of millions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432896881824%2Fa1aa0dcc-94f7-4ec9-b00e-eb40c99da8ac-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Farewell%2C%20readers%E2%80%99%3A%20Alan%20Rusbridger%20on%20leaving%20the%20Guardian%20after%20two%20decades%20at%20the%20helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Farewell%2C%20readers%E2%80%99%3A%20Alan%20Rusbridger%20on%20leaving%20the%20Guardian%20after%20two%20decades%20at%20the%20helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432896881824%2Fa1aa0dcc-94f7-4ec9-b00e-eb40c99da8ac-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Before the recent general election, 200 of us sat in a room one lunchtime to 
decide which party, if any, to endorse.’ Photograph: Alan Rusbridger 
As we’ve seen, they can break the law while delving into private lives in 
reasonable confidence that no one will stop them, not even the police or 
regulator. They can have a disproportionate influence in shaping debates – if 
only by excluding any contrary arguments. One voice can dominate an entire 
newspaper, from the front page, throughout the reporting and the editorial 
columns to a select few allowed to be commentators.

People do still bend their knee to this kind of power, even in an age when the 
influence of mainstream media is supposed to be waning. In my modest fashion, 
I’ve experienced it at first hand. And, in a way, I’m glad of that. I want 
strong institutions of the fourth estate. In a world of globalised, distant, 
often unaccountable power, a countervailing source of scrutiny and influence is 
needed more than ever.

Climate change: why the Guardian is putting threat to Earth front and centre | 
Alan Rusbridger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/06/climate-change-guardian-threat-to-earth-alan-rusbridger>
But I’ve never wanted the Guardian to be my voice – nor would my Guardian 
colleagues have wanted or allowed it. Scott saw clearly that a newspaper had to 
shun “the temptations of a monopoly … the voice of opponents no less than that 
of friends has a right to be heard”.

I don’t know that I’ve always lived up to Scott’s ideal in that, but it was 
important to me that the Guardian had, for instance, aSimon Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/simonjenkins>, a Max Hastings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/maxhastings> or a Matthew d’Ancona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/matthew-dancona> as well as writers who 
swam more easily with our liberal currents.

Giving away power

The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> has had the 
strength to withstand all the attacks launched in response to our journalism 
during the past 20 years – and there have been many. But we drew our resilience 
from the power of the institution, not of any individual.

But the power of an editor has always made me nervous. Early in my editorship 
I gave away significant power: the power of correction. It seemed obvious to me 
that journalism, as an imperfect medium, will always include mistakes – and 
that the very last person to adjudicate on whether or not an error had been 
made was the person responsible for the error in the first place.

I have never forgotten this tell-it-like it is description of a newspaper by 
the Washington Post’s David Broder: “[A] partial, hasty, incomplete, inevitably 
somewhat flawed and inaccurate rendering of some of the things we have heard 
about in the past 24 hours – distorted, despite our best efforts to eliminate 
gross bias, by the very process of compression that makes it possible for you 
to lift it from the doorstep and read it in about an hour. If we labelled the 
product accurately, then we could immediately add: ‘But it’s the best we could 
do under the circumstances, and we will be back tomorrow, with a corrected and 
updated version.’”

And so, since 1997, anyone who thinks the Guardian has got something wrong can 
bypass the editor andappeal to someone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/mar/13/comment.pressandpublishing>
 who is himself not answerable to the editor, but to the Scott Trust. I cannot 
interfere in his judgments, nor editthe weekly column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/open-door> in which he is 
free to criticise the paper or expose our weaknesses.

Something like this is commonplace in American newspapers, and elsewhere, but 
is still not the rule in the UK. You can see why. If, as editor, you greatly 
savour the view from the bully pulpit, then it makes no sense at all to appoint 
a truly independent umpire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432896621845%2Fdbc484c1-2b65-4ab6-aa00-134bffcc1ceb-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Farewell%2C%20readers%E2%80%99%3A%20Alan%20Rusbridger%20on%20leaving%20the%20Guardian%20after%20two%20decades%20at%20the%20helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Farewell%2C%20readers%E2%80%99%3A%20Alan%20Rusbridger%20on%20leaving%20the%20Guardian%20after%20two%20decades%20at%20the%20helm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Ffarewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432896621845%2Fdbc484c1-2b65-4ab6-aa00-134bffcc1ceb-2060x1373.jpeg>
 ‘Thank you for your support, engagement, response and argument over many 
years’ … Alan Rusbridger. Photograph: Martin Argles for the Guardian 
More recently, I gave away more power – creating an editorial board to oversee 
the comment pages and leader columns. We did not completely follow the US 
model, in which the executive editor of, say, the Washington Post or New York 
Times has no say at all over the opinion pages. I remained editor of the whole 
Guardian. But I did want to create a clear divide between the business of news 
and comment, and to give the editorial board, headed by Jonathan Freedland, the 
freedom (and time) to think for themselves. Of course, CP Scott famously 
articulated the separation in his 1921 essay. One was free, the other sacred. 
As usual, he was right.

Next week, for the first time in 20 years, I will have stepped off the hamster 
wheel of news. The Guardian is in good shape, its reach, influence and 
endowment bigger than anything imaginable at the time John Scott made his noble 
and philanthropic sacrifice.

I have been blessed with wonderful colleagues, whom I shall miss terribly – 
only a very few of them named here. Katharine Viner will be a wonderful 11th 
(or even 12th) editor of the paper. Next year I will head (as well as Lady 
Margaret Hall at Oxford University – founded, like the Guardian, in the cause 
of reform) the institution I have come to cherish beyond all other in the media:
the Scott Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office/2014/dec/10/alan-rusbridger-appointed-chair-of-the-scott-trust>
 itself.

I will say goodbye to colleagues in person. But please, readers, accept this 
as my farewell to you, along with my intense gratitude for your support, 
engagement, response and argument over many years. I know many of youhave now 
become “members” of the Guardian 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/?CMP=ppc_mem_11>, as we open the paper up 
even more to live and physical experience.

I’ve noticed that some of the most devoted readers tend to carbon-date 
themselves by editor. “I started with Wadsworth,” an elderly loyalist might 
say; or “I began reading under Hetherington.”

But, in the end, we editors just pass through. We all know that you, the 
readers, are the real carriers of the flame.

Twitter: @arusbridger <https://twitter.com/@arusbridger> 

alan.rusbridger@theguardian.com

The Rusbridger years: a timeline

24 January 1995 Rusbridger is named editor by the Scott Trust, having won a 
vote of journalists, taking over from Peter Preston. He had been features 
editor for a year, and had launched both Weekend magazine and G2.

November 1995 Launch of Go2, the Guardian’s first internet publication – the 
online form of the paper’s science and technology supplement.

30 September 1996 Neil Hamilton withdraws libel action. The MP was later found 
guilty of asking questions in parliament in exchange for brown envelopes full 
of cash.

1997 The Guardian becomes the first British newspaper to create its own 
ombudsman, as Ian Mayes is appointed Readers’ Editor. He has a regular column 
handling corrections, clarifications and complaints.

20 June 1997 Jonathan Aitken withdraws libel action. Having promised to “cut 
out the cancer of bent and twisted journalism”, the former minister is later 
imprisoned for perjury.

January 1999 Launch of Guardian Unlimited, covering news, football, cricket 
and jobs. By September it has a million users.

12 September 2005 The Berliner is launched. The Guardian becomes the only 
national newspaper to publish in a new medium size, and in full colour.

14 March 2006 All opinion writing – and the discussion it starts – gets its 
own home online: Comment Is Free.

December 2008 The Guardian moves to Kings Place, moving 1,700 staff a short 
distance across north London after 32 years in Farringdon Road.

November 28 2010 Wikileaks cables are published. The Guardian is one of five 
newspapers worldwide to publish a selection of the US diplomatic documents 
leaked by Bradley (now Chelsea) Manning, a soldier who had downloaded them.

July 4 2011 Years of revelations about phone-hacking at News International 
culminate with evidence that the News of the World hacked the phone of murdered 
schoolgirl Milly Dowler. The paper closes six days later.

June 5 2013 The Guardian publishes documents leaked by Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> detailing surveillance of 
private information by the NSA and other bodies. The Guardian and the 
Washington Post win a Pulitzer prize the following year.
 