
Shaquille O’Neal is many things to many people: NBA hall of famer, 
businessman, TV personality, rapper andreserve police officer 
<http://espn.go.com/nba/story/_/id/12202263/shaquille-oneal-becomes-reserve-police-officer-south-florida>
. And now, at 7ft 1in, he is literally one of Northampton Town’s biggest fans.


As English football’s popularity has grown in the US, celebrities have put 
their support behind teams such as Liverpool (LeBron James), Chelsea (Will 
Ferrell) and Arsenal (Kevin Costner). But, ever the free spirit, Shaq has 
instead decided to eschew the glory of the Premier League and plumped for the 
Cobblers, a club who can name among their biggest achievements finishing 
runners-up in the Second Division in 1964-65.

Shaq’s support is not entirely unqualified. He co-owns a radio station in the 
US with the Cobblers chairman, Kelvin Thomas, andthe team are currently top of 
League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/northampton-town-promotion-chris-wilder-league-two-leaders>
. “I just wanted to wish Kelvin and all the Cobblers best of luck,” said O’Neal 
in a video message. “First place is where I like to be and it’s great to see 
you guys at the top.”

The 15-time All-Star also left open the possibility of a visit to Northampton, 
where he can also take in sights such as Delapré Abbey andone of Europe’s 
premier elevator-testing towers 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Lift_Tower>. “[I’m] looking forward to 
coming to Sixfields at some point to see a match. Guys know what you got to 
do,” he said.

“We are delighted to have the support of Shaq, and his support has created a 
lot of excitement,” said a club spokesperson. “We have invited him to come to a
Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> Town game when 
he is next in England and we can’t wait to see him at Sixfields wearing a 
claret shirt, cheering the Cobblers on.”

Shaq isn’t the only US celebrity who supports a team for whom hopes of Premier 
League glory are a distant dream:Tom Hanks is an Aston Villa fan 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/sport/football/fa-league-cups/arsenal-vs-aston-villa-tom-hanks-sends-villans-message-of-support-ahead-of-fa-cup-final-10286603.html>
.
 