
The Brexit vote has been a “huge wake-up call” for the arts to realise they 
are not reflecting the lives and experiences of much of the UK, theNational 
Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre>’s artistic 
director, Rufus Norris, has said.


Norris told a BBC Radio 4 debate on Tuesday 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07m88y1> the NT had initiated a nationwide 
listening project that would involve one-to-one conversations with people from 
all backgrounds and all persuasions.

'A huge creative step backwards': the arts view on Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/19/huge-creative-step-backwards-arts-view-brexit-eu-referendum>
“Art always responds to the time,” he said. “And this has been a huge wake-up 
call for all of us to realise that half the country feels that they have no 
voice. If we are going to be a national organisation we must speak to and for 
the nation. Our principal response initially is to listen: to listen to that 
voice and art will follow from that.

“We are an art house, we’re a theatre and we are going to be making work – 
quite what the form of that will be we will discover.”

The listening project, Norris said, would ask questions such as: “What are 
British values? What are your values? What do you think about where you live 
and what is the Britain you want to live in?”

The cultural community was overwhelmingly in support of staying in the EU 
during the referendum, with one poll, for the Creative Industries Federation,
putting the figure at 96% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/19/british-cultural-heavyweights-sign-250-letter-backing-eu-benedict-cumberbatch-paloma-faith->
.

The live radio debate for the BBC arts programme Front Row was exploring what 
kind of cultural response there should be to Brexit. The novelistVal McDermid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/val-mcdermid> said people in the arts had to 
take some responsibility for the “fact there is this huge stratum of 
disaffected people. A lot of people who voted to leave did so as a protest 
vote: they felt dispossessed because they felt disregarded.”

She said artists in the last decade had ignored the rise of things they were 
uncomfortable with, so there had been a build up of emotions that had not had 
any creative release.

Norris said there was no doubt the arts had been surprised by the vote to 
leave. But the novelistDreda Say Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/18/aint-easy-black-brexiteer-farage-civility-other-side>
, a leave supporter, said: “If the arts community was so shocked, is the arts 
community out of touch?”

Phil Redmond <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/philredmond>, the Brookside 
and Grange Hill creator who chairsNational Museums Liverpool 
<http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/>, said the arts disconnect was also down 
to the creative community retreating to London. He asked the audience at the 
Royal Society of Arts in central London: “Why are we all not talking in 
Salford, or if you can’t quite make Salford, what about Birmingham? Or go to 
the easiest place to get to in the world, which is Crewe.”

The designer Wayne Hemingway said that what to do next was currently the 
liveliest debate in the arts and it was an important one given the importance 
of the sector to the UK economy. “Britain has been seen as the creative nation, 
bar none, in the world,” he said. “Suddenly people in Berlin, Brooklyn in New 
York, in Johannesburg are rubbing their hands together ... all of a sudden 
Britain is devalued.”

He feared a drain of younger artists to cities like Berlin instead of, say, 
Manchester, and predicted some form of “youthquake” as young people became more 
engaged with politics. “We have to take something positive from it. We can’t go 
round in mourning for very long. The creative industries are brilliant at 
turning sows’ ears into silk purses – that’s what we do – but it is going to 
take some form of revolution. We will solve this but it will be a youthful 
rebellion of sorts.”

McDermid predicted something along the lines of the punk revolution of the 
1970s or the rave revolution of the late 80s, saying “we need something to 
galvanise us”.

Arts hit back at Brexit: 'I feel nothing but rage'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/24/arts-hit-back-at-brexit-i-feel-nothing-but-rage>
Aside from the practical concerns over what freedom of movement changes might 
mean for individual organisations, and what would happen to the money some get 
from the EU, there are more existential questions about what the mindset of the 
arts should be.

Norris believed the vote would be a catalyst to increase collaborations with 
arts organisations in Europe and further. “We are a world leader and we are not 
going to give up that position,” he said. “For us it is going to spur an 
increase in our collaborations with European partners and our international 
work. Being isolated is bad for culture and is very bad for society and there 
is no way we are going to go down that path.”

Asked what the cultural landscape might be like in 10 years as a result of 
Brexit, Mitchell said: “The culture and the art we look at will be much more 
representative of the Britain that we live in: more black faces, more 
working-class types of art, more regional representation.”
 