
In Heather Speak’s immaculate back garden in the Lancashire village of 
Roseacre, the only sound was the tranquil rustling of trees and the singing of 
the budgerigar, finches and miniature Chinese quail in her aviary.

But a gloomy atmosphere hung over the picturesque village on Thursday after 
Sajid Javid, the communities secretary,overturned Lancashire county council’s 
rejection of plans for a fracking site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-fracking-given-go-ahead-as-lancashire-council-rejection-is-overturned>
 on its doorstep, saying he was “minded” to permit the drilling if Cuadrilla 
provided evidence on road traffic issues.

“I’m absolutely devastated,” said Speak, who will be able to see and hear the 
53 metre-tall fracking equipment from her back garden 300 metres away. “I 
should be feeling happy and relieved that it’s not been outright approved but 
I’m not. I feel sad and a bit sick. I’m so, so angry that a government minister 
has turned their back on local democracy.”

UK fracking decision is nothing short of hypocrisy | Damian Carrington
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-fracking-decision-is-nothing-short-of-hypocrisy>
Speak, a former mayor of Fylde and a lifelong Conservative voter who has lived 
in Roseacre for 30 years, added: “I will never vote Conservative again.”

Ten miles away at Preston New Road, where Javid approved a fracking site, 
overturning another council decision, the anger was palpable. Tina Rothery, who 
leads a group of local women calling themselves “the Nanas” against fracking, 
said they would not take the decision lying down.

“We have been standing in the path of Cuadrilla for our children. There is 
nothing going to shift us from that path,” she said, gathered among fellow 
campaigners at the proposed fracking site.

Wearing a black tabard with the words “No fracking democracy”, Kate Styles, 
55, dished out homemade lemon drizzle cake and chocolate brownies she had baked 
to calm her nerves on Wednesday night. “Extreme times, extreme baking,” she 
said.

A lifelong Tory voter who had never previously taken up a placard, Styles has 
been radicalised by the government’s pro-fracking policy. “I never thought as a 
middle-aged woman I’d be fighting the government on anything,” she said. “They 
could offer me diamonds and pearls – I’ll never vote Tory again.”

Another of the self-declared “frack-fighting nanas”, Julia Stribling, 67, said 
she was seething at Theresa May’s government. The fracking operation would make 
the everyday task of crossing the road a “deathtrap” due to the convoys of 
heavy goods vehicles passing by her static home 300 yards from the drill site, 
she said.

“It’s a very sad day for me. I’m a pensioner. I never thought I’d be 
protesting,” she said as passing cars honked their horns. “This has riled me up 
so much because they’re just not listening to people. What don’t they 
understand about no?”
Josh Halliday (@JoshHalliday) 
Lancashire's frack-fighting nanas out in fine voice after @sajidjavid 
<https://twitter.com/sajidjavid> decision pic.twitter.com/NOdFixD3FG 
<https://t.co/NOdFixD3FG>
 <https://twitter.com/JoshHalliday/status/784007102993993728> October 6, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JoshHalliday/status/784007102993993728> 
Hundreds of residents have united in opposition to Cuadrilla’s plans, but it 
has come at a high price. There remains underlying tension in the rural 
villages between Preston and Blackpool. Some are angry at the farmers who have 
allowed the energy firm to drill on their land. Others, like Claire Stephenson, 
37, even removed their children from a school a mile from the Preston New Road 
fracking site over concerns about its potential impact on their health.

“The children were banned from talking about fracking in school so we removed 
them,” Stephenson said, her seven-year-old daughter Eveline clutching at her 
leg. “We’re a rural farming community, we rely on farms and tourism. We rely on 
democracy, which has been shattered. It’s just a big shock. We’re devastated.”

Stephenson and the other campaigners believe they have strong grounds for a 
judicial review of Javid’s decision. Rothery, who was part of a group that
occupied a field earmarked for shale gas exploration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/24/anti-fracking-activist-refuses-to-pay-legal-bill-cuadrilla>
 in 2014, added: “At what point do you stand aside and say: ‘You know what, 
it’s fine, I’m sure I trust you’? Because if my regulators and my government 
aren’t looking after my kids then that’s just down to us then, isn’t it? And 
that’s a ridiculous state of affairs in a democracy.”

In Roseacare, Jackie and Jim Sylvester, who live less than 300 metres away 
from the proposed fracking site, were furious that ministers in London could 
overrule a decision made locally.

“Democracy is dead as far as we’re concerned,” said Jackie, a parish 
councillor who has lived in the area with her husband for 47 years. “They’ve 
gone against the will of the people. I think the people of England don’t 
realise that once this starts it’s not going to stop and there’s going to be 
hundreds of drills.”

Elizabeth Warner, who runs a local action group against the Roseacre fracking 
from her kitchen table, described the process as a “Chinese show trial” and an 
affront to local democracy.

Warner, her husband, Barry, and other local campaigners raised £100,000 in 
donations to fight Cuadrilla’s application throughout the two-and-a-half-year 
process. They were staggered and felt cheated when they received notice of 
Javid’s decision by email shortly before 10am on Thursday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fhes-rewriting-the-rules-locals-furious-sajid-javid-fracking-intervention%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b921b63865af3192c66a80df56ab10bb65b6d74%2F0_106_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='He%E2%80%99s%20rewriting%20the%20rules'%3A%20locals%20furious%20at%20minister's%20fracking%20intervention&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fhes-rewriting-the-rules-locals-furious-sajid-javid-fracking-intervention%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27He%E2%80%99s%20rewriting%20the%20rules%27%3A%20locals%20furious%20at%20minister%27s%20fracking%20intervention&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fhes-rewriting-the-rules-locals-furious-sajid-javid-fracking-intervention%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b921b63865af3192c66a80df56ab10bb65b6d74%2F0_106_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Elizabeth and Barry Warner. Photograph: Josh Halliday for the Guardian 
“It’s just intolerable for the communities that are affected. It is absolute 
torture. At the heart of it is the expectation that people will buckle because 
of the strain. It will inflict further anxiety on people who have been through 
it by two and a half years,” Elizabeth Warner said.

“It’s like reaching the end of a football match and extra time and a penalty 
shootout then inventing something else like let’s run round the pitch for 10 
laps and the last man home, your team loses. It’s a truly shocking outcome.”

As texts and emails pinged around Warner’s anti-fracking nerve centre in her 
pristine kitchen, her husband, Barry, said Theresa May’s government had ridden 
roughshod over the objections of 15,000 local residents.

“Theresa May just yesterday was talking about fairness,” he said. “She says 
that one day and the very next day her secretary of state bends the meaning of 
the word. He’s rewriting the rules.”

UK fracking given go-ahead as Lancashire council rejection overturned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-fracking-given-go-ahead-as-lancashire-council-rejection-is-overturned>
Mick Danby, an anti-fracking campaigner from nearby Inskip, added: “Both 
Cuadrilla and the government have underestimated our resolve. We’re not nimbys, 
we’re not scaremongerers. We’ve done our research. As far as I’m concerned, 
fracking is a very bad thing and it clearly is not in line with the 
government’s commitment on climate change.”

Several Roseacre residents said Cuadrilla’s fracking application, first lodged 
two years ago, had split the once tight-knit rural community. The farmers 
allowing Cuadrilla to drill for shale gas on their land have been shunned by 
the majority of locals, who fear it will damage their health, the environment 
and the area’s reputation as a rural retreat from the bright lights and excess 
of Blackpool 20 minutes away.

Clutching a mug of tea as her grandchildren ran round her back garden, Speak 
said she had initially been open to the idea of fracking. She turned against 
it, she said, after researching its potentially harmful effect on the 
environment.


She said Thursday’s decision had made her consider quitting her posts as a 
borough and parish councillor, which she has held for 17 years and 23 years 
respectively.

“I feel like walking away from it all because you feel what is the point? What 
is the point? They should be ashamed of themselves,” she said.

 