
The government has launched a new health drive aimed at 40- to 60-year-olds, 
83% of whom are either overweight, drink too much or are physically inactive.

With its One You campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/28/middle-aged-britons-overweight-exercise-too-little-exceed-alcohol-guidelines-public-health-england>
, Public Health England wants to help middle-aged people stay in shape. It says 
aspects of modern life – such as sedentary lifestyles and the consumption of 
junk food – are bad for our health, but it is those in middle age who are 
suffering the consequences most.

We asked our readers what they thought of the campaign and whether they had 
any concerns about their own lifestyles. Here’s what you told us.


Caroline, 58, from Essex: ‘There’s no incentive to lose weight when everyone 
you see is bigger than you’


I feel like I am generally in good health despite having an underactive thyroid
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/sep/08/underactive-thyroid-was-slowly-killing-me>
 and high cholesterol (I take medication for both these things). My weight is 
creeping up, however, which aggravates my arthritic knee – the legacy of a 
motorcycle accident in my 20s. MyNew Year resolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/new-year-eve-resolution-tradition>
 is to do more walking. I’ve got borderline osteoporosis, a condition that 
weakens bones, so know it’s important to build bone density, buthaving a desk 
job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/30/women-suffer-much-more-work-stress-than-men-says-psychiatrist>
 makes this hard.

I know I am overweight at 5ft 4in and 11st, but a lot of people are bigger 
than me and tell me I am “slim”. My clothes size has not changed over the 
years: I still wear a size 12, the same as when I was a teenager. There is no 
incentive to lose weight if nearly everyone you see is bigger than you.

I doubt that the One You campaign will make much of a difference. We all know 
we shouldeat healthier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/29/usda-diet-nutrition-environment-sustainability-omega-3-beef>
, be active anddrink and smoke less 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/17/couples-healthier-wealthier-marriage-good-health-single-survey-research>
 but how many people who don’t do this already will really be bothered to 
change?

Kevin Varney, 49, from Reading: ‘I exercise a lot, but drink a bit too much’


My health is pretty good at the moment. My body mass index is not much over 
25. I exercise quite a lot, but I drink a bit too much. I probably drink about 
14 pints, sometimes a small bottle of wine and two or three mixer tins – for 
example, of gin and tonic – a week.

I do worry about it a bit. If I am socialising with friends, that will involve 
drinking, but if I am on my own at the weekend, I will drink too. However, I am 
suspicious of medical guidelines. I suspect there is a puritanical element or a 
wide safety margin in them. I suspect the government would like to ban alcohol 
altogether if they could.

I am surprised by the rates of inactivity reported recently – it should be 
possible to fit in someexercise while working 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/dec/01/10-ways-to-get-more-exercise-without-really-trying>
. You can cycle to work, jog over lunch or head to the gym in the evening. I 
suspect a lot of people just hate exercise. I don’t think a campaign to change 
this will help. People are constantly being told they are too fat and don’t 
take enough exercise. Telling them again won’t make much difference.

Gita Bapat, 51, from London: ‘Long working and commuting hours make it harder 
to stay in shape’


I’ve never smoked (inherited asthma) and am a moderate drinker – around 5-6 
units a week – but I am about 1st overweight. This is my main concern as I am 
quite vain. I have dogs and walk them most days for around an hour and a half. 
I am also trying tostart running again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2013/aug/28/running-great-sport-start-later-life>
. When I lived in Paris I ran 25km a week. My goal is to run 5km three times a 
week.

Modern lifestyles – long working and commuting hours – make it harder to stay 
in shape, as do care obligations, such as looking after children and older 
people. It’s easy to feel a sense of hopelessness if one cannot live up to the 
unrealistic and Photoshopped standards of peopleportrayed in the media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/02/link-media-and-eating-disorders>
.

Medi Parry, 59, from north Wales: ‘I want to be active, self-sufficient and 
healthy as I get older’

We are living longer and I don’t want to be one of those elderly women who 
can’t do anything for themselves. I want to enjoy as much life as possible with 
my daughters and their families. I am an independent heritage consultant and 
want to keep working for as long as I can. I want to be active, self-sufficient 
and healthy as I age. I try to keep fit but hate the gym. Ilike to cycle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/apr/03/best-traffic-free-cycle-rides-uk>
 but there are no cycle paths near where I live. I exercise by using the stairs 
where possible. I also jog in the kitchen while I’m waiting for the kettle to 
boil and go to aZumba class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/12/is-it-worth-it-zumba-exercise-review>
 once a week.

It’s not just modern lifestyles that make it hard to stay fit. The easy 
availability of high-calorie food also makes it difficult. Chocolates, sweets, 
pizzas and takeaways – they’re alltoo easy to get hold of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/dec/04/robochops-on-the-road-with-a-food-delivery-droid>
 and it’s hard not to eat them when you’ve been working hard all week. Our love 
of the internet means that we sit down for hours on end to engage with it; work 
is far more internet-based now and so more of us aretied to our desks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2008/feb/14/workandcareers> for hours. 

I’m not sure whether this campaign will work, it depends how it’s done. GPs 
find it difficult to broach the subject of weight with their patients as they 
mostly respond negatively (I have GP friends who confirm this – one has been 
reported for having “offended” his patient). It’s a good idea to flag up this 
research, and a preventative campaign should be more cost-effective than 
dealing with thelong-term consequences of obesity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/may/12/obesity-dementia-alzheimers-disease>
 in old age. However, I’m sceptical of the impact of this campaign unless it is 
backed up by some sort of legislation. The NHS has been running smoking 
cessation campaigns for decades but smoking has only really lessened following 
the ban in public areas.

Alex Dean, 40, from Kent: ‘I try not to drink during the week but usually buy 
a bottle of red on Friday’

I don’t worry about my health but I do limit the amount I drink, I exercise 
and only eat healthy low-sugar foods. I don’t think modern lifestyles are to 
blame for the rise in obesity. I have two young kids, work in an office and 
have a minimum 15-hour commute each week but still find the time to exercise. 
It is a state of mind.


I have always been aware of my health and enjoyed walking and climbing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/20/best-climbing-areas-europe-improving-skills-el-capitan>
, but last year I stepped it up and did my firsttriathlon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2015/apr/03/mountain-bike-triathlon-off-road-malta>
. Having a date set for that (I gave myself six months to train) really helped 
me achieve my goal. Also taking on three new sports, especially swimming, was 
really beneficial – I gained a lot from the learning process. I loved 
completing the triathlon and have already booked myself into a longer one for 
next year. Again having “an event” was something to aim for. I regularly got 
out and trained.


I am not sure whether the campaign will work but it’s good to try something. I 
also believe schools play a big role and we need toeducate on the importance of 
fitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/18/england-pupils-the-least-fit-they-have-ever-been>
 from a young age.

I try not to drink during the week but usually buy a bottle of red on Friday. 
I drink it over Friday and Saturday night. Not having drink in the house for 
the rest of the week makes it easier to manage for me. I’ve managed to cut down 
by knowing my wife does not like it if I amdrunk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/03/can-you-tell-how-drunk-you-are>
 or drinking too much. I also think it would negatively affect my health and 
motivation if I drank more.
 