
The festive period is full of cheer, overindulgence and presents. But it can 
also be stressful: there are meals to cook, relatives to please and the 
pressure to be happy. This is compounded by the fact we are now also privy to 
other people’s Christmases through social media. Photos of smiling families 
apparently without a care in the world fill our social media streams. If our 
celebrations are not as joyous, we can feel inadequate.


But how accurate are these posts? We asked our readers to tell us whether the 
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> they posted on 
Facebook and Instagram reflected the reality.


Laura, 28, from Manchester (living in Shenzhen, China): I make my stream look 
‘fun’ so I don’t upset loved ones


I spent the run-up to Christmas as an emotional wreck. This was my first 
Christmas away from home, in a hot city with new people and food that I’m not 
especially fond of. On Christmas Eve I Skyped home, trying to put on a brave 
face for my family, but seeing them and not being there broke my heart and I 
broke down.

Loneliness and social isolation: share your experiences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/29/loneliness-and-social-isolation-share-your-experiences>
I didn’t put anything on Instagram that day. My boyfriend and I checked into 
one of Shenzhen’s top hotels for Christmas Day, not wanting to spend it eating 
noodles in a flat full of bugs. The hotel was our Christmas gift to ourselves, 
and I shared with my friends and family on Instagram the “fun” we were having. 
The fancy afternoon tea, the pillow menu, the open bar, the giant bathtub. The 
pictures were all joy and happiness. But my social media feed isn’t a true 
representation of real life. I experience anxiety and often use my accounts as 
a way to reflect on my life and remind myself of all the good things in it. 
It’s not real life, it’s an edited version. I edit it for myself and for my 
loved ones, who would be heartbroken seeing me so sad when I’m so far away from 
them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Flonely-shared-photo-social-media-reality-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd821051e2953810b659fe76bd1c0d7c5260203fd%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20felt%20lonely%20when%20I%20shared%20that%20photo'%3A%20Social%20media%20v%20reality%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Flonely-shared-photo-social-media-reality-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20felt%20lonely%20when%20I%20shared%20that%20photo%27%3A%20Social%20media%20v%20reality%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Flonely-shared-photo-social-media-reality-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd821051e2953810b659fe76bd1c0d7c5260203fd%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
 ‘When I uploaded this I was missing my family like crazy and I just wanted to 
be home.’ 
When I uploaded the photo above I was missing the stuffing and the nut roast 
and the roaring fire. I was missing my family like crazy and I just wanted to 
be home. I wanted to hug them and be with them and to pull crackers and be 
silly. The snacks in the picture are beautiful but nothing is as good as a 
home-cooked Christmas dinner, and that’s all I wanted.

I never look at other posts with envy, because I know that other people do 
what I do – edit their lives online. I enjoy seeing other people’s highlights. 
Life can be tough and difficult, and I find social media a good escape. I don’t 
have an issue with looking at life through rose-tinted filters.








Madge, 45, from Sheffield: I didn’t look at social media on Christmas Day – I 
get fed up of the endless festive pics


I am more extroverted and outspoken on social media than in real life. But in 
both, I am more of an observer than a participant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Flonely-shared-photo-social-media-reality-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cf97b7404754f4a5ef2181290257e6b86f325c9%2F0_0_640_486%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20felt%20lonely%20when%20I%20shared%20that%20photo'%3A%20Social%20media%20v%20reality%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Flonely-shared-photo-social-media-reality-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20felt%20lonely%20when%20I%20shared%20that%20photo%27%3A%20Social%20media%20v%20reality%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Flonely-shared-photo-social-media-reality-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cf97b7404754f4a5ef2181290257e6b86f325c9%2F0_0_640_486%2F640.jpg>
 ‘I felt good when I shared this picture.’ 
I felt good when I shared this picture above: the food was as delicious as it 
looks. But I only shared it on a veggie Facebook page. Most of my friends do 
not share my dietary choices and would not want to see my dinner, just as I 
wouldn’t want to see their turkey.


I did not look at social media on Christmas Day itself, as I get fed up of 
seeing endless pics of presents, turkeys and trees. I do celebrate Christmas 
Day with my partner, but in our own way. We like it to be simple and quiet.


Heather, 28, from London: I am going through a divorce and could not face the 
happy Christmas photos this year


I try not to post a lot, as I feel it’s often false or boastful. When I do, I 
usually put up photos of sunsets or places I’ve visited (great architecture, 
etc). I actually didn’t upload anything this year for the first time in seven 
years. My wife and I are going through a divorce, and normally upload a lovely 
family picture together. Since I spent Christmas alone anything I could have 
posted would have just drawn attention to that fact. You don’t want pity on 
Instagram, you want likes.

I completely ignored the world of social media this year by turning my phone 
off. I can’t remember the last time I did that, as I’m pretty addicted to 
Facebook and Twitter. I didn’t want to face the happy Christmas photos of 
friends and their families. I know lots are probably having a miserable time, 
but there’s no way to know that from a glossy photo.

Lynne Moncrieff, 50, from London (living in Congo-Brazzaville): My stream is 
an honest reflection, warts and all


I like to think my social media life is an accurate mirror of my real life, 
warts and all. I’m not one to sprinkle glitter on it. Having said that, I’ve 
tried to keep recent awful family tragedies as palatable as possible. I 
wouldn’t want to put anyone off their cornflakes.


I’m living in Congo-Brazzaville because of my partner’s work. I haven’t been 
able to work for almost six years due to caring for ill family so I wanted to 
work as soon as I got here in August. I’m teaching English to some Congolese 
adults working at Chevron. I also volunteer at the orphanage one or two 
afternoons a week. This Christmas I’ve uploaded a couple of videos of the party 
at the orphanage. Then on Boxing Day, I posted a few George Michael tracks 
(Flawless and the excellent cover of Papa Was a Rolling Stone). I was sad to 
hear of his passing.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Flonely-shared-photo-social-media-reality-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54ce4b3d8fb32162332626a489bddb38847feb5d%2F401_40_1754_2923%2F1754.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20felt%20lonely%20when%20I%20shared%20that%20photo'%3A%20Social%20media%20v%20reality%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Flonely-shared-photo-social-media-reality-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20felt%20lonely%20when%20I%20shared%20that%20photo%27%3A%20Social%20media%20v%20reality%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Flonely-shared-photo-social-media-reality-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54ce4b3d8fb32162332626a489bddb38847feb5d%2F401_40_1754_2923%2F1754.jpg>
 ‘This was a special moment in these little boys’ lives.’ 
I felt proud when I shared the picture above. It was a special moment in these 
little boys’ lives. It’s a shame the shot is from behind as they’re all so 
beautiful but I thought it was quite a cute image anyway.


I like social media and being able to see what’s going on with my friends, but 
I do feel exasperated sometimes at how it’s only the gloss most people portray. 
Life is not all about infinity pools, glamorous places and happy, shiny people. 
Life can at times be cruel, raw and difficult and I don’t see many posts about 
that.





Anonymous, 29, from Nottinghamshire: The photo of my stollen got a lot of 
likes but I felt lonely when I made it


I posted on Facebook before Christmas that I’d made figgy pudding and stollen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/15/how-to-bake-the-perfect-stollen>
 for the Christmas Day feast. The status got around 15 likes and soundedhygge 
[a Danish word that roughly translates to homeliness]. In reality, I’d spent 
the day arguing with my boyfriend about the baking. We hadn’t worked well as a 
team. Also, I didn’t get to enjoy watching my family eat these treats because I 
was working. I actually felt quite lonely when I shared that picture. I have a 
mixed opinion of social media – sometimes it makes me feel jealous and 
inadequate, while at other times I’m happy my friends seem to be doing well. 
But it is a poor substitute for sharing problems or successes face-to-face.


 * How did your Christmas compare with what you posted? Share your stories in 
the comments below  