
The teens spinning, jumping and posing in a small, sweaty practice room of the 
English National Ballet, behind the Royal Albert Hall in London, all have one 
thing in common.

They are not professional dancers, but carers rehearsing a curtain-raiser for 
tonight’s production ofMatthew Bourne’s Sleeping Beauty at Sadler’s Wells 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2015/matthew-bournes-sleeping-beauty/>. 
With the guidance of two of Bourne’s dancers, they have created – in less than 
a week – their own work around the theme of sleep.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmatthew-bourne-sleeping-beauty-at-sleeping-beauty-teen-carers-dancing-create-london-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79e607f0162e1ba221d5a5149f39e27515c046ac%2F87_0_1600_2400%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20time%20for%20myself'%3A%20the%20teen%20carers%20dancing%20for%20Matthew%20Bourne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmatthew-bourne-sleeping-beauty-at-sleeping-beauty-teen-carers-dancing-create-london-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20time%20for%20myself%27%3A%20the%20teen%20carers%20dancing%20for%20Matthew%20Bourne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmatthew-bourne-sleeping-beauty-at-sleeping-beauty-teen-carers-dancing-create-london-sadlers-wells%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79e607f0162e1ba221d5a5149f39e27515c046ac%2F87_0_1600_2400%2F1600.jpg>
 Young members of the Create company rehearsing in the Kahn Studio, Sadler’s 
Wells Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
With the session in its last late-afternoon half hour, a restive mood prevails 
in the space where the carers – ranging from 13 to 19 – lie on the floor, 
practically on top of each other, simulating sleep. Some chat rather than pay 
attention to the instructions of Michela Meazza, principal dancer with New 
Adventures, Bourne’s dance company. They have been practising since 10 in the 
morning, so waning concentration is understandable.

Asked about the low-level hubbub, Meazza says diplomatically: “They are very 
good at focusing when they have to. You have to go with the spirit of the 
group.” She adds that they will have more room once the rehearsals move to 
Sadler’s Wells itself.

The work revolves around dreams and nightmares, with the 22 dancers split into 
four groups representing different professions – doctor, clothes designer, 
musician and photographer – that some of them aspire to. There is a final 
run-through as they rise slowly from sleeping positions on the floor to form 
four tableaux. The one representing doctors is a convincing representation of a 
patient on an operating table.

As they sit cross-legged in a circle, Meazza asks each in turn to sum up the 
day in one word. “Hard-working”, “compact”, “tiring”, “explosive”, “exciting” 
and “repetitive” come in reply – along with a couple of mentions of 
“interesting”.

They’re juggling duties with school and have no time for friendships, but for 
six days they can focus on something else
Nicky Goulder, Create’s chief executive 
Shannan Dean, 15, who is from the Romany Gypsy community, cared for her 
grandfather until late 2013, when he died after suffering from cancer and other 
conditions including arthritis, renal failure and diabetes.

“I took care of him since I was nine,” she said. “I’d take him up to hospital 
every Christmas, fed him, sorted out his clothes for him, took his blood 
pressure every day, worked out the dose and gave him his insulin injection.”

Caring for her grandfather constantly for six years has left its mark. She 
struggles with school and currently attends a referral unit. She is also 
affected by her mother’s mental health problems and substance misuse. Dean took 
part in the curtain-raiser for Bourne’s production of Edward Scissorhands last 
year, but almost gave up after the first day of rehearsal this time.

“Last year was so much easier, more like drama,” she says. “This time I 
couldn’t get the steps right. It was frustrating. But the second day was much 
easier.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmatthew-bourne-sleeping-beauty-at-sleeping-beauty-teen-carers-dancing-create-london-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2256132a665250061b1d8136563c56b7e503178%2F174_226_1390_2083%2F1390.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20time%20for%20myself'%3A%20the%20teen%20carers%20dancing%20for%20Matthew%20Bourne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmatthew-bourne-sleeping-beauty-at-sleeping-beauty-teen-carers-dancing-create-london-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20time%20for%20myself%27%3A%20the%20teen%20carers%20dancing%20for%20Matthew%20Bourne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fmatthew-bourne-sleeping-beauty-at-sleeping-beauty-teen-carers-dancing-create-london-sadlers-wells%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2256132a665250061b1d8136563c56b7e503178%2F174_226_1390_2083%2F1390.jpg>
 Young members of the Create company rehearsing in the Kahn Studio, Sadler’s 
Wells Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Dean, who was persuaded to stay by a friend, said she found the rehearsals fun 
but exhausting, adding that she “can enjoy meeting new people” while having 
“time for myself”.

Warren Cummings, 14, effectively primary carer for his mother who has has type 
1 diabetes and peripheral neuropathy, also enjoyed meeting new people through 
the project. A keen actor and performer with his mother in a local drama group, 
Cummings also hopes the experience will help him get into the Brit School for 
Performing Arts. Understandably nervous about appearing on stage, he says: “If 
I just focus on the dancing and not the people watching – if I don’t look at 
them – I should be fine I think.”

The project that brought Dean and Cummings together with the other teens from 
across London is a collaboration betweenCreate <http://createarts.org.uk/>, an 
arts charity, and Bourne, who is one of its patrons. Their second collaboration 
after Edward Scissorhands, the Sleeping Beauty curtain-raiser aims to give 
young carers a chance to explore dance and to lessen their sense of isolation.

According to the Children’s Society, the number of young carers rose by a 
fifth to 166,363 in 2011 from 139,000 in 2001, with the largest age profile of 
young carers 10-14 at 41%.

“It’s a fantastic way of raising the profiles of young carers,” says Nicky 
Goulder, Create’s chief executive. “It’s a chance for them to have time for 
themselves and to balance out their increasingly demanding roles as carers. 
They’re juggling duties with school, they have no time for friendships, but for 
six days they can focus on something that builds skills such as communication 
and teamwork. As well as increasing their confidence.”

Bourne said: “Dance can provide such a sense of freedom. It’s only right that 
young people have every chance to access it.”

 * Matthew Bourne’s Sleeping Beauty is at Sadler’s Wells, London, until 24 
January 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2015/matthew-bournes-sleeping-beauty/>.
 