
As Sandy Balfour wrote last month, I am returned, battered but unbowed, from 
the South Atlantic. My boat also got a bit battered south of the River Plate, 
so I sold her to a Falkland Islander, who seemed better placed than I to do the 
required refit, and returned by public transport via Santiago de Chile.

For me one of the joys of crosswords is the way they bring you unexpected 
gobbets of useless information. So I pass on to you news that the Upland Goose 
Hotel at Stanley is shutting down after more than 150 years and is to be 
converted by its owners, the Falkland Islands Company, into houses and flats. 
The hotel's place in history is assured by the fact that it was "liberated" 
from the Argentinians on June 14 1982 by the Daily Telegraph's war 
correspondent, Max Hastings, some eight hours before the formal surrender was 
signed. "It was like liberating an English suburban golf club", he reported.

The hotel, built in 1954 as the Eagle Inn, was the first in the Falkland 
Islands and has another claim to fame. An adventurer called Lewin, who did many 
things in many parts of the world, was briefly trying his hand at sheep farming 
when his wife gave birth in 1872 in the then Ship Hotel to a girl who became a 
well-known actress as Ellaline Terriss and who married an even better known 
actor-manager, Sir Seymour Hicks. Together they founded what is today the 
Gielgud Theatre in Shaftesbury Avenue. Ellaline lived on until 1971.

Part of the reason why the Upland Goose Hotel became unprofitable is that 
there is now a much better hotel in Stanley, the Malvina House. The food there 
is moderately priced and delicious. If you are ever down that way, I cannot 
recommend too highly as a starter its upland goose p�t�, served with a local 
wild berry sauce. It may seem odd that the leading hotel in Stanley is called 
Malvina House, but it has nothing to do with the mainland. It was originally 
built in the 1880s and Malvina, it seems, is an old Scottish name.

____

Taking back the reins from Sandy was, as Yogi Berra once said, "like d�j� vu 
all over again". My mail box for a couple of weeks was flooded with complaints 
about the service you were getting because the re-launched Guardian website was 
resulting in the crosswords printing out in miniaturised form and all I could 
do was apologise, say that it should not have happened and that we were working 
on the problem. And I am also sorry that we were not able to put it right more 
quickly.

However, I hope that this cloud does have a silver lining. When the correct 
size was restored, it was possible to produce a print version without the 
previous advertising and other clutter at the top. This means that, despite the 
larger type, the downloaded puzzle still fits a single sheet of A4, which so 
many of you have understandably been demanding for years.

There is another "improvement" to the site that you may not have noticed. It 
is now possible to check back on the previous puzzle and solution without 
having to work out its number and get to it via the archive search facility. If 
you click at the top of the home page on "Latest solutions" or "Find a 
crossword", you are provided with a menus of "previous" puzzles, with solutions.

I hope that this is not a false dawn, but I have a feeling that it may now be 
possible to work slowly on other improvements to the site. Without wishing to 
raise expectations that cannot immediately be met, I should welcome suggestions 
for changes that you would like to see to add to those already on my list so 
that I can be as fully armed as possible for the fray.

____

An email from British Columbia last month complained that a solution in an old 
Bunthorne puzzle was a word that could not be found in any known dictionary or, 
indeed, on Google; and asking what was my policy, if any, on dictionaries. The 
offender was WOSBIRD. Though put politely in the form of a question ("Did 
Bunthorne make this word up?"), it was a frontal challenge.

The clue was "Wide, large prison for the strumpet's child" and is in an April 
2006 puzzle. It was with some relief that I found the word in the current 
Chambers as: "(dialect) a variant of whore's bird".

So, though I would not allow WOSBIRD as a solution in a Quick or Quiptic 
crossword, on the grounds that I have never heard of the word, at least it 
meets my basic criterion for a Cryptic that the solution should appear in one 
of my main dictionaries. These are Chambers, Collins and the newish Oxford 
Dictionary of English (1st edition 1998, 2nd 2003).

My defence of this list would run:

1. Chambers is traditionally the crossword setter's favoured dictionary, with 
a reasonable range of dialect and Scottish/Irish words. Collins is, I think, 
slightly more modern, particularly in the question of hyphenation and/or word 
splitting. It was once also useful because, unlike Chambers, it included many 
famous people, but tragically no longer does. So I use both an old and a new 
Collins.

2. Why both Chambers and Collins? Because a surprising number of perfectly 
common words appear in one but not the other.

3. Why the ODE and not the full OED or other dictionaries from the Oxford 
stable? Because, though I certainly look at the OED online from time to time, 
it has too much in it and allows too many variant spellings to be the basis of 
fair arbitration as to whether or not a word should be allowed as a solution. 
The range of the other Oxford dictionaries would be too limited, I think, for a 
Guardian Cryptic puzzle. As a bonus, the new ODE has people in it, though not 
quite as many as the old Collins.

P.S. Every now and again I break my own rules, for example with iPod, which is 
not yet in any of my trio.

· This article was amended on Sunday March 9 2008.
 