
A moment of class from Ángel Di María gave Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> a 2-1 win at Marseille as 
the French champions stretched their unbeaten Ligue 1 run to a record-extending 
34 games on Sunday. The Argentinian winger netted the winner in the 71st minute 
after Rémy Cabella had equalised Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s early goal to put PSG on 
69 points from 25 games.

Laurent Blanc’s side lead second-placed Monaco, who beat Nice 1-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2016/feb/06/monaco-v-nice> on 
Saturday, by 24 points. Marseille are 10th on 34 points.

“I don’t know if it was fair but we managed to win. It’s good to play such a 
game before the Chelsea match [in the Champions League’s last 16],” the PSG 
captain Thiago Silva said. “If we stay focused like this we may end the season 
unbeaten.“

PSG got off to a dream start, with Ibrahimovic tapping in at the far post from 
Maxwell’s cross in the second minute.Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille>, however, pushed hard and they 
were rewarded in the 25th minute when Cabella ran 50 metres with the ball, 
almost unchallenged, before firing home from just outside the box.

Marseille’s Michy Batshuayi had a shot cleared off the line by Maxwell five 
minutes before the break, as PSG looked unusually shaky at the back and in the 
midfield nine days before the first leg of their clash with Chelsea.

Yet with 19 minutes remaining, Ibrahimovic set up Di María in the box and he 
dribbled past Brice Dja Djédjé before coolly beating Steve Mandanda as PSG 
completed a third successive league double over their rivals.

It was Di María’s ninth league goal this season from 19 appearances, while he 
also has 10 assists.

Cabella blamed Marseille’s defeat on their failure to take their chances. “We 
can be disappointed, it’s another home defeat,” he said. “We did the job but 
you have to convert your chances.”
 