
During its development, the creators of Dear Evan Hansen, a fantastically 
poignantBroadway <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> musical that 
opened Sunday, had one rule: no lockers. “We never wanted lockers onstage,” 
says the playwright Steven Levenson (Core Values, The Language of Trees). “That 
was always our thing. We never wanted any lockers onstage, people dancing with 
lockers.”

 Dear Evan Hansen is a high school musical unrelated to the chirpy, toothy 
likes of High School Musical or more anodyne Broadway fare such as School of 
Rock or Wicked. The first original musical by the composers Ben Pasek and 
Justin Paul (Christmas Story, Dogfight, La La Land), it has a book by Levenson 
and direction by Michael Greif, who has had his greatest successes with 
unflinching portrayals of youth (Rent, Next to Normal). A story of isolation in 
a hyperlinked world, it is written and performed with an emotional acuity that 
defies hashtag simplifications and 140-character limits.

Dear Evan Hansen review – sentimental high-school musical that should go viral
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/02/dear-evan-hansen-review-musical-emotional-critique-internet>
Its plot revolves around Evan (Ben Platt), a teenager with crippling social 
anxiety. Through a couple of mishaps established in the show’s first minutes, a 
letter that Evan has written falls into the hands of a troubled classmate. The 
classmate kills himself and Evan is wrongly identified as that boy’s friend, 
conferring brief celebrity.Social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/social-media> spreads this fiction and soon 
awkward Evan, besieged by friends and followers, goes viral.

On a weekday morning, Levenson, 32, and Greif, 57, sit in a waiting room at 
the Music Box Theatre, ready to discuss the show’s origins and impact. The 
waiting room has been outfitted by Bloomingdale’s, with debatably modish 
furniture and a “Twitter mirror” ready for selfies. There are also a pile of 
teddy bears, dressed like the show’s lead and sold by Bloomingdale’s to benefit 
the Child Mind Institute, a charity devoted to children with mental health 
issues. The bears themselves looked fairly stable, as do Levenson and Greif.

As Levenson tells it, the show was sparked by the overdose of Pasek’s high 
school classmate. After the boy’s death, kids who hadn’t really known him 
claimed close bonds. “People wanted to have a piece of the tragedy,” he says. 
That memory twined with a desire to explore the internet’s role in people’s 
lives, especially those of teenagers.

Both Greif and Levenson exited adolescence long before the social media 
heyday. “Twitter and Instagram are still kind of mysterious to me,” says 
Levenson. Greif doesn’t use them much either. Online “no one can find me”, he 
says. But Levenson argues that such platforms make adolescents of us all. 
“Being part of social media makes you a teenager in a weird way,” he says, 
“wondering what everybody else is doing, wondering if you’ve been invited.”

Yet both acknowledge that the omnipresence of the online world poses 
particular challenges for today’s teenagers. “I have the advantage of having 
some teenagers, so I’ve been able to see some of that,” says Greif. “Everything 
that you hear is true in terms of the increased scrutiny.”

Seemingly gone are the days when you could figure out who you were without the 
world watching, when you could make mistakes without them being preserved. 
“Nothing is private any more and nothing is sacred, I guess,” says Levenson. 
“Everything is for public consumption.”

He also worries that Snapchat and its ilk might increase feelings of 
alienation. “It does feel like the more connected we are, the more alone we 
feel,” he says. “I was always so acutely aware of feeling alone.” Being able to 
monitor the limits of your likes, the numbers of your friends must make that 
worse, he thinks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdear-evan-hansen-social-media-musical-broadway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb34c50b82f61f3b656b8e5a158014ac9bdbcdd14%2F105_0_1197_718%2F1197.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Nothing%20is%20private%20any%20more'%3A%20behind%20Dear%20Evan%20Hansen%2C%20the%20social%20media%20musical&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdear-evan-hansen-social-media-musical-broadway%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Nothing%20is%20private%20any%20more%27%3A%20behind%20Dear%20Evan%20Hansen%2C%20the%20social%20media%20musical&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdear-evan-hansen-social-media-musical-broadway%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb34c50b82f61f3b656b8e5a158014ac9bdbcdd14%2F105_0_1197_718%2F1197.jpg>
 The set of Dear Evan Hansen. Photograph: PR 
If Dear Evan Hansen addresses these problems and anxieties, it also explores, 
presciently, how easily experience can be faked online and how persuasive those 
fakes can be. In the aftermath of the presidential election and its 
proliferation offake news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/fake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world>
, this aspect has come to seem more urgent and upsetting, though Levenson 
argues that the show “ultimately lands in a very human place ... with two 
people on a couch having to face one another”.

Broadway has often sat two people on a couch before, but Dear Evan Hansen, 
with its multiscreen set and comprehensive projection design, has finally found 
a way to make time on the internet seem theatrically and visually interesting.

It has also found a way, while using traditional Broadway structures and 
styles, to offer depth of character and a psychological complexity not usually 
witnessed in a Broadway musical. This has to do, in part, with the somewhat 
unusual way in which the musical was written. After Paul and Pasek discussed a 
tentative outline, they sent Levenson away and told him to write it as a play, 
with monologues where songs, which came later, might go. “So the character 
feels less like the character in a musical in some sense because he’s not,” 
says Levenson. “We’re not taking him from song to song.”

Pasek and Paul, says Greif, “had incredibly great instincts of what things you 
sing about and what things you don’t sing about and there was a lot of 
sensitivity to that”.

“They were always willing to not write a song,” says Levenson.

But many of the songs they did write effectively communicate the intensified, 
overexposed feelings of adolescence. “The stakes are never as high again as it 
feels when you’re at that age,” says Levenson.

And teenagers have felt that, too. Many have written letters to the show’s 
creators, as have parents who have lost children. “That’s obviously the most 
gratifying thing possible,” says Levenson. “It is such a strange time in the 
world, to feel like what you’re working on can actually help people in a small 
way makes it feel not just completely insane to be doing a musical in such a 
terrible time.” Let’s hope #NotJustCompletelyInsane catches on.
 