
They are the hidden killers that maim or kill more than 4,000 men, women and 
children every year 
<http://www.icbl.org/en-gb/problem/why-landmines-are-still-a-problem.aspx>, in 
countries around the world. Recently, the challenge posed by landmines has been 
compounded by the increasing use of improvised explosive devices (IEDs).

“Every country has its own challenges,” explained Damian O’Brien, a programme 
manager for the international demining agencythe Halo Trust 
<https://www.halotrust.org/>, on a visit back to Britain from his ongoing work 
in Afghanistan.

“One of the problems in Afghanistan, for example, is the sheer density and the 
widespread availability of munitions which have fed conflicts. People are still 
digging things up and scooping out the explosives from anti tank mines to 
create IEDS.”

Injuries inflicted by mines or IEDs can be devastating. However, technology 
being developed to produce synthetically grown “off the shelf” bone 
replacements could prove life-changing.


A team behind the new £2.8m regenerative medicine project at the University of 
Glasgow are using a 3D printer to create bone “scaffolds”. The scaffolds are 
coated with nanolayers of a growth substance known as BMP-2 and stem cells.

They are then placed into a specially designed machine known as a Nanokick, 
developed at the university, which shakes the bone scaffold 1,000 times per 
second to stimulate the growth of bone tissue. When completed, it should be 
possible within three to four days for technicians to create tailor-made bone 
pieces from tissue that will continue to grow when implanted in the body.

“In principle, the technology is very flexible and can be used for the needs 
of all sorts of different patients, including children,” said Professor Manuel 
Salmeron-Sanchez, the project lead.

“The aim will be to create a bone which can then be ready to be delivered in a 
couple days anywhere in the world and which can then be used on a human being 
to minimise the impact of the injury as soon as possible.”

It is envisaged that the process of manufacture could be exported. “In the 
future there is the possibility that we could have small 3D printers in place 
in different countries with basic surgical theatres where the technology could 
be incorporated,” he added.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Foff-the-shelf-bone-replacements-offer-life-changing-help-to-landmine-victims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a32e55fa5517fa5e85295fe6df0c6522a0e5969%2F0_67_2592_1610%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Off%20the%20shelf%E2%80%99%20bone%20replacements%20offer%20life-changing%20help%20to%20landmine%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Foff-the-shelf-bone-replacements-offer-life-changing-help-to-landmine-victims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Off%20the%20shelf%E2%80%99%20bone%20replacements%20offer%20life-changing%20help%20to%20landmine%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Foff-the-shelf-bone-replacements-offer-life-changing-help-to-landmine-victims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a32e55fa5517fa5e85295fe6df0c6522a0e5969%2F0_67_2592_1610%2F2592.jpg>
 The Nanokick, which shakes bone scaffolds to stimulate the growth of bone 
tissue. Photograph: Courtesy Nanokick Technologies 
Lou McGrath, CEO of the charity Find a Better Way 
<http://www.findabetterway.org.uk/>, which is funding the project, said it 
could herald an important breakthrough for landmine blast survivors. “Advances 
in reconstructive surgical techniques now encourage trauma surgeons to retain 
as much of a limb as possible, instead of quickly amputating above the knee,” 
he said.

“In many cases, the amount of bone that can be recovered is a limiting factor 
in how much of a leg or arm can be salvaged. With the developments from this 
project, we could reach a situation where it is only the limitations of 
surgical techniques, not the amount of viable tissue remaining, that determines 
the outcome.”

Children are particularly vulnerable to landmine blasts. In 2015, there were 
1,072 recorded child casualties from mines or other explosive devices,according 
to Landmine and Cluster Munition Monitor 
<http://www.the-monitor.org/media/2389719/MinesChildren2016Final.pdf>. The 
figure included 347 deaths and 725 injuries. However, the actual number of 
child casualties is believed to be far higher due to the difficulty in 
collecting data in hazardous environments.

As well as current conflict zones, countries such as Cambodia and Angola are 
still dealing with casualties from landmines.Earlier this year, Ukraine launched
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/04/ukraine-attempt-defuse-landmines-as-more-are-planted>
 an operation in its war-torn east to defuse landmines laid across thousands of 
hectares of land.
 