
An exercise has gone badly wrong at École Philippe Gaulier 
<http://www.ecolephilippegaulier.com/>. “You are the definition of a bad 
student,” croaks the septuagenarian teacher. “This is boring. It is so shit!” 
Gaulier’s student gawps at him, chastened and gormless, as his classmates laugh 
cheerfully at his discomfort. It’s a fate that you, I and the rest of the 
non-ridiculous world might cross continents to avoid. But for those aspiring to 
be funny, this is the place to be – and Gaulier’s tongue-lashings are an 
exquisite form of torture.

“I had moments of extreme suffering there,” remembers Phil Burgers, better 
known for his stage persona,the smouldering silent clown Doctor Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/20/doctor-brown-phil-burgers-sam-simmons-comedy>
. “It’s really, really hard. But once you can handle the insults, something 
inside you cracks and you can begin.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fphilippe-gaulier-clown-school-emma-thompson-sacha-baron-cohen-edinburgh-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda5565452bcb8e0be90841473d91993efa185117%2F0_251_2000_2697%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Once%20you%20can%20handle%20the%20insults%2C%20you%20begin'%3A%20inside%20Philippe%20Gaulier's%20clown%20school&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fphilippe-gaulier-clown-school-emma-thompson-sacha-baron-cohen-edinburgh-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Once%20you%20can%20handle%20the%20insults%2C%20you%20begin%27%3A%20inside%20Philippe%20Gaulier%27s%20clown%20school&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fphilippe-gaulier-clown-school-emma-thompson-sacha-baron-cohen-edinburgh-festival-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda5565452bcb8e0be90841473d91993efa185117%2F0_251_2000_2697%2F2000.jpg>
 Sacha Baron Cohen, here as Borat, calls Gaulier the funniest man he’s met. 
Photograph: Alexandra Lambrinidis/AP 
What began for Burgers at the school led to an Edinburgh comedy award in 2012: 
his cult popularity is the main reason why “Gaulier-trained” is now a buzzword 
on many a comic’s publicity. On the Edinburgh fringe, which begins this week, 
no fewer than 14 comedy acts boast of a Gaulier education, including oddball 
standupJohn-Luke Roberts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/25/john-luke-roberts-at-edinburgh-festival-review-filial-rage-fires-up-grotesque-tribute>
, double actZach and Viggo 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/zach-viggo-thunderflop>, and sketch 
troupePlague of Idiots <http://www.plagueofidiots.net/>. 

But Gaulier’s guru status long predates this purple patch: his alumni include 
Emma Thompson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-thompson> and Simon 
McBurney <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/simon-mcburney>, Helena Bonham 
Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/film/helena-bonham-carter> and Sacha Baron 
Cohen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sachabaroncohen>. “Gaulier,” the Ali G 
star has said, “is the greatest living teacher of clown and modern theatre, and 
the funniest man I’ve ever met.” Having started as a student, then a colleague, 
of the physical theatre maestro Jacques Lecoq, Gaulier has run his own college 
– in France, then the UK, and now in Étampes, near Paris – for 36 years. He 
isn’t modest about its virtues. “If you come for a year,” he rasps, “we change 
your life.”


When I visit on a sunny summer day, his class includes the young British 
standupElf Lyons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/30/edinburgh-festival-female-comedians>
, here for a year to study being funny (and to take courses in Greek tragedy, 
melodrama and Chekhov) at the clown-feet of the master. You can learn a la 
carte, taking one three-week course at a time, and stay for up to two years. 
Fees are €2,300 a term and there are no auditions (“because the role of the 
teacher is to change the person, not to judge them”). Enrolment is first-come, 
first-served; students are of all ages, but are mainly young and from many 
countries, although Brits slightly predominate. Some are aspiring comics, but 
Gaulier’s institute is not just a clown school, far less a place to learn 
standup. “It is a theatre school,” he growls. “I hate standup comedy. I would 
never teach something so horrible.”


Gaulier is not a man to mince words, but neither is he the ogre legend 
implies. This grizzled, straggle-haired goblin of a man couldn’t look or sound 
more like a “clown guru” if he tried, but there’s humour and warmth behind 
every blunt statement and volley of abuse (“I don’t give a tiny shit!”). The 
first class I attend begins with a kissing session: students requestbisous from 
one another, and from Gaulier, to atone for mild wrongdoings. Then Gaulier 
distributes red noses. This classic prop, he says, lays bare what performers 
were like as children – and infant playfulness is at the core of his teaching. 
But first comes a comedy routine, as the old sage demonstrates, with references 
to Sigmund Freud and much orgasmic groaning, how to insert string into the nose.

An actor shouldn't be too comfortable. If you want to be comfortable, you 
should be a pharmacist

There follows an exercise in which red-nosed students “boo!” at the audience. 
Gaulier then proposes to each a costume tailored to their particular spirit: a 
church mouse in love with a priest; a character from theAsterix books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/16/anthea-bell-asterix-translator-interview>
; Confucius; a Boy Scout. “When they come in on Monday with the costume,” he 
tells me, “they will feel ridiculous. And ridiculousness is good for a clown. 
It’s good for everything. To feel ridiculous and sensitive is a part of 
freedom.”


This is the kernel of Gaulier philosophy: good performers (in comedy or 
theatre – there’s no difference) are in touch with their own unique absurdity, 
and have fun celebrating it on stage. Is that something anyone can do? “It’s 
not difficult to be ridiculous,” he replies, with a great Gallic shrug. “You 
look at people, and normally after five seconds they are ridiculous.” Maybe, 
but not everyone is comfortable showing it. “If you are an actor, you shouldn’t 
be comfortable. If you want to be comfortable, you should be a pharmacist.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fphilippe-gaulier-clown-school-emma-thompson-sacha-baron-cohen-edinburgh-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13993becb86fa2bd048863acef0801065c499f36%2F86_690_6269_3760%2F6269.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Once%20you%20can%20handle%20the%20insults%2C%20you%20begin'%3A%20inside%20Philippe%20Gaulier's%20clown%20school&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fphilippe-gaulier-clown-school-emma-thompson-sacha-baron-cohen-edinburgh-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Once%20you%20can%20handle%20the%20insults%2C%20you%20begin%27%3A%20inside%20Philippe%20Gaulier%27s%20clown%20school&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fphilippe-gaulier-clown-school-emma-thompson-sacha-baron-cohen-edinburgh-festival-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13993becb86fa2bd048863acef0801065c499f36%2F86_690_6269_3760%2F6269.jpg>
 Gaulier, left, watches students at his school 
Elf Lyons elaborates: “He always says, ‘We’re doing the best job in the world. 
If you’re not the happiest person in the world to be on stage, then don’t go on 
stage.’” Lyons isn’t an actor, nor a clown – she’s a standup. But Gaulier’s 
teaching has been invaluable, she says, because “it’s about being at ease with 
the audience. It’s about the joy of pretending. It teaches you simple things 
like standing still, looking at the audience, not taking yourself seriously, 
being happy to fail.”

I see plenty of failure in another exercise, which obliges students to sing 
along to songs in an unfamiliar foreign language – then keep singing, 
convincingly, after the music stops. It’s an inherently ridiculous activity, 
and the self-consciousness of some students is hard to witness. But Gaulier 
watches it beadily, for glimpses of the sensitive child behind the ill-at-ease, 
inhibited grownup.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fphilippe-gaulier-clown-school-emma-thompson-sacha-baron-cohen-edinburgh-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5139c7fe93f1f9928fe531e8a7b05a33250452d%2F0_259_3277_1966%2F3277.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Once%20you%20can%20handle%20the%20insults%2C%20you%20begin'%3A%20inside%20Philippe%20Gaulier's%20clown%20school&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fphilippe-gaulier-clown-school-emma-thompson-sacha-baron-cohen-edinburgh-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Once%20you%20can%20handle%20the%20insults%2C%20you%20begin%27%3A%20inside%20Philippe%20Gaulier%27s%20clown%20school&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fphilippe-gaulier-clown-school-emma-thompson-sacha-baron-cohen-edinburgh-festival-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5139c7fe93f1f9928fe531e8a7b05a33250452d%2F0_259_3277_1966%2F3277.jpg>
 ‘He teaches you simple things like standing still’ … British standup Elf Lyons 
“He can penetrate through your bullshit to get to the best thing in you,” 
Burgers says. “Philippe doesn’t settle for any mediocrity.” It’s a point echoed 
by Lyons: “Nothing goes past him. Suddenly he’ll ask you a cutting question 
about yourself, and you realise he’s been watching you the whole time.” Both 
agree that the school’s attraction isn’t primarily the philosophy – it’s the 
man. “A lot of his ideas are down on paper,” says Lyons. “You could re-create 
them elsewhere. But his delivery is phenomenal. It’s like the difference 
between reading a comedian’s material and seeing his show.”


He can penetrate through your bullshit to get to the best thing in you
Phil Burgers 
But if Gaulier enjoys the atmosphere of guru worship that surrounds him in 
Étampes, it’s mainly because of the opportunities it yields for self-mockery. 
Squatted gnome-like in front of his class, whacking his tambourine, he is 
clearly delighted with his own ridiculousness. “A teacher has to make sense,” 
he burbles at one point, repeating the phrase over and over until it dissolves 
into gibberish. No one seems intimidated by him and, as for his abusive brand 
of pedagogy, well, it’s a kind of game, says his colleague and former student 
Carlo Jacucci. “It is a very serious game, to do with dignity. Because when we 
play with somebody who is fair and honest and fun we are all dignified.” Or, in 
Gaulier’s words: “If you do something bad, we love you. But you were bad.”


The teacher is unimpressed with his hip cachet in UK comedy circles. “I don’t 
teach something fashionable,” Gaulier grumbles. “I teach theatre. You take it 
and, after, you do whatever you want with it.” Meanwhile, he’ll be here in 
Étampes, accepting kisses and telling people they’re shit. “I didn’t expect to 
become a legend,” he says. “It would make my mother happy, but she’s dead. So I 
don’t care. I did my job, not too bad, but I don’t want to be a legend.”
 