
They had become a ratings-challenged washout 
<http://variety.com/2015/tv/ratings/oscar-ratings-abc-telecast-down-10-in-overnights-to-four-year-low-1201439543/>
, enlivened only bygaffes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/11/john-travolta-oscars-presenter-idina-menzel-adele-dazeem>
,stumbles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2014/mar/06/jennifer-lawrence-falling-down-oscars>
 andover-thanking fiascos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/feb/23/oscars-2015-a-masterclass-in-how-to-beat-the-orchestra-send-off-music>
. No longer. This year, the Academy Awards have won back the world’s attention 
by becoming an outrage. The notoriety bred by#OscarsSoWhite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/09/academy-nominees-group-photo-oscarssowhite-white-hollywood>
 will doubtless boost Sunday’s TV audience; but the episode’s long-term fallout 
may prove less benign than many assume.

#OscarsSoWhite: a 10-point plan for change by the hashtag’s creator
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/25/oscarssowhite-10-point-plan-hashtag-academy-awards-april-reign>
The absence of actors of colour from the 20 nominees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/oscars-2016-full-list-of-nominations-awards-movies>
 for the second year running was never going to pass unnoticed. Anti-whiteout 
protesters have ranged fromDavid Oyelowo 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/actor-david-oyelowo-slams-academy-857045>
 andLupita Nyong’o <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-35360113> to 
George Clooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/19/george-clooney-critical-oscars-nominations-diversity-2016>
,Reese Witherspoon 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3412323/These-filmmakers-deserve-recognition-Oscar-winner-Reese-Witherspoon-joins-growing-number-actors-criticising-lack-diversity-Academy-Awards-nominations.html>
 andBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/28/barack-obama-speaks-oscars-diversity-academy-awards-2016>
. A boycott has been called, and those staying away from theDolby 
<http://www.dolby.com/us/en/about/2016-oscars.html> will include Ava DuVernay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/23/ava-duvernay-ryan-coogler-flint-water-crisis-benefit-oscars>
,Spike Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/18/spike-lee-boycott-2016-oscars-nominations-academy-awards-lack-of-diversity>
,Michael Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/19/michael-moore-joins-oscars-2016-boycott-lack-of-black-nominees>
 andWill Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/21/will-smith-oscars-diversity-boycott>
.

It is hardly surprising that prejudice is getting the blame. In 2014, only 2% 
of the Academy’s voters were black 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/envelope/oscars/la-et-unmasking-oscar-academy-project-20120219-story.html>
. The dominance of the 94% who are white has always infected their judgment,
according to their detractors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/03/oscars-diversity-2016-favorite-movies-racism-prejudice-aesthetics-taste>
.

So, who are the black actors who have been unfairly snubbed? The main 
candidates 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/race/oscars-omission-black-actors-upsetting-856743>
 appear to beThe Hateful Eight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hateful-eight>
’sSamuel L Jackson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/samuel-l-jackson>, Creed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/creed>’s Michael B Jordan, Concussion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/concussion>’s Will Smith and Beasts of No 
Nation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/beasts-of-no-nation>’s Idris Elba. All 
of their performances were worthy – yet not obviously worthier than those of 
the nominees.

The backlash began last month when New York critic Andrew Gruttadaro 
<http://uk.complex.com/pop-culture/2016/01/oscars-so-white-2016> dared breathe 
the unsayable: “This year,” he wrote, “no black people deserved a nomination.”
Charlotte Rampling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/22/oscars-2016-charlotte-rampling-diversity-row-racist-to-white-people>
 half-agreed. Showbiz guru Baz Bamigboye wasemphatic on the matter 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3409377/Oh-stop-whingeing-Oscars-white-Hollywood-snubs-blck-actors-star-columnist-Baz-Bamigboye-says-Sorry-aren-t-good-year.html>
. John Singleton, Oscar nominated for Boyz n the Hood at 23, said he was“not 
disappointed” 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/john-singleton-oscar-diversity-reaction-1201682288/>
.Earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/24/jamie-foxx-tells-african-american-stars-to-act-better-oscars-so-white-diversity-row>
, Jamie Foxx – who won an Oscar for Ray, in 2005 – told Will Smith he needed to 
“act better” to stand a chance (he then took the mickey out of his Nigerian 
accent in Concussion).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Foscarssowhite-right-and-wrong-academy-awards-audience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F343b96065adceac66d7608b1dd65bf583706498f%2F52_253_3452_2073%2F3452.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20%23OscarsSoWhite%20got%20right%20%E2%80%93%20and%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Foscarssowhite-right-and-wrong-academy-awards-audience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20%23OscarsSoWhite%20got%20right%20%E2%80%93%20and%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Foscarssowhite-right-and-wrong-academy-awards-audience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F343b96065adceac66d7608b1dd65bf583706498f%2F52_253_3452_2073%2F3452.jpg>
 Michael B Jordan in Creed 
The past two years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/03/oscars-2014-gravity-win-12-years-a-slave>
 should not perhaps be taken as proof of a black lock-out. Only two years ago, 
Nyong’o, Chiwetel Ejiofor and Barkhad Abdi all won acting nominations, while12 
Years a Slave <https://www.theguardian.com/film/12-years-a-slave>, directed by 
Steve McQueen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/steve-mcqueen>, won best 
picture. In the past couple of decades, Foxx, Morgan Freeman and Forest 
Whitaker have won best actor.

During the current century, 10% of the Academy’s acting nominations have gone 
to black actors <http://www.economist.com/blogs/prospero/2016/01/film-and-race>
. Black people form 13% of the US population. So are things actually almost OK? 
Not quite.

Although black actors have done better at the Oscars than some realise, ethnic 
minorities as a whole have not. Hispanic actors have secured only 3% of the 
nominations, although 16% of Americans are Latino. Asian-Americans (6% of the 
population) have had to make do with 1%. The Oscars may not be anti-black; but 
they are definitelyhideously white 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/22/major-study-hollywood-endemic-diversity-crisis?utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=Film+Today+-+automated+vB+curation&utm_term=158091&subid=6951&CMP=ema_861b>
.

Nonetheless, analysis by the Economist 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/prospero/2016/01/film-and-race> suggests that 
this cannot be blamed solely on voter prejudice. The Academy’s choices have 
been limited. During this century, minority actors have secured only 15 % of 
the top roles (as identified by billing, critical esteem and box-office 
takings). So, Oscar voters can hardly be criticised for awarding them 15% of 
the nominations and 17% of the statuettes.

The Oscars may not be anti-black; but they are definitely hideously white

It is not the Academy that is cheating minorities, it is the film industry 
itself. Currently, ethnic minorities make up around 40% of America’s 
population, yet they are outnumberedtwo to one 
<http://www.bunchecenter.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/2015-Hollywood-Diversity-Report-2-25-15.pdf>
 among film leads, two to one among film directors and three to one among film 
writers.

This is hardly surprising, according to some 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/15/meryl-streep-blames-white-male-studio-bosses-for-hampering-diversity?utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=Film+Today+-+automated+vB+curation&utm_term=156920&subid=6951&CMP=ema_861b>
: studio bosses, like Academy voters, are94% white 
<https://docs.google.com/viewer?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.bunchecenter.ucla.edu%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F02%2F2015-Hollywood-Diversity-Report-2-25-15.pdf>
. Yet Hollywood honchos are not out to indulge their personal tastes, but to 
make money. If they thought minority acting, directing and subjects would 
deliver it, they would doubtless pounce on these assets. They believe instead, 
however, that on-screen whiteness is an economic necessity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Foscarssowhite-right-and-wrong-academy-awards-audience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc01731e5881f3f0663034d228886918ac60f936%2F0_0_1485_2234%2F1485.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20%23OscarsSoWhite%20got%20right%20%E2%80%93%20and%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Foscarssowhite-right-and-wrong-academy-awards-audience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20%23OscarsSoWhite%20got%20right%20%E2%80%93%20and%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Foscarssowhite-right-and-wrong-academy-awards-audience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc01731e5881f3f0663034d228886918ac60f936%2F0_0_1485_2234%2F1485.jpg>
 Lupita Nyong’o at the 2014 Oscars. Photograph: Jeff Kravitz/FilmMagic 
Ridley Scott, challenged for casting white actors in Exodus: Gods and Kings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/exodus>, replied 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/envelope/oscars/la-et-mn-oscars-white-mtv-david-bowie-20160114-htmlstory.html>
: “I can’t mount a film of this budget, where I have to rely on tax rebates in 
Spain, and say that my lead actor is Mohammad so-and-so from such-and-such.”

This kind of thinking is often challenged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/18/hollywood-diversity-box-office-money>
. After all,Creed <https://www.theguardian.com/film/creed> and Straight Outta 
Compton <https://www.theguardian.com/film/straight-outta-compton> proved 
box-office hits 
<https://www.thewrap.com/creed-rocky-5-reasons-why-box-office-champ/>. Perhaps 
Hollywood is being too cautious, failing to appreciate that audience appetites 
have broadened. If films portraying minorities were readily funded and properly 
marketed, wouldn’t they break through?

Sadly, we cannot assume that they would. The independently produced biopic 
Selma <https://www.theguardian.com/film/selma> is often cited as the prime 
example 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/hollywoods-race-problem-an-insular-industry-struggles-to-change/2014/12/19/d870df04-8625-11e4-9534-f79a23c40e6c_story.html>
 of myriad sure-fire minority projects routinely turned down by over-nervous 
major studios. Yet Selma’s returnsfailed to cover its costs 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-hollywood/2015/01/12/as-america-tires-of-race-hoaxes-selma-disappoints-at-box-office/>
. By their own lights, the big boys were right to shun it, and are right to 
steer clear of its ilk. Unfortunately, the evidence shows that white people are
reluctant to watch 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1460-2466.2011.01544.x/abstract> 
minority-dominated films.

This reluctance is sometimes attributed to a racial empathy gap 
<http://blogs.indiewire.com/shadowandact/why-white-people-dont-like-black-movies>
. Yet no equivalent gap affects minority audiences. America’s minority 
filmgoers eagerly watch the movies that ignore them. During 2012, those 
slighted Hispanics were their country’s keenest film fans, representing 18% of 
filmgoers, but accounting for25% of all tickets sold 
<http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2013/popcorn-people-profiles-of-the-u-s-moviegoer-audience.html>
. Only20% of the films that black people watch feature predominantly black casts
 
<http://www.bet.com/news/national/2011/05/24/study-says-black-moviegoers-don-t-watch-just-black-films.html>
.

Beyond America, the same picture prevails. The likes of Captain America wow the
Chinese, Brazilians and Koreans 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?page=intl&id=marvel14b.htm> as much as 
they do these characters’ compatriots. Indeed, executives citefear of putting 
off overseas audiences 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/hollywoods-race-problem-an-insular-industry-struggles-to-change/2014/12/19/d870df04-8625-11e4-9534-f79a23c40e6c_story.html>
 as a prime reason for avoiding minority material. Multicultural Britain is not 
immune from this: black films are evenless successful in the UK than in the US 
<http://www.screendaily.com/news/dear-white-people-will-the-uk-listen-to-race-comedy/5089629.article>
.

Mysteriously, white characters, from Disney princesses to Marvel supermen, 
appear to have almost universal cinematic cultural appeal. Perhaps this merely 
reflects Hollywood’s historic hegemony. Whatever it is, the phenomenon is real.

Nonetheless, it is the Oscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> that 
remain in the line of fire. They undoubtedly influence the industry, its 
audiences and wider public attitudes. So, why not ask them to take the lead?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Foscarssowhite-right-and-wrong-academy-awards-audience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cf9121288954c291e20fd29087811cabab00b2d%2F0_0_2261_1065%2F2261.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20%23OscarsSoWhite%20got%20right%20%E2%80%93%20and%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Foscarssowhite-right-and-wrong-academy-awards-audience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20%23OscarsSoWhite%20got%20right%20%E2%80%93%20and%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Foscarssowhite-right-and-wrong-academy-awards-audience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cf9121288954c291e20fd29087811cabab00b2d%2F0_0_2261_1065%2F2261.jpg>
 Will Smith in Concussion 
In the face of the storm, the Academy is buckling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/11/academy-president-oscarssowhite-a-punch-to-the-stomach-but-new-rule-changes-not-ageist>
. It had already chosena black host 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/21/chris-rock-host-2016-oscars-confirmed>
 for Sunday’s ceremony. It is increasing the diversity of its board. It is to
purge older voters 
<http://www.oscars.org/news/academy-takes-historic-action-increase-diversity> 
and seek out more diverse replacements. Yet such steps will achieve little on 
their own as long as the industry’s output remains unaltered. If minorities’ 
share of the awards is to rise, the basis on which votes are cast will also 
have to change.

The black Oscar wins that got away | Peter Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/25/the-black-oscar-wins-that-got-away>
Some openly call for favouritism. “Awards shows have several functions: to 
reward excellence, but also to show the many forms excellence can occupy,”says 
Mary McNamara, the Pulitzer prize-winning critic 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/tv/showtracker/la-et-st-0119-why-the-oscarssowhite-fuss-matters-20160119-column.html>
. Mounting pressure could induce Academy members to overrate minority cinema. 
Newcomers specifically recruited to boost ethnic prospects might prove 
particularly susceptible. Yet a drift in this direction could prove 
counter-productive.

Minority winners could find themselves simultaneously patronised and 
undermined. The achievements of the genuinely outstanding among them could be 
tarnished. In the wider community, resentment could be stoked.Fewer than a 
quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/19/oscarssowhite-boycott-oscars-poll?utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=Film+Today+-+automated+vB+curation&utm_term=157706&subid=6951&CMP=ema_861b>
 of Americans support this year’s boycott.

Of course, the Oscars have never been allotted exclusively on merit 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2016/01/22/charlotte_rampling_says_black_actors_didn_t_deserve_to_be_nominated_for.html>
. Candidates who are well liked in the business, are “overdue”, fatten up for a 
part, orplay a character with learning difficulties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2008/sep/22/tropicthunder.benstiller>
 often enjoy an inflated chance of success. Yet, even if the Academy’s 
commitment to excellence is sometimes honoured in the breach, it is still what 
makes its awards enthral the world.

It’s not the Oscars that need to change. It’s us.
 