
“It’s fantastic what they can get people to achieve. They can literally get 
people out of wheelchairs.”

Owen James, 71, is one of the people with Parkinson’s disease attending 
classes run by the award-winning dance company, BalletBoyz, aimed at helping 
them overcome limitations imposed by the illness.

They train at at the same south-west London studio as the all-male ensemble, 
perform routines from the repertoire and have even danced with the troupe.

Like most of the men at the Parkinson’s Can Dance 
<http://www.balletboyz.com/news/parkinsons-can-dance/> classes, James had not 
danced before and was apprehensive about joining. But he fought back tears as 
he described the positive impact attending the class has had on his life.

“It’s great to socialise with people with the same problems,” he said. “I 
would do it every day if they had classes here. They are always smiling. You 
can look around and see how happy people are.

“I just wish it had happened years ago. I can’t speak highly enough of it, it 
keeps your joints moving. I have a chronic back problem, which compounds my 
Parkinson’s, and it really helps.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fthey-come-in-to-dance-and-leave-parkinsons-behind-ballet-boyz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccb48e4d458a11d29e09bfd5402a79f2c0887fd4%2F197_17_4803_2882%2F4803.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20come%20in%20to%20dance%20and%20leave%20their%20Parkinson%E2%80%99s%20behind'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fthey-come-in-to-dance-and-leave-parkinsons-behind-ballet-boyz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20come%20in%20to%20dance%20and%20leave%20their%20Parkinson%E2%80%99s%20behind%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fthey-come-in-to-dance-and-leave-parkinsons-behind-ballet-boyz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccb48e4d458a11d29e09bfd5402a79f2c0887fd4%2F197_17_4803_2882%2F4803.jpg>
 The classes build up gradually to standing movements. Photograph: David Levene 
for the Guardian 
A number of studies have suggested that dance can help lessen the tremors and 
rigidity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/03/dancing-proves-good-move-for-people-with-parkinsons-disease>
 associated with the incurable neurological condition, which affects about 
125,000 people in the UK. Just as importantly, Parkinson’s Can Dance aims to 
get its participants smiling and boost their self-confidence.


Annie Breckell, one of two ex-Royal Ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> dancers who lead the class, said: 
“They come in and leave their Parkinson’s behind. We don’t talk about symptoms, 
it’s about trying to get them to move in a certain way. There are lots of 
things they can’t do, we are showing them what they can do.

“When we take them to see the BalletBoyz, they can say: ‘We’ve done that.’ 
They danced with the BalletBoyz when they did Romeo and Juliet and that fact 
that they can go and say, ‘I danced with the BalletBoyz,’ has given them a 
lift.”

To plan the classes, Breckell and Becky Trevitt, who were at Royal Ballet at 
the same time, scrutinise the BalletBoyz repertoire to find characters, themes 
and music that can be employed.

Dancing proves a good move for people with Parkinson’s disease
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/03/dancing-proves-good-move-for-people-with-parkinsons-disease>
The sessions, which feature live musicians who can alter the rhythm and tempo 
as required, begin slowly, with participants doing seated movements. They also 
go through breathing exercises and singing, as people with Parkinson’s often 
have problems with their speech.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fthey-come-in-to-dance-and-leave-parkinsons-behind-ballet-boyz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18dfd25a3571be892ebb2551e7922a30e44d126a%2F0_167_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20come%20in%20to%20dance%20and%20leave%20their%20Parkinson%E2%80%99s%20behind'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fthey-come-in-to-dance-and-leave-parkinsons-behind-ballet-boyz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20come%20in%20to%20dance%20and%20leave%20their%20Parkinson%E2%80%99s%20behind%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fthey-come-in-to-dance-and-leave-parkinsons-behind-ballet-boyz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18dfd25a3571be892ebb2551e7922a30e44d126a%2F0_167_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Lydia Raugner takes part in a class. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
They build up gradually to standing movements using their chair for support 
before the finale, when they move freely around the room, with volunteers on 
hand to help those who need it.

Trevitt said attracting men to the class – at the beginning it was all women – 
was important given they are based at the home of BalletBoyz, which aims to 
make dance for men “a cool thing to do”.

Janet Skeen, another class regular, said: “It takes a lot of courage for a man 
to say: ‘I’m going to go and do dance.’ I used to do ballet as a child and I 
love the music. It gives me a lift having the BalletBoyz come in. I think it’s 
marvellous, we’re incredibly lucky, it raises everyone’s spirit level.”


As word of the class has spread, interest – from men and women – has soared 
and a second Parkinson’s CanDance <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance> 
session has recently been launched at the studio. Earlier this month, the 
company raised more than £20,000 through the Big Give, securing funding for at 
least another 12 months.

Rising awareness of the therapeutic properties of dance mean that referrals 
fromParkinson’s UK <https://www.parkinsons.org.uk/> and the medical profession 
are frequent, although Trevitt stresses that it is first and foremost a dance 
class.

“The idea is consciously thinking about balance and how your body is moving in 
space, using dance and movement to inspire movement,” she said. “The emphasis 
is on it being an artistic class rather than therapy. We are not neuro physios, 
we are doing what we know as dancers.”
 