
Some flood victims rescued family photographs. Others saved their pets. But 
when Angela Watson saw theflood water outside her house rising rapidly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/08/minister-says-flooding-is-unprecedented-event-as-she-defends-spending>
, there was one item particularly worth salvaging for her – her precious 
Carlisle United season tickets.


“When we realised the water was rising, I grabbed the computer and modem, then 
I thought ‘Oh, desk – season tickets!’ so I grabbed them, took them upstairs 
and then an hour later the water was literally 4ft 5in – I measured it by a 
mark on the wall,” she said on the doorstep of her flooded home on Warwick Road 
inCarlisle <https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> on Tuesday.


It was only later Watson realised she had left her handbag, along with her 
husband’s wallet and medication downstairs. “All those sort of things I never 
thought about – I just thought aboutCarlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/carlisle> United.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fflood-water-rising-grabbed-carlisle-united-season-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28e4c43478f970176ee2c49ec1ed8a95aea68093%2F0_0_3000_1984%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20flood%20water%20was%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20I%20grabbed%20our%20Carlisle%20United%20season%20tickets'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fflood-water-rising-grabbed-carlisle-united-season-tickets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20flood%20water%20was%20rising%20%E2%80%93%20I%20grabbed%20our%20Carlisle%20United%20season%20tickets%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fflood-water-rising-grabbed-carlisle-united-season-tickets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28e4c43478f970176ee2c49ec1ed8a95aea68093%2F0_0_3000_1984%2F3000.jpg>
 Carlisle United football players help residents clear their properties. 
Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images 
The 67-year-old, who has followed the club since her grandfather took her to 
her first game when she was five, lives opposite Carlisle United’s partially 
submerged Brunton Park stadium, whose pitch remains under water.


Fifteen of the club’s players swapped their football boots for wellies and 
industrial cleaning masks on Tuesday as they helped clear some of the homes
worst affected by Storm Desmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/08/storm-desmond-damage-cumbria-estimated-500m>
. “It doesn’t matter if they didn’t do anything, just come and chat to people. 
That’s all that matters,” said Wilson Watson, 73, Angela’s husband.


Down the road, first team players Charlie Wyke, Joe Thompson and Jason Kennedy 
helped clear the swamped house of Bill Douthwaite, 73, a lifelong Carlisle fan 
who had to be rescued from his house in a floating fridge-freezer at the 
weekend.

Josh Halliday (@JoshHalliday) 
Carlisle United players with Angela Watson, whose season ticket was first 
thing she saved from flooded homepic.twitter.com/4QkXQVLELN 
<https://t.co/4QkXQVLELN>
 <https://twitter.com/JoshHalliday/status/674233456650506241> December 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/JoshHalliday/status/674233456650506241> 
The players returned to Cumbria from Sunday’s FA Cup win at Welling to find 
the Brunton Park pitch under 8ft of water and some of their cars swept away by 
the area’s worst floods for 30 years.


Goalkeeper Dan Hanford and his girlfriend Suzi were due to move into a new 
home near the town’s flood-hit Warwick Road on Monday – but the house now 
resembles a bomb site and those plans lie in ruin.


He returned to Brunton Park’s car park to find his white BMW wrecked. A back 
window had been put through, a suitcase filled with his clothes had been swept 
away and a big green wheelie bin had been planted on the car’s roof by the 
sheer force of Desmond.


The footballer said he could smile about his car being ruined because it was 
replaceable but added: “That’s not my life, that’s replaceable. I’ve got 
friends and family that are here and their whole lives have gone – their 
Christmas presents, their carpets, couches.

Josh Halliday (@JoshHalliday) 
Carlisle rugby club pitch next door to Brunton Park #StormDesmond 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/StormDesmond?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/AQm3JECshy 
<https://t.co/AQm3JECshy>
 <https://twitter.com/JoshHalliday/status/674261173513097217> December 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/JoshHalliday/status/674261173513097217> 
“Have a look inside the club – everything’s gone. That’s people’s hard work, 
lives. I can get a new car – they’re gonna need a new home.”


Midfielder Gary Dicker, who was among the players helping out after a training 
session on Tuesday morning, said the scale of the devastation hit home as the 
players travelled back from Welling on Sunday.


“There were people after the game, when we went over to clap the fans in the 
stands, who’ve been affected – there was one or two who said their houses were 
flooded and they still made it to the game,” he said.


“It hit home on the way back, all of the foreign lads said they’ve never seen 
anything like it. To be so close to it and see how it’s affected so many people 
is devastating.”

Josh Halliday (@JoshHalliday) 
Carlisle United keeper Dan Hanford, himself a flood victim, on giving back to 
the community after#StormDesmond 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/StormDesmond?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/uVZPyAyhvZ 
<https://t.co/uVZPyAyhvZ>
 <https://twitter.com/JoshHalliday/status/674243366905905152> December 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/JoshHalliday/status/674243366905905152> 
In Penrith, the former fire station has been turned into the nerve centre for 
the massive volunteer operation across Cumbria. Van-loads of food, water, 
toiletries and even the odd Christmas tree are being delivered here before 
being distributed to those most in need.


The volunteer headquarters started as a modest Facebook group, Cumbria flood 
volunteers <https://www.facebook.com/groups/cumbriafloodvolunteers>, at the 
weekend, quickly attracting more than 15,000 members as appeals spread across 
the county.


Amid the relief operation, some volunteers said they felt badly hit rural 
communities around west Appleby were being forgotten and overshadowed by the 
damage in Carlisle.

Josh Halliday (@JoshHalliday) 
Carlisle United keeper Dan Hanford's car - wrecked behind submerged football 
stadiumpic.twitter.com/geKB5Is2y5 <https://t.co/geKB5Is2y5>
 <https://twitter.com/JoshHalliday/status/674233878207401984> December 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/JoshHalliday/status/674233878207401984> 
“The west side of Appleby felt they had been completely ignored. They felt 
they had no support so they were really surprised when we turned up with our 
care packages last night. They felt as if they’d been left alone,” said 
Kerryanne Wilde, 42, a Cumbria police officer and former army intelligence 
officer who is lead coordinator of the volunteer operation.


Wilde was one of the volunteers who took four van-loads of goods – including 
water, food, bedding and clothes – to flood-hit hamlets like Burrells, Colby 
and Hoff on Monday night. “The relief you could see on people’s faces – it was 
like, ‘Oh my God, people from outside Appleby have come.’ They actually thought 
that all the aid was going to Penrith, then to Carlisle. They hadn’t been told 
they were going to get some of that. They’ve got no electricity, no food, no 
fuel,” she said.


“Carlisle is really badly hit but it’s not the be all and end all. Carlisle is 
the main city in Cumbria but it will recover from this much quicker than the 
rural communities. If you speak to anybody in the west side of Appleby they 
will tell you the county council has not been there, the police haven’t been 
there,” she said, adding that only the fire service and mountain rescue had 
ventured there.




 