
It’s the third day of Christmas, and we’ve hit the middle of the week in which 
it’s traditional to look at one’s true love, think “actually, I’m not sure 
you’re my true love at all” and apply for a decree nisi.Last year one legal 
firm predicted a 332% rise in divorce inquiries in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/28/divorce-inquiries-predicted-increase-january-2016-post-christmas>
, compared with the preceding four months, with hundreds of thousands of people 
apparently gritting their teeth through Christmas and new year, in order to 
make it to the first working day of January, nicknamed “divorce day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/05/divorce-day-marriage-myths>
”, before ending their marriage.

7 ways to tell if you’re heading for divorce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/26/how-to-tell-heading-divorce-sex-appreciate-partner-criticism-relationship>
This is a desperately sad state of affairs, but it makes sense. As we reach 
the end of the old year and prepare for a fresh start, it’s natural to take 
stock, assess the areas of our lives that aren’t working and vow to make 
dramatic changes. Everyone who has ever read a magazine is familiar with the 
cliched “new year, new you”. It’s much easier to reinvent yourself when you’re 
no longer with the person who is familiar with your flatulence and pillow 
drool. Perhaps more significantly, festive celebrations tend to put your 
relationship in the spotlight, and its glare is often unforgiving.

Throughout December, the emotional advertising is relentless. We see thousands 
of images of idealised romantic love, expressed through the giving of diamonds. 
We don’t always stop to ask why these couples are almost always white, 
heterosexual and wearing improbably well-laundered satin dressing gowns. 
Instead, a nugget of dissatisfaction lodges in our subconscious, and grows and 
irritates until we’re in front ofthe Queen’s speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/25/queens-christmas-message-2016-inspirational-people-video>
, anxious and tearful, with a partially unwrapped Kärcher steam cleaner at our 
feet.

In Christmas advertising, women – always the first in advert land to be forced 
behind the sink, frowning thoughtfully at a plate of congealed gravy – are 
expected to become an unlikely combination of Nigella and Jesus, capable of 
feeding 5,000 people while looking hotter than a fresh batch of roast potatoes. 
Advertising is designed to make us dissatisfied, desperate to replace our cars, 
appliances and shampoo. BecauseChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> advertising is especially 
emotive and family focused, it arguably helps plant the seed that makes us 
think about replacing our partners too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fits-the-week-for-divorce-but-perhaps-we-should-think-twice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c0f2c73736b254b13ee482d5a756f70c4d895be%2F0_0_2548_1158%2F2548.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Tis%20the%20season%20for%20divorce%20%E2%80%93%20but%20perhaps%20we%20should%20think%20twice%20%7C%20Daisy%20Buchanan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fits-the-week-for-divorce-but-perhaps-we-should-think-twice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Tis%20the%20season%20for%20divorce%20%E2%80%93%20but%20perhaps%20we%20should%20think%20twice%20%7C%20Daisy%20Buchanan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fits-the-week-for-divorce-but-perhaps-we-should-think-twice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c0f2c73736b254b13ee482d5a756f70c4d895be%2F0_0_2548_1158%2F2548.jpg>
 ‘Christmas advertising is especially emotive and family focused.’ Photograph: 
Nick Jablonka 
In-laws are another major factor in the swirl of marital and romantic 
dissatisfaction. Most of us don’t spend the Christmas period sequestered in a 
love nest, our spouse topping up our champagne glass and fetching a freshly 
laundered robe for us each day. We’re with our families, and their families, 
and when you’ve been chatting to your partner’s sister for half an hour, taking 
deep breaths as she interrupts your every reply with “yup yup yup … yeah”, or 
you’ve been struggling to weather their mum’s passive aggression as she lays 
disdainful eyes on your tray of pigs in blankets, there is no one in the world 
you wouldn’t divorce. How can you possibly stay with your partner when their 
family is so terrible? The very least they could do is take your side, and 
loudly talk about disowning all their relatives. But there’s another way of 
looking at this. The flaws of our in-laws should be what force us to take stock 
and appreciate how miraculous it is that our partner turned out the way they 
did.

The truth is, while Christmas has become associated with romance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/dec/21/engaged-when-afford-get-married> 
for some – it’s apparently a popular time for a proposal – this period is, in 
fact, a relationship assault course. It’s a chance to be with our loved ones, 
and tell them how much they mean to us, but it’s also filled with seemingly 
infinite obstacles. We’re under pressure to perform perfectly, and when we’re 
exhausting ourselves to make sure everyone has a nice time, we need our 
partners to make us feel loved and appreciated. However, they’re working 
equally hard and waiting for us to present them with the pony/puppy/ticket to a 
tropical island that will make them feel they are loved as much as they love 
us. No one wins, apart from the in-laws, who eat all the cheese and 
Celebrations.

No one should have to stay in a relationship that makes them unhappy, and in 
some instances ending a relationship is the very best way to begin the new 
year. But I think we need to be more honest about the fact that Christmas is 
hard, and it’s normal to spend at least part of it hating your partner. The way 
you feel about each other at the end of December might not accurately reflect 
your relationship during the rest of the year. If you’re still talking to each 
other at this point, it’s probably worth seeing how January goes before you get 
serious about serving papers.
 