
Trump voters sure are sensitive lately. They’re upset that the cast of the hit 
play Hamiltonmade a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-booed-at-hamilton-performance-then-hears-diversity-plea>
 to Vice-President-elect Mike Pence, and that the audience booed him. They’re 
displeased that their vote iscosting them relationships 
<http://nypost.com/2016/11/16/my-best-man-unfriended-me-because-i-support-trump/>
 with family and friends. And for some reason not entirely clear to me, they’re 
unhappy with Starbucks and decided to demonstrate as much by …buying lots of 
coffee at Starbucks. <http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/18/living/trump-cup-starbucks/>

Trump demands apology from Hamilton cast after Mike Pence booed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-booed-at-hamilton-performance-then-hears-diversity-plea>
The same people who wear shirts that read “fuck your feelings” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/15/republican-party-after-donald-trump-paul-ryan>
 and rail against “political correctness” seem to believe that there should be 
no social consequences for their vote. I keep hearing calls for empathy and 
healing, civility and polite discourse. As if supporting a man who would fill 
his administration withwhite nationalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
 and misogynists is something to simply agree to disagree on.

Absolutely not. You don’t get to vote for a person who brags about sexual 
assault and expect that the women in your life will just shrug their shoulders. 
You don’t get to play the victim when people unfriend you on Facebook, as if 
being disliked for supporting a bigot is somehow worse than the suffering that 
marginalized people will endure under Trump. And you certainly do not get to 
enjoy a performance by people of color and those in the LGBT community without 
remark or protest when you enact policies and stoke hatred that put those very 
people’s lives in danger.

Being socially ostracized for supporting Trump is not an infringement of your 
rights, it’s a reasonable response by those of us who are disgusted, anxious, 
and afraid. I was recently accused by a writer of “vote shaming” – but there’s 
nothing wrong with being made to feel ashamed for doing something shameful.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
I suppose I should not be surprised by this reaction; people are taking cues 
from Trump himself, a man who feels so entitled to universal adoration that he 
whines about protests being“unfair” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/anti-trump-protests-election-president-new-york-chicago>
. Indeed, after Pence’s uncomfortable evening at Hamilton, Trump tweeted that 
the quite respectful statement from the cast was“harassment” 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/799972624713420804>. This from a 
man who has mocked a disabled reporter, encouraged violence at his rallies, and 
spent a lifetime denigrating women.

Grief comes in five stages. But when it comes to Trump, I can’t get past anger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/grief-five-stages-trump-cant-get-past-anger>
The president-elect even wrote that the theater should be a “safe” place. 
Apparently “safe space” is politically correct nonsense when women don’t want 
to get raped at college, but vitally important when a powerful man who 
advocates conversion therapy wants to enjoy a Broadway musical.

Since Trump won the election, hate crimes are being reported at a rate higher 
than right after 9/11. 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2016/11/12/post-election-spate-hate-crimes-worse-than-post-911-experts-say/93681294/>
 Just a few blocks from my home in Brooklyn,a woman was punched in the face by 
a Trump supporter 
<http://gothamist.com/2016/11/14/bar_tabac_trump_supporter_attack.php> and a 
swastika was drawn in a nearby children’s park 
<http://gothamist.com/2016/11/19/swastikas_at_adam_yauch_park_painte.php>. We 
have a president-elect who just settled aclass-action fraud case for $25m. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/trump-university-settlement-twitter>
 But yes, by all means, let’s talk more about your hurt feelings and “civility”.

Whether it’s Pence at a play or your Trump-voting uncle at Thanksgiving, there 
are people right now who should be made to feel uncomfortable. In a time when 
there is so much to protest, so much work to do, the booing is necessary – 
shame on us if we ever stop.
 