
As an Indigenous American, there was never any question of whether I should 
travel to Standing Rock or not. I needed to witness firsthand what was 
happening there, and wanted to offer solidarity to those fighting for the right 
of tribes to exercise agency over their own futures.

Only one problem remained: I had to find a way to go.

I am not a man of means. I weighed obligations, such as bills and work, and 
considered travelling expenses. I glanced at my vehicle, already knowing it was 
hardly suited for the 1,100-mile drive from my home in north-east Oregon, and 
resigned myself to staying home. I just couldn’t afford the trip.

The Standing Rock protests are a symbolic moment | Neil Young and Daryl Hannah
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/28/standing-rock-protests-neil-young>
But as police use of force escalated and news came out of private oil company 
security contractorsusing dogs 
<https://www.democracynow.org/2016/9/8/standoff_at_standing_rock_even_attack> 
against protesters, more and more people began to reach out to me, expressing a 
desire to help.

In early November, I was contacted by my good friend Jamie Stone, who said he 
wanted to go and offered his truck and trailer to haul supplies. Jamie also 
happens to be a former oil worker on the North Slope of Alaska. His uncle is an 
oil executive, and his brother works for oil companies around the globe, but he 
also has family members who are farmers in the midwest and have had easements 
forced across their own land for oil pipelines.

 “This issue brings a lot of people together for a lot of reasons,” Jamie told 
me, “whether it’s eminent domain, protecting water rights, or just people sick 
of ‘profit over people’. These corporate terrorists need to get the point that 
people are changing, and we aren’t going to be their sheep for much longer.”

I quickly agreed to the opportunity, but requested that we attempt to raise 
donations for thewater protectors 
<http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2016/09/portraits-from-dakota-access-pipeline-protest/>
, the group of Native Americans representing over 300 different tribes who are 
encamped near the location where the pipeline is slated to cross the Missouri 
river. They had put out a call for donations of firewood and winter camping 
supplies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa38d14b69739bfda3e041178d4a3cf9ee37d180f%2F0_28_2419_1452%2F2419.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20opened%20eyes'%3A%20at%20Standing%20Rock%2C%20my%20fellow%20Native%20Americans%20make%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20opened%20eyes%27%3A%20at%20Standing%20Rock%2C%20my%20fellow%20Native%20Americans%20make%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa38d14b69739bfda3e041178d4a3cf9ee37d180f%2F0_28_2419_1452%2F2419.jpg>
 Jack Walker, a tree care specialist from Oregon, cuts firewood to be donated 
to the water protectors. Photograph: Joe Whittle for the Guardian 
Large supplies of firewood are not easy to come by on the Great Plains – 
especially enough to keep a camp of several thousand people warm. Where I live, 
in the wooded mountains of north-east Oregon, firewood is abundant. So the 
first thing I did was start reaching out to people for firewood donations.

The response was overwhelming. Within 24 hours, we had reached our goal and 
acquired two more full-sized pickups and another trailer to accompany us. 
People also gave winter clothes, bulk food, horse feed and tack for the Sioux 
youth riders who have been active on the front lines of the movement since day 
one.

Jack Walker, from Wallowa County, Oregon, was one of the people who donated. 
In the picture above, he is seen cutting firewood to take to Standing Rock.

“My primary motivation for supporting Standing Rock is to stand for those who 
are standing up to corporate fascism in the face of human rights violations,” 
he told me. “I have always felt a deep remorse for the atrocities that the 
indigenous peoples of Turtle Island (the name given to America by indigenous 
groups) have suffered. I understand that we can’t take away the injustice, but 
I’m aware that if we face the injustices that occurred to our Native brothers 
and sisters, we can begin the healing process.”
 Chief Joseph, a leader in the Nez Perce war of 1877. Photograph: Public domain
Wallowa County itself, much like the Standing Rock area, is home to one of the 
most tragic tales in American history and the Indian wars. Much as cities in 
the Dakotas are named for local tribes, Wallowa County and my hometown of 
Joseph are named for the people who had to endure atrocities committed by 
settlers eager to clear that land.

The story of Chief Joseph, in particular, is yet another tale of a protector 
willing to sacrifice everything in the face of insurmountable odds. Chief 
Joseph was a leader in theNez Perce war of 1877 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nez_Perce_War>, in which his tribe and others 
opposed the US army. The conflict tragically ended when Chief Joseph 
surrendered a few hundred miles from Standing Rock, after an 1,100-mile running 
battle in an attempt to escape to Canada to live with Sitting Bull’s people in 
exile. They were cut short not far from the border by a surprise flank attack 
in which much of the tribe was killed. Some did make it to Canada, including 
Joseph’s young daughter, whom he never saw again.

During a speech he gave in Seattle shortly before his death (which his doctor 
literally deemed to be of a broken heart), Chief Joseph said: “Today I would 
like to be back in my old home in Wallowa Valley. All my friends are there. My 
father is buried there. Some of my children are buried there. I like the white 
people, but they have driven me out of my home. I have friendly feelings for 
all. My blood is the same that flows in the veins of the white men. We will all 
die just the same. But I have one grievance, that is because I am not allowed 
to go back to my old home.”

Joseph was not allowed that right, and he died in exile. 


‘We will never give up our relationship with the land and the water’

On 7 November, Jamie Stone, Cody Nowland and I began the two-day trip to the 
Standing Rock Sioux reservation. Cody is a member of the Confederated Tribes of 
the Umatilla Indian reservation, which is not far from my home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae07e98b79844f832001381da173df2570e6d82d%2F0_0_1768_1183%2F1768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20opened%20eyes'%3A%20at%20Standing%20Rock%2C%20my%20fellow%20Native%20Americans%20make%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20opened%20eyes%27%3A%20at%20Standing%20Rock%2C%20my%20fellow%20Native%20Americans%20make%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae07e98b79844f832001381da173df2570e6d82d%2F0_0_1768_1183%2F1768.jpg>
 Standing Rock Sioux siblings Austin, Mani, and PJ, stand in front of a 
police-guarded barricade. Photograph: Joe Whittle for the Guardian 
On the long drive into the Great Plains from the mountains and forests of our 
home, we talked of the days when his tribe and the Nez Perce would cross the 
continental divide and hunt bison, sometimes allying with the Sioux who lived 
on the plains, occasionally warring with them. We passed through eastern 
Montana, nearing the site of Chief Joseph’s surrender. Travelling those aisles 
of American history together felt surreal, considering where we were headed. 
History, it seemed, was repeating itself, only in a more modern form.

When we finally arrived, it was dark and cold, and we were met by a security 
team. We were informed of the strict camp policy – no weapons, drugs, or 
alcohol – and had to submit our trailer to a search. After the team made sure 
we were not intoxicated or bringing weapons, we were allowed in. Around 4,000 
people are spread across roughly one-mile stretches of land on either side of 
the Cannonball river, which are filled with tipis, tents and a few RVs.

My own daughter was fired at with rubber bullets while kneeling on the ground 
praying

The sounds of Native American drum groups and songs echoed through the crisp 
air. Native people have survived 500 years of atrocity on this continent with 
the help of prayers, ceremony, and our community. We are steady in our promise 
to never give up on our cultural and spiritual relationship with the land and 
water we owe everything to. It is perhaps for this reason that despite the 
continuing war against our way of life, there is love, happiness and a deep 
spirituality at Oceti Sakowin Camp. (Oceti Sakowin means “Seven Council Fires” 
– the seven tribes of the Great Sioux Nation.)

In the distance, to my left, I could see the bright lights coming from a line 
of police cars behind the barricade, across State Highway 1806. To my right, 
high-powered floodlights near theDakota Access pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dakota-access-pipeline> (DAPL) 
construction site shone brightly, pointing at the camp all night long.

DAPL floodlights point at the camp from dusk until dawn. Many in the camp 
believe they are part of “psy-ops” intentionally trying to disrupt the peace 
and rest of water protectors, although it is hard to substantiate it. But a 
plane circles the camp low, with lights off (an FAAviolation 
<http://aviation.stackexchange.com/questions/64/when-to-use-beacon-anti-collision-strobe-logo-and-navigation-lights>
) all night long, providing a near-constant droning buzz.

Every morning, during the large prayer ceremonies which take place at the 
river’s edge, a yellow DAPL helicopter flies low, buzzing the two ceremony 
locations repeatedly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16019f0ac0801271848952b1dcd68ce4455c74d9%2F0_0_2419_1613%2F2419.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20opened%20eyes'%3A%20at%20Standing%20Rock%2C%20my%20fellow%20Native%20Americans%20make%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20opened%20eyes%27%3A%20at%20Standing%20Rock%2C%20my%20fellow%20Native%20Americans%20make%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16019f0ac0801271848952b1dcd68ce4455c74d9%2F0_0_2419_1613%2F2419.jpg>
 DAPL floodlights point at the Oceti Sakowin camp from dusk until dawn.  
Photograph: Joe Whittle for the Guardian 
Intimidation doesn’t stop there; as has been widely reported, physical 
interactions have also taken place.

My own daughter, Mia, a 4.0-grade average student at Stanford University with 
a full-ride doctorate scholarship to any university in the world, was fired at 
with rubber bullets while kneeling on the ground praying.

The following is the text message I received from her after a terrified night 
of watching live feeds on Facebook from my home back in Oregon:

My friend was shot with a rubber bullet right next to me. We were bringing 
blankets to the folks who were getting sprayed with water/chemical combo, 
because it was freezing cold and the cops were literally putting the people at 
risk of dying; spraying water on people in this weather is trying to kill them. 
I watched one man get carried out after getting sprayed, water on his beard 
looked frozen, he needed help to lift his legs up over the guardrail to get to 
the van, it didn’t look like he could do it on his own. We knelt to pray on the 
earth and that’s when they shot, and got my friend.

Her auntie took care of us; she swiftly and strongly guided us back to the van 
where she was taken to the medics. She was a badass warrior.

 The women are all holding it down, that needs to be clear. They are the ones 
who get forgotten about in these movements, their importance needs to be 
emphasized. My friend and her auntie were treated dismissively at the ER in 
Bismarck, and a nurse said ‘that’ll teach you’ when they told her how she was 
injured.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-women-speak-police-abuse-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dakota%20Access%3A%20women%20on%20frontlines%20tell%20of%20violent%20arrests%20and%20police%20abuse%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-women-speak-police-abuse-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dakota%20Access%3A%20women%20on%20frontlines%20tell%20of%20violent%20arrests%20and%20police%20abuse%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-women-speak-police-abuse-video&media=>
Dakota Access: women on frontlines tell of violent arrests and police abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/04/dakota-access-pipeline-women-speak-police-abuse-video>
Two of the worst confrontations took place on the low hill known as “Turtle 
Hill”, where the gravesites of two known grandmothers of the tribe lie. The 
entire area is considered a sacred area, and said to contain other graves.

When construction began, water protectors made an attempt to occupy the 
location to protect it. Police responded with violent force and lined the 
shores of the Cannonball river under the hill, repelling people with rubber 
bullets and high powered pepper spray. Many people were injured. It was one of 
the mostviolent encounters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/standing-rock-protest-north-dakota-shutdown-evacuation>
 of the ongoing resistance.

Last week, Sophia Wilansky, 21, was seriously injured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/standing-rock-dakota-access-pipeline-sophia-wilansky-injury>
 after being hit by a projectile when officers threw less-than-lethal weapons 
at demonstrators. She mightlose her arm 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/11/23/503120449/woman-injured-at-standing-rock-protest-might-lose-arm-family-says>
.

‘There is a heightened stress because of cultural ignorance’

On Veteran’s Day, more than 100 veterans gathered in formation. They marched 
to the police roadblock, and performed a 21-gun salute for a fallen veteran and 
a prayer ceremony on the bridge. Many people are surprised to learn of the 
seeming irony of the fact thatNative Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/native-americans> possess more enrolled 
military members per capita than any other ethnicity in America.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2e84c33b8f757658ab99b4753960fc3e4335a08%2F0_0_2419_1613%2F2419.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20opened%20eyes'%3A%20at%20Standing%20Rock%2C%20my%20fellow%20Native%20Americans%20make%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20opened%20eyes%27%3A%20at%20Standing%20Rock%2C%20my%20fellow%20Native%20Americans%20make%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2e84c33b8f757658ab99b4753960fc3e4335a08%2F0_0_2419_1613%2F2419.jpg>
 On Veteran’s Day, over 100 veterans gathered in formation and marched to the 
roadblock. This week, over 2,000 veterans will arrive at Standing Rock as part 
of a support ‘deployment’. Photograph: Joe Whittle for the Guardian 
Veterans aren’t the only uniformed servicemen and women who’ve joined the 
resistance at Standing Rock. Law enforcement officers have, too.

Former Wallowa County police officer Michelle Bloker joined the caravan from 
Oregon. “I am horrified,” she said. “People praying, voicing their views and 
heart, were met with disdain and a level of force exceeding what was needed. 
Instead of mediation and active listening engagement, protectors were met with 
stout commands and ‘lawful orders’. I felt a sense of profiling.”

She believes part of the motivation behind the police mistreatment of water 
protectors is “a perceived threat when there was no intention of violence. 
There is a heightened stress because of cultural ignorance, and manipulation of 
law enforcement by corporate greed to pit them against protectors in an attempt 
to divide people.”

Jeff Ginter, a former Department of Justice investigations officer and 
Homeland Security air marshall, was at Standing Rock during my time there. 
Retired after 30 years in law enforcement, Jeff has an easy way about him which 
would lend itself to de-escalation tactics as a police officer.

It was needed. I think that’s how we can change the world – by everybody 
coming together
Phillip Wright, a Lakota youth 
“It is not appropriate to use water cannons during adverse conditions that 
will cause harm to the protesters – that would be considered inhumane 
treatment,” he said. “I decided to come and support after watching video 
footage online that I believe clearly demonstrates unlawful use of force. I’ve 
watched the videos of people being shot in the face with plastic bullets, 
struck in the head with riot batons, and the use of untrained police dogs. The 
abuses are many. I hope more police officers will come and stand with us.”

My own brother Larry Whittle, a Marine Corps veteran of the Gulf war and 
enrolled member of the Caddo Nation of Oklahoma, also decided to show 
solidarity at Standing Rock. On my fifth day there, he informed me that he 
would be joining the peaceful direct action. Their intent was to march 
peacefully down a county road to DAPL headquarters, where tribal elders would 
pray and hold ceremony to bless the sacred sites being disturbed by pipeline 
construction.

Little did my brother know his veteran’s experience and Marine Corps training 
would be called into action that day. The group was threatened by an angry 
local owner of a construction company called Four Square Concrete, who flew 
into a rage at having his drive home impeded by water protectors.

After pushing into several protectors with his truck while laying on his horn 
and revving his engine, hepulled out a handgun 
<http://www.motherjones.com/environment/2016/11/man-pulled-gun-pipeline-protesters>
 and began pointing it at people.

When someone yelled “gun”, in fear, Larry sprang into action with several 
others and ran to confront the man and place himself in between harm’s way and 
the other water protectors. The gunman eventually re-entered his truck and sped 
away from the group, running over a woman’s foot in the process. Before leaving 
the scene, he reached his gun out the window and fired seven rounds over the 
crowd.

‘It’s seven-generation time’

“When I was just a boy my grandma used to tell me, ‘Grandson, let’s walk out 
into the hills and listen.’ We used to go out there and listen to the spirits, 
really listen to what they had to say. If you really believe in the traditional 
ways, and if you do open your ears and listen to what’s going on around you … 
they’re trying to tell you stories,” says Standing Rock rider Sunny Iron Cloud.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa00e3a6978ff259e260031ad9015559cca39f1e8%2F0_0_1857_1240%2F1857.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20opened%20eyes'%3A%20at%20Standing%20Rock%2C%20my%20fellow%20Native%20Americans%20make%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20opened%20eyes%27%3A%20at%20Standing%20Rock%2C%20my%20fellow%20Native%20Americans%20make%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa00e3a6978ff259e260031ad9015559cca39f1e8%2F0_0_1857_1240%2F1857.jpg>
 Lakota youth riders of the “Horse Nation” gallop bareback at Standing Rock. 
Photograph: Joe Whittle for the Guardian 
He and his friends are the peaceful modern-day equivalent of the famous Great 
Plains horse warriors of yesteryear. It was their ancestors who defeated Gen 
Custer at the famous battle of theLittle Bighorn 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_the_Little_Bighorn>. They have not 
only been instrumental in helping to initiate the movement, but also in leading 
and inspiring it. They have provided security for people in the camp and 
repeatedly protected elders during confrontations.

One horse was shot twice with lethal ammunition by an unknown assailant during 
one protest encounter. Another horse was killed by rubber bullet impact from 
police during the first Backwater Bridge incident.

There is a prophecy among Native tribes called “the seventh generation”, which 
speaks of a time thought to be seven generations after first contact with 
Europeans, when indigenous youth and allies from all races come together to 
enact a new age of healing and rebirth for Native people and Turtle Island.

Lakota leader Crazy Horse spoke of his vision of that prophecy with the 
following words:

Upon suffering beyond suffering, the Red Nation shall rise again and it shall 
be a blessing for a sick world. A world filled with broken promises, 
selfishness and separations. A world longing for light again. I see a time of 
seven generations when all the colors of mankind will gather under the sacred 
Tree of Life and the whole Earth will become one circle again. In that day 
there will be those among the Lakota who will carry knowledge and understanding 
of unity among all living things, and the young white ones will come to those 
of my people and ask for this wisdom.

So far, Standing Rock has seen visitors come from as far as Tibet, Japan, and 
New Zealand to offer support. Even the last remaining indigenous people of 
Europe, the Sami tribe, have sent representatives.

People such as Lakota youth Phillip Wright believe the time Crazy Horse 
described is now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58c5520fa76dc9e9647583e3e951d36248347592%2F0_0_2116_1417%2F2116.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20opened%20eyes'%3A%20at%20Standing%20Rock%2C%20my%20fellow%20Native%20Americans%20make%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20opened%20eyes%27%3A%20at%20Standing%20Rock%2C%20my%20fellow%20Native%20Americans%20make%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fstanding-rock-indigenous-people-history-north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58c5520fa76dc9e9647583e3e951d36248347592%2F0_0_2116_1417%2F2116.jpg>
 ‘A lot of people are here for the future generations’, says Standing Rock 
tribal member Sunny Iron Cloud. Photograph: Joe Whittle for the Guardian 
“It was needed,” says Phillip. “Something big like this, to change the world. 
I think that’s how we can change the world – by everybody coming together. The 
Yellow Nation, the Red Nation, the Black Nation, and the White Nation, all came 
together. This is the first time in history all four have come together.”

Dakota Access pipeline: the who, what and why of the Standing Rock protests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/north-dakota-access-oil-pipeline-protests-explainer>
He’s right: this gathering of nations is unprecedented in Native American 
history. There is a sense of history in the making.

“It’s seven-generation time,” says Oglala Lakota, Brandon Iron Hawk, speaking 
to a group of his fellow riders. “You know, growing up they always said our 
seventh generation was gonna have to face something. This is what they were 
probably talking about. They were calling us, warning us about something. We’re 
gonna be standing for our people protecting our sacred land and water. We all 
came here for a reason.”

“I want to pray for them too,” he added, pointing at police. “Because who 
knows, maybe deep down inside they don’t want to be doing that to us. But it’s 
their job, because they have a family to support. We’re not here in anger, 
we’re here in peace and prayer.”

No one at the camp really wants to think about the possibility of the pipeline 
crossing the river. But there is definitely a sense that something bigger is 
happening. That story is one of a singular voice made up of many people’s 
voices, united for an ideal that Native voices have been singing for millennia.

“Even if we can’t stop this pipeline,” says Wright, “we still won. Because we 
opened up everybody’s eyes.”
 