
“If you spend your evenings going to these horrible places, it’s part of your 
life.” Take it from an actor who knows. Kate Fleetwood has played bothLady 
Macbeth <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/sep/27/theatre4> and Medea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/medea-review-rupert-goold-kate-fleetwood-almeida>
. Her last stage outing, inTracy Letts’ Bug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/03/bug-review-found111-kate-fleetwood-james-norton>
, was as a delusional heroin addict, hiding from a violent ex-husband, 
traumatised by the loss of her son. She has gone to some pretty horrible places.

Actors have to – that’s the job. But that’s not to say it doesn’t take a toll. 
As audiences, we look on, invest and exhale a cathartic sigh as we head home to 
bed, safe in the knowledge that it was all just make-believe and pretence. 
Only, of course, it’s not. Not entirely.

Actors' advice to actors: 'Costumes catching fire can be fun'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/28/actors-secrets-advice-from-the-players-book-laura-barnett>
To act is to be bound up in a fiction. It is to use one’s own life, one’s own 
emotions and experiences, to stand in for someone else. At some level, it’s 
real: a real act in real time with real consequences. “You don’t not feel it,” 
Fleetwood stresses. “You’re not just technically producing it. When you cry, 
you really cry – physically, emotionally, everything. It’s in you. It’s part of 
your life.”

Whereas screen actors have to summon that once, perhaps for a few takes in a 
row, stage actors have to do so night after night after night. As Lady M, 
Fleetwood wrung the blood from her hands almost 300 times, having to hit the 
same (damn) spot every time. “The thing we don’t talk about is the repetition,” 
she says – the way it embeds emotions into a person, the way it affects the 
rest of one’s life, the way it rewires the brain.

Michelle Terry found the same with Sarah Kane’s Cleansed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/24/cleansed-review-katie-mitchell-sarah-kane-dorfman-national-theatre-london>
, a play that put her through torture every night for three months. As Grace, 
she grieved for her brother, watched horrors and realigned her gender – two 
hours of extreme emotions every day.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Factors-emotions-on-stage-kate-fleetwood-michelle-terry-ben-miles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F982b6805c3233f17f3bd20c5023bf8ce4a6318b0%2F0_396_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='When%20you%20cry%2C%20you%20really%20cry'%3A%20the%20emotional%20toll%20of%20stage%20acting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Factors-emotions-on-stage-kate-fleetwood-michelle-terry-ben-miles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27When%20you%20cry%2C%20you%20really%20cry%27%3A%20the%20emotional%20toll%20of%20stage%20acting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Factors-emotions-on-stage-kate-fleetwood-michelle-terry-ben-miles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F982b6805c3233f17f3bd20c5023bf8ce4a6318b0%2F0_396_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Two hours of extreme emotions … Terry, with Graham Butler, in Sarah Kane’s 
Cleansed. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
“Living with that was quite hard,” she remembers. “You’re not meant to feel 
those feelings all of the time. It’s an emotional shock, having to remind your 
body of feelings you’ve felt in the past.” It came with consequences, carried 
off stage into life. “I was living with a low-level grief. Tom Mothersdale [who 
played the torturer Tinker] found he had this underlying rage.”


“The process of training or rehearsing is really good at getting you inside 
the world of a play, inside the mind of a writer or the psyche of a character, 
but there’s nothing about dropping it,” Terry points out. Several studies have 
shown that actors are particularly susceptible to mental health issues.

There are different schools of thought on acting and emotion. Some, from 
Constantin Stanislavski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/apr/17/modern-drama-konstantin-stanislavsky>
 to Lee Strasberg, stress the equivalence of actor and character, pushing 
performers to replicate the emotional states they are representing. Others, 
Diderot first, then Vsevolod Meyerhold andDavid Mamet 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/wednesdays-book-true-and-false-heresy-and-common-sense-for-the-actor-by-david-mamet-faber-pounds-999-1158544.html>
, advocate detachment: a kind of “just do it” approach.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Factors-emotions-on-stage-kate-fleetwood-michelle-terry-ben-miles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d00a393b12ec37f044d8c43db0482a7d2a5e2f6%2F0_0_1914_2888%2F1914.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='When%20you%20cry%2C%20you%20really%20cry'%3A%20the%20emotional%20toll%20of%20stage%20acting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Factors-emotions-on-stage-kate-fleetwood-michelle-terry-ben-miles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27When%20you%20cry%2C%20you%20really%20cry%27%3A%20the%20emotional%20toll%20of%20stage%20acting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Factors-emotions-on-stage-kate-fleetwood-michelle-terry-ben-miles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d00a393b12ec37f044d8c43db0482a7d2a5e2f6%2F0_0_1914_2888%2F1914.jpg>
 Just do it … David Mamet. Photograph: International/Rex Shutterstock 
Dutch psychologist Elly Konijn 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=kbcGfeaYfQ4C&pg=PA8&lpg=PA8&dq=elly+konijn&source=bl&ots=Y5zHQygha5&sig=sKHdzt7dUFm6ssQTtKieP-CthSw&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj9jLO1wKLOAhXGLMAKHX9GDN0Q6AEIZTAO>
 has looked into this. Her research proved that, although actors (even method 
actors) don’t experience the same emotions as their characters, they do undergo 
heightened emotions – largely as a result of being on stage in front of an 
audience with a job to do. It’s a highwire act, live performance, the 
psychological stresses of which one medical study has likened to “a small car 
crash”. That might explain the adrenaline rush actors feel immediately after 
coming off stage, and the strange hangover that can come the next day.

There’s a curious duality in this, a kind of split-consciousness, as if actor 
and character coexist in performance. “It’s an interesting state,” says Ben 
Miles. “On the one hand, you’re behaving, psychologically and physically, like 
someone else. At the same time, it’s you doing it.” To be seen and heard, 
actors have to remain aware of their situation, yet they have to give in to it 
as well. “It’s a sort of trance-like state – I don’t mean running around 
boggle-eyed and dribbling, but a mix of control and complete surrender.”

Even if their feelings aren’t equivalent, actors are nonetheless indivisible 
from their parts. They can’t escape themselves on stage. Hence the old saying: 
there are as many Hamlets as there are actors. Each brings something of 
themselves to every role. “We’re all capable of being many different things,” 
Terry says. “What happens is that you’ll access those bits of you that fit.”

There is, therefore, an element of self-discovery in playing somebody else. 
For Terry, it means “unearthing bits of yourself, and depending on how near the 
surface or how dormant they are, that determines whether it’s painful or not”. 
Actors rarely open up about these things, certainly not outside of rehearsal 
rooms. It can be a very private process: whatever gets you into a role. “It’s 
never self-indulgent, though. You’re never using it as therapy.”

That act of entwining, of identifying with a character, cuts both ways. Just 
as the actor puts themselves into a part, so that part can creep into the 
actor. When we speak, Terry is inHenry V mode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/23/henry-v-review-open-air-theatre-regents-park>
 and, uncharacteristically, she has found herself pulling rank. When her 
director brought a drill sergeant into rehearsals to put the cast through their 
paces, she resisted. “I went: ‘Absolutely not. You’re not shouting at me for 
two hours.’” In a writers’ meeting a few days later, she found herself pitching 
idea after idea about conflict. “They were like: ‘You’re doing Henry V, aren’t 
you?’ You only clock what’s happening to you gradually.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Factors-emotions-on-stage-kate-fleetwood-michelle-terry-ben-miles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feff48ec537518a39b2f0b6693c602d2962418758%2F80_194_3161_1897%2F3161.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='When%20you%20cry%2C%20you%20really%20cry'%3A%20the%20emotional%20toll%20of%20stage%20acting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Factors-emotions-on-stage-kate-fleetwood-michelle-terry-ben-miles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27When%20you%20cry%2C%20you%20really%20cry%27%3A%20the%20emotional%20toll%20of%20stage%20acting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Factors-emotions-on-stage-kate-fleetwood-michelle-terry-ben-miles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feff48ec537518a39b2f0b6693c602d2962418758%2F80_194_3161_1897%2F3161.jpg>
 As Lady Macbeth, Fleetwood wrung the blood from her hands almost 300 times. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
That can unlock things for the good. Henry has forced Terry to take ownership 
of authority, something she says she naturally shies away from, while playing 
Titania unlocked some newfound sexuality. “I don’t live my life like a sexy 
woman, but my partner pointed out that it’s in me. If I chose to, I could.” 
Acting, then, can be liberating; a way of playing out other versions of 
yourself, almost rehearsing for life. After finding herself typecast as 
victims, Terry pushed for assertive, assured roles; it was a way of discovering 
“what it means to take responsibility for your own identity. That can be 
incredibly empowering. Once you put a part down, you come to crave being that 
person again.”

All this means that actors carry characters around with them – sometimes for 
years. Miles still catches himself thinking of Thomas Cromwell,as Thomas 
Cromwell, a year afterWolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/09/wolf-hall-bring-bodies-swan> 
ended, while Terry occasionally finds herself caught off-guard when her life 
echoes something she has lived out on stage – a chance phrase or a fleeting 
look. “Quite a few times, I’ve flinched in recognition.”

For Fleetwood, it is more controlled: her past characters lying dormant, their 
mental and emotional states ingrained through repetition. “You can turn it on 
and off,” she says. “I can be sat in traffic and take 30 seconds to check 
someone’s still in there. It’s bizarre.”
 