
The first in a four-part series in which our writers choose their favourite 
football moments of the year

This being the season of goodwill, it is best not to admit one’s favourite 
football moment of 2016 wasSteve McClaren’s commentary of the England-Iceland 
match <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bMu_yRJu6no>, exquisite though that 
sketch’s timing was (“it’s been the perfect response, you think no problem, 
start again, keep dominating, keep putting pressure on the Icelandic back four 
… oh.”)

Liverpool’s Lovren sinks Borussia Dortmund in remarkable comeback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league-report>
Similarly it is wise not to guffaw too heartily while recalling Italy’s 
penalties in the Euro 2016 quarter-final shootout with Germany, when Graziano 
Pellè and Simone Zaza embarked on elaborate bluffs withthe same ill-founded 
confidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/19/joey-barton-interview-conflict-rangers>
 that Joey Barton took to Scotland. All ended up with sausage-wrapped egg on 
their faces. Funny for sure but in the spirit of Dr Strangelove’s President 
Merkin Muffley (“Gentlemen, you can’t fight in here. This is the War Room!”), 
one should demand nobler sentiments from a festive football blog.

Best, all told, to plump for something positive – a moment, perhaps, that 
encapsulated the appeal of a player who got you out of your seat nearly every 
time he approached the ball because the prospect of his involvement in the play 
was a bugle call announcing that something extraordinary was about to happen. 
Barcelona, of course, have a trio of such players. So didLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>.

Lionel Messi, Neymar and Luis Suárez frolicked on a rarefied plane throughout 
2016 but even they did not produce anything to match the night in April when 
Mamadou Sakho and Dejan Lovren brought the Anfield house down. The third member 
of Liverpool’s special trio of defenders did not play inthe thrilling Europa 
League quarter-final second leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league-report>
 against Borussia Dortmund because of the sheer callousness of squad selection, 
Jürgen Klopp explaining before kick-off that he had such an armoury at his 
disposal that “Kolo Touré, in his 280th spring, is not even in the squad.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2F2016-football-moment-dejan-lovren-liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f06776f2253106a799d6ed2d8ede9b92e329c73%2F0_13_1788_1073%2F1788.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%202016%20football%20moment%20to%20remember%3A%20Dejan%20Lovren%20sets%20the%20Kop%20on%20fire%20%7C%20Paul%20Doyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2F2016-football-moment-dejan-lovren-liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%202016%20football%20moment%20to%20remember%3A%20Dejan%20Lovren%20sets%20the%20Kop%20on%20fire%20%7C%20Paul%20Doyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2F2016-football-moment-dejan-lovren-liverpool-borussia-dortmund-europa-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f06776f2253106a799d6ed2d8ede9b92e329c73%2F0_13_1788_1073%2F1788.jpg>
 Jürgen Klopp celebrates with Dejan Lovren. Photograph: Jon Super/AP 
What makes Liverpool different from almost all other clubs with a worldwide 
fanbase is that much of their appeal is rooted in the fact that most of their 
victories, even when they were England’s dominant club, have seemed like 
triumphs over adversity. Often their wins have owed as much to the strength of 
unique men’s will as to their skill. Bruce Grobbelaar or Craig Johnston would 
probably say that, and Djimi Traoré dare not claim otherwise. April’s win over 
Dortmund slotted rambunctiously well into the Anfield canon.

Dejan Lovren: ‘I never expected that I would be somebody’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/15/dejan-lovren-i-never-expected-to-be-somebody>
It started perfectly badly. Liverpool were sliced open twice in the first nine 
minutes as Dortmund sought to kill the tie pronto. At 3-1 up on aggregate, with 
away goals from Henrikh Mkhitaryan and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, the German 
team were flying and the German fans were jubilating. The visitors’ vibe was 
adding to the suspicion that while English football has most of the money, the 
Bundesliga has a richness that the Premier League has lost. Klopp’s former club 
were threatening to show how far behind his current one is. Embarrassment 
loomed like a Simon Mignolet fumble.

But those were negative thoughts and would gain no traction on this joyous 
night. Instead Liverpool attacked with gusto and panache. So did Dortmund. It 
was exhilarating fare, served up at breakneck speed and with head-spinning 
twists. A goal from Divock Origi drew Liverpool closer to their improbable 
target before Marco Reus sent them back to square one. With less than half an 
hour left Liverpool needed to score three times – and to avoid conceding again. 
Lovren and Sakho almost seemed to grow extra limbs as they found new ways to 
block shots. Meanwhile Mats Hummels, who is John Stonesauf Deutsch, hoped that 
dapper sallies forward would remain the best form of defence – but not on this 
night, not during prime Sakho and Lovren.

Philippe Coutinho embellished a snazzy move with a bijou finish to make it 2-3 
on the night, 3-4 on aggregate. Now Dortmund were clinging on but none of their 
defenders was looking much like Franz Beckenbauer nor any otherKaiser. Then 
Sakho showed these men of will what will really was. There was no question of 
anyone other than him meeting Coutinho’s corner in the 78th minute. Three-three 
on the night, 4-4 on aggregate, but Dortmund were ahead on away goals.

Liverpool’s Jürgen Klopp: comeback to beat Dortmund 'a wonderful, wonderful 
night’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/15/wonderful-night-liverpool-jurgen-klopp-borussia-dortmund-europa-league>
As time ticked down the enraptured home crowd sought to summon another goal 
like cult members invoking deliverance. Enter Lovren. This was the moment he 
had been craving for an amusingly long time. It had been apparent for a while 
that the Croat had been operating in the belief that the best way to banish 
criticism of him following several rickety performances after his arrival from 
Southampton in 2014 was to produce one spectacular gesture of atonement.

He had tried it in the previous year’s Europa League in a shootout against 
Besiktas <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oVFtkm1E9X0>, when he attempted to 
steer a penalty into the top corner but sent it sailing towards the Bosphorus 
instead. That strengthened his resolve. So he tried it again the following 
April, when Liverpool weretrailing pitifully to Aston Villa in the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/19/aston-villa-liverpool-fa-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 semi-final with only seconds left on the clock. When the ball came to Lovren 
he eschewed the Hail Mary lob into the box, essaying instead a heavenly, 
imaginary 40-yard bolt into the top corner. His godawful effort flew into the 
stands and Liverpool were beaten by the most diabolical Villa side for a 
generation. Jesus wept.

Jürgen Klopp evoked Istanbul to inspire Liverpool against Borussia Dortmund
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/15/jurgen-klopp-memories-istanbul-liverpool-borussia-dortmund>
None of that deterred the quixotic Croat. When James Milner fired a cross into 
the area in stoppage time against Dortmund, Lovren saw another chance to shape 
his destiny.This time he seized it <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8eNOc38SQOA>
. When his header hit the net it was not only Liverpool supporters who punched 
the air with one hand, while pinching themselves with the other. It was a 
beautiful moment to behold.

But it was just a moment. Sakho’s Liverpool career soon fell into ruin because 
of a doping mystery and an attitude farce. Touré played in theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> final instead and, 
truth be told, the best that could be said about his performance was that it 
was his last for the club. Lovren, of course, is still at Liverpool, still, 
perhaps, building up to another special moment.
 