
When you put tequila and cars side-by-side, the story doesn’t usually end 
well. ButFord <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> is trying to change 
the narrative.

The car manufacturer has plans to introduce a new kind of plastic for some of 
its automobile parts using waste material generated by Jose Cuervo, the tequila 
manufacturer. Tequila is made by juicing the heart of an agave plant, a spiky 
desert succulent with a core composed of very strong fibers. These fibers are 
left over during the juicing process, and are usually thrown away or burned.

Now, Ford hopes to use these agave fibers to create a so-called bioplastic to 
replace synthetic materials, such as fiberglass, which are used to strengthen 
plastic components in cars – things such as storage bins, air-conditioning 
ducts and fuse boxes.

Would you wear wool shoes to save the environment?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/25/wool-shoes-green-footwear-ugg-allbirds-glerups>
Bioplastics are an old class of materials, invented after Anselme Payen 
<http://cell.sites.acs.org/anselmepayenaward.htm>, a French chemist, discovered 
cellulose in 1838 – a compound in many plants that can be made into fibers. By 
the late 1800s, cellulose from plants was being used to make rayon and viscose 
fabrics, as well as cellulose acetate photographic film, or safety film, 
designed to replace highly flammable nitrate film. Carmaker Henry Ford became 
an early champion, developing soybean-based plastic auto parts in the 1940s.

Ford began using a soy-based foam in seat cushions for the Mustang coupe in 
2001, a material produced from crop waste on soybean fields in the Midwest. It 
is now used in every vehicle Ford makes in North America, and has also been 
adopted by the mattress industry.

Later, in 2010, the car manufacturer looked at using plastics produced with 
wheat straw in the Flex SUV, which is manufactured in Ontario, Canada. The 
straw was previously burned by Canadian farmers because the climate was too 
cold to compost it. It was adopted as a reinforcing material in automobile 
plastics to replace talc, which must be mined.

Agave fibers will serve the same purpose in a new hybrid plastic. The fibers 
are extremely strong and resilient, and have been used for centuries by 
indigenous people in both the US and Mexico for sewing and weaving, and for 
making rope.

“There are a lot of companies around the world that are looking at agave 
fibers,” saysDavid Grewell <http://dgrewell.public.iastate.edu/>, an associate 
professor at Iowa State University and also director of theCenter for 
Bioplastics and Biocomposites <http://www.cb2.iastate.edu/index.html>, a 
National Science Foundation research center.

“The fibers themselves are relatively flexible, so that when they go through 
processing equipment, they are able to retain their strength. They don’t break 
and they’re relatively tough. Unlike glass fibers, which tend to be relatively 
brittle and not able to absorb energy.”

Ford hopes to begin using the new bioplastic made from agave at its factory in 
Hermosillo, Mexico, where it builds the Fusion and Lincoln MKZ sedans, within a 
year or two.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fford-cars-jose-cuervo-bioplastic-greeenhouse-gas-emissions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3244ac0a9c92cb7e98faa6f5c40d369d0907f0%2F52_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20car%20made%20from%20tequila%3F%20Ford%20Motor%20Co%20says%20it's%20good%20for%20the%20planet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fford-cars-jose-cuervo-bioplastic-greeenhouse-gas-emissions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20car%20made%20from%20tequila%3F%20Ford%20Motor%20Co%20says%20it%27s%20good%20for%20the%20planet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fford-cars-jose-cuervo-bioplastic-greeenhouse-gas-emissions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3244ac0a9c92cb7e98faa6f5c40d369d0907f0%2F52_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Agave fibers are put into a processing machine at a Ford lab. Photograph: Ford 
“You’ve heard of the farm-to-table movement in food,” says Debbie Mielewski, 
Ford’s senior technical leader of sustainable products. “This is sort of the 
same kind of thinking, where you would look at the local farms and see what 
kind of things could be incorporated into our products. We call it farm-to-car.”

Bioplastics may sound natural, but there is some controversy about how they 
break down. Many people make the assumption that because bioplastics contain 
natural materials, they must also be recyclable or compostable – or both. 
Whether either of these is possible generally depends upon what makes up the 
plastic substitute in the final material.

Frederick Michel, an associate professor of food, agriculture and biological 
engineering at Ohio State University 
<http://fic.osu.edu/members/directory/m/michel-frederick.html>, notes that 
despite robust recycling programs in the US, most plastics still end up as 
garbage in a landfill. So a new product’s fate in that environment is important 
to consider. Michel says Ford’s new material can’t be considered a true 
bioplastic, because the agave fibers are merely a strengthening filler mixed 
with a petroleum based plastic, not one derived from natural materials.

“If [bioplastics] are made from carbon from the atmosphere, and do not degrade 
in the landfill, then they can sequester atmospheric carbon and reduce global 
warming,” Michel says. “If they do biodegrade in the landfill, they form 
methane, which is a greenhouse gas 20-30 times worse than carbon dioxide. So it 
depends.”

One example of a petroleum based bioplastic is the PlantBottle 
<http://www.coca-colacompany.com/stories/plantbottle-frequently-asked-questions>
 developed by Coca-Cola in 2009. Some 30% of the material comes from sugar 
cane, the remaining 70% is petroleum derived. The company has been gradually 
phasing in the use of this material, and expects all its plastic bottles to use 
it by 2020.

Ford has collaborated with Coca-Cola in the past to use PlantBottle material 
on atrial basis 
<http://www.coca-colacompany.com/stories/driving-innovation-coca-cola-and-ford-take-plantbottle-technology-beyond-packaging>
 in seat fabrics.

Mielewski says Ford’s tests with the agave bioplastic have switched 30% of the 
strengthening material in the bioplastic to agave fibers, while the rest 
remains either fiberglass or talc. The balance of the material is a 
petroleum-derived plastic.

She said the company has not yet found a bioplastic that lasts long enough in 
car parts. Most biodegrade too quickly, yielding a shorter lifespan than the 
car itself.

“The advantage with switching out fiberglass with agave is the agave is more 
recyclable,” she says. “The fiber doesn’t break when remolding, so there is 
potential there to reuse it in the same product.”

Let them eat bugs: US startup sees future of sustainable food in creepy 
crawlies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/06/eating-insects-food-grubbly-farms-sustainable-seafood-startups>
Possibly the most direct advantage, Mielewski says, is improved fuel 
efficiency. A typical car totes around some 400lbs of plastic, she says. 
Plastics made with plants tend to be about 20% lighter, potentially cutting 
80-100lbs off a car’s weight. That’s enough, she says, to produce a measurable 
drop in fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions.

Across the 2.6m vehicles sold by Ford in 2015, this has the potential to 
significantly reduce the company’s carbon emissions.

Darby Hoover <https://www.nrdc.org/experts/darby-hoover>, a senior resource 
specialist at the Natural Resources Defense Council, praised Ford for focusing 
on agricultural waste, rather than virgin materials. There are 5bn metric tons 
of agricultural waste produced globally every year, Hoover says, so reusing 
more of this is important to the planet. It is also preferable to growing a 
plant specifically to make plastic, which takes land and other resources out of 
food production.

“It’s absolutely true that you’re avoiding impacts that likely would happen if 
that agave waste were not repurposed,” Hoover says. “All of that would create 
near term carbon emissions. So finding ways to repurpose those into products is 
commendable.”
 