
The substantial bag of mail (electronic and snail) that awaited me on my 
return from holiday was dominated by complaints about the number and quality of 
our themed puzzles. Some of the letters were quite vituperative.

"Enough", wrote Sickened of Solihull, following a Quick in August that 
featured instruments of torture. She was strongly of the view that iron 
maidens, racks and thumbscrews were out of place in bed with her morning cup of 
tea. But, having put finger to keyboard, she was equally opposed to having King 
Arthur's court or chemical elements in bed with her as well.

With nothing to guide me but instinct, my policy has been to have a 
splattering of themed puzzles, but not too many. With themed Cryptic puzzles we 
get the further complaint that they are too hard and unfair if you cannot crack 
the theme, or too easy if you crack it at once. And it is true that setters 
tend to like producing themed puzzles, partly to ring the changes and partly 
because getting a lot of themed words into a single puzzle keeps their grey 
cells engaged. Obviously, the definition of "not too many" is subjective, so 
feedback would be welcome.

_____

Apart from the complaints about themed puzzles, I found on my return a couple 
of letters speculating about the identity of the Guardian's setters behind 
their "noms de plume". Araucaria/John Graham has had his cover completely blown 
over the years, particularly when he featured in this year's birthday honours 
list for "services to the newspaper industry". But mostly our solvers know 
nothing - age, sex, background, profession or trade - of most of our setters. 
An interesting parlour game might be to ask you to send in thumbnail sketches 
of how you picture individual setters in your mind on the basis of the clues 
they set.

For example, one expat and her partner, living in Princeton, New Jersey, 
"guess that Bunthorne is closer to our age range (mid-30s) than some other 
setters". This will, no doubt, please him (for Bunthorne is a he), since in 
fact our Princeton pair are 100% wrong!

_____

The crossword puzzles in the Observer are no concern of mine, but I am 
delighted that, after too long a delay, we have been able to add the weekly 
Azed puzzle to the website. The delay was because the original software could 
not cope with barred solution grids. It now can.

However, many of you will not have registered this breakthrough, because it is 
not yet advertised separately on the crossword home page. You get to it 
directly via the archive facility at the bottom right of the home page, where 
Azed is one of the pull-down options on offer.

_____

Araucaria fans will want to know that another volume of his puzzles has just 
been published:Chambers Book of Araucaria Crosswords Volume 2 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=0550101950>
, available (as they say) from all good booksellers and theGuardian bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk>. It consists of the first 100 puzzles that 
he set for 1 Across, the monthly crossword subscription magazine he founded 
almost a quarter of a century ago, which is still going strong. The puzzles 
originally date from the mid-1980s, but he has re-edited them all so that the 
references make sense in 2005.

_____

Those of you who do the daily crosswords in the Guardian itself will by now 
have had time to adjust to the new Berliner layout. There were, I fear, a 
number of transitional problems, as one or two puzzles set and proofread in the 
old format failed to transfer accurately to the new. But that phase is over.

It would have been better from our point of view to have the main Cryptic 
crossword on the back page of the main section of the paper, but from both an 
editorial and an advertisement revenue point of view this was never a real 
option. The advantage of the present make-up is that the Cryptic is now in the 
same position every day. The Quick has certainly come well out of the change, 
with its prime position on the back page of G2.

Â·  Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor
 