
The planned council tax rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/15/council-tax-bills-can-rise-by-3-for-two-years-to-help-fund-social-care-says-javid>
 and government pledge to fund social care have done little to abate the 
growing frustration at the crisis breaking in the sector. If the prime minister 
is serious about making social care fit for purpose, her government needs to 
take a broader, more comprehensive look at the care industry. A rise in council 
tax alone is unlikely to be the silver bullet that solves the social care 
funding conundrum.


Social care is at a tipping point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/13/social-care-cuts-take-english-service-to-tipping-point-regulator-warns>
, according to the Care Quality Commission. Recent figures show that77 of the 
152 local authorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/26/nhs-elderly-care-close-to-collapse>
 responsible for providing care for older people have seen at least one 
residential and nursing care provider close due to insufficient funds, and far 
more face severe financial pressures. Every time a local authority cannot 
deliver the social care its residents need, it puts further strain on the NHS.

Even with greater ability to raise taxes to pay for social care, it is some of 
the most deprived areas that will gain the least from the tax increase: Wirral, 
Barking and Dagenham and Kingston upon Hull to name but a few.

To get social care back on track, as a society we must radically rethink our 
strategy towards the health and happiness of the British people. We need to 
fully appreciate the role wellbeing and health play in the prosperity of the 
country as a whole, and not just see health and social care as a burden on the 
budget. We must learn how to do more with less in order to ensure that the 
health and social care system survives for years to come.

Safeguarding talent

It starts with talent. Once article 50 has been triggered, we will have to do 
more than ever to safeguard talent across the health and social care sectors. 
In the NHS,9% of doctors and 6% of nurses are from the EU. In adult social 
care, the number rises to 12% of all professionals. 
<http://content.digital.nhs.uk/catalogue/PUB20503> It is crucial that we 
protect their status and ability to work in the UK – no strings attached.

Regardless of the passport you hold, little is being done to make care an 
attractive career choice. Roles are typically low paid, and subject to 
temporary contracts – a result of a squeeze on local government budgets.

Amid the gloom, there are promising signs. The government’s commitment to 
nurture homegrown talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/03/jeremy-hunt-promises-to-end-nhs-reliance-on-overseas-doctors-after-brexit>
 bodes well for the state of healthcare in 10 years’ time, but we will see 
demand continue to intensify before these schemes bear fruit. Having the right 
level of appropriately skilled staff is non-negotiable, and the government must 
move to protect EU workers.

How can health and social care work together effectively?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/dec/15/how-can-health-and-social-care-work-together-effectively>
Building partnerships

Secondly, collaborative efforts that bring together the best of the public, 
private and third sectors have the potential to transform care as we know it.

There are already examples of excellent partnerships between councils and the 
NHS. For example, in Devon where local government and theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> have worked together to share 
budgets. In this region, care homes have come together to develop a kite mark 
that allows operators in both the private and voluntary sectors to share ideas 
and information.

The private sector has a crucial role to play in future proofing social care 
in the UK. Businesses have the resources and expertise to fund pioneering 
research that could resolve the problems facing the NHS and social care.
HomeTouch <https://www.myhometouch.com/>, for example, uses modern technology 
to address pressing healthcare issues. It has developed an online marketplace 
to help families find trusted, vetted home carers so patients can leave 
hospital sooner. It is just one example of the innovation sparked when the 
private sector is granted a role in public service delivery.

And the third sector can work alongside both private and public sectors to 
ensure patients are supported where they might need additional help. It has the 
specialisms and dedication to ensure that that empathy is at the core of 
healthcare. ThePoint of Care Foundation 
<https://www.pointofcarefoundation.org.uk/>, for instance, is a charity with a 
mission to humanise healthcare and create a culture in which staff are valued 
and supported.

Last month, the Vibrant Economy Index 
<http://www.grantthornton.co.uk/insights/vibrant-economy-index/> demonstrated 
the necessity of cross-sector collaboration to tackle economic and social 
issues.

Measuring the overall performance of the country, the index reveals that urban 
areas, despite economic prosperity in the more traditional sense, perform less 
well in the health, wellbeing and happiness of their populations. It is in fact 
theinclusion and equality score 
<http://www.vibranteconomyindex.grantthornton.co.uk/inclusion-and-equality?_ga=1.264096969.474425598.1477994282>
 of a place that correlates most with its social prosperity. Hart in Hampshire 
scores above average for inclusion, equality health and happiness. In contrast, 
Birmingham and Newcastle upon Tyne score correspondingly low in both categories.

Bridging the divide: how can the NHS get collaboration right?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/dec/14/bridging-the-divide-how-can-the-nhs-get-collaboration-right>
Developing a blueprint

Greater Manchester emerges as a focal point for an opportunity to develop a 
blueprint for the rest of the UK. Although business is booming, economic 
prosperity is not reaching everyone.

Manchester’s devolved health budget provides the opportunity for deeper 
collaboration between sectors, with truly transformational potential.

This is already taking shape. For example, Health Innovation Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jun/10/new-research-partnership-health-innovation-manchester>
, a new research partnership, is working with industry, the public sector, and 
academic institutions to share knowledge, and remove barriers that prevent the 
development of life-changing innovations.

At Grant Thornton, we are also working to break down the barriers between 
different parts of the health system. Last month, we convened a day where 
people across the city met to share ideas and innovate, to shape Manchester’s 
future as a pioneer of world-class health. Partnerships like these must be 
cultivated.

The UK has a long tradition of providing care to those who need it most. Yet, 
without ensuring funding from government and private resources, and failing to 
do anything to secure talent, we endanger the future of British social care 
altogether.

Without a fit, healthy population, this country cannot grow and socio-economic 
divides will worsen.Social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-care> is not an add on, and care is 
not just for individuals, but society as a whole.

Paul Dossett is head of local government at Grant Thornton 
<http://vibranteconomy.grantthornton.co.uk/>.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 