
On Wednesday, Australia found out that only a few days before Christmas, a 
low-income single mother was hit with a wrongful debt notice from Centrelink, 
demanding she front up to them with$24,000 in “recovery fees” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/28/call-to-suspend-centrelink-system-after-single-mother-receives-24000-debt-notice>
 for a supposed overpayment.

She was a victim of Centrelink’s new automated “data-matching” compliance 
system, in whichCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> and the Australian 
Taxation Office cross-reference their records, to see who is earning what 
where, and how earned income might affect their eligibility for income support, 
like the dole.

Government backs Centrelink debt system despite 'incorrect' $24,000 demand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/29/government-confident-in-centrelink-debt-compliance-system-despite-reported-errors>
There have been calls to suspend the system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/28/call-to-suspend-centrelink-system-after-single-mother-receives-24000-debt-notice>
, because the computers are making shocking mistakes. The woman mentioned above 
found herself subject to the wrongful notice because she’d recorded the name of 
her employer slightly differently in two different documents. The automated 
system decided that she was working for two different employers. So the 
experience of being on welfare in Australia – which is onerous in its 
reporting, punishing in its obligations and impoverishing in its conditions – 
became anxious and terrifying for an entire family at an expensive and 
stressful time of the year.

Are the government likely to heed calls for the faulty system’s abolition? 
Highly unlikely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/28/call-to-suspend-centrelink-system-after-single-mother-receives-24000-debt-notice>
, and for three reasons.

 Firstly, data-matching was actually a “cornerstone” of the Coalition’s final 
budget costings 
<http://mobile.abc.net.au/news/2016-06-28/election-2016-coalition-releases-election-costings/7550790>
 before the July election. Howling about a “budget emergency” before their 2013 
election, the Liberals and Nationals insisted that only their economic 
management of could rescue the economy. Over the intervening four years, their 
economic management has consisted of a debt that has ballooned by the billions.

Spoiler alert: their much talked-about election “plan” to redress their own 
financial ineptitude was merely to cut spending, like kicking elderly 
Australians off the pension, defunding legal centres and this data-matching 
“crackdown”, which is supposed to yield the bottom line a cool $2bn.

 Second, while the government is instilling terror into pensioners, single 
mothers and the unemployed with labyrinthine obligations around Centrelink 
payments, it can pretend it is doing something about the growing debtwithout 
addressing any of the real reasons it keeps getting bigger.

Like how income tax revenue is not increasing its contribution to government 
coffers because under four years of Liberal/National “management” wage growth 
has hit a record low. Wage growth is now a full percentage point lower than 
during the global financial crisis, and as a resultreal wages have not grown in 
three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/nov/17/three-years-of-stagnant-wage-growth-dont-be-surprised-if-people-look-for-someone-to-blame?CMP=share_btn_link>
. Three years.

And how has the government sought to redress these problems? Oh, with an 
aggressive fight against wage increases for public servants, stealing a failed 
overseas scheme in which young workers will take adult jobs for $4 an hour and 
flattering the business lobby’s attempts to cut penalty rates andabandon the 
minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/27/the-only-certainty-of-a-reduced-minimum-wage-is-a-lot-more-poor-people?CMP=share_btn_link.>
.

Income tax is not, of course, the only means of raising revenue. There’s 
company tax, too. Alas, the stated priority of the Turnbull government before 
the election was a $50bn tax cut to big business – a gift of some generosity 
when such a large number of corporations pay no tax anyway.

In October, the Guardian revealed that the government was forgoing “billions 
of dollars” of potential revenue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/11/fears-australia-losing-billions-in-liquefied-natural-gas-tax-sparks-calls-for-inquiry>
 from a failure to properly apply a petroleum resource rent tax to liquefied 
natural gas exports. And the government knew a year ago that585 companies 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/the-economy/which-of-australias-biggest-companies-are-not-paying-tax-20151216-glpl3a.html>
, each with $100m or more of annual turnover, were paying no tax.

Fears Australia losing billions in liquefied natural gas tax sparks calls for 
inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/11/fears-australia-losing-billions-in-liquefied-natural-gas-tax-sparks-calls-for-inquiry>
Why non-tax-paying corporations that include ExxonMobil, Lend Lease, Glencore, 
Virgin or Mitsubishi need further tax breaks is as open a question as that 
which asks why the government will “crack down” on welfare recipients when 27 
individual Australian millionaires paid close to no income tax in 2013-14 
despite rustling together acombined $46.7m for the cost of “managing their tax 
affairs” 
<http://www.petermartin.com.au/2016/03/revealed-56-australian-millionaires-who.html?m=1>
. Or why the government has gone after part-pensioners when it is maintaining 
superannuation tax concessions for the super rich that’s costing the budget 
$35bn in tax revenue a year 
<http://mobile.abc.net.au/news/2016-09-15/superannuation-changes-slammed-as-cave-to-rich/7849360>
.

 Unless, of course, we can all grasp the third reason for the unfairness: it’s 
what the Liberals and Nationals prioritise.

I wrote in 2014 about Joe Hockey’s willingness to punish welfare recipients 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/21/tax-avoiders-australia-amnesty>
 at the same time he was offering amnesties to tax avoiders; Hockey has gone, 
the theme hasn’t changed.

And, frankly people, it’s not going to while the Coalition remain in power. 
The belief that taxes are “burdensome” and that the political mission is the 
“encouragement and facilitation of wealth” is not some partisan accusation 
against the Liberal party – it’s theirexplicit commitment 
<https://www.liberal.org.au/our-beliefs>. They will phrase it as they must to 
get elected, but theirs is a mission to defend the wealthy people and 
corporations; the poor, the vulnerable, the struggling – hell, even the merely 
ordinary – do not come into it.

Be outraged at the unfairness, but don’t be surprised – it’s the one electoral 
promise they really can be guaranteed to keep.
 