
Life would be easier for the crossword editor if the English language were 
more like, say, French, where there is one right answer as to how a word is 
spelt, authorised by the sages of the Académie Française or its equivalent.

But English is a more vital and democratic language, which is why it is such a 
joy to the cryptic crossword setter. On March 21 a clue by Rufus [Arm of the 
leg (5-3)] required as an answer that little, two-edged dagger that Scotsmen 
tuck into the top of their socks when wearing the kilt. The clue also required 
the dagger to be spelt SKENE-DHU, or else it wouldn't fit with the down 
solutions.

To my surprise, the complaints were mainly from south of the border. They 
asserted that we had again made a howler and the readers' editor made ready to 
apologise. For, as everyone knows, the thing is a skean-dhu.

It is true, as declared by the new god Google, that skean-dhu is the 
democratically elected correct spelling. But Chambers gives skene-dhu first and 
skean-dhu second, which must be intentional as it is not the alphabetical 
order. Collins goes further. Its gives as its main spelling sgian-dhu [Gaelic 
sgian knife + dhu black] and downgrades skean-dhu completely to the status of 
"variant".

_______________

There have been several other such problems already this year. "It's about a 
hero getting a record 99 (4)" was a clue from Logodaedalus for EPIC. One of you 
protested that any half-educated person knows that the Roman numeral for 99 is 
XCIX, not IC. I am not aware of any evidence that the Romans themselves ever 
saved space by writing or carving IC, but later Latin speakers, according to 
the Everyman Encyclopaedia, have done so. IC for 99 is recorded in as having 
been used in Holland as early as 1599. Purists may counter that this was just 
dog Latin, but I am inclined to think that what was good enough for the 
Hollanders is good enough for a Guardian crossword.

Also, Araucaria, whose familiarity with information technology is greater than 
mine, set this clue in February: "The setter's poem gets online from phone 
(5)". Surely that should be (1-4), not (5), came the complaint. Here I was in 
new territory, because the IMODE is such a recent invention that it had not 
made it into any of the dictionaries on my shelf. So I was reluctantly forced 
to rely on Google alone.

I am not sure exactly what the IMODE does, but my impression is that its 
spelling has already changed. It seems to have started life as iMode, but is 
growing up to become i-mode, or i-Mode. Perhaps this is because it has fallen 
under the influence of its older brother, e-mail. But, if so, it could soon 
find itself alone, because my fashion sense (and the Guardian's style guide) 
tell me that e-mail is increasingly passing itself off as email. Such a 
development would be welcome to crossword setters, because clues for e-mail 
(1-4) are beginning to stick out like a sore thumb.

All this raises difficult issues. For, while I am happy to justify the 
appearance of alternative spellings for sgian-dhu, ukulele and the rest, I 
think we need to start following the Guardian's style guide for email. It is 
too unsettling to have (1-4) one day and (5) the next. But how is one to decide 
when the time has come for such a far-reaching change?

And is it wise to allow oneself to become so reliant on Google? The warning 
from a solver in the Philippines keeps playing on my mind. "The more results 
there are on Google", he wrote, "the more likely a fact is to be wrong. A good 
deal of Google's pages seem to be opinions of 14-year-olds in the USA."

That may be putting it rather strongly, but it is of a piece with the fact 
that even the venerable Oxford University Press has been under a well-organised 
and sustained electronic write-in campaign (which happily it is ignoring) to 
accept "bouncebackability" as a legitimate synonym for resilience.

_______________

Araucaria and I owe those of you who did last month's Genius puzzle an 
apology. His clue "King George and a student at lakeside town near Kiev" 
required the answer Zhigansk. As every schoolboy knows, Zhigansk (being above 
the Arctic Circle in Siberia) is not much further from London than it is from 
Kiev. Please accept our apologies. This 2,500 mile error, however, did not 
prevent an unusually large number of correct prize submissions.

_______________

In case you haven't already noticed, in response to popular request we have 
added a new feature to the website. There is now an explanation in note form as 
to how the clues in each Saturday prize puzzle are intended to work. To find 
it, all you have to do is to click where indicated above the grid in any of the 
blank, complete or print forms of the puzzle in question in the archive section.

· Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor
 