
February was very much Araucaria's month so far as we were concerned. The GOM 
of British crosswords celebrated his 90th birthday on 16 February.

As well as birthday gatherings of his family and of his neighbours in the 
village in Cambridgeshire where he lives and a lunch in his honour in King's 
College, Cambridge, organised by the crossword magazine 1 Across, which he 
founded, edited for many years and to which he still contributes each month, 
there was a party for him at the Guardian on the eve of the great day. Alan 
Rusbridger, the editor, hailed his almost 53 years unbroken stint as a 
crossword setter for the paper. He pointed out that Araucaria's length of 
service is now far longer than that of either of those two other giants of the 
paper's history: Neville Cardus as music critic and cricket writer and Alistair 
Cooke as foreign correspondent.

Araucaria's first puzzle for us (then, of course, anonymous) was published in 
what was still the Manchester Guardian on 10 July 1958. The first clue in that 
puzzle was Araucaria pure and simple: "Establishment cut to the bone? (8,5)" 
for SKELETON STAFF. His friend and admirer, the actor Timothy West, in 
proposing Araucaria's health, recorded how he had come to know his wife 
Prunella Scales properly as a result of them both killing time, as actors must, 
by doing an Araucaria puzzle together in the 1960s. Throughout this hectic 
month Araucaria continued to produce his regular flow of puzzles for us and for 
others, as well as satisfying the demand for 'bespoke' puzzles for what might 
be termed private clients via his new websitewww.araucariacrosswords.com 
<http://www.araucariacrosswords.com>. Lesser and younger mortals would stagger 
under such a prodigious volume of work but luckily for us he seems to thrive on 
it.

All of which makes doubly embarrassing the fact that a mistake was introduced 
into the current Araucaria Saturday prize puzzle, No 25,262 for 5 March, one of 
his popular alphabetical jigsaw offerings. The letter count at the and of the 
clue for A should be (7) and not (7,5) as shown. My apologies to him and to you.

_____

On 24 March, Guardian cryptic crossword setter Paul will be giving Extra 
members a fascinating insight into the mysterious minds of the the Guardian 
cryptic crossword setting team.

How does one become a setter? How are cryptic crosswords written? What is a 
fair clue and what isn't? What is the secret of crossword comedy?

Paul, aka John Halpern, will charm and delight you as you enter the 
bamboozling, magical world of the cryptic crossword.

You will also get the chance to write a clue and have it published on the 
Extra site. Prepare to be amazed - words will never be the same again!

Learn the secrets of the setters and get answers to all your crossword queries 
at the event, which starts at 7pm at Manchester Metropolitan University on 
Thursday 24 March.

Tickets for the event cost Â£12. The ticket price includes a complimentary 
drink on arrival.Click here to find out more about the event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/extra/2011/feb/09/crosswords-manchester>.

_____

February's Genius (No 92) by Brummie produced another large crop of entries 
(383) with 44 of them on the first day. Ian of London SW3 was first past the 
post at 00:53, just pipping Tony of London W5 by a minute and Ian of London N14 
by six.

Congratulations to Andy Dickerson from Sheffield, who is February's Genius 
winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>. For Observer crosswords 
please emailcrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 