
Of all the many Nutcrackers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/dec/18/movetube-nutcracker-beginners> 
competing for Christmas audiences this year, one production had promised to 
stand out.Will Tuckett <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/will-tuckett>, a former 
member of the Royal Ballet, had long had the idea of creating a fully immersive 
version, allowing his audience to become guests at the Act 1 Christmas party, 
and to wander through the magical delights of the Act 2 Kingdom of the Sweets. 
Everything was in place for Tuckett’s production to open at the end of 
November. Last week, however, the realisation that it had run into insuperable 
financial problems forced the heartbreaking decision to cancel.

Most of the big classical ballets that we see in the UK are performed by 
state-subsidised companies, who additionally benefit from wealthy patrons. But 
Tuckett has always been interested in taking his work outside an opera house 
context, presenting it to different audiences. His immersive Nutcracker was to 
be staged at the Printworks, a converted industrial space in east London, and 
he and his producer Bob Watts were confident that they were offering a radical, 
but still accessible take on the family classic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fwill-tuckett-nutcracker-ballet-cancelled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d7915736121ecd8109123b8823f00812ba7f4ad%2F0_625_3861_5167%2F3861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20leap%20too%20far%3A%20Will%20Tuckett%20on%20why%20his%20Nutcracker%20won't%20go%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fwill-tuckett-nutcracker-ballet-cancelled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20leap%20too%20far%3A%20Will%20Tuckett%20on%20why%20his%20Nutcracker%20won%27t%20go%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fwill-tuckett-nutcracker-ballet-cancelled%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d7915736121ecd8109123b8823f00812ba7f4ad%2F0_625_3861_5167%2F3861.jpg>
 ‘We felt we had made something really glorious’ … Will Tuckett. Photograph: 
Johan Persson 
The numbers, however, didn’t add up. Talking to Tuckett the day after he made 
his decision, he says they had encountered “a perfect storm” of issues: 
problems with the economy after the Brexit vote, a shortfall in investment and, 
he admits, a dangerous level of optimism among all concerned. Tuckett had known 
Watts’ work as aproduction manager 
<http://www.stagejobspro.com/uk/theatre-professional/profile/bob-watts> from 
the Royal Opera House, Glyndebourne and Secret Cinema. All had been going 
perfectly in the studio, where Tuckett and his 50 dancers and musicians had 
“been having a lovely time”. There had been just seven minutes of material left 
to create when it became clear that money was running out. Large sums were owed 
(“the price of a flat”) and the company made desperate efforts to raise funds 
themselves. A number of West End producers and investors have showed an 
interest in salvaging the project. Bob Watts has said that he hopes it will 
come to a London audience soon.

“Everyone has felt the blow,” says Tuckett unhappily. “We’d just done our 
first run-through for an invited audience and we felt we had made something 
really glorious here.” Tuckett had made a beguiling case for the ballet when I 
met him a couple of weeks earlier. “I’ve always thought that it would be 
wonderful to be a 10-year-old child and just be allowed to go inside the 
Nutcracker,” he said – and he made it sound pretty wonderful for an adult too. 
He explained how the audience was going to be drawn into the Christmas party as 
soon as they arrived in the venue: allowed to watch the action from the 
sidelines if they preferred, but given plenty of cues to join in by the cast, 
who would offer them drinks, engage in conversation, even invite them to dance.

Although the audience would be be seated throughout the magical transformation 
and battle scenes, they would be on the move again for the rest of the evening. 
Towards the end of Act 1 they’d be invited to process through the Kingdom of 
Snow and into the Kingdom of Sweets that Tuckett had beautifully reimagined as 
a winter fair with roasting chestnuts and popcorn, and with the dance 
divertissements being performed simultaneously, in different areas of the 
stage, so that people could sample them as they chose.

It was key to Tuckett’s vision that whatever choices his audience made, they 
would still see all of his choreography and hear all of Tchaikovsky’s score. “I 
hate that thing in immersive theatre when only a few people get that to have 
that ‘one-on-one moment’ in the ‘secret room’. It’s my job to make sure that 
everyone sees everything and has a really good time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fwill-tuckett-nutcracker-ballet-cancelled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ad80b0091e9153ff130462185e4652668e6644a%2F0_0_3644_2588%2F3644.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20leap%20too%20far%3A%20Will%20Tuckett%20on%20why%20his%20Nutcracker%20won't%20go%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fwill-tuckett-nutcracker-ballet-cancelled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20leap%20too%20far%3A%20Will%20Tuckett%20on%20why%20his%20Nutcracker%20won%27t%20go%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fwill-tuckett-nutcracker-ballet-cancelled%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ad80b0091e9153ff130462185e4652668e6644a%2F0_0_3644_2588%2F3644.jpg>
 William Tuckett as Drosselmeyer, with Iohna Loots as Clara, in the Royal 
Ballet’s 2011 staging of The Nutcracker. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
Tuckett’s other ambition was to overcome the structural flaw in The 
Nutcracker. In traditional productions, all of the storytelling is in the first 
half and most of the dancing in the second. “That’s always driven me crazy,” 
Tuckett says. “When you’re on stage, you can feel how involved the audience are 
with Act 1. But then they go out for their interval gin and ice cream, and it 
all falls flat.” By keeping his audience on the move, and adding extra 
novelties such as an aerial Arabian dance, he’d hoped to sustain his 
production’s energy all the way to the end. He’d also aimed to strengthen the 
ballet’s narrative: presenting all of the complicated magic as the dream of its 
heroine Clara, and adding new characters such as the mean governess who, having 
broken Clara’s beloved Nutcracker doll, reappears as the evil Queen Rat of her 
dream.

Writer Alasdair Middleton <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/alasdair-middleton> 
had fleshed out every character with a backstory, and devised a stylised but 
vivid script with which they could all engage verbally with the audience. 
Figuring out all the possible devices of performer-audience interaction had 
been huge fun for Tuckett and he was particularly glowing aboutAdam Cooper 
<http://www.adam-cooper.com/biography.htm> in the role of the magician 
Drosselmeyer. “It blows the back of my head off, how good Adam is. He can do 
anything you ask, he watches the room like a hawk, seeing what has to be done.”

The small audience who witnessed the one public performance of this Nutcracker 
seem to have agreed. Tuckett says they were hugely responsive, some were in 
tears by the end of Act 1, and he and his shocked, bereaved cast have been 
clinging to that. Even in the middle of the financial crisis, no one has 
questioned the quality of the work or the cleverness of the concept, and a 
revival next year is being talked about. “That’s been really great” says 
Tuckett, striving for optimism: “Everyone is saying to me that it’s a really 
good show and that it’s going to happen. It’s just not going to happen right 
now.”

 * Information about The Nutcracker for ticket holders 
<http://www.immersivenutcracker.com/about/>  