
“Well, we haven’t really talked about football, have we? There are more 
important things in life.” With these words, SCFreiburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/freiburg> trainer Christian Streich ended 
an emotional press conference before his team’s match against Armenia Bielefeld 
in September. During the press conference, the issue of Germany’s recent influx 
of refugees was brought up, and one journalist asked Streich his opinions on 
the matter. What followed was typical Streich: emotional, political and 
eloquent, and delivered in his thick south-German accent.

The refugee issue in Germany is complex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/08/refugee-crisis-germany-creaks-under-strain-of-open-door-policy>
. It has polarised family and friends, caused political and social chasms, and 
affected the whole nation these past few months. What’s more, it is an issue 
without easy solutions. Still, with no intention of sidestepping the issue, 
Streich gave an impassioned answer, almost plea, to the gathered journalists on 
behalf of the country’s new arrivals. It was a scene more at home at a UN 
convention, not the buildup to a second division football game – but Streich is 
no ordinary football trainer.

Bayern Munich to donate €1m to help city’s refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/03/bayern-munich-donate-migrants>
Following their latest victory, away at Heidenheim on Friday night 
<http://uk.soccerway.com/matches/2015/11/27/germany/2-bundesliga/1-fc-heidenheim-1846/sc-freiburg/2054638/>
, SC Freiburg sit top of the 2. Bundesliga, above RB Leipzig on goal 
difference. As it stands, they look set to bounce back from the bitter 
disappointment of relegation from the top flight last season.

As has been the norm in recent years, anyone wanting drama from the Bundesliga 
should look to the bottom of the table rather than the top. Bayern Munich’s 
dominance has barely been challenged as Borussia Dortmund have regrouped after 
losing Jürgen Klopp, while Wolfsburg and Leverkusen have continued to falter. 
Over the same three or four seasons, though, the scrap to stay in the league 
has involved some big names, such as Hamburg, VfB Stuttgart and Werder Bremen – 
all of whom are among the top fiveBundesliga teams of all time in terms of 
points won <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/All-time_Bundesliga_table>.

Last season was no different, as both VfB and Hamburg found themselves in real 
danger of dropping into the 2. Bundesliga. In fact, whereas Stuttgart narrowly 
escaped, Hamburg could only finish third from bottom, meaning a two-leg 
play-off with Karlsruhe, the third-place team from the second division. Many 
would argue that Hamburg, who also needed the play-off the season before to 
stay up, deserved to go down. Nevertheless, despite falling behind in both 
legs, the1983 European Cup winners 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1983_European_Cup_Final> managed to hold on to 
their Bundesliga status and they remainthe only ever-present team in the 
league’s 52-year history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/jun/02/which-european-football-clubs-have-never-been-relegated>
.

But while VfB and Hamburg huffed and puffed, and wheezed their way to safety, 
SC Freiburg quietly slipped into the bottom two and were relegated. Perhaps any 
team that finishes in the relegation zone deserves to be there, but the 
negative atmosphere around the larger clubs at the bottom left many thinking 
that their time had come – even some of their own fans. Freiburg, on the other 
hand, were on the receiving end of a wave of sympathy from neutrals as they 
went down,losing away at Hannover on the final day of the season 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pP9Zru-3NEA>.

Freiburg had only been in the bottom two for eight of the previous 33 weeks 
and went into the final round of matches on the back ofa 2-1 home victory 
against Bayern Munich <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fWQi4pPXiAc>. Streich’s 
team had finished 14th the season before and were always going to be among the 
favourites for the drop. However, their relegation never seemed nailed on and 
many thought, and maybe hoped, they would somehow save themselves. Many 
Bundesliga fans knew Freiburg and their trainer would be missed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfWQi4pPXiAc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfWQi4pPXiAc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfWQi4pPXiAc&media=>
After serving as a youth coach under Robin Dutt for four years and then as an 
assistant manager to Marcus Sorg for the first half of the 2011-12 season, 
Streich was appointed head coach at the turn of the year. He was initially hit 
with a setback as star striker Papiss Cissé was sold to Newcastle for €12m in 
the January 2012 transfer window. Losing a key player midway through the season 
is hard for any team, but even more so when they are nailed to the bottom of 
the league. Cissé’s importance to the club was underlined when he finished as 
their top goalscorer that season with nine league goals, despite only playing 
the first half of the campaign. In the season before he had scored 22 league 
goals, finishing only behind Mario Gómez at Bayern Munich in the race for the 
golden boot.

Despite being new in the role, Streich was certainly not new to the club, 
where he had spent 15 years as a player and coach. He was aware of the young 
talent at his disposal and quickly reached into the youth set-up and reserve 
team to booster his depleted squad – perhaps most notably with Matthias Ginter, 
a powerful and promising teenage defender who was born and bred in Freiburg.

Already on the radar of the fans, Ginter had a debut to remember 
<https://youtu.be/yRJL2HsVah4?t=57>. After stepping up to train with the first 
team in the winter break, he came on as a second-half substitute in Streich’s 
first game in charge, a home clash against fellow strugglers Augsburg, two days 
after his 18th birthday. In the 88th minute,Ginter headed in a free-kick to 
seal three valuable points <https://youtu.be/yRJL2HsVah4?t=61>. Aside from 
making him an instant hit with supporters, the goal made Ginter the youngest 
Bundesliga goalscorer in the club’s history.

The match also gave viewers a taste of what was to come from the league’s most 
idiosyncratic trainer. As Ginter’s header hit the back of the net, the stadium 
erupted and the entire Freiburg bench ran on to to the pitch in celebration – 
apart from Streich. Motionless, he stood and took in the scene for a couple of 
seconds as his staff swarmed by him, before he suddenly jerked into action and 
ran down the touchline, bellowing at his players to get back into their own 
half and concentrate on seeing out the game. Gesticulating wildly and screaming 
to make himself heard over more than 20,000 relieved fans, you would think his 
team had just conceded.

The win started an impressive second half of the season. Although they won 
none of their next five games, collecting only two points, Streich then led 
Freiburg on a run of 10 games without defeat, picking up 22 points from a 
possible 30. And, having looked doomed in the winter break, they secured their 
safety with two games to spare, eventually finishing a very respectable 12th.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fenglische-woche%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsc-freiburg-bundesliga-germany-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2f21a38eec7db4973735fdb86bdc9a874dd6dfa%2F0_72_3500_2235%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20lesson%20from%20SC%20Freiburg%20in%20Germany%3A%20back%20your%20manager%20and%20give%20him%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fenglische-woche%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsc-freiburg-bundesliga-germany-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20lesson%20from%20SC%20Freiburg%20in%20Germany%3A%20back%20your%20manager%20and%20give%20him%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fenglische-woche%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsc-freiburg-bundesliga-germany-manager%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2f21a38eec7db4973735fdb86bdc9a874dd6dfa%2F0_72_3500_2235%2F3500.jpg>
 SC Freiburg head coach Christian Streich. Photograph: Lennart 
Preiss/Bongarts/Getty Images 
The following season, 2012-13, Streich really took the club forward. Ginter, 
the hero against Augsburg, was now a bona fide first-teamer, and was regularly 
joined in the starting XI by fellow young defenders Oliver Sorg and Christian 
Günter, goalkeeper Oliver Baumann and attacking midfielder Daniel Caligiuri. 
These five local players were joined by Max Kruse, Streich’s shrewd €750,000 
summer signing from St. Pauli, who went on to finish the season with 11 goal 
and seven assists. Under the effervescent leadership of Streich, the team 
managed to carry their form from the back end of the old season into the new 
campaign, ending the first half of 2012-13 in fifth place – 13 places higher 
than the year before.

Free from the pressure of relegation, the team flourished – not only 
maintaining their league position and finishing fifth 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2012%E2%80%9313_SC_Freiburg_season>, but also 
reaching the semi-finals of the DFB-Pokal for the first time in the club’s 
history. But for a defeat at the hands of Schalke on the final day of the 
season, SC Freiburg could have finished fourth, thus entering the Champions 
League qualification rounds. Still, a place in the Europa League and the club’s 
second best ever finish in the Bundesliga was still cause for celebration, as 
was the decision to award Streich – who was voted trainer of the year for 2013 
by the league’s players – a new long-term deal.

The team’s performances and youthful exuberance won them new many fans as well 
as points. And as they became more acclaimed, so their star players become more 
coveted. Despite playing in Europe, Freiburg were powerless when larger clubs 
came knocking. Five of their key players, among them Caligiuri, Kruse and 
Cédric Makiadi – who between them were responsible for almost half of their 
league goals that season – were tempted elsewhere. Incidentally, all five 
players joined clubs that had finished below Freiburg in the league.

As is often the case, entry into the Europa League turned out to be a blight 
on their league form. The extra strain of midweek fixtures coupled with the 
significant departures and subsequent bedding in time required for new players 
culminated in a frustrating season, and the club only managed to lurch to 
safety two weeks before the end of 2013-14. Again, players came and, more 
notably, left in the summer. The two main departures were goalkeeper Baumann 
and, perhaps most bitterly disappointing for the fans, Ginter, who joined 
Borussia Dortmund for €10m.

With the lofty heights of two seasons ago long forgotten, many supporters 
foresaw a difficult campaign, and one that ultimately ended in relegation once 
the fallen giants of Hamburg and Stuttgart mustered together enough fight and 
quality to save themselves. The club’s recent seasons had won them fans and 
made them a natural second team for many people. As long as they weren’t facing 
your club, you’d generally want them to do well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fenglische-woche%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsc-freiburg-bundesliga-germany-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20370595e56f43918c5e2b66902df5c98b6fad52%2F0_0_3595_1679%2F3595.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20lesson%20from%20SC%20Freiburg%20in%20Germany%3A%20back%20your%20manager%20and%20give%20him%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fenglische-woche%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsc-freiburg-bundesliga-germany-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20lesson%20from%20SC%20Freiburg%20in%20Germany%3A%20back%20your%20manager%20and%20give%20him%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fenglische-woche%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsc-freiburg-bundesliga-germany-manager%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20370595e56f43918c5e2b66902df5c98b6fad52%2F0_0_3595_1679%2F3595.jpg>
 Freiburg players celebrate after their winning goal against Bayern Munich. 
Photograph: Daniel Roland/AFP/Getty Images 
The club has many things going for it. Primarily, the attacking and expansive 
brand of football played under Streich, who is not afraid to put his faith in 
young players, including those promoted internally. Secondly, the city itself, 
nestled in south Germany, is one of the most beautiful places in the country, 
where palm trees grow and the warm temperatures draw people to linger in street 
cafes and bars in the evening. The Schwarzwald Stadion is one of those 
old-fashioned four-cornered grounds, rather than a sleek modern oval – a tight 
Subbuteo-like stadium with the fans close to the byline, where a capacity crowd 
of 24,000 can whip up quite an atmosphere.

And then there is the trainer. Streich is a dichotomy. On one hand, what you 
see it is what you get. He is a man without pretence – not even a tracksuit 
manager, but a jeans-and-T-shirt trainer. The son of a butcher, Streich is a 
straight talker, neither mincing his words nor hiding behind clichés. On the 
other hand, he is also a sensitive and reflective character who is at ease 
discussing current socio-political issues alongside football tactics.

His life is very much interwoven with the city of Freiburg. He began his 
playing days with FC Freiburger, the city’s second team, in the third tier of 
German football, and he returned there to end his career in the early 1990s. He 
also played for SC Freiburg for one season and began his coaching path with 
SC’s Under-19 squad, a position he held for over 15 years, winning three youth 
cups and one league title, before becoming co-trainer, and eventually trainer 
of the first team.

Pep Guardiola should ignore Manchester City and build a true dynasty in Munich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/englische-woche/2015/oct/22/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-bayern-munich>
Just as Streich himself is refreshing, so too is the manner in which he has 
been treated by SC Freiburg and the club’s fans. Despite following a 
fifth-place finish with a scrap for survival, and then a disappointing 
relegation, both fans and club stuck by their man. There were no unrealistic 
expectations and no short-termism.

The club and manager did not hide their hurt when they went down. Streich 
choked up in the press conference following relegation and had to leave the 
room. But what better person to try and get them back up again? Despite 
relegation, his future was never in question. And having held on to Streich, 
with a new stadium under construction, and promotion looking possible, the 
future seems bright for the club from one of Germany’s sunniest cities.

• This article first appeared on Englische Woche 
<http://englischewoche.com/writing/>
• Follow Englische Woche on Twitter <https://twitter.com/englische_woche>
 