
There are a lot of strange things in Alex Noble’s live-work studio. The 
weirdest is probably what he calls “the green fist” – an oversized green Hulk 
hand that sits on a shelf above his computer. Noble reaches over and puts it 
on: “We thought we’d do this” – he punches the air – “every time something good 
and ethical happens in the studio.”

Noble is an artist, stylist and fashion designer with an aversion to creating 
more clothes. “I am constantly overwhelmed by the amount of clothes that 
exist,” he says. Three years ago, he went from creating one-off, avant-garde 
designs for style icons such asLady Gaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lady-gaga> and Florence Welch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/florence-and-the-machine> to launching 
Everything Must Go <http://www.emginitiative.com/> (EMG) – an ethical creative 
design initiative that uses waste material produced by the fashion industry as 
a way to challenge “destructive consumption”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fa-live-work-space-in-hackney-fashion-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8243386b84943c1b8a32902e820079ce3455ece7%2F0_0_5484_3290%2F5484.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20live-work%20haven%20in%20Hackney%E2%80%99s%20fashion%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fa-live-work-space-in-hackney-fashion-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20live-work%20haven%20in%20Hackney%E2%80%99s%20fashion%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fa-live-work-space-in-hackney-fashion-district%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8243386b84943c1b8a32902e820079ce3455ece7%2F0_0_5484_3290%2F5484.jpg>
 Material world: Alex Noble at work. Photograph: Anna Batchelor; styling 
Tamineh Dhondy 
On the morning I visit his studio, which is on the ground floor of a converted 
council office in Hackney, east London, his assistant is engulfed in comforting 
clouds of steam as she prepares the latest range of EMG T-shirts. They are 
destined forThe Hackney Shop <https://www.instagram.com/thehackneyshop/?hl=en>, 
a council-run retail space in the borough’s newly coined “fashion district.”
Giles Deacon <http://giles-deacon.com/> was the first to respond to Noble’s 
call-out for waste material; others were quick to follow. Each unique EMG 
T-shirt will incorporate offcuts from up to six fashion houses. They retail for 
£125, with 40% going towards a day centre for children of garment workers in 
Bangladesh.

“We don’t exist to be a fashion brand,” says Noble. “We exist to use our 
practice for positive impact. That’s the mission. We use creativity as a force 
for good. Only we’ve been stuck making T-shirts for three years…” Confronted by 
the transience and obsolescence of the industry, and a general surfeit of 
stuff, Noble admits, “The whole industry is really complicated. It’s such a 
massive subject that incorporates everything from serious human-rights 
exploitation to creative exploitation. It’s difficult to navigate.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fa-live-work-space-in-hackney-fashion-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4049a2ceab3f7b979086db037aef9b18ba585760%2F0_135_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20live-work%20haven%20in%20Hackney%E2%80%99s%20fashion%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fa-live-work-space-in-hackney-fashion-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20live-work%20haven%20in%20Hackney%E2%80%99s%20fashion%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fa-live-work-space-in-hackney-fashion-district%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4049a2ceab3f7b979086db037aef9b18ba585760%2F0_135_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Work-life balance: a sewing machine but also, lots of loudspeakers at Noble’s 
home. Photograph: Anna Batchelor; styling Tamineh Dhondy 
For Noble, this struggle between the urge to create and the urge to “go back 
to the bare essentials” is played out at home, too. His personal possessions 
could probably be reduced to a boot-load – if you exclude his collection of 
mannequins. “I’ve always had a big obsession with mannequins,” says Noble. 
After graduating from the London College of Fashion Noble found a temporary job 
on the shop floor of Selfridges at Christmas. He stayed for two years, 
masterminding the window displays, and hoarding neglected mannequins. “At one 
point I had 30 in here,” he confesses. “I had to do a cull.”

In the kitchen are vegan cookbooks, house plants, a jar of wholewheat pasta, a 
bottle of JD and “a female version of sliced bread in wooden form”. At least 
that’s how Noble describes the curvilinear mannequin that stands at one end of 
his kitchen table. “I love her organic curves, but she’s really hard to dust.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fa-live-work-space-in-hackney-fashion-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3470f08048db5404fabe9c8bc5898e3f177c85b1%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20live-work%20haven%20in%20Hackney%E2%80%99s%20fashion%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fa-live-work-space-in-hackney-fashion-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20live-work%20haven%20in%20Hackney%E2%80%99s%20fashion%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fa-live-work-space-in-hackney-fashion-district%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3470f08048db5404fabe9c8bc5898e3f177c85b1%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Cool for cats: Noble’s bedroom, including a banner made for a festival. 
Photograph: Anna Batchelor; styling Tamineh Dhondy 
His bedroom has little in the way of furniture – Noble gave most of it away 
when he moved into the building five years ago. He has kept what matters: a 
wall-mounted Chinese chequer board and a one-armed bandit slot machine, both 
salvaged from his childhood home; a glossy bag for Fiorucci Safety Jeans that 
his mum bought when she was a teenager.

What Noble hasn’t reappropriated from his childhood home or the basement of 
Selfridges, he has created. Murals and drawings cover the walls of his studio: 
above the bed is a totemic pink cat made for a festival; above the desk are 
line drawings ofBjörk <http://bjork.com/>. “They are for work,” says Noble, who 
is storyboarding concepts for her immersivevirtual-reality exhibition 
<https://www.somersethouse.org.uk/visual-arts/bjork-digital> at Somerset House, 
London, next month. “But I draw every night for my own personal practice, too,” 
he says. “You have to commit to your work personally, not just commercially.”

No one could suggest that he does otherwise.
 