
It’s midday, and the meat stalls in Turin’s open-air food market, Porta 
Palazzo, are crowded with customers browsing the beef, salami and prosciutto on 
offer. Shopping for meat is an everyday ritual in the capital city of Piedmont, 
a region ofItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> with a rich culinary 
history – but this could all be about to change.

In the summer the new mayor Chiara Appendino – of the populist Five Star 
Movement (M5S) – announced plans to make TurinItaly’s first vegetarian city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/turin-mayor-italys-first-vegetarian-city-five-star>
. The exact details of Appendino’s five-year plan have yet to be fleshed out, 
but the city is expected to set up educational projects in schools to teach 
students about animal welfare and nutrition. There are also plans to create a 
vegetarian map of the city for tourists, and introduce a weekly meat-free day.

“The promotion of vegan and vegetarian diets is a fundamental act in 
safeguarding our environment, the health of our citizens and the welfare of our 
animals,”the programme said in a launch statement 
<https://www.thelocal.it/20160721/new-mayor-wants-to-turn-turin-into-italys-first-vegan-city>
 in July. “Leading medical, nutritional and political experts will help promote 
a culture of respect in our schools, teaching children how to eat well while 
protecting the earth and animal rights.”


But the plans are proving divisive. While environmentalists and vegetarians 
welcome them, others argue they contravene the culinary tradition of the 
region. The local butchers’ association has responded by telling the mayor’s 
office it is privileging one form of nutrition over another upon which they are 
economically dependent. The association has also opposed a meat-free day, 
saying if this happens they would want a meat-only day too.

The vegan choice is only part of the plan to make our city more sustainable 
and promote environmental issues
Stefania Giannuzzi 
The response is similarly negative among the venders in Porta Palazzo. The 
open-air food market where they work has been active since the 19th century, 
selling a range of products sourced locally from farms around the city. Fabio, 
a meat seller who has worked in the market for two decades, offers a brisk 
response: “I am not happy, of course. I sell meat!” He took over the stall when 
his father retired, but says it’s less popular these days. “In the last few 
years my sales have dropped by maybe 40-50% and I believe that this is partly 
because being vegan has become so fashionable – there’s a message nowadays that 
meat is bad for you, it’s all over the TV and media.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fitaly-first-vegetarian-city-turin-residents-divided-meat-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F769d742f024f78c4be44e2bb97b7be2be3ea4aa3%2F0_43_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20meat-free%20Turin%3F%20Is%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20first%20'vegetarian%20city'%20a%20recipe%20for%20disaster%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fitaly-first-vegetarian-city-turin-residents-divided-meat-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20meat-free%20Turin%3F%20Is%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20first%20%27vegetarian%20city%27%20a%20recipe%20for%20disaster%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fitaly-first-vegetarian-city-turin-residents-divided-meat-free%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F769d742f024f78c4be44e2bb97b7be2be3ea4aa3%2F0_43_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Some meat sellers are worried they are losing business with the increasing 
popularity of veganism. Photograph: Filippo Monteforte/AFP/Getty Images 
Around the corner, Giannona Vito, 60, says that good quality meat will always 
have a place in this city. “I don’t think that people will stop eating meat or 
go vegan no matter what you do, but the younger generation are pickier. They 
want less but what they do get has to be of a high quality.”

But Stefania Giannuzzi, a new councillor for the environment and deputy mayor, 
believes there has been a misunderstanding, mainly caused by the media, about 
what they are trying to achieve. “It isn’t about forcing people to eat a 
certain way and we don’t want to clash with the meat industry. Instead, it’s 
about raising awareness and showing people that there is an alternative if they 
are interested. The vegan choice is only part of the plan to make our city more 
sustainable and promote environmental issues,” she says.

Some people believe that this shouldn’t be a priority, however, and there are 
other issues that need to be addressed more urgently. Barbara Stancati, a local 
parent, says they need to sort out the quality of the food in schools before 
introducing lessons on animal welfare and sustainability. “The schools in Italy 
have a lot of problems. I find it strange that the local government wants to 
tell people to change their eating habits and become vegan when they don’t even 
have enough money for toilet paper in the schools. They tell us to bring it in. 
They should focus on that instead. There are much bigger issues for the city.”

She says of plans to introduce a vegan festival, “why not?” but adds that 
there should be more focus on the cultural losses that have hit the city 
recently –a major sponsor of a proposed Édouard Manet exhibition backed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/turins-top-museum-official-quits-five-star-mayor-chiara-appendino-manet-sponsor>
 of hosting the show in Turin, favouring Milan instead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fitaly-first-vegetarian-city-turin-residents-divided-meat-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf6161b790f937bd541142984823e153a0313c46%2F0_145_5572_3343%2F5572.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20meat-free%20Turin%3F%20Is%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20first%20'vegetarian%20city'%20a%20recipe%20for%20disaster%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fitaly-first-vegetarian-city-turin-residents-divided-meat-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20meat-free%20Turin%3F%20Is%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20first%20%27vegetarian%20city%27%20a%20recipe%20for%20disaster%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fitaly-first-vegetarian-city-turin-residents-divided-meat-free%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf6161b790f937bd541142984823e153a0313c46%2F0_145_5572_3343%2F5572.jpg>
 Is it possible to balance vegetarianism and the famous meat-producing industry 
of Piedmont? Photograph: Robert Harding/Rex/Shutterstock 
For all the resistance there is also support. Egidio Dansero, an academic who 
teaches culture and politics at the University of Turin, says: “This could be a 
really positive step in cultural and economic terms. We can embrace both diets. 
It is because we are a city that’s known for its cuisine, the home of ‘Eataly’ 
and the slow food movement that I believe we can have a big impact on food 
culture and education inside and outside of Turin.”


Five Star mayor of Turin to create Italy’s first ‘vegetarian city’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/turin-mayor-italys-first-vegetarian-city-five-star>
Veganism has risen gradually in Italy: according to the Italian Research 
Institute, Euripses,1% of the Italian population in 2016 are vegan 
<http://www.probios.it/en/eurispes-italy-2016-report-vegetarians-and-vegans-increasing/>
. That’s a rise of just 0.4% over the previous year, but still one of the 
fastest rates of change anywhere in the world. In Turin, according to Corriere 
Della Sera, there are nowmore than 30 vegan and vegetarian restaurants 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/food/article/2016/07/26/will-turin-become-italys-first-vegan-city>
, many of which have sprung up in recent years.

One of those restaurants, Ratatouille, which opened three years ago, can be 
found near the river Po. Inside, the owner, Silvia Voltolini, says that 
veganism has been rising long before the mayor stepped in: “Every year more and 
more people are coming through the doors. I cannot say the exact number, but 
it’s definitely something I have noticed; and they are not all vegans but also 
people interested in trying a plant-based diet.”

Claudia Giacometti, 26, who works at Rattatouille, is vegan and welcomes 
Appendino’s attempts to educate people on this choice. She believes that the 
tide is changing in terms of what people eat as this diet becomes more popular. 
“At first it was something that was hard for my family to accept but now I live 
alone it’s fine. I come from a big Italian family and my mum has tried to eat 
like me but my sister isn’t into it. When I go home I prepare vegan food for 
the whole family now.

The rise of veganism in Italy appears to be driven by the young, according to 
Giacometti who says that people are becoming vegan for environmental reasons. 
She notes that when older people convert it tends to be about their health.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fitaly-first-vegetarian-city-turin-residents-divided-meat-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95d27fcc22f5a3b7170a73eec811e30320bb0a38%2F0_72_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20meat-free%20Turin%3F%20Is%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20first%20'vegetarian%20city'%20a%20recipe%20for%20disaster%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fitaly-first-vegetarian-city-turin-residents-divided-meat-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20meat-free%20Turin%3F%20Is%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20first%20%27vegetarian%20city%27%20a%20recipe%20for%20disaster%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fitaly-first-vegetarian-city-turin-residents-divided-meat-free%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95d27fcc22f5a3b7170a73eec811e30320bb0a38%2F0_72_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Ratatouille is one of many vegan and vegetarian restaurants in Turin. 
Photograph: Sarah Marsh 
The response to this decision, however, may be premature as five months after 
the announcement nothing has happened. Giuseppe Ientile, 32, owner of Manzò, a 
popular steak house feels it never will. “Meat is especially important for the 
tradition of the area and Piedmont in particular is known for meat. I am not 
worried about the popularity of the vegan diet, it’s just fashionable at the 
moment and the mayor wants to win the vote. I believe that her vegan stuff is 
part of this and for publicity.”

Professor Michelangelo Conoscenti, who teaches English Language and 
Linguistics in the Department of Culture, Politics and Society at the 
University of Turin, agrees. “I don’t think this vegan plan is part of a larger 
plan to bring tourism to the area but rather vegetarians have been recognised 
as an important part of the electorate and it’s about getting votes.”

Milan leads fight against food waste – with ugly fruit and Michelin-starred 
soup kitchens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/16/milan-fight-against-food-waste-ugly-fruit-grassroots-world-food-day>
Deputy mayor Giannuzzi indicates, however, that it’s much more personal. She 
doesn’t eat meat herself and it’s something she believes in. She says that this 
is part of a much bigger plan about sustainability – a global issue, not just 
one affecting Turin or even Italy. “The main thing here is really focusing on 
the fact that this isn’t about imposing a dietary change or ethics on people, 
but it’s about raising awareness that there are other possibilities that can 
have a positive environmental impact. We all need to think healthier for our 
environment and ourselves. This isn’t just an issue affecting Italy it affects 
the world.”

She admits that it’s gong to be a long process: “I don’t think that we will 
have an impact straight away – it’s the start of a long process to change 
sensibilities.”

But the mayor’s office could be underestimating the challenge they face in 
Turin. Conoscenti says: “I don’t see Turin as the city to lead this cultural 
change, because people come here to drink our regional wines and eat good meat. 
The Catholic church has already made Friday a free-meat day (fish can be eaten 
instead), but it is rare for families to comply with this rule. We don’t even 
eat that much meat anyway and we don’t like to be told what to do in terms of 
our diet. This is part of our anti-authoritarian genetics, it’s what makes us 
Italians!”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 