
272 and counting at the time of writing. I am not sure whether the number of 
entries for a genius crossword are an indication of how hard or easy it was, 
but Mark Thomas requested I tell you - and there it is. I don't get to see the 
solutions; they are delivered to a different email address, but I assume that 
most of these are correct. Last month's puzzle which depended (in the setter's 
own word) on a series of 'dreadful' homophones seems to have attracted an 
average number of entrants. Mark Thomas's letter was one of few in a much 
diminished postbag this month - a sign perhaps not that I have mastered the job 
completely but that at least I am making fewer mistakes.

It is a truism - and true - that solvers write in much more readily to point 
out mistakes than to offer praise. By far the largest proportion of emails to 
me via the website are complaints about technical problems. The fonts are too 
small. Java is not enabled. The print option doesn't work and so on. I know 
these are frustrating, but they are also beyond my control. Can I make a plea 
that these are sent tosubshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com>
. That's where I forward them anyway; all you'll be doing is cutting out the 
middleman.

The paucity of other feedback was brought home to me last week when I attended 
a lunch of broadsheet crossword editors. Most of us had just been interviewed 
by a journalist from the Times of India who wanted to hear about the 'decline' 
of a great British institution. His presumption was that with the 'dumbing 
down' of popular culture it is inevitable that crosswords and other 
intellectual games would 'follow the market' and also dumb down. We were all 
very polite. None of us mentioned the word 'sudoku'. But nor was anyone ready 
to admit crosswords were in decline. If anything we thought - a reflection on 
the increasing skills of solvers and setters rather than anything we might do 
as editors - that puzzles had got better over the past few years. There is a 
wider range of devices available to setters. There are more complex and 
thematic puzzles. Solvers are presumed to be more skilful at solving. You have 
only to do puzzles from the fifties and sixties, for example, to appreciate how 
much more complicated and entertaining puzzles are today. Many of our setters 
have been doing this for a long time. Many solvers have too. We have grown 
older - and better - together.

Which, naturally, brought the journalist to his other supposition: that 
crosswords must be in decline because 'we' (I'm not sure whom, exactly, the 
'we' included) are failing to create a new generation of solvers. In the 'old 
days' (this must predate even me) families would do the puzzle after dinner, 
sitting round the fire. But now kids have computer games and Myspace and 
mobiles phones and nobody sits anywhere doing anything - let alone crossword 
puzzles - with their parents. Perhaps this is true, but I was unwilling to 
concede the point. Some correspondents have written in to say they do puzzles 
with their children. Others - I am a case in point - have tutors other than our 
parents. The case is 'unproven'. In putting these views to the journalist we 
realised that we were partly in the dark because we don't get as much feedback 
as we would like.

There are various websites, of course, where puzzles, setters and clues are 
discussed in some detail but as editors we tend to avoid them. The danger is 
that you start trying to please a particularly vociferous group of solvers. We 
like to think our brief is wider that that. But we also know that our impact on 
the puzzles is limited. It is the setters who really matter. We editors get to 
choose who the setters are, but after that we are largely at the mercy (as are 
you, dear solvers) of their imaginations.

And, lastly, I should say that if your daily puzzle is not enough, you can 
revisit the scenes of past delights by purchasing the new crossword puzzles 
from Guardian Books (http://www.guardianbooks.co.uk 
<http://www.guardianbooks.co.uk:>). There are now collections of puzzles by 
Bunthorne, Gordius, Paul and Rufus. Each of them excellent value at Â£6.99. As 
far as I understand it, the market works like this: buy enough of these and 
more collections will follow. The perfect gift for all your relatives. They're 
available now at Amazon.
 