
Welcome to the crossword email update from theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international>.

The new Genius is now available at theguardian.com/crossword/genius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/genius>.

The solutions to last month's puzzle can be viewed at 
theguardian.com/crossword/solutions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/solutions>. Congratulations to Brian 
Piggott from Oxfordshire who is October's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any problems with the 
service, please emailsubshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com>
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>.

--------------

Either people found Locum's October "all-the-A's" Genius puzzle slightly 
easier than average or the fact that the crosswords are now freely available is 
reaching a wider audience. For the number of correct entries for October was an 
all time record at 398. The first correct entry was timed at 13.51 on Monday 
October 6 and was from London N14; there were no fewer that 26 in total that 
day. You may find the November offering a bit harder and something that should 
keep most people going until Hogmanay is in the pipeline for December.

In passing may I explain why the new Genius puzzle appears on different days 
each month? It is because the changeover is set for the first Monday of each 
month and can, therefore, vary between the 1st and the 7th. The deadline for 
submission floats as well, so you still have a full month to solve each one. 
The deadline is 23.59 GMT (or UT if you prefer) on the Saturday before the 
first Monday of the following month. If you are still with me, this means that 
the deadline can float between the 29th of one month (or, indeed, the 27th if 
we are talking February) and the 5th of the next.

--------------

Being of an essentially conservative nature, I like anachronisms that hang on 
long after anyone can remember their original justification. When I first 
travelled by train you asked for a third class ticket (unless you were the sort 
of person who bought a first class one). Presumably at some point the railway 
companies abolished second class tickets (and maybe fourth as well for all I 
know). It was said that the change was essential because visitors to our shores 
felt demeaned at having to ask for something third class, when what they felt 
was only second class. That seemed to me as much bureaucratic nonsense as the 
argument that our currency had to go decimal because Â£.s.d was confusing to the 
same foreigners, who actually just found it quaint. All of this long digression 
is by way of coming to the point that the address for your technical questions 
and complaints remainssubshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com>
 (notcrossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>
) and I hope that at some future point my successor as crossword editor will 
resist the suggestion that this has to be changed to something else on the 
feeble grounds that since 2008 there have no longer been any subscribers to 
help.

--------------

In this month's Corrections & Clarifications department, I have to apologise 
for the fact that the clue published in the paper for 26 across in Paul's 
Saturday puzzle offered an anagram that did not produce the required solution - 
SAO PAULO. The clue was changed online as soon as the error was pointed out to 
one that worked, but I hope that hundreds of you were not beating your brains 
out as a result for the whole of that weekend.

On the other hand, no apology was needed and none was given in response to the 
flood of complaints about a clue in the Quick crossword for October 11, where 
"Roman emperor (6)" led to CAESAR. Most of these complaints were more in pity 
than in anger at the woeful lack of knowledge about ancient history that the 
clue revealed. But, even if the clue had been "Roman emperor (6,6)", the answer 
JULIUS CAESAR would have been wrong, for (as we all know) Gaius Julius had not 
managed to get himself made Emperor by the time that Brutus and the others did 
for him. But the word count was, in any case, (6) not (6,6) and Caesar was the 
title given to any Roman emperor, especially those from Augustus to Hadrian.

--------------

One FAQ is whether the Guardian publishes books of and about crosswords. The 
answer is yes and the list can be seen atguardianbooks.co.uk 
<http://www.guardianbooks.co.uk>.

In addition to what is there I can warmly recommend for Christmas a new volume 
of puzzles by Araucaria, originally published between 1986 and 1991 in the 
subscription magazine 1 Across. It is published by Chambers (ISBN 978 0550 
10409 0).
 