
Congratulations to Jeffrey Goldsmith from Bedfordshire who is September's 
winner.

There has lately been a mini-spate of complaints about impossibly obscure 
words appearing in the crosswords, combined with ones to the effect that 
solvers are now disadvantaged if they do not have access to Internet and 
Google. "Might it not be a good idea to ban clues where the solution depends on 
previous knowledge of some barely known definition?" or "Dismal teaming of 
obscure words with possible solutions. Does the setter speak English?" are a 
couple of observations that give the flavour of these emails.

It would be invidious to name the setters involved in this correspondence and 
so I can't here give specific examples of the words complained of. In 
principle, however, with the Quicks my rule of thumb is that words should not 
be included that an averagely intelligent, Guardian-reading person (eg myself) 
could not spell correctly and know the meaning of without having to go to a 
dictionary. As with all rules there have to be exceptions, such as the spelling 
of desiccated, haemorrhage, pyrrhic and rarefy. And technical or specialist 
terms, even those in reasonably common usage, can also cause problems, such as 
the difference between a cathode and an anode (particularly since an anode 
seems to be both positively charged in come contexts and negatively in others). 
There is also the problem that some averagely intelligent, Guardian-reading 
persons seem to have curious blind spots. For example, Quick No 12,274 on 10 
September had the clue "Pet (7)" for TANTRUM, which caused much perplexity. It 
never occurred to me that some sentence like "Mother's in a pet today" might 
cause problems.

With the Cryptics, things are rather different. It seems to me that 
discovering new words and meanings is part of the pleasure of doing these 
puzzles, provided of course that there are not too many of them in any one 
puzzle and that the clue by which the solution is reached is fair.

Which brings one to the question of the Internet and Google. The purists say 
that puzzles should be solved without dictionaries and other aids; or, at 
least, that the role of dictionaries should be confined to checking whether the 
solution you think you have worked out from the clue is a real word and what 
its exact meaning may be; and that they should never be used just for fishing 
expeditions. Slightly less pure purists say that it is permissible to use 
dictionaries and other printed works of reference, but that the use of 
electronic search engines is beyond the pale.

For my part I cannot see the force of this last distinction. Books of 
reference (dictionaries, encyclopedias, the DNB, Who's Who etc) are all now 
published online and available remotely and free to anyone who has registered 
at the local authority library. What is the difference between using the hard 
copy of a publication and its digital version? The real question seems to me to 
be how much outside assistance does each individual feel happy about using. For 
example, I personally would regard using the "cheat" facility attached to the 
interactive online puzzles as akin to cheating against oneself at patience or 
setting off for an enjoyable walk and then catching a bus half way. But I know 
from the howls of complaint that come in when something goes wrong with the 
cheat button that this is not a universal view. In other words, your 
relationship with the crossword is entirely personal. There is no right and 
wrong approach.

For those who still set their faces against new technology but want to consult 
books, Chambers has produced a fine new edition of its "Crossword Lists", first 
published in 2005. It claims over 170,000 solutions handily arranged for 
setters and solvers alike; so that, for example, if you want to run through 
lists of computer parts or the works of Enid Blyton, you can probably do so 
quicker than you could online.

Our setters and solvers seem to be a particularly charitable group of human 
beings. At the risk of causing donation fatigue, October is Arachne's turn. On 
Sunday 25 October she will be running in the Marine Corps 10K in Washington DC 
in aid of the charity PAGEANT, which funds eduction in Gambia. The 10-kilometre 
run, as its name implies, is organised by the US Marine Corps and is from the 
Mall to Arlington National Cemetery. Most of the participants will be military, 
but civilians are also welcome. Arachne is running specifically for Barra/Essau 
Upper School in the North Bank Division of Gambia. Donations can be made via 
her website atpageant.org.uk/sarah.htm <http://pageant.org.uk/sarah.htm> or 
cheques can be sent directly to PAGEANT, Old School, Worthing Road, Southwater, 
Horsham RH13 9DT, marked SARAH on the back so that the money goes to the right 
school. The usual Gift Aid form can be downloaded from the website, which also 
has more information and pictures of the school.

Lavatch's September Genius puzzle produced 271 correct entries. The first was 
from Peter S of Montville, Queensland, timed at 04:51 on the first day. The 
first domestic solution was from Alan H in York at 07:51. In all there were 18 
correct entries on the first Monday.
 