
Aberdeen have cause to rue what might have been. A curiously dismal league run 
from late September led to Derek McInnes’s team losing four out of five 
matches; they drew the odd one out. As they approach Wednesday evening’s 
meeting of Celtic, still within touching distance onlysix points behind the 
reigning champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/16/ronny-deila-celtic-six-point-gap-aberdeen-scottish-premiership>
, contentment over this position will be offset by frustration. This could be 
an altogether different, genuinely exciting movie, not quite on thescale of 
Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/feb/03/leicester-city-claudio-ranieri-jamie-vardy-goal-liverpool-video>
 but similar in capturing a broader public opinion.

One of Celtic’s strengths in recent times has been an ability to respond after 
wounding events. Ronny Deila will unquestionably draw on that again, as the 
follow-up to a dreadful Hampden Sunday afternoon which sawCeltic bundled out of 
the League Cup by Ross County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/ross-county-celtic-scottish-league-cup-semi-final-match-report>
. This didn’t so much raise questions over Deila’s position as enhance the 
notion that his appointment was fundamentally flawed in the first place.

Deila looks and acts like a man under pressure, a picture that has eroded the 
characters of better managers than him when in the Glasgow goldfish bowl. On 
Tuesday he insisted his “hunger” remains intact. Nobody doubts that; they have 
justifiable cause to doubt his ability.

The basic realities of resource mean Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> shouldn’t have a hope of 
pipping Celtic to the title. Barring something extraordinary, they still won’t. 
It shouldn’t so much be a basis for Deila keeping his job that the league flag 
is retained as a glaring case for sacking if it isn’t.

Which footballers have tattoos of their former clubs? | The Knowledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/03/which-players-have-tattoos-of-their-former-clubs>
And yet McInnes and his players should have neutral backing. The duopoly and 
occasional monopoly of Old Firm title achievement since 1985 has suffocated the 
Scottish game. Were this Rangers rather than Aberdeen in close pursuit ofCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>, it is obvious that excitement 
over a championship race would be more prevalent than is currently the case.

McInnes bristles at the notion that his team have underachieved on the big 
stage and yet there have been frequent slipups. The return of only a League Cup 
from a period in which Rangers have been consigned to the Scottish game’s 
nether regions isn’t exactly stirring. Aberdeen haven’t made inroads in Europe, 
haven’t sold any players for seven-figure fees and haven’t made the most of 
wage resource that was last reported at £6.7m.

McInnes has at least gone where so many of his predecessors could not by 
restoring Aberdeen to a prominent position. He has made the club an attractive 
prospect once again for players. And both, it must be noted, without so much as 
a permanent training facility.

Adam Rooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/19/hearts-aberdeen-rangers-scottish-premiership-championship>
 has proved a wonderfully effective Scottish top-flight forward, one McInnes 
was willing to gamble on when others viewed the Irishman’s struggles at 
Birmingham City as a cause for second thoughts. The success of Danny Ward as a 
loanee from Liverpool will have done its part in boosting Aberdeen’s reputation 
as a solid grounding for emerging talent.

The unavoidable big picture is that Celtic under Deila have stagnated. While 
that isn’t entirely the fault of the manager – the club’s recruitment process 
is both erratic and downsizing in nature – there is little to provide faith in 
regular, idealistic cliche. That Deila himself is in position, as an 
inexpensive project for Celtic, is a nod towards the club’s chosen approach. On 
the field, the consequence has been no obvious identity to the team.

At best, it would be a gamble to allow Deila another attempt at taking Celtic 
back to the Champions League. Rumours of replacements already abound. Therein 
lies the dilemma for the club’s board, which has backed every element of the 
manager’s plan, life coaches and all, even to the recent point of altering 
matchday physiotherapy duties. At what point do they implement another change 
in direction?

Deila, it must be presumed, plays at least a part in the signing of players 
which has seen the squad top-loaded with creative midfield players. There is a 
lack of bite, even nastiness, which is necessary both when stakes are raised 
and when going gets tough.

Centre-forwards have arrived, made no impact and vanished with astonishing 
regularity. When Leigh Griffiths doesn’t score – to be fair, he routinely does 
– Celtic are ominously blunt. Deila has shown an inability to change his team’s 
set-up or approach mid-game. If Plan A doesn’t work, Celtic try to execute it 
better.

Deila cannot coach bravery but he can surely impact upon the series of 
defensive horror shows which have undermined his tenure. The games which were 
supposed to endorse the 40-year-old as a capable manager still resulted 
ultimately in defeat toInternazionale in last season’s Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/26/inter-celtic-europa-league-match-report>
. This time around, Celtic looked chronically underprepared for Europe.

At Pittodrie early in the campaign, Aberdeen inflicted a bloody nose on Celtic 
with 10 men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/12/aberdeen-celtic-scottish-premiership-match-report>
. When the teams met again, in Glasgow, Deila’s side simplyswatted their 
visitors aside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/31/celtic-aberdeen-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 in forceful fashion. And yet, to Aberdeen’s credit and the surprise of some 
onlookers, they have not gone away in the intervening months.

In front of a sellout Pittodrie crowd, this is one of the Scottish season’s 
marquee matches. Deila needs another example of that reply to adversity, which 
it would be folly to rule out. Should McInnes preside over an alternative 
scene, perhaps Aberdeen will be taken seriously after all.
 