
Derek McInnes praised his Aberdeen side for their pace and energy after a 
scintillating first-half display earned them a convincing win overHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton>.

The Dons raced into a 3-0 lead in the opening 33 minutes, thanks to goals from 
Simon Church, Niall McGinn and Kenny McLean and closed the game out to move 
within four points of the Premiership leaders, Celtic.

“It was a strong 90-minute performance,” McInnes said. “In the first half we 
obviously got the goals, but the movement and speed we brought was difficult 
for Hamilton to contain.

Roberts shines as Celtic fight back to beat Hearts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/02/celtic-hearts-scottish-premiership-match-report>
“We’ve started a lot of games similarly but haven’t always managed to get the 
goals to match, so getting the second goal was very important to us, and the 
third goal knocked the stuffing from Hamilton.”

The Dons lost to Motherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/19/motherwell-aberdeen-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 before the international break, and McInnes was delighted with the reaction to 
that result and hailed the impact of players such as Jonny Hayes and McLean, 
who won their first caps.

“It was important the players showed they were still fighting,” he said. “The 
pitch helped us as it was in far better condition today, but we had a lot of 
players playing at the top of their game.

“Nobody within our camp feels the season is a write-off. We’ve still got work 
to do, and we’ll finish where we deserve.

“The international break might have been good for us – Kenny and Jonny came 
bouncing in the door on Thursday after winning their first caps, and that gave 
everyone a lift. The ability of the players has never been in question, it’s 
just getting the best out of them.”

The Hamilton player-manager, Martin Canning, was disappointed with the way his 
side capitulated. “We didn’t start the game well,” he said. “It was an issue 
for us when we went to Celtic Park, and it’s been the same again today.

“When you come up against players of the quality of Hayes, McLean and McGinn, 
the last thing you want to do is give away an early goal.

Scottish roundup: Dow keeps Dundee United’s survival hopes alive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/02/dundee-united-rangers-scottish-premiership-championship>
“I’m very angry with the first-half performance. We conceded two soft goals 
and we didn’t respond to it. We were far better in the second half. We 
responded better and were competing better, but by then the damage is done. ”

Canning admitted his gamble in handing the former Swansea City and Crystal 
Palace midfielder Kemy Agustien a debut backfired, the Dutchman having not 
played since lining up in the Danish First Division at the tail end of last 
year.

“It was a gamble to play him. I saw it would be a difficult game up here, and 
I thought he could get on the ball and give us a platform to build from rather 
than turning the ball over again and again. He took a knock, but I was going to 
make a change anyway as the gamble didn’t really work.”
 