
The web's a fine and private place, as the poet Andrew Marvell would have 
observed had he still been with us; but one, I fear, where all embrace. This 
poses new questions for the cruciverbal world.

Take the question put to me by Dave Harding, who has been happily doing the 
Guardian crossword for 30 years, but who now finds himself working in Bangkok. 
No one expects the crossword, when it appears in the printed Guardian, to be 
anything other than culture-specific - ie riddled with references and allusions 
that you can only understand in terms of UK 2004 (or worse, Islington 2004).

Even foreigners or expats who get the crossword via the Guardian Weekly, or 
who find it syndicated in another publication, can be assumed either to know, 
or to want to know, more about British culture. But the www is what it says it 
is - worldwide. So, Dave Harding asks, ought we not to think about publishing a 
non-culture-specific crossword?

He was led to the question specifically by a Brummie puzzle last month in 
which Guinness = Alec, Jack = Dee, Tyler = Wat, Billy = Bunter, in which you 
would have made no progress if you could not place Torquay and the Isle of Man 
on a map, or if you did not know that Axminster is a carpet as well as a place, 
or that "squirrel away" means something other than a rodent being on holiday.

I see what Dave Harding is worrying about and there is, of course, the danger 
that cultural imperialism and unattractively dismissive attitudes to "lesser 
breeds without the law" can permeate British crosswords as much as they 
unattractively permeate other aspects of British attitudes towards the rest of 
the world. But I have to say that I do not believe that there is any mileage 
(or whatever might be the metric equivalent) in the idea.

You would have to rule out all cricket-based references for a start. Leaving 
aside any Thai who might have the time and inclination to take out a 
subscription to the Guardian crossword, even the English-speaking world is 
split down the middle into those that do and those that don't understand the 
game, or those who think that the third man is just a film and those who know 
better.

I have an American colleague who has lived in St Johns Wood, in north-west 
London, for two years. She complained that for five days running the traffic 
round her house was terrible because each day there was a cricket match at 
Lord's. The look on her face when I explained that we were talking about one 
continuous game, not five, and that even after five days it had ended in a draw 
convinced me that some people, however intelligent and however good their 
English, will never be able to do a Guardian cryptic crossword.

What's more, as the South African-born Sandy Balfour describes in his charming 
autobiographical memoir Pretty Girl in Crimson Rose (8), the cryptic crossword 
is, at its best, a subtle way into contemporary British culture that is of 
value in itself.

Of course, we now live in a world where market forces rule. So, if those in 
charge of these things conclude that there is a significant potential market 
for Guardian crossword online subscriptions in non-cricket playing parts of the 
world, then (in the jargon) there would be no difficulty in repackaging the 
product.

 ___________

A related problem concerning the web is whether it is fair for compilers to 
use Google as a legitimising source. Can solvers use it for reference as they 
might a printed Thesaurus or Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians? Until 
now, the Guardian has been quite purist on this issue. Words and names have 
generally not been included (give or take the odd obscure French cheese in a 
Bunthorne puzzle) unless they appear in one of a relatively small number of 
generally recognised reference books.

But I feel that the ground here may be beginning to move. Inevitably, there is 
a lag between a word achieving fairly common usage and its appearance in a work 
of reference, even with the Oxford English Dictionary adopting an online-only 
format.

If, via Google or some other search engine, it can be established that some 
neologism or someone has passed a critical level of hits per month, is it not 
legitimate to let them into the crossword vocabulary? This applies in 
particular to web-linked words and phrases, like the "blog novel" and "Wi-Fi", 
but the issue goes wider.

I only ask the question as I am not at all sure what I think about it. What 
would poor old Ximenes have made of this brave new electronic world?

Â·  Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor.
 