
The high-minded often complain that the fringe is now dominated by standup 
comedy – as if standup were this monolithic, anti-creative art form. It's not, 
nor ever has been. But it's striking how much more fluid it's becoming – and in 
particular how the artists, who you used to be able to confidently pin down as 
sketch comedians, standups or whatever, are now increasingly appearing in a 
variety of different guises.

A few years ago, the phenomenon manifested as sketch groups splintering into 
solo acts –Greg Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/nov/05/greg-davies-review> sprang from
We Are Klang <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/We_Are_Klang>, Cowards 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cowards> gave us Tim Key and Tom Basden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/nov/22/kafka-comics-standup-key-basden>.
Thom Tuck <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/aug/28/thom-tuck-review> and 
Edinburgh comedy award-winnerHumphrey Ker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/18/humphrey-ker-dymock-watson-review>
 seceded from the Penny Dreadfuls. These days, there's not necessarily any 
distinction in the first place. IsLiam Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/04/liam-williams-edinburgh-festival-2014>
 a standup or, with Sheeps, a sketch comic? Well, he's both, and has been right 
from the recent outset of his career. Pippa Evans is another comedy 
award-nominated comic who does standup, character comedy (in the guise of 
malevolentalt-country singer Loretta Maine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/aug/13/loretta-maine-review>), improv 
(she's in Showstoppers!) and indeed evangelical atheism, as one of thefounders 
of the Sunday Assembly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/29/atheist-sunday-assembly-first-synod>
.

The other day I watched a show featuring the woman who represents the zenith 
of this trend,Cariad Lloyd <http://cariadlloyd.com/>. A former best newcomer 
nominee (for a solo character-comedy show), Lloyd is like the Edinburgh fringe 
in human form.She does solo shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/26/cariad-lloyd-review>. She 
stars inAustentatious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/14/austentatious-edinburgh-festival-review>
, the very successful improvised Jane Austen format. This year, she's also in 
Cariad & Paul: A Two-Player (Improvised) Adventure, and in Cariad and Louise's 
Character Hour. Her sidekick, Louise Ford, is another shapeshifter: she was in 
a double act (Ford and Akram), then did a solo character hour (asJenny Fawcett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/aug/21/jenny-fawcett-edinburgh-review-comedy>
); now she's in another double act, shortly afteracting in a West End show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/30/quartermaines-terms-wyndhams-london-review>
.

Theirs is a really enjoyable free fringe show, with a surfeit of 
larger-than-life characters who (as with Lloyd's 2011 solo debut) only barely 
conceal the fun-loving performer beneath. Ford's gurning Cara Delevingne 
piss-take was a highlight ("Actor, model – the list goes on …"), and I liked 
Lloyd's Jesus impersonator, Alan Lantern – you can book him in the run-up to 
your wedding to approve pre-marital sex. In the past, I'd have been looking 
forward by now to Cariad & Louise's next show. But these days, there's no way 
of knowing what type of comedy these artists will be presenting at next year's 
fringe, or in what new combinations they'll be presenting it.
 Cariad and Louise. Photograph: Damian Robertson 
Maybe that's about career development: you maximise your chance of success if 
you show you can do everything and work with anyone. But I get a stronger sense 
that it's a creative impulse, that a generation of comics have arrived who 
enjoy testing themselves and see minimal value in the distinctions between 
different modes of comedy.The comic and theatre-maker Will Adamsdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/01/will-adamsdale-on-the-current-state-of-the-fringe>
 has repeatedly criticised "[the] emphasis on the difference between things – 
between comedy and theatre, for example." He refuses to acknowledge those 
differences – and the acts who've emerged in his wake are taking that logic to 
the next level. As Cara Delevingne might say: "standup, sketch act, character 
comic, improviser – the list goes on …" – and it's exciting for comedy that it 
does so.
 