
Say what you like about his plays, but Anders Lustgarten knows how to deliver 
a line. “Most people who go to the theatre aresort of beyond salvation 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/goingout/theatre/angrier-young-man-interview-with-activist-playwright-anders-lustgarten-8492682.html>
,” he declared a few years ago. More recently, he informed the Huffington Post 
that “80% of theatre was bourgeois wank 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/04/20/anders-lustgarten-interview-lampedusa_n_7101344.html>
”. His thoughts onDavid Hare <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/david-hare>, 
whose work he experienced as a teenager, verge on the unprintable.


The man who greets me in a Brighton cafe, with a boxer’s squat frame and 
blokeish, bone-crunching handshake, does indeed look as if he’s spoiling for a 
fight. But Lustgarten offers a toothy grin when I read the quotes back, and 
insists he’s not nearly as fist-clenchingly angry about the state of UK theatre 
as he sounds. OK, only slightly fist-clenchingly angry. “I love winding people 
up,” he says, raising his hands in the air in a gesture of mock defence. “But I 
stick by the idea that a lot of people go to the theatre to have their values 
reaffirmed. I want to do the opposite.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3BcgzbQ7SJ4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3BcgzbQ7SJ4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3BcgzbQ7SJ4&media=>
 Watch a trailer for The Seven Acts of Mercy 
No one could accuse him of not putting in the effort. Since he burst on to the 
scene in 2010 with an astringently funny satire on the BNP,A Day at the Racists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/mar/09/a-day-at-the-racists-review>, 
Lustgarten has unleashed a rapid fusillade of plays tackling everything from 
the banking crisis (If You Don’t Let Us Dream, We Won’t Let You Sleep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/feb/21/if-you-dont-let-us-dream-review>
) to the migrant crisis (Lampedusa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/12/lampedusa-soho-theatre-london-review>
) and the state of Zimbabwe (Black Jesus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/03/black-jesus-review>). His eye 
for reportage, and human-size stories that illuminate the bigger picture, is 
especially keen:Shrapnel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/17/shrapnel-arcola-review>, which 
opened in 2015, retold the story of a massacre of Kurds by US-assisted Turkish 
forces in 2011;The Sugar-Coated Bullets of the Bourgeoisie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/12/the-sugar-coated-bullets-of-the-bourgeoisie-arcola-theatre-review>
, which followed at London’s Arcola last April, focused on the long shadow 
thrown by the Chinese cultural revolution on one village.

In a British playwriting scene that can seem nervous about tackling big ideas 
head-on, particularly when they concern complex global politics, Lustgarten – 
who began his theatrical life directing plays in prisons, and remains committed 
as a political activist – appears to have no such compunctions. Some have 
complained that the results are too pitchfork-waving and agitprop-y by far;one 
reviewer wrote 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/goingout/theatre/lampedusa-soho-theatre-review-anders-lustgarten-s-antipathy-to-political-injustice-is-laudable-10174949.html]>
 that Lampedusa felt like being “heckled rather than stimulated”. The rebuttal 
might be that, in the age of Brexit and Trump, agitprop is exactly what we need.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanders-lustgarten-rsc-caravaggio-seven-acts-of-mercy-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3303f8700928be6c080e0a71182f68800773ed2%2F96_1147_1795_1077%2F1795.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Activist%20playwright%20Anders%20Lustgarten%3A%20'I%20love%20winding%20people%20up'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanders-lustgarten-rsc-caravaggio-seven-acts-of-mercy-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Activist%20playwright%20Anders%20Lustgarten%3A%20%27I%20love%20winding%20people%20up%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanders-lustgarten-rsc-caravaggio-seven-acts-of-mercy-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3303f8700928be6c080e0a71182f68800773ed2%2F96_1147_1795_1077%2F1795.jpg>
 A swearing, swaggering loudmouth … Patrick O’Kane as Caravaggio in rehearsals 
for The Seven Acts of Mercy. Photograph: Ellie Kurttz 
Caravaggio is so sophisticated, so formally experimental, but his paintings 
are just visceral. He bangs you in the gut

Given all this, Lustgarten’s new script sounds surprising. Commissioned by the 
Royal Shakespeare Company <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rsc>, The Seven 
Acts of Mercy focuses on the canvas of that name by the baroque masterCaravaggio
 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/feb/17/1>. The painting itself 
<https://www.rsc.org.uk/the-seven-acts-of-mercy/caravaggio-s-painting> is a 
depiction of Christian charity in action and is, characteristically, both 
brilliant and brilliantly unsettling: as angels wheel and soar above the frame, 
a mother suckles a starving man from her own breast while a corpse is carted 
away to burial, only its feet visible.

But anyone expecting the play to be a thesis on early 17th-century brushwork 
should brace themselves. This Caravaggio, played in the new production by 
Patrick O’Kane, is a swearing, swaggering loudmouth whose talent with a 
paintbrush is rivalled only by his dexterity with a hidden dagger. The 
daredevil image is, of course, historically accurate: directly before painting 
The Seven Acts, the artist had been forced to flee Rome after killing a man in 
a brawl, and the brazen sexuality of some of his pictures hasled many to 
speculate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/may/27/caravaggio-lust-talent-power-jonathan-jones>
 that he might have been gay in a period when to be so was dangerous, to put it 
mildly.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanders-lustgarten-rsc-caravaggio-seven-acts-of-mercy-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42a7d4e9019b133d97d819891cd47c2e5bb2dfc2%2F0_92_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Activist%20playwright%20Anders%20Lustgarten%3A%20'I%20love%20winding%20people%20up'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanders-lustgarten-rsc-caravaggio-seven-acts-of-mercy-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Activist%20playwright%20Anders%20Lustgarten%3A%20%27I%20love%20winding%20people%20up%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanders-lustgarten-rsc-caravaggio-seven-acts-of-mercy-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42a7d4e9019b133d97d819891cd47c2e5bb2dfc2%2F0_92_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
 A Day at the Racists, Lustgarten’s play about the BNP, at the Finborough in 
2010. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Lustgarten’s own obsession with Caravaggio began when he visited Malta on an 
athletics trip; in another surprising twist to his CV, the playwright was once 
Scottish 400m champion at senior level and considered becoming a professional 
runner. He found himself standing in front of another powerful Caravaggio,The 
Beheading of St John the Baptist <http://www.visitmalta.com/en/caravaggio> 
(1608) in St John’s Co-Cathedral, Valletta. “One of the other lads said he was 
going to see the painting on his day off. I ended up staring at this thing for 
two hours. Caravaggio is so sophisticated, so formally experimental, but his 
paintings are just visceral. He bangs you in the gut.”


Echoing Lampedusa, which entwined monologues from a Leeds debt collector and a 
Sicilian man who fishes bodies of refugees out of the Mediterranean, The Seven 
Acts transcends time as well as geography. It braids together the story of the 
painting’s creation with a parallel narrative set in contemporaryMerseyside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool>, where council flats are circled by 
sharkish developers and food banks are on the rise. Modern-day Britain, the 
play starkly suggests, is every bit in need of charity as 17th-century Italy.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanders-lustgarten-rsc-caravaggio-seven-acts-of-mercy-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a4f1297e27c64a28b667c50be27d802b934a3cd%2F0_0_4256_2723%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Activist%20playwright%20Anders%20Lustgarten%3A%20'I%20love%20winding%20people%20up'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanders-lustgarten-rsc-caravaggio-seven-acts-of-mercy-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Activist%20playwright%20Anders%20Lustgarten%3A%20%27I%20love%20winding%20people%20up%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanders-lustgarten-rsc-caravaggio-seven-acts-of-mercy-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a4f1297e27c64a28b667c50be27d802b934a3cd%2F0_0_4256_2723%2F4256.jpg>
 If You Don’t Let Us Dream, We Won’t Let You Sleep at the Royal Court in 2013. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
The script also nags at a big question that Lustgarten, as an avowed 
leftwinger, admits is his too: whether art needs to be hitched to a social 
purpose. While Caravaggio blithely assumes that his paintings are so powerful 
that they are innately life-changing, this drama makes it clear that life is 
substantially more complicated, particularly if you happen to be bankrolled by 
the Catholic church. In Lustgarten’s view, “the whole play is taking on 
Caravaggio’s idea that he fights for the people and makes things better through 
his work. It’s a nice romantic vision, but it’s bullshit, I think.”


Is there a hint of his own in-out position, as a man who has repeatedly 
proclaimed his disdain for the British theatrical establishment, yet who now 
writes for some of the biggest theatrical establishments in the UK? He raises 
his hands defensively again. “I do know how lucky I am. Every time I get a play 
on, I feel lucky. But it’s good for me to do stuff in weird places like the 
RSC, because it challenges my own preconceptions and prejudices, of which I 
have as many as anybody else.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanders-lustgarten-rsc-caravaggio-seven-acts-of-mercy-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8128a65249bda8bc0e61ce3c455980fb214d3569%2F353_370_4110_2466%2F4110.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Activist%20playwright%20Anders%20Lustgarten%3A%20'I%20love%20winding%20people%20up'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanders-lustgarten-rsc-caravaggio-seven-acts-of-mercy-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Activist%20playwright%20Anders%20Lustgarten%3A%20%27I%20love%20winding%20people%20up%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fanders-lustgarten-rsc-caravaggio-seven-acts-of-mercy-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8128a65249bda8bc0e61ce3c455980fb214d3569%2F353_370_4110_2466%2F4110.jpg>
 Hidden stories … Shrapnel: 34 Fragments of a Massacre at the Arcola in 2015. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Lustgarten certainly isn’t short of opinions: moments after declaring that 
“most playwrights write to win awards, and there’s something morally corrupt 
about that”, he concedes that he haswon the odd award 
<https://www.curtisbrown.co.uk/client/anders-lustgarten>. Minutes later, our 
discussion is almost derailed by a 20-minute disquisition onCorbynism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> and the shortcomings of 
the liberalmedia <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/media> – the Guardian and BBC 
included. The only moment he seems genuinely tongue-tied is when I ask him what 
he does for fun; marathon training and drum’n’bass clubs, he eventually admits.


In theatre, you can entertain and say something about the world. There's not 
another medium like it. You can't fake it

It’s hard not to warm to him, particularly for his blazing-eyed belief that 
theatre, if it wants to matter to wider society, has to do its utmost to change 
that society. “In theatre, you can entertain, and you can also say something 
about the world. There’s not another medium like it. You can’t fake it, you 
can’t commodify it.” It has even more of a duty to do so given the current 
political situation, he adds, citing one playwright he does admire,Arthur Miller
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/feb/12/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
. “It’s our duty to stand up. If someone stands up, then other people jump in 
behind.”

He’s as busy as ever. In between commuting to Stratford-upon-Avon for 
rehearsals, he’s recently completed a short piece on the housing crisis for the
Cardboard Citizens <https://www.cardboardcitizens.org.uk/> troupe, which works 
with performers who have been homeless or otherwise socially marginalised. He’s 
mulling a piece on the legacy of the British empire. And he’s just returned 
from a two-week trip toIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> and 
Palestine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/palestinian-territories>, 
researching for yet another new project, this time for theNational Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre>. He describes it as 
“trying to see the world from a Zionist perspective”.

Nicely uncontroversial, then? He grins again, and flexes his knuckles. “Oh 
yeah, it’s not going to wind anybody up – no one at all.”

 * The Seven Acts of Mercy is at the Swan theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon 
<https://www.rsc.org.uk/the-seven-acts-of-mercy>, 24 November–10 February. Box 
office: 01789 403493.  