
In the manner of a middle-distance runner making that all-important kick for 
the finishing line,Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> have forced their way to 
the front of the Championship pack.

The best goals of the week: Shinji Kagawa, Sean Okoli and Scott Parker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/12/best-goals-week-shinji-kagawa-tavernier-kluivert>
Aitor Karanka’s side may take some stopping now but they left securing the win 
that lifted them to the top of the table – two points ahead of Burnley andfour 
in front of Brighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/11/steve-sidwell-brighton-nottingham-forest>
 – extremely late.

The game had entered its 94th minute when Adam Forshaw sealed it with the last 
kick of stoppage time, the midfielder pouncing on a loose ball in the chaotic 
fallout from a Stewart Downing corner and scrambling it home to send the 
Riverside wild.

“I couldn’t be prouder of my players than I am at this moment,” said Karanka, 
whose team have recorded five successive wins since an extraordinarily 
acrimonious but apparently temporaryfalling out with his dressing room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/12/aitor-karanka-middlesbrough-future-doubt>
. “It was a very difficult game, so I’m more than pleased. Adam’s scored an 
important goal. We’re in a good position now.”

Teesside was shrouded in thick fog but Middlesbrough’s focus remained crystal 
clear as Emilio Nsue swiftly gave them the lead. When Jordan Rhodes connected 
with George Friend’s clever cross, a goal seemed certain but the excellent Ali 
al-Habsi performed wonders to block the striker’s shot. With the rebound 
falling to Nsue, the goalkeeper proved powerless to prevent the midfielder 
stabbing the opener into the bottom corner from close range.

Karanka was sufficiently confident to allow Gastón Ramírez, Boro’s principal 
creator, to rest his legs on the bench but, having weathered an early attacking 
storm,Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> began 
disconcerting the locals by settling into a possession-monopolising, 
sweet-passing groove.

Happily for local nerves, Brian McDermott’s side were persistently let down by 
their final ball but Karanka’s blood pressure would surely have been 
appreciably lower had Al-Habsi not saved Albert Adomah’s shot quite so 
brilliantly at the end of a Downing initiated counterattack.

With the fog thickening to the point where it became difficult to identify 
individual players, the home fans trusted Dani Ayala and the rest of his 
resolute defence to retain sufficient vision to keep restricting Matej Vydra 
and co to long-range efforts.

Such faith faltered after the otherwise impressive Adomah missed a sitter and 
Simon Cox equalised. The goal featured the Boro old boy, Andrew Taylor, 
unleashing a shot that Dimi Konstantopoulos – who might have done better – 
touched but could not hold before Cox lashed the loose ball home.

Eventually, Karanka liberated Ramírez but Reading and the seemingly 
magnetic-gloved Habsi looked set to hold firm until Forshaw’s dramatic 
denouement. “We should have won,” said McDermott, for whom Vydra went close 
late on. “We’ve given Middlesbrough as good a game as anyone.”
 