
Some sweet strikes and a dose of luck helped Spanish club Malaga CF trounce 
Adelaide United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> 5-1 in a 
friendly. The Liga outfit outclassed their A-League opponents in the pre-season 
fixture before a 23,254-strong crowd at Adelaide Oval.

Adelaide's Osama Malik gifted the visitors the opener with an own-goal before 
the Reds conceded three goals in 14 minutes in the second half - a scoring 
spree punctuated by a reply from Reds striker Bruce Djite.

Malaga, tuning up for their La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> opener on August 24, set 
an early tone of dominance with three gilt-edged scoring chances before Malik's 
brain-fade gave them a goal in the 18th minute. After a corner, Malaga's Samu 
Castillejo's first-time volley bounced to Malik, who inexplicably turned a 
header into his net - the Adelaide defender furiously slapped his head at his 
error while his team-mates shook theirs.

Adelaide managed to find the Malaga net in the 24th minute when Isaias drove 
goalward only for his teammate Nigel Boogard to get a touch on the shot from an 
offside position to have the goal disallowed.

After trailing 1-0 at half-time, the Reds rapidly slipped further behind. In 
the 49th minute, Pablo Perez crunched a powerful right-footer into the net from 
20 metres out. Four minutes later, team-mate Luis Alberto neatly curled a 
free-kick into the top corner of the net from the same distance.

Adelaide's Djite responded in the 59th minute, beating the keeper with a 
superb long-range left-footer. But the Spaniards replied just four minutes 
later when Perez cut through the Adelaide defence and laid a perfect pass into 
the path of Juanmi at the far post and he duly tapped in. Juanmi added another 
in the 86th minute with a sliding tap-in from a metre out to cap a resounding 
triumph.
 