
Federal Nationals have expressed concern about the New South Wales 
government’s decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/04/adler-shotgun-category-d-gun-control-coag>
 to classify the Adler 110 shotgun in category D, which would mean it is only 
accessible to professional shooters.


Victorian Nationals senator Bridget McKenzie declared on Monday the NSW 
government had given in to “political opportunism” by arguing for the tight 
classification, describing city-based opponents of the shooting lobby as the
“smashed avocado curtain” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2016/oct/19/how-smashed-avocado-divided-the-generations-video-explainer>
.

“I’m yet to see any evidence of why you’d shift the Adler into category D,” 
McKenzie told Guardian Australia.

States reportedly agree to place Adler shotgun in strictest category
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/04/adler-shotgun-category-d-gun-control-coag>
The NSW Nationals senator John Williams told Guardian Australia on Monday he 
agreed with the former deputy premier Troy Grant who wanted to put the weapon 
into category B.

“I think category D is very, very restrictive,” Williams said.

The Adler A110 is currently subject to an import ban because state governments 
have not been able to agree on how to classify the weapon.

The NSW government was pushing for the seven-shot Adler weapon to be 
classified in category B, but over the weekend, the state switched course, 
signalling it would support category D, which likely means agreement on Friday 
when the prime minister meets premiers at Coag for a discussion about gun 
control.

Agreement between jurisdictions on Friday would allow limited importation of 
the weapon.

McKenzie and Williams late last month voted in defiance of government policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/nationals-senators-break-with-liberals-and-vote-to-end-adler-shotgun-ban>
 by supporting a motion that would have ended the import ban on the Adler 
weapon. Nationals ministers Fiona Nash, Nigel Scullion and Matt Canavan were 
absent from the chamber during the critical vote.

The Senate debate and the show of dissent by federal Nationals in late October 
followed confirmation the Shooters, Fishers and Farmers party’s had won the 
Orange byelection –a significant political upset in NSW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/shooters-party-wins-orange-byelection-by-50-votes-from-nationals>
 that has triggered significant nervousness in Canberra among National 
parliamentarians.

Both McKenzie and Williams argued it was strange to allow the five-shot Adler 
weapon to stay in category A, while arguing the seven shot needed a much 
tougher classification.

Shooting body's $34m assets spark calls to amend national firearm laws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/shooting-bodys-34m-assets-spark-calls-to-amend-national-firearm-laws>
Williams said he could get access to semi-automatic weapons in category C 
which were “far more dangerous weapons than a reloader”.

McKenzie said it was incumbent on NSW to produce the evidence informing its 
decision. “This has come out of the blue, there really doesn’t seem to be any 
rhyme or reason behind it.”

She said rather restricting the activities of responsible licensed shooters, 
governments would be better placed going after illegal weapons used by 
criminals and crime gangs.
 