
What got you started?

Watching a wonderful TV broadcast of Giorgio Strehler's A Servant of Two 
Masters <http://www.clownlink.com/2011/02/giants-of-commedia-giorgio-strehler/> 
from the Piccolo theatre in Milan when I was 12 or 13. It didn't make me want 
to become a director straight away; I don't think I really knew what a director 
was. But it became a template in my head for what theatre could be. Most 
theatre is fantastically boring.

What was your big breakthrough?

The Duchess of Malfi 
<http://openlearn.open.ac.uk/mod/oucontent/view.php?id=406540&section=4.5> at 
the Royal Exchange, Manchester, in 1980, with Helen Mirren, Bob Hoskins and 
Pete Postlethwaite. A great bunch of people – and it won awards.

What are the challenges of directing Shakespeare today?

Making it both meaningful and accessible. I went into directing Shakespeare 
pretty blind. I was asked to do Titus Andronicus at the Bristol Old Vic [in 
1978]. I discovered that when the play was first written, it was a huge hit. I 
thought: "That's what I'll do then – I'll see if I can make this 400-year-old 
play a huge hit." And I did.

You've been working in the US. What differences have you noticed?

American actors are eager to please. There's no cynicism or sense of 
entitlement – and they have an energy you don't always get in the UK. 
They'll come to an audition with six pieces prepared.

What have you sacrificed for your art?

I don't think I've sacrificed anything. I've made choices: on one curious day 
in December 1990, I was offered the chance to take over as artistic director of 
the Royal Shakespeare Company; then my agent rang and said I'd been asked to 
make a film of Wuthering Heights with Ralph Fiennes. I chose the RSC, of 
course, which meant I took a particular path. But I don't regret it.

What's the biggest myth about directing?

That we're puppet-masters. That's just bollocks. The great thing about actors 
is that they can do it without you. Directing is about guiding their creative 
impulses: sometimes editing them, sometimes challenging them.

What work of art would you most like to own?

Anything by [Danish artist] Vilhelm Hammershøi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2008/jun/25/art.denmark>. His 
work contains both drama and stillness.

What's the worst thing anyone ever said about you?

When it comes to nasty things, I have 20/20 amnesia. When you're running a big 
company like the RSC, every day 40 or 50 press cuttings land on your desk. If 
you started worrying about what they said, it would drive you mad.

What's the best advice anyone ever gave you?

The wonderful French actor-director Jean-Louis Barrault 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0056761/> took me under his wing when I was very 
young. He used to say: "Feel passion for everything, but cling to nothing." For 
a director, that's a useful thing to bear in mind.

In short

Born Chichester, 1950

Career: Was artistic director and chief executive of the RSC 1990-2003. Also 
directed operas and musicals, including Chitty Chitty Bang Bang and Così Fan 
Tutte. DirectsThe Tempest at Theatre Royal, Bath 
<http://www.theatreroyal.org.uk/page/3028/The+Tempest/290> (01225 448844), 23 
August to 8 September.

High point: "The Return of Ulysses at the Aix-en-Provence festival in 2000."

Low point: "Leaving the RSC – it felt like leaving home."
 