
Those interested in the history of the cryptic crossword may like to know that 
Derek Harrison, who runs the admirable free crossword sitewww.crossword.org.uk 
<http://www.crossword.org.uk>, has organised the reprinting of Prebendary AF 
Ritchie's Armchair Crosswords, first published 60 years ago and long since out 
of print. His daytime job was headmaster of Wells Cathedral School but he was 
more widely known as a setter of the fiendishly difficult weekly Listener 
puzzles under his nom de plume, Afrit - a powerful demon of Arabian mythology, 
which happened to be hidden in his initials and surname. Afrit was the first of 
three classics teachers centrally involved in the process of codifying the 
'rules' of the modern cryptic crossword clue. (The other two were Derrick 
Macnutt, head of classics at Christ's Hospital in Sussex and Torquemada in the 
Observer, and Alec Robins, a Mancunian who taught classics at Chorlton Grammar 
School for boys and subsequently at Stand Grammar School for girls. He also set 
as Custos for the Guardian and for many other publications besides.

Afrit's 1949 introduction to his collection of puzzles set out (in bold type) 
for the first time what became the golden rule of cryptic cluing: I need not 
mean what I say, but I must say what I mean. This key injunction to crossword 
setters was a play on the exchange in Alice in Wonderland where the March Hare 
says, 'Then you should say what you mean.' Alice replies, 'I do, at least - at 
least I mean what I say - that's the same thing, you know.'

The book can be ordered via Derek's website. It is a classic and it also shows 
by comparison how modern cluing style has developed (dare I say it, improved) 
over the intervening six decades.
 _____

I was reminded of Afrit's injunction when more than one irate North-eastener 
complained about a clue in puzzle No 24,733 by Gordius for 23 June. It was (11 
across): 'Where all the poor assemble (10)'. My defence was that the clue did 
not mean to say that all the poor assemble at Hartlepool; what it said in 
cryptic clue terms was that the solution was a place (defined by 'Where') and 
that you were meant to get to it by way of an anagram (of ALL THE POOR). It 
intended no aspersion on the good people who were once lucky enough to have had 
Peter Mandelson as their MP until he left them suddenly for Brussels and 
subsequently the House of Lords. But, on reading it again, I can see that 
someone might conclude think that Gordius was trying to slip through an 'anag & 
Lit' clue, so I hasten to assure all concerned that this was not the case.
 _____

People who complete and submit solutions for prize puzzles week after week, 
year after year, without ever winning may understandably suspect that the 
system must be rigged against them. Such suspicions would be heightened if they 
were aware of the following story from Della, a cat-lover, who lives just 
outside Darlington in County Durham. She had been sending in prize puzzles for 
some 20 years before she won the Saturday competition about 12 years ago. She 
then switched the name on her entries to that of her then partner and won again 
six years later. After that she decided to 'flip' the name on her entries once 
more to that of Beatrice, whom she regarded as the most intelligent of her 
three cats and, in May, Beatrice duly won, though seems to be showing no 
interest in the dictionary prize. Now, it seems, her other cats Mac and Jessie 
are tempted to enter as well.

I shall tell Cat-lover of County Durham that, happy as I am for Beatrice in 
her success, the idea that entering under aliases increases your chances of 
winning the prize again assumes an unjustified sophistication in our entry 
vetting procedures. The truth is that the names on all entries each week are 
copied into one computerised list from which random selections are made by a 
mailing house in Birmingham. These are then checked manually in the Guardian to 
ensure that the entries picked are in fact correct.
 _____

Araucaria's June Genius puzzle produced fewer correct entries than of late, 
perhaps because it was an alphabetical jig-saw as well as the clues being quite 
hard. There was only one entry on the first day (from Tony C at Uxbridge, 
Middlesex at 15.40) The next entry was from Jeremy G at Canberra, Australia, 
timed at 04.10 on the second day. This reverses the order in which the pair of 
them were first and second home with the May Genius. In all there were just 200 
entries.

There was a culinary error in this puzzle, which several wrote in about and 
more will certainly have noticed. Clue No 2 read: 'Backer for soap, perhaps, 
has no eggs (5,4)', obviously intended to lead you to ANGEL CAKE. All angel 
cake recipes, of course, call for plentiful white of eggs and the clue should 
have ended 'have no yolks'. I took the unilateral decision to let the error 
stand until after the deadline for entry so that everyone at least was 
labouring under the same handicap. A solver from Winnipeg added the comment 
that angel cake is not worth the trouble of making it, but that may just be a 
subjective judgement.
 