
As we hurtle toward the Labour party conference, our attention diverted only 
momentarily by the Liberal Democrats, engaged not so much in a conference as a 
seaside book festival, it is time to consider what happens after Jeremy Corbyn 
wins theleadership election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labourleadership>. We have to assume that 
he will win, but since freak events have become the political norm, picture 
waking up a week hence withOwen Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-smith> as leader. He would have won 
by promising to be exactly like Corbyn on all matters of policy, but younger, 
more approachable, andbetter at getting laid 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/labour-leadership-hopeful-owen-smith-8803113>
 (more precisely, he told the Daily Mirror that he had fought off hundreds of 
lads to get his wife, so he “knew how to win”. The message was plain, if 
bizarre – Corbyn is all very well for the young idealists, but who’s going to 
appeal to the unrepresented constituencies, the men who like to battle 
bare-chested for their womenfolk, the Vikings, the post-apocalypse brigands, 
the readers of Andy Capp? Owen Smith! That’s who).

Labour leadership contest: one result, five possible scenarios
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/labour-leadership-contest-one-result-five-scenarios-corbyn-smith>
Smith has not set out a moderate, centrist alternative and would not have a 
mandate to deliver one. This is not his fault: moderate, “electable” Labour has 
no innate identity at the moment and only defines itself against others; it is 
against inequality, butunlike Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-to-call-for-unity-equality-and-successful-exit-from-eu>
, really means it; it is internationalist and open, but not in a George 
Osborne-y way; it is anti-austerity, but not like one of those lunatic 
Corbynistas; it is pro-immigrants but, in the interests of realism and winning 
back its heartlands, anti-immigration; it is strongly in favour of winning 
elections. It would have taken a truly extraordinary, mercurial, charismatic 
individual to turn all that into a credible political programme, and Smith 
should never blame himself that he wasn’t that.

Returning to the more likely scenario, Corbyn is leader, probably with a lower 
number of votes, which he will ascribe to the NEC rules on who received a 
ballot paper, but a larger proportion. It is in anticipation of this 
probability that a number of rather aerated attacks on the Corbyn phenomenon 
came out at the weekend: the Mail on Sunday described a“secret summit” in a 
“Downton mansion” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3794817/Secret-summit-wipe-Watson-Corbyn-cabal-plans-political-execution-deputy-leader-Downton-mansion-lorded-TUC-bosses.html>
 at which Corbyn and his “cabal” plotted the “political assassination” of Tom 
Watson and general secretary Iain McNicol. It is true that the leader of the 
opposition held a meeting, which a number of people attended who would 
reasonably be called his allies, some of them even in his employ; and they got 
the address right, though Esher Place is actually a training centre and is no 
longer used for the oppression of a service class in Downton-style dinner 
parties. Regrettably, it was sourced from someone who was not there, and was 
wrong in every other particular.

The Sunday Times, meanwhile, picked up the evidence of Dispatches, airing on 
Monday night, which claims to show secretly filmed footage of Momentum groups 
plotting to infiltrate theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
party and deselect MPs. What it actually shows is a bloke who isn’t a Momentum 
member, wishing he could deselect his MP, and a woman named Jill Mountford, 
from the Alliance for Workers’ Liberty, giving out ruthless, Trotskyite ideas 
such as “fight for what you believe in”.

Taken together with the levels of despair and animosity within the 
parliamentary Labour party, encapsulated in Alan Johnson’s sorrowful conclusion 
that theLabour party must be recaptured or face extinction 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/we-have-got-to-recapture-the-labour-party-otherwise-its-dead-and-finished-3r30ghb7g>
, it is plain that the warring parties have to re-evaluate. The bit where they 
call each other horrible names in the hope that one side will give up has 
reached its endgame.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-make-up-or-break-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d1b952489834bf4bf58a74b800bd96d83ac0d09%2F0_196_4320_2591%2F4320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20wins%2C%20Labour%20has%20to%20make%20up%20or%20break%20up%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-make-up-or-break-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20wins%2C%20Labour%20has%20to%20make%20up%20or%20break%20up%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-make-up-or-break-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d1b952489834bf4bf58a74b800bd96d83ac0d09%2F0_196_4320_2591%2F4320.jpg>
 Owen Smith: ‘waiting for that gotcha moment’. Photograph: Richard 
Gardner/Rex/Shutterstock 
The current strategy of Corbyn’s parliamentary foes is to wait for that gotcha 
moment, when a Momentum member or some other affiliate says something – or, 
more likely, said something five years ago – so outrageous, so unpleasant, so 
antisemitic or misogynist or both, that Corbyn himself is discredited. This, as 
anyone can tell you who turned themselves blue in the face doing the same to 
Ukip, will never work. I remember a Ukip councillor opining on Facebook that 
foetuses with a disability should be compulsorily aborted, because they were 
simply unaffordable. Surely that would eject them from reasonable discourse? 
Surely Nigel Farage wouldn’t be asked on Question Time for the 14th time?

The fact is, any group clustered around conviction politics will contain 
people with unbelievable views; you will find Greens in favour of a one-child 
policy and Conservatives in favour of repatriating second-generation 
immigrants. To fixate on them is unfair, but that’s politics; the more serious 
problem is that if you can only see a party or a group where it manifests most 
clearly the things that you hate about it, you will never reach any 
understanding of why people love it. Most Momentum members would not want to 
put abrick through Angela Eagle’s window 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/angela-eagles-constituency-office-vandalised-after-leadership-bid-launch>
, or threaten to throw acid in anyone’s face, or have any great enthusiasm for 
deselections, if some better solution, such as establishing shared values and 
working on them together, could be reached.

The Labour MPs who will not work with Corbyn must set up or occupy another 
party

Revelling in the worst of the fringes prevents any meaningful connection with 
the best. How bizarre this must look to the untrained observer, that an army of 
new activists arrives and they are dismissed en masse as revolutionaries. Most 
of them want nothing more radical than to spend less than 70% of their wages on 
rent; Trotsky would laugh them out of town. For Corbyn’s part, he needs to do 
more than simply deny that deselections are part of his plan: he needs to look 
like a man who genuinely wants to understand what people like about Dan Jarvis. 
He needs to be able to give his victory speech without mentioning the size of 
his mandate; it is not the language of unity. It is like avoiding a pub brawl 
by pointing to your four gigantic friends.

If none of this is possible – if the Corbyn camp is already seeking 
conciliation, and the resistance is simply implacable – they need to move 
beyond it, and fast. The Labour MPs who will not work with Corbyn must set up 
or occupy another party – there was talk of using the Cooperative party as such 
a vehicle. Those who remain in Labour will have to drop the betrayal narrative 
and build a story that doesn’t rely on, but crucially doesn’t preclude, working 
with others. Even if a snap election is not called in May, it will not wait 
until 2020; the opposition does not have time for a fight to the death. It must 
rescue the convictions that are still alive.
 