
The American circus, Ringling Brothers and Barnum & Bailey, has said it will 
cease performances after 146 years because of declining tickets sales and high 
operating costs.


 “After much evaluation and deliberation, my family and I have made the 
difficult business decision that Ringling Bros and Barnum & Bailey will hold 
its final performances in May,” Kenneth Feld, chairman and chief executive of 
Feld Entertainment, the circus producer, said on the circus’ web site.

 In May last year, the circus retired its elephant act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/02/ringling-brothers-elephants-circus-final-show>
, years after legal action by activists. It admitted no wrongdoing, but agreed 
to a six-figure fine several years before ending the elephant performances.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fringling-brothers-circus-elephant-animal-sanctuary-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ringling%20Bros'%20remaining%20circus%20elephants%20headed%20to%20sanctuary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fringling-brothers-circus-elephant-animal-sanctuary-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ringling%20Bros%27%20remaining%20circus%20elephants%20headed%20to%20sanctuary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fringling-brothers-circus-elephant-animal-sanctuary-video&media=>
Ringling Bros’ remaining circus elephants headed to sanctuary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/may/02/ringling-brothers-circus-elephant-animal-sanctuary-video>
 In his statement on Saturday, Feld noted that declining sales had fallen off 
even more dramatically following what he called “the transition of the 
elephants off the road”.

 Animal rights group Peta said it the decision heralded “the end of what has 
been the saddest show on earth for wild animals, and asks all other animal 
circuses to follow suit, as this is a sign of changing times”.

 Peta president Ingrid Newkirk also said in its statement that 36 years of 
protests had “awoken the world to the plight of animals in captivity.“

 Activists often appeared outside venues with fliers, protesting against the 
use of elephants, and pictures of animals they said were abused.

 After Feld Entertainment sued, claiming malicious prosecution, more than a 
dozen animal welfare groups agreed in 2012 and 2014 to pay settlements 
totalling about $25m to end 14 years of litigation.

 The circus went by the slogan “The greatest show on earth”, a catchphrase 
that was so ubiquitous it was employed for the title of the 1952 Cecil B 
DeMille best picture Oscar-winning film starring Charlton Heston and Betty 
Hutton.

 The circus will end it long run with performances in Providence on 7 May and 
in Uniondale, New York, on 21 May. Other Feld productions, including Marvel 
Universe LIVE!, Monster Jam, Monster Energy Supercross, AMSOIL Arenacross, 
Disney On Ice and Disney Live!, will continue, and the company said it will 
continue to develop new shows.

 Employees were told of the decision to close down following performances on 
Saturday in Florida.
 