
“Seeing Giselle as a member of the audience is a very different thing from 
seeing it as a choreographer – and knowing that, fucking hell, you’re going to 
have to be dealing with it yourself.”

That was the sobering thought that struck Akram Khan 
<http://www.akramkhancompany.net>, whose new version of the ballet 
<http://giselle.ballet.org.uk> has just opened in Manchester. Before he 
embarked on the project for English National Ballet, he explains, he had only 
ever seen one performance of Giselle, and that was as a curious outsider. 
Originally choreographed in 1842 by Jules Perrot and Jean Coralli, the ballet 
comes straight from the heart of European Romanticism. Its plot is a narrative 
world away from Khan’sBangladeshi heritage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/16/akram-khan-desh-review>: the 
story of a young peasant heroine who is deceived by her aristocratic lover, 
Albrecht, but continues to adore him from beyond the grave.

By the same measure, Giselle’s delicate, airborne vocabulary is on a 
completely different physical plane from the grounded, percussive language of 
the Indian dance formKathak <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kathak>, and from 
the western contemporary dance styles in which Khan was trained.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fakram-khan-giselle-migrant-english-national-ballet-tamara-rojo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8da617b2bb91dc738b3fa00095cc566e4a61340b%2F1159_442_2169_2169%2F2169.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Akram%20Khan's%20refugee%20Giselle%3A%20'A%20real%20woman%20in%20a%20catastrophic%20situation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fakram-khan-giselle-migrant-english-national-ballet-tamara-rojo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Akram%20Khan%27s%20refugee%20Giselle%3A%20%27A%20real%20woman%20in%20a%20catastrophic%20situation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fakram-khan-giselle-migrant-english-national-ballet-tamara-rojo-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8da617b2bb91dc738b3fa00095cc566e4a61340b%2F1159_442_2169_2169%2F2169.jpg>
 Akram Khan in Dust, 2014. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Yet the world of ballet has begun scouting for its choreographers in new and 
sometimes surprising places, and Khan himself has been growing progressively 
more responsive to its call. He has collaborated with French ballerinaSylvie 
Guillem <http:> and in 2014 he accepted a commission from ENB’s newly appointed 
director, Tamara Rojo, to create a new work for the company.

That work, Dust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/11/tamara-rojo-english-national-ballet-first-world-war>
, proved to be such a mutually satisfying experiment that Rojo then suggested 
Giselle. And as daunting as it was for Khan to tackle so revered a classic, he 
was also fascinated to discover exactly what its story, its characters and its 
structure might offer him as a choreographer. “It was so important to me to 
respect the original. With a work as sacred as Giselle, it would be easy to say 
‘Fuck off’ and make something that’s the exact opposite. But I realised you 
have to listen to it and open yourself up to it.”

This is what Khan has spent the last year doing, in collaboration with his 
dramaturgRuth Little 
<http://www.akramkhancompany.net/company-profiles/ruth-little/>. When I speak 
to the pair in a small mirrored studio in ENB’S London base, they acknowledge 
how hard it was, at first, to get to grips with the ballet’s plot and with its 
accompanyingAdolphe Adam <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adolphe_Adam> score. 
“The story seemed naive in so many ways,” says Little, “and the music seemed so 
bitty and motif-led.” Each sequence was only a minute or so long, and it all 
seemed so different from the kind of organic unfolding that happens in Khan’s 
work. But, as Little points out, “the ballet hasn’t survived for no reason”, 
and it has been robust enough to support other radical retellings, including 
those by Mats Ek andMichael Keegan-Dolan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/feb/24/dance>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fakram-khan-giselle-migrant-english-national-ballet-tamara-rojo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fc0348e8a3b68263261c04177640e93eb32ec9a%2F0_371_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Akram%20Khan's%20refugee%20Giselle%3A%20'A%20real%20woman%20in%20a%20catastrophic%20situation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fakram-khan-giselle-migrant-english-national-ballet-tamara-rojo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Akram%20Khan%27s%20refugee%20Giselle%3A%20%27A%20real%20woman%20in%20a%20catastrophic%20situation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fakram-khan-giselle-migrant-english-national-ballet-tamara-rojo-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fc0348e8a3b68263261c04177640e93eb32ec9a%2F0_371_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
 Akram Khan and Stina Quagebeur in rehearsal. Photograph: Laurent Liotardo 
As she and Khan explored their own ideas about Giselle, they realised that the 
ballet’s apparently formulaic simplicity was actually its strength, and that 
its starkly opposed themes of love and betrayal, of reality and the 
supernatural, provided the power of its narrative bones. Most fruitful to them 
was exploring the underlying issue of power – the gulf of money and class that 
separates the aristocrats from the peasants in the ballet, and that dooms 
Albrecht and Giselle’s love to tragedy.

When Khan and Little began work on the project last year, the news was full of 
the refugee crisis in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/21/the-new-odyssey-patrick-kingsley-cast-away-charlotte-mcdonald-gibson-europes-refugee-crisis-review>
 and it became obvious that this would be the key to their own 21st-century 
Giselle. They have set the ballet among a community of migrant workers, who 
have been sacked from their jobs at a garment factory and are having to eke out 
a precarious existence in an impromptu camp. The courtly world of Albrecht is 
replaced by a privileged group of landlords and factory owners, who live apart 
from their workers behind a high wall.

If I danced in it I’d have to be a minor character – sort of limping and messy

Given this harsh new setting, it’s inevitable that the ballet’s heroine has 
also undergone profound changes. Khan says he found it hard to connect with the 
passive, childlike Giselle of the original, comparing her to the delicately 
feminised women in Kathak, who are “nearly always so shy and in awe. I hate 
that. [The Hindu goddess]Radha <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radha_Krishna> 
today would be chewing gum and holding out her hand for Krishna to write his 
telephone number on. With Giselle I wanted to create a real woman who has lived 
life and experienced a lot.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fakram-khan-giselle-migrant-english-national-ballet-tamara-rojo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb0a57473f7822ad12df62540b34ec621d1d711d%2F0_517_5241_3145%2F5241.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Akram%20Khan's%20refugee%20Giselle%3A%20'A%20real%20woman%20in%20a%20catastrophic%20situation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fakram-khan-giselle-migrant-english-national-ballet-tamara-rojo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Akram%20Khan%27s%20refugee%20Giselle%3A%20%27A%20real%20woman%20in%20a%20catastrophic%20situation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fakram-khan-giselle-migrant-english-national-ballet-tamara-rojo-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb0a57473f7822ad12df62540b34ec621d1d711d%2F0_517_5241_3145%2F5241.jpg>
 ‘Visionary doggedness’ … ENB artistic director Tamara Rojo rehearses Akram 
Khan’s Giselle. Photograph: Laurent Liotardo 
What defines Giselle for Khan is not her naivety, but her capacity for hope. 
“She’s in this catastrophic situation but she still falls in love, she sees 
beauty everywhere, she’s always hoping for better things, and that’s why she’s 
so vulnerable to Albrecht.”

Another character who fascinated him is Hilarion, the peasant gamekeeper who 
loves Giselle but cruelly forces her to acknowledge Albrecht’s duplicity. “He’s 
the most flawed and human character – he has that inner battle that always 
interests me.” Khan and Little have expanded Hilarion’s role in the ballet into 
a fixer, a go-between who works with both migrants and capitalists: “At one 
point I got so interested in him I had the idea of having the title as Giselle, 
then crossing it out and writing Hilarion in blood.”

In the process of refashioning the ballet, Khan has been working with a 
radical rearrangement of the score. Some of Adam’s themes and melodies will be 
identifiable, but he says that they have been stretched and altered by his 
composer,Vincenzo Lamagna 
<http://www.akramkhancompany.net/company-profiles/beautiful-noise-vincenzo-lamagna/>
, into “beautiful, interesting stuff”. In its own way, Khan’s choreography 
remains in dialogue with the 19th-century text, for although the dance material 
is all brand new, he steeped himself in the vocabulary of classicism while he 
was creating it. “Tamara always told me that she wanted this to be a journey 
for me as an artist,” he says. “It would have been a waste of time for me if I 
had made a work for ENB that my own dancers could have done better.”

It would have been a waste of time to make a work for ENB that my own dancers 
could have done better
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJMcHPDN41q0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJMcHPDN41q0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJMcHPDN41q0&media=>
 Watch rehearsals for Giselle 
Perhaps the most extreme journey Khan has taken is into the language of pointe 
work. He’s using it only in the ghostly second act (now relocated from a 
moonlit graveyard to an abandoned factory) but is fascinated by the 
gravity-defying possibilities it affords him. “This act is so otherworldly, 
floating and spiritual; how could I not use pointe shoes? They were developed 
for that purpose.”

The two principal ballerinas who will alternate in the role of Giselle are 
Alina Cojocaru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/nov/24/alina-cojocaru-interview-ballet-corsaire-nutcracker>
 and Rojo herself. “They are such great artists and they’ve asked so many 
interesting questions,” Khan says. “Tamara always looks at the whole picture of 
the ballet; when Alina asks questions, she always looks through the eyes of 
Giselle.” He would adore to partner the two ballerinas himself, but says he has 
created a work that is impossible for him to dance. “If I was in it I’d have to 
be a minor character – sort of limping and messy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fakram-khan-giselle-migrant-english-national-ballet-tamara-rojo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa68731b9bd6ca8752cd33bb5e5a95880e4a202b0%2F0_0_3069_2188%2F3069.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Akram%20Khan's%20refugee%20Giselle%3A%20'A%20real%20woman%20in%20a%20catastrophic%20situation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fakram-khan-giselle-migrant-english-national-ballet-tamara-rojo-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Akram%20Khan%27s%20refugee%20Giselle%3A%20%27A%20real%20woman%20in%20a%20catastrophic%20situation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fakram-khan-giselle-migrant-english-national-ballet-tamara-rojo-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa68731b9bd6ca8752cd33bb5e5a95880e4a202b0%2F0_0_3069_2188%2F3069.jpg>
 Traditional … Agnes Oakes performs Giselle for English National Ballet in 
2007. Photograph: Luke Macgregor/Reuters 
His greatest admiration, however, is reserved for the visionary doggedness 
that Rojo has displayed as artistic director. In order to give Khan the time he 
needed to develop his material with ENB’s dancers, she has put rehearsals and 
performances of all other ballets on hold – a sacrifice almost unknown for a 
busy repertory company. “With Tamara it’s all about the art, and she really 
cares about this Giselle,” Khan says. “She doesn’t just want a shiny new thing 
– she wants a Giselle that has a life and a future. I’m not saying I can make 
it happen, but it’s the aspiration for us all.”

• Akram Khan’s Giselle <http://www.manchestertheatres.com/emails/giselle.htm> 
is at the Palace theatre, Manchester (box office: 0844 871 3019), until 1 
October,then touring <http://giselle.ballet.org.uk/book-tickets>.
 