
Alan Pardew has recalled the “mercenary” role he played in Tottenham Hotspur’s 
all-time record defeat, as he prepared to face them on Saturday in his first
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> match in 
charge of Crystal Palace.

Pardew was approaching his 34th birthday in the summer of 1995 and the end of 
his playing spell at Charlton Athletic when he was taken on a brief loan by 
Tottenham to feature in their unwanted Intertoto Cup campaign.

The club played four matches at the tournament’s group phase and the final 
one, four days after Pardew had turned 34, was the farcical 8-0 away loss to 
Köln. Tottenham picked a team of youngsters, reserves and players on loan in 
all of the games, as they had been opposed to playing in the first place, but 
the problem was thatKöln <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cologne> took it 
extremely seriously.

The German club, who had hoped to advance into the Uefa Cup, took Tottenham 
apart in a tie marked by cracking goals, bad hairstyles and black comedy. Chris 
Day, who is still playing for Stevenage in League Two, was in goal for 
Tottenham that day, aged 19, and he described it as “Tottenham reserves against 
World Cup players.” He remembers how his opposite number, Bodo Illgner, the 
Germany World Cup winner in 1990, told him beforehand that he was warming up at 
the wrong end.

“In a way, I suppose I am part of Spurs’ history,” Pardew said, of his 
involvement in the 8-0 defeat. “It was the end of my career and I was looking 
for a club. I was asked: ‘Would you like to come to play in the Intertoto Cup 
for Spurs?’ I said: ‘OK, that sounds like a good idea.’ It was specifically on 
that basis.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNeiBT-GLS0w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNeiBT-GLS0w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNeiBT-GLS0w&media=>
“I remember the live TV cameras being there. That was the first time I saw a 
camera behind the goal and I thought: ‘This is going to be entertaining,’ 
bearing in mind it was their first team. We literally had the youth team, a 
couple of reserves, and some mercenaries – I was one of them. I still enjoyed 
it. It was a great experience.”

Gerry Francis was the Tottenham manager but he left control of the team to his 
assistant, Chris Hughton. None of the club’s first-team players were involved. 
“I don’t recall seeing Francis at the games,” Pardew said. “He was probably 
watching from the beach somewhere.”

Sheffield Wednesday and Wimbledon also played in that summer’s Intertoto Cup, 
with Wednesday taking it seriously – they narrowly failed to emerge from the 
group stage. However, like Tottenham, Wimbledon had not wanted to play and they 
also picked weakened teams to exit after poor results. Both Tottenham and 
Wimbledon were banned by Uefa from European competition as a result of their 
selections but the punishment was lifted on appeal.

Pardew joined Barnet on a free transfer after the Intertoto Cup and he played 
there for two seasons before moving into management. Tottenham had been forced 
into playing the Intertoto Cup by the authorities and they can highlight the 
circumstances behind the thrashing by Köln. But the fact remains that Uefa and 
Fifa recognised it as an official match and, as such, it has entered the record 
books.
 