
‘I’m afraid I really haven’t got much left to say,” is Alan Bennett’s opening 
gambit. “I have such a limited repertoire.” This, from a writer who recently 
published achunky new volume of prose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/02/keeping-on-keeping-on-alan-bennett-review>
, and is about to be the subject of a new documentary, is frankly a tease. He 
will shortly converse in something approximate to high spirits (a relative term 
in Bennett’s universe) for about an hour and a half in the sombre elegance of 
his sitting room.

Outside his Victorian front door, a film crew is shooting Paddington 2 against 
the discreet pastels of his street in leafy Primrose Hill, north London, not 
far from Gloucester Crescent, where he lived for nearly 40 years, famously 
co-existing with Miss Shepherd, “the lady in the van” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/14/alan-bennett-diaries-lady-in-the-van>
. This interview is the curtain-raiser to a BBC Bennett double bill on 
Christmas Eve: Adam Low’sAlan Bennett’s Diaries documentary – a portrait of the 
artist as “an old git” – followed by the TV premiere ofThe Lady in the Van, 
Nicholas Hytner’s 2015 film, starring Maggie Smith, about the woman who became 
a bizarre and eccentric part of Bennett’s life in his former home.

He and his partner, Rupert Thomas, moved to his current address in 2006. It 
was, says Bennett, a reluctant farewell to the “drunks, drug-dealers, snogging 
by the wall, and the stop-and-search” of Camden Town. Here the biggest 
excitement is “the occasional squirrel”, a species with which he is cordially 
at war. Otherwise, Bennett says that, having embraced the tranquillity of 
Primrose Hill, he has “just got on with it”.

Bennett is now 82. In these past 10 years he has been “getting on”, in all 
senses: films ofThe History Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/oct/15/comedy.drama> and The Lady in the 
Van 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/15/lady-in-van-review-maggie-smith-alan-bennett>
; four more plays at the National Theatre, includingThe Habit of Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/nov/18/alan-bennett-the-habit-of-art>; 
and the treadmill of senescence punctuating the quotidian reality of what he 
calls “keeping on keeping on”. That happens to be the title of his latest 
collection of diaries (2005 -2015), followingWriting Home (1994) and Untold 
Stories(2005). In Low’s film he jokes that “banging on, banging on” might be a 
better title. As always, that’s part of an ironical self-presentation by a man 
who admits: “I always wanted to perform, I knew I could do it.”

The History Boys is taught at A-level, so it has an afterlife.... some kids 
are quite surprised that I’m still alive

In the 20-odd years since he first began sharing his progress with his 
readers, Bennett has become the zen master of the public/private literary 
career, fusing life and art in a nationally treasured presentation of himself 
that’s both immensely popular and also, on closer examination, surprisingly 
complex. Bennett wrestles with what he’s created. On the one hand, he rejects 
becoming “tweeness’s accepted measure”. On the other, he seems to recognise his 
fate, lamenting: “did I stab Judi Dench with a pitch-fork, I should still be a 
teddy bear”.

You can almost hear the nation’s grammarians yodelling with joy at that 
faultless archaism. But what would they make of the writer himself? That might 
depend on timing. In Hytner’s film, Alex Jennings plays both the “teddy bear” 
Bennett – and a tougher alter ego. Indeed, in any encounter with the writer 
himself, there will always be at least two “Alans” present: the Somebody and 
the Nobody. Both are to be found seamlessly interacting in his diary, and both 
are on show in the BBC documentary which follows Bennett as he completes the 
editing of the latest diaries, and goes about his business as a nationally 
renowned talking head. We find the Somebody feted as a “literary lion” by the 
great and the good at the New York Public Library, and also appearing on Radio 
3’sPrivate Passions. Meanwhile, the Nobody gets comically misidentified by the 
gawping public (“which Alan are you?”) or, in Bennett’s memories of his Oxford 
graduate days, patronised on high table. Bennett the academic manqué (“I was no 
great loss to history”) is a component of this persona, a role he will slip 
into as happily as he inhabits the limelight. Bennett the Nobody can still be 
shy/self-effacing, telling funny stories to distract attention. Behind a 
beguiling mask of melancholy, he nurtures a fierce and well camouflaged 
commitment to his art.

Today, Bennett’s mood (and the mood of Keeping On Keeping On), projects 
contentment, valediction, and “banging on”, an engaging sort of Why-oh-why. “I 
try not to sound like an old git,” he says, laughing. Mixed in with the 
grumbling, and the obituaries, memorial services and funerals, there’s the 
evident happiness he derives from his life with Rupert Thomas, editor of the 
World of Interiors, and 30 years his junior, with whom he made a civil 
partnership in 2006.

In the book, and the film, Bennett narrates this milestone in his life with a 
minimum of self-scrutiny, while approving the absence of fuss: “no more 
splother or ceremony than renewing one’s parking permit”. It’s just possible 
that the documentary will supply more information about his marriage than any 
record he has kept for himself. Long ago, in his pre-Rupert days, when asked if 
he was gay, Bennett replied that this was like asking a man who has just 
crawled across the Sahara desert “to choose between Perrier or Malvern water”. 
His first instinct is to divert his audience. Now, discussing the diaries’ 
appeal, he remarks that readers like them because “they come in bite-sized 
chunks”.

They are a dish he first served up to his public in the London Review of Books
, and later in book form. He marvels at fellow diarist Joe Orton’s fearless 
candour while recognising that such “unabashed” self-exposure is not really his 
game. Self-abasing, he says: “so little happens to me”. In another tease, he 
confides that “printed in their entirety, they [the diaries] wouldn’t do me any 
good at all”. So the published version becomes a confection for his fans, with 
Bennett himself doubly disguised: first in the process of writing for 
publication, and, second, in the editorial process of selection.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falan-bennett-i-dont-fret-about-posterity-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8342523b76d6a29336b87d39d478043f355404bc%2F0_127_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20fret%20about%20posterity.%20But%20some%20things%20will%20last%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falan-bennett-i-dont-fret-about-posterity-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20fret%20about%20posterity.%20But%20some%20things%20will%20last%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falan-bennett-i-dont-fret-about-posterity-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8342523b76d6a29336b87d39d478043f355404bc%2F0_127_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Alex Jennings as Alan Bennett with Maggie Smith as Miss Shepherd in The Lady 
in the Van. Photograph: Allstar/BBC Films 
The pleasure of Bennett’s journal comes from his chuntering elegy for a lost 
world, the land of his Leeds childhood, and the England of healthcare; Kathleen 
Ferrier; parish churches; his friendship with “Debo” Devonshire;Hymns Ancient 
and Modern (hymns make him cry); public libraries; and state education (“I owe 
everything to the state,” he says). Who could not warm to someone who loathes 
Virgin trains, Classic FM and Tony Blair? Or to a writer who has “real regrets” 
about never having kept a donkey? Simultaneously, he wants to entertain: “Spend 
part of the afternoon in the gazebo with a water-pistol,” he writes on 16 May 
2010, “hoping to surprise the squirrel rifling the bird-feeder.”

There’s also the potent magic of his crystal prose. This comes in two kinds of 
observation: a) brilliantly allusive grace notes, for instance, footballer 
Frank Lampard’s open mouth like “the howl on the face of the damned man in 
Michelangelo’sLast Judgment”, and b) ironic self-effacement. “I am in the 
pigeon-hole marked ‘no threat’”, he writes. Whatever he might do to Judi Dench, 
he would still be that teddy bear.

A teddy bear with sharp teeth. Bennett is plainly devoted to his partner, but 
on 31 August 2009 demonstrates his writer’s splinter of ice firmly intact, 
reporting that, after watchingWuthering Heights:

“Rupert turns to me and says: ‘You’re rather like Heathcliff.’

Me: (gratified) Really?

R: Yeah. Difficult, northern and a cunt.”

As we talk about the chance of his diary giving offence – a suggestion he 
rebuts – Bennett suddenly seems “unabashed”, happy to be funny, honest – and 
casually devastating. Perhaps, like many older people, he no longer cares.

Ageing is definitely on his mind. Does he think about dying ? “Yes,” he says, 
with a short laugh. “All the time. And the fact that there’s 30 years between 
me and Rupert means it’s not something I can talk about because it’s not fair 
on him.” A beat. “But it’s always there, yes.”

Nearly 20 years ago, Bennett had an operation for colon cancer during which 
his surgeon removed a “rock bun-sized” tumour. “I was very, very lucky”, he 
says now. “I never had any pain, but it was touch and go, though they didn’t 
tell me that till after.”

It’s a shock to remember, talking to him now, just how long Bennett has been a 
“much-loved” part of English cultural life. He was born in 1934 which makes him 
a contemporary with his friend Michael Frayn, Joe Orton, and the late Simon 
Gray, another dramatist-diarist whom he admires. (“I like his diaries better 
than his plays,” he says).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Falan-bennetts-diaries-trailer-adam-low-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett's%20Diaries%20Live%20trailer%3A%20'I%20long%20for%20a%20donkey'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0exclusive%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Falan-bennetts-diaries-trailer-adam-low-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%27s%20Diaries%20Live%20trailer%3A%20%27I%20long%20for%20a%20donkey%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0exclusive%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Falan-bennetts-diaries-trailer-adam-low-video&media=>
Alan Bennett’s Diaries Live trailer: ‘I long for a donkey’ – exclusive video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/27/alan-bennetts-diaries-trailer-adam-low-video>
Does he fret about posterity and his posthumous reputation? “Not really. I 
don’t think I’m that kind of writer, and anyway I won’t be around, will I?” He 
pauses to reflect on the question. “I think some things will last. The story 
about the Queen [A novella,The Uncommon Reader, 2007], for instance. That might 
last, I suppose, but that’s really to do with the Queen.”

I wonder if HMQ has ever expressed any opinion about her role in his work, for 
exampleA Question of Attribution,  
<https://store.bbc.com/screen-one/a-question-of-attribution>his play about 
Anthony Blunt’s chance encounter with Her Majesty in the picture gallery of 
Buckingham Palace. Bennett finds this idea laughable. “Oh no, no – she’s got 
better things to do.” He goes on, “The nice thing is thatThe History Boys is 
taught at A-level, so it does have an afterlife. Sometimes when people come up 
to me, some kids are quite surprised that I’m still alive.”

Bennett’s own theatrical debut in Beyond the Fringe occurred in 1960, when 
Harold Macmillan was prime minister, and he occupies an odd position in British 
theatre. AfterBeyond the Fringe, it was some years before he returned with 
Forty Years On, and then more than two decades (and a few flops) before he 
struck gold withThe Madness of George III. Some critics locate his masterpiece 
in his TV writing, notablyTalking Heads. Is he a diarist or a playwright ?

“I’m a writer,” he replies, admitting that he has always seen himself as a 
performer, preferring the company of actors to writers. As a writer-performer, 
he prefers monologues, and began his stage career with a famous comic sermon. 
For years afterBeyond the Fringe, he thought he would be a teacher or a 
clergyman, or possibly a librarian. He always knew he wanted to perform, but is 
less certain about writing. Ask him to define himself as a “playwright” and he 
will demur. “I’m a writer,” he replies. “I get embarrassed when they say 
‘playwright, novelist and actor’. I’m not a novelist, and I’m not much of an 
actor.” Ask him about work in progress and he’ll tell you that his plays 
usually gestate in a four-year cycle. At the moment, he says: “I’ve started 
one, but haven’t got any further.”

In this vein, Bennett could win a Nobel prize for self-deprecation. Still both 
shy and an outsider, he’s a man with a terror of parties, who says he can 
easily feel his 16-year-old self returning. Even at 82, he doesn’t feel “any 
different”.

The phone rings at the other end of the room. Bennett, walking deliberately, 
goes to pick up. It’s his brother Gordon, three years his senior. Bennett 
politely explains that he has a visitor and can’t talk. As he resumes his seat 
by the fireplace, he says: “When we were young, we used to quarrel. We get on 
much better now. He’s really good. He wants nothing to do with show business, 
but he does come to see my plays.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falan-bennett-i-dont-fret-about-posterity-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8fe19816d678b046c3ba5bb0b14742a5df503c5%2F0_52_1496_898%2F1496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20fret%20about%20posterity.%20But%20some%20things%20will%20last%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falan-bennett-i-dont-fret-about-posterity-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20fret%20about%20posterity.%20But%20some%20things%20will%20last%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falan-bennett-i-dont-fret-about-posterity-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8fe19816d678b046c3ba5bb0b14742a5df503c5%2F0_52_1496_898%2F1496.jpg>
 Alan Bennett, centre, with the cast of the film adaptation of the History 
Boys: (l-r) Jamie Parker, Russell Tovey, Samuel Anderson, Andrew Knott, Alan 
Bennett, Dominic Cooper, Sacha Dhawan and James Corden. Photograph: Snap 
Stills/Rex Shutterstock 
Gordon Bennett seems to share his younger brother’s reticence. Apropos the 
north-south gap between Leeds and Camden Town, Bennett volunteers: “I didn’t 
know how he would take to my being gay when Rupert turned up.”

“Surely, he knew you were gay ?”

“I don’t know whether he knew or not, but he never made any comment. We never 
discussed it.”

Bennett’s reticence, an indispensable part of being Somebody/Nobody, holds the 
key to his appeal. He is a very special kind of English writer who is beloved 
of a people who love literature, and its entertainments, but don’t want it 
thrust down their throats. They want honesty, but not the show-off, flashy kind 
that feels like self-promotion. His readers want to explore for themselves the 
life of an Englishman who could be a neighbour, savouring its austere 
satisfactions in private. Bennett will never break this unspoken contract, even 
though he will test it a bit, when he can. He is, after all, an English 
libertarian as well as a writer.

Perhaps it’s no surprise that the dominant tone of Bennett’s recent work is 
valedictory. He has always harked back to an England where questions about 
class and sex were unspoken. At the same time, he identifies strongly with the 
common man, who is as good as anyone else. He believes in tolerance, fairness 
and fair play, while hating snobbery, pretension and privilege. He knows that 
preaching won’t get him anywhere, so he has perfected the art of being funny 
and affectionate about English life through which he has morphed into being a 
national somebody, a role he acknowledges, while sending it up.

As the nation watches Bennett on TV, how will he and his partner celebrate 
Christmas? “We’ll stay in London, and go to Rupert’s parents on Christmas Day. 
That will be the nearest thing to a family lunch.” He sounds quite happy to 
play the spouse, but the prospect of the meal seems faintly alarming. “I don’t 
much like turkey,” he admits, then brightens. “But I do like Christmas pudding, 
and we’ll go to Yorkshire after.” In a connection he cherishes, Bennett keeps 
his parents’ old home, on the edge of the Yorkshire Dales. With Rupert, he 
visits regularly on the train. “I’m the only non-resident in the village, but 
I’ve been going there for 50 years.”

How, then, did Yorkshire respond to his civil partnership? “The village…?” 
Bennett laughs. “Well, there are far more interesting things going on there 
than that…” He does not finish the sentence. “Rupert is more at home there now 
than I am really.”

Alan Bennett’s Diaries is on BBC2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> on 
24 December at 8pm, followed by The Lady in the Van
 