
Alan Pardew hopes to persuade Mike Ashley not to sack him as manager of 
Newcastle United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> during 
talks with the club's owner in London next week.

As reports emerged from France claiming that Ashley is interested in replacing 
Pardew – whose ninth-placed side have endured a dramatic post-Christmas slump 
and who has been the subject of angry protests from fans – with Christophe 
Galtier, theSt Etienne <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stetienne> coach, 
the manager remained cautiously optimistic.

"I don't know who Christophe Galtier would have spoken to," said Pardew. "But 
there are only one or two people who really matter here and I don't think they 
have spoken to him.

"I hope Sunday [at Liverpool] won't be my last match. As a Premier League 
manager, and especially on the run I've been on, you can't be 100% confident 
but I hope I'll be here next season."

He will certainly do his very best to convince Ashley to give him another 
chance and assure the owner he can win back hearts and minds on Tyneside. "I've 
got to do better but I turned it round at West Ham and, as a manager, that 
happens more times than you think," said Pardew.

"There are problems. You can't get away from that. But I always enjoy meeting 
the owner and the board. It [the meeting] will be a time for reflection and 
time to be honest. I think anybody who knows Mike and who knows me, knows that 
we speak our minds. We need to face things and find a solution."

Newcastle's manager deeply regrets his head-butt on Hull's David Meyler 
<http://http://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/11/alan-pardew-seven-games-ban-head-butt>
 in early March which led to him receiving a three-game stadium ban followed by 
a four-match touchline ban.

"The Hull incident was obviously a turning point," acknowledged Pardew, whose 
side recently suffered six straight defeats. "I think that affected me and the 
team. I will make sure that never happens again."

He is also anxious never again to be on the receiving end of the sort of abuse 
from fans he encountered during last Saturday's 3-0 win against Cardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/03/newcastle-united-cardiff-city-premier-league-match-report>
 at St James' Park.

"It's not something I want to experience again," he said. "There was a lot of 
frustration towards me and I understand that. Hopefully I can prove that I can 
deal with it and come back better and stronger. Life is a rocky road and, when 
it gets rocky, you have to stay strong and focused.

"I will work hard this summer on making myself a stronger manager and try to 
improve the club."
 