
Scotland have suffered their latest personnel blow with Alan Hutton having 
confirmed his retirement from international duty. TheAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> right-back, who won 50 caps, 
informed Gordon Strachan of his decision before the squad for Friday’s World 
Cup qualifier with England was announced in midweek.

Hutton, 31, made his Scotland debut in a friendly against Austria in May 2007. 
He was part of the team thatmemorably defeated France 1-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/sep/13/match.scotlandfootballteam> 
in Paris, four months later. More recently, Hutton was a routine starter under 
Strachan even when out of the first-team picture at Villa. His cap haul earned 
the former Rangers and Tottenham player a spot in Scotland’s international hall 
of fame.

“I feel this is the right time to spend more time with my family, put 
everything I have professionally into doing well at Villa and give others a 
chance for Scotland,” Hutton toldThe Observer. “I’ve had a really enjoyable 
nine years withScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland> and 
would like to think I have done my bit for my country.

Scotland’s Robert Snodgrass hits hat-trick in defeat of nine-man Malta
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/04/malta-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier>
“ I’d like to thank all the managers I have played under, especially Gordon 
for sticking by me when I wasn’t a club regular. We had a couple of good chats 
over the last few weeks and I appreciate his understanding. I wish both Gordon 
and the team all the best for the future.”

Scotland fielded Callum Paterson at right-back against Malta in the opening 
match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/04/malta-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier>
 of their 2018 World Cup qualifying campaign. After Hutton withdrew from the 
squad for the matches against Lithuania and Slovakia, the Hearts player 
retained his place. Paterson, though, remains the only natural right-back in 
the Scotland party to play England. Russell Martin, who has played there for 
Norwich City, has been deployed as a centre-back by Strachan.

Celtic’s Scott Brown, who retired from international duty in September only to 
reverse his decision, is back in the Scotland squad but is a doubt with a numb 
foot sustained in Celtic’s 3-0 win on Saturday. Tow of Strachan’s left backs, 
Kieran Tierney and Andy Robertson, have been rendered unavailable because of 
injury.
 