
20 February

In the colourful and variegated background of Camden Town, Miss Mary Shepherd 
seems in some respects not unusual. She was a vagrant but a stationary one, 
resident for the last 15 years of her life a few feet from my front door where 
there was a paved area – the architect had wishfully called it a patio – just 
big enough to take a car. Or, as it transpired, a van.

The neighbourhood has never been without its eccentrics, a steady assortment 
of which were supplied by Arlington House, one of the Rowton Houses put up in 
the 19th century to provide respectable working men with bed and board at a 
reasonable rate. And so it admirably did, though it also housed some unusual 
characters, one or two of them straight out of Samuel Beckett. Roaming the 
streets besides was a cast of itinerant alcoholics who roosted the steps of any 
empty premises or the vicinity of any warm-air outlet. If Miss Shepherd stood 
out in this company it was not, as she perhaps imagined, on account of 
some degree of social superiority, but because she had, however decrepit, 
a place of her own in the shape of the van. She never had to sleep in 
a doorway, as many of the men did who had not managed to be taken in 
at Arlington House.

My decision to invite Miss S to put the van in my drive in 1974 was taken 
reluctantly, but the construction put upon it in the film seems to me true 
to the facts. The two Alan Bennetts (Alan Bennett and AB), played by different 
actors in the stage play that premiered in 1999, are both played by Alex 
Jennings in the film, and the notion that one part of myself dealt with this 
awkward, demanding woman while another part of myself watched myself doing so, 
often noting it down, was very much what it felt like when it was happening.

In the street the van was parked directly opposite the table in the bay window 
where I did my work. Anything that happened to Miss Shepherd – from the 
everyday skirmishes she had with neighbours and passersby to the more serious 
provocations regularly visited on her by hooligans or the malevolent – all 
these were a distraction to me when I was trying to write. Moving Miss S into 
the garden got her out of the way of passersby and the curious so that both of 
us could thereby have a quieter life and I could for much of the time forget 
about her – much, as AB points out, like a marriage.

It was this element of self-interest or self-concern about the move that has 
always made me reluctant to consider it an act of charity. I was looking after 
myself, Miss Shepherd only incidentally; kindness didn’t really come into it.

The person who never felt the need to go in for such moral analysis, and who 
I’m sure didn’t think it was kindness if she ever gave it a thought, was Miss 
Shepherd herself. To her, parking in my drive was a favour she was doing me, 
not the other way round. To have allowed herself to feel in the least bit 
grateful would have been a chink in her necessary armour, braced as she always 
was against the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-bennett-diaries-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7698eeeb013626212a032b3d91563462d4767fd%2F0_0_2048_1536%2Fmaster%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%E2%80%99s%20Diary%3A%20The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-bennett-diaries-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%E2%80%99s%20Diary%3A%20The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-bennett-diaries-lady-in-the-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7698eeeb013626212a032b3d91563462d4767fd%2F0_0_2048_1536%2Fmaster%2F2048.jpg>
 Maggie Smith in The Lady in the Van Photograph: BBC Films 
“It wasn’t a marriage. She wasn’t my life,” AB says in one exchange, 
later cut, though the van always came in handy as a conversation piece. I don’t 
have much small talk so, for anyone landed with me at a party, “How’s your old 
lady?” was a good standby. That she had become even in her lifetime something 
of a celebrity would not have surprised her and she would also consider it 
entirely fitting that some of her pamphlets are now in the Bodleian Library at 
Oxford, whereMaggie Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/maggie-smith> 
was able to consult them before playing her in the film.

Miss Shepherd’s presence in the garden didn’t, of course, stop me jotting 
things down, making notes on her activities and chronicling her  comic 
encounters. Indeed, in my bleaker moments it sometimes seemed that this was all 
there was to note down since nothing else was happening to me.

Still, there was no question of writing or publishing anything about her until 
she was dead or gone from the garden, and as time passed the two came to seem 
the same thing. Occasionally newspapers took an interest and tried to blow the 
situation up into a jolly news item, but the ramparts of privacy were more 
impregnable in those days and she was generally left to herself.

Lady in the Van review: Maggie Smith makes pitstop at Oscars drive-thru
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/12/lady-in-the-van-review-maggie-smith-makes-pitstop-at-oscars-drive-thru>
Miss Shepherd helped, lying low if anybody came to my door, and at night 
switching off her light whenever she heard a footstep. But she was not averse 
to the occasional bout of celebrity. I came back one day to find her posing 
beside the van for a female columnist who had somehow sweet-talked her into 
giving an interview, Miss Shepherd managing in the process to imply that I had 
over the years systematically stifled her voice. If she has since achieved any 
fame or notoriety through my having written about her, I suspect she would 
think it no more than her due and that her position as writer of pamphlets and 
political commentator entitled her to public recognition or, as she says in the 
play, “the freedom of the land”.

It’s said of the poet Robert Lowell that when he regularly went off his head 
it took the form of thinking he could rub shoulders with Beethoven, Voltaire 
and other all-time greats, with whom he considered himself to be on equal 
terms. (Isaiah Berlin, about whose sanity there was no doubt, made exactly the 
same assumption but that’s by the way.) The Virgin Mary excepted, Miss 
Shepherd’s sights were set rather lower. Her assumed equals were Harold Wilson, 
Mr Heath and (as she always called him) “Enoch”, and I was constantly being 
badgered to find out their private addresses so that they could be sent the 
latest copy of True View. Atypically for someone unbalanced, Miss Shepherd 
never seemed to take much interest in the royal family, the Queen and the Duke 
of Edinburgh were never thought of as potential readers.

6 October

The first morning of filming for The Lady in the Van. As always on a film 
I feel a bit lost, the writer not having a proper function and seldom being 
called upon. After weeks of warm sunny weather, today is wet and cold and as 
Maggie Smith goes out for her first shot she says out of the corner of her 
mouth, “Thanks a million.”

7 October

Roger Allam and Deborah Findlay play the neighbours opposite, outside whose 
house Miss Shepherd parks. They aren’t modelled on the actual neighbours (who 
had triplets). The only properly named neighbour is Ursula Vaughan Williams, 
the composer’s widow, who is played by Frances de la Tour. Most of the actors 
have been in stuff of mine before but not Roger Allam, who has been in 
practically every play Michael Frayn has written. And I can see why as he’s 
subtle and funny and as good offscreen as on.

Taking it all in is David Gentleman. At 80-odd he stands for two hours 
sketching what’s going on, delighted at having such a subject on his doorstep.

11 October

Come away around 4.30, weary rather than exhausted as I’ve contributed very 
little, my only suggestion being that Alex Jennings, who is eating an egg 
sandwich, should drop some of the egg down his pullover, as I invariably do. 
The costume department seize on this as a piece ofcinéma vérité and egg is 
accordingly smeared down his front. It hardly seems a day’s work.

15 October

Telling the truth crops up quite a bit in the film, what Miss Shepherd did or 
didn’t do is a subject of some disagreement between the two Alan Bennetts. They 
call not telling the truth “lying”, but “the imagination” would be a kinder way 
of putting it, withAlan Bennett <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanbennett> 
the writer finally winning through to make Miss Shepherd talk of her past (as 
she never actually did) and even to bring her back from the dead in order to 
take her bodily up to heaven (also imaginary). These departures from the facts 
were hard-won and took some coming to, causing me to reflect, not for the first 
time, that the biggest impediment for a writer is to have had a decent 
upbringing. Brought up not to lie or show off, I was temperamentally inclined 
to do both, and though reining me in perhaps improved my character it was no 
help in my future profession, where lying, or romancing anyway, is the essence 
of it. Nor did my education help. One of the difficulties I had in writingThe 
Madness of George III was that, having been educated as a historian, I found it 
hard to take leave of the facts. With the king’s first bout of madness the 
facts needed scarcely any alteration to make them dramatic and only a little 
tweaking was required, but even that I found hard to do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-bennett-diaries-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd84b1a7200ce340dd25b50eca3056cfbdd02c17a%2F231_0_2151_3508%2F2151.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%E2%80%99s%20Diary%3A%20The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-bennett-diaries-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%E2%80%99s%20Diary%3A%20The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-bennett-diaries-lady-in-the-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd84b1a7200ce340dd25b50eca3056cfbdd02c17a%2F231_0_2151_3508%2F2151.jpg>
 Illustration by David Gentleman 
Never strong on invention I have kept pretty closely to the facts of Miss 
Shepherd’s life, the one exception being the character of the former policeman, 
Underwood. He is fictional. That Miss Shepherd had an accident in which a 
motorcyclist crashed fatally into the van was told me by her brother after her 
death. It was not her fault, but by leaving the scene of the accident before 
the police arrived she was technically guilty of a felony, and thus open to 
blackmail. Underwood is played by Jim Broadbent, with whom I last worked onThe 
Insurance Man, a film about Kafka directed by Richard Eyre which we did in 
Liverpool in 1985, since when Jim has become an international film star much as 
Pete Postlethwaite did, while seeming no older than he did thirty years back. 
He’s instantly authentic (it’s the haircut, I decide), both funny and sinister, 
and it reminds me how working with him and Julie Walters years ago I used to 
despair because their casual conversation was funnier and livelier than 
anything I could dream up. Jim has the ability to look utterly ordinary, 
certainly in the streets of Camden Town, and one would know just from his walk 
that his character is a former policeman.

17 October

We’re not shooting in sequence so only 10 days into the schedule we do the 
ending of the film. As written 10 years or so after Miss S died in 1989, I’d 
imagined a blue plaque to her being unveiled on the wall of no 23. Nick Hytner, 
the director, has made this wittier by having the camera pull back to show 
today’s film crew recording the scene watched by real-life neighbours. This is 
their small reward for being so forbearing about the inevitable inconvenience 
the film has involved. But, as I wrote to all of them beforehand, although it 
would involve them being denied their parking rights for six weeks, housing 
Miss Shepherd had meant I was deprived of my parking rights for 15 years. In 
the event, the scene turns out not quite as I’d imagined. There’s a blue plaque 
on the wall, with a crowd of neighbours including Antony Crolla, who now 
lives in the house, and my (slightly embarrassed) partner Rupert Thomas, but 
then the camera catches me higher up the street as I bike down to the set. 
I join the crowd as Alex Jennings makes a little speech about Miss S, pulls the 
cord and the camera reveals the rest of the crew.

The plaque looks good and genuine, made, I believe, out of some rubbery 
material. I’m hoping it can be left in situ when the film is finished as it may 
enhance the value of the property, thus compensating for the dilapidations 
consequent on filming and the company getting the house on the cheap.

22 October

We are using several vans in varying stages of distress, including one smart 
number in its original trim given to Miss Shepherd some time in the 70s by Lady 
Wiggin, a Catholic well-wisher from Regent’s Park Terrace. Smart as it was, 
Miss Shepherd still gave it her usual treatment, coating it in lumpy yellow 
paint (lumpy because she had somehow mixed it with madeira cake), which she 
applied with a washing-up brush. Consequent on these vehicular permutations, 
for the purposes of filming the contents of one van have to be taken out and 
installed in its successor. I sit in my chair on the pavement watching this 
wearisome process at work and marvelling at the dedication and 
conscientiousness of Katie Money and the props department who have it to do. 
Miss S’s belongings consist of mountains of old clothes, carrier bags stuffed 
with her papers interspersed with the contents of her larder, half-eaten tins 
of baked beans, packets of stale sliced bread, loose onions (which she ate 
raw), rotting apples and wilting celery and dressed over all with half-used 
toilet rolls, dirty dusters and soiled Kleenex that one didn’t like to look at 
too closely.

It would be entirely possible to mock up this distasteful agglomeration with 
some underlying bean bags and a top‑dressing of eye-catching refuse. The camera 
wouldn’t know. But the actors would. So all this detritus is repeatedly and 
meticulously transferred from van to van as if it were the contents of 
an 18th-century salon. I know this devotion to duty has nothing to do with me 
personally but I would like to shake all their hands – the boy who carefully 
transfers the opened can of congealed tomato soup, Katie, who delicately 
repositions the dog-eared pack of incontinence pads and puts one of them to 
dry, as Miss Shepherd did, over the electric ring. I am in all their debt. 
Instead, one of them breaks off to see if she can fetch me a cup of tea.

2 November

Miss S’s funeral, which in life (or in death) was at Our Lady of Hal in 
Arlington Road but in the film is at St Silas’s at the foot of Haverstock 
Hill. We also film Miss S at mass, with Maggie Smith at the communion rail. But 
not just kneeling. After Miss S’s death I had a letter from Father CormacRigby, 
who was 20 years an announcer on Radio 3 before leaving the BBC and being 
ordained a priest in 1985, when he was sent to live at Our Lady of Hal, Miss 
S’s local church. He told me how, seeing her in the congregation, his heart 
would sink as he had a bad back and Miss S’s exigent (though not ostentatious) 
piety required her virtually to prostrate herself when receiving the host, with 
the priest thus having to follow her right down in order to post the wafer into 
her mouth. Maggie does this too, on her knees, four or five times without 
complaint or assistance. She’s a few months younger than me but I couldn’t 
kneel like this, or if I went down I couldn’t get up again. She does both, and 
on camera. Then she goes into the confessional box to unburden herself for the 
umpteenth time to the long-suffering priest (Dermot Crowley), telling him about 
the motorcyclist she thinks she killed in an accident years ago. He has heard 
it all before and has absolved her many times. “Absolution, my child, is not 
like the bus pass. It does not run out.”

It was Father Cormac Rigby who told me, as much, I felt, out of kindness as 
conviction, that my taking in Miss Shepherd would speed my passage through 
purgatory. I am not banking on it.


6 November

A wet morning and today we are filming Miss S’s burial in Kensal Green 
cemetery. In fact she is buried in an unmarked grave in Camden and Islington 
cemetery out near the North Circular Road but Kensal Green is more photogenic. 
It’s cold and drizzling with the actors under umbrellas until the moment before 
“Action!”, when the puddles are briskly swept from the path before the actors 
stroll down.

The crucial shot of the day (still raining) comes when the dead Miss Shepherd 
reappears from the grave and discovers the young biker whom she’s always 
thought she’d killed having a fag behind a gravestone. She walks off with him 
arm in arm into her own personal sunset and as she does so lets out a cackle. 
“Mr Bennett. Do you know what that is? It’s the last laugh!” Thereafter – and 
by some technical wizardry I don’t understand – she will ascend into heaven.

10 November, Shoreditch Town Hall

Today we film the young Miss Shepherd as the soloist in a symphony concert in 
the 40s playing Chopin’sFirst Piano Concerto. I have allowed myself a little 
leeway in speculating about her concert career, except that if, as her brother 
said, she had studied with Alfred Cortot she must have been a pianist of some 
ability. Cortot was the leading French pianist between the wars, Miss Shepherd 
presumably studying with him at the height of his fame. He continued to give 
concerts throughout the occupation but finished the war under a cloud, and 
it was perhaps this that sent him on a concert tour to England, where I 
remember seeing his photograph on posters some time in the late 40s. Perhaps 
Miss Shepherd saw it too, though by this time her hopes of a concert career 
must have been fading, a vocation as a nun already her goal.

I would have liked her concert career to have outlasted the war or to have 
resumed after the duration. If she had ever made it to the concert circuit this 
would be when I might have seen her, as I was by then going every week to 
symphony concerts in Leeds Town Hall where Miss Shepherd would have taken her 
place alongside Daphne Spottiswoode or Phyllis Sellick, Moura Lympany, Valda 
Aveling and Gina Bachauer – artistes with their décolleté shawl-collared gowns 
as glamorous and imposing in my 14-year-old eyes as fashion models, Barbara 
Goalens of the keyboard, brought to their feet by the conductor to acknowledge 
the applause, clutching to their bosoms the bouquets with which they were 
invariably presented, to which Miss Shepherd on the last night of her life 
contemptuously compares the scrutty bunch of anemones which AB brings her.

And it was the last night of her life. When I wrote the original account I 
glossed over the fact that Miss Shepherd’s death occurred the same night that 
she, washed and in clean things, returned from the day centre. I chose not to 
make this plain because for her to die then seemed so handy and convenient, 
just when a writer would (if a little obviously) have chosen for her to die. I 
was nervous not only of altering the facts to suit the drama but of even 
seeming to have altered them.

25 November

There is an odd footnote to Miss Shepherd’s story that persists into 
the present day: in Chiswick there was another lady in a van, who died quite 
recently. This might not seem so odd except that she, too, had been a pianist 
and was as averse to publicity as Miss Shepherd ever was. When I first heard of 
her I felt somehow that she was a rival, and somehow disauthenticated the story 
of my lady in the van. That’s absurd, though of one thing I’m sure: Miss 
Shepherd would not have been pleased.

Miss Shepherd was solipsistic to a degree and, in her persistent refusal to 
take into account the concerns or feelings of anyone else except herself and 
her inability to see the world and what happened in it except as it affected 
her, she behaved more like a man than a woman. I took this undeviating 
selfishness to have something to do with staying alive. Gratitude, humility, 
forgiveness or fellow feelings were foreign to her nature or had become so over 
the years, but had she been otherwise she might not have survived as long as 
she did. She hated noise, though she made plenty, particularly when sitting in 
her three-wheeler on a Sunday morning revving the engine to recharge the 
battery. She hated children. Reluctant to have the police called when the van’s 
window had been broken and herself hurt, she would want the law summoning if 
there were children playing in the street and making what she considered too 
much noise or indeed any noise at all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-bennett-diaries-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde0695c7c9ef9119c20a0700f5d883d7c56a5d3c%2F0_188_3508_2106%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%E2%80%99s%20Diary%3A%20The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-bennett-diaries-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%E2%80%99s%20Diary%3A%20The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-bennett-diaries-lady-in-the-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde0695c7c9ef9119c20a0700f5d883d7c56a5d3c%2F0_188_3508_2106%2F3508.jpg>
 Illustration by David Gentleman 
She inhabited a different world from ordinary humanity, a world in which the 
Virgin Mary would be encountered outside the post office in Parkway and Mr 
Khrushchev higher up the street; a world in which her advice was welcomed by 
world leaders and the College of Cardinals took note of her opinion. Seeing 
herself as the centre of the world, she had great faith in the power of the 
individual voice, even when it could only be heard through pamphlets 
photocopied at Prontaprint or read on the pavement outside Williams and Glyn’s 
Bank.

I never questioned Miss Shepherd on the subject, but what intrigued me about 
the regular appearances put in by the Virgin Mary was that she seldom turned up 
in her traditional habiliments; no sky-blue veil for her, still less a halo. 
Before leaving heaven for earth the BVM always seemed to go through the 
dressing-up box so that she could come down as Queen Victoria, say, or dressed 
in what sounded very much like a sari. And not only her. One of my father’s 
posthumous appearances was as a Victorian statesman, and an old tramp, 
grey-haired and not undistinguished, was confidently identified as St Joseph 
(minus his donkey), just as I was taken briefly for St John.

With their fancy dress and a good deal of gliding about, it was hard 
not to find Miss Shepherd’s visions comic, but they were evidence of a faith 
that manifestly sustained her and a component of her daily and difficult life. 
In one of her pamphlets she mentioned the poet Francis Thompson, who was a 
Catholic as she was (and who lived in similar squalor). Her vision of the 
intermingling of this world and the next was not unlike his:

But (when so sad thou canst not sadder) 
Cry: – and upon thy so sore loss 
Shall shine the traffic of Jacob’s ladder 
Pitched betwixt heaven and Charing Cross. 

Yea, in the night, my Soul, my daughter, 
Cry, – clinging Heaven by the hems; 
And lo, Christ walking on the water 
Not of Gennesareth, but Thames! 

It’s now over a quarter of a century since Miss Shepherd died, but hearing a 
van door slide shut will still take me back to the time when she was in the 
garden. For Marcel, the narrator in Proust’sRemembrance of Things Past, the 
sound that took him back was that of the gate of his aunt’s idyllic garden; 
with me it’s the door of a broken down Commer van. The discrepancy is 
depressing, but then most writers discover quite early on that they’re not 
going to be Proust. Besides, I couldn’t have heard my own garden gate because 
in order to deaden the (to her) irritating noise, Miss Shepherd had insisted on 
me putting a piece of chewing gum on the latch.

• The Lady in the Van is on general release. © Forelake Limited and Van 
Productions Ltd Illustrations © David Gentleman. Alan Bennett’sThe Lady in the 
Van: The Complete Edition is published by Faber and Profile, RRP £14.99. To 
order a copy for £11.99 go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/350671?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-bennett-diaries-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81d8fb6d9e59f57bbd3c0129216ab3a790186f77%2F0_0_1824_1095%2F1824.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%E2%80%99s%20Diary%3A%20The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-bennett-diaries-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%E2%80%99s%20Diary%3A%20The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-bennett-diaries-lady-in-the-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81d8fb6d9e59f57bbd3c0129216ab3a790186f77%2F0_0_1824_1095%2F1824.jpg>
 Illustration by David Gentleman  