
Imagine you had a dream one night. A very vivid dream, but one you were happy 
to share. Now try to imagine that one day this dream of yours is made into 
flesh and blood, movement and passion; that in the darkness of an auditorium 
human beings are talking, acting out every detail of your dream, giving their 
energies and talents to it, before your eyes. It would be alarming yet 
compelling, would it not? It might also be wonderful and confirming to see such 
an echo of your inner life; you might feel humbled, surprised that this dream 
of yours, among so many, is being rendered just as you once saw it inside your 
head. You would wonder: why and how did this happen? That is what it feels like 
for me with National Theatre of Scotland’s adaptation of my novelThe Sopranos, 
which Vicky Featherstone, Lee Hall, our cast, musicians, and many others, have 
transformed intoOur Ladies of Perpetual Succour, which has now come to the 
National Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre> in London.

I had two novels published by 1997, and I clearly remember sitting in the old 
torture chamber (my study), clamped to the rock face of so-called literary 
creation. In other words, I was trying to decide what bloody book I could write 
next. I had two rough ideas, both with a theme in common. I knew I wanted to 
write an ensemble piece; a novel with many characters, moving quickly and 
intensely, with lots of gregarious and effusive dialogue.

One idea was to set a novel in a cultish Christian community where a group of 
young, impressionable, largely female characters, would find themselves at the 
mercy of a charismatic but menacing male guru. Sort of Mervyn Peake’sGormenghast
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/aug/16/gormenghast-masterpiece-mervyn-peake>
 meets Rumer Godden’sBlack Narcissus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/01/rumer-godden-rereading-india-novels>
, was how I ambitiously saw it. My other idea was to write a novel about a 
Catholic schoolgirls’ choir, out on the lash, attending a competition; the 
religious overtones would be present but there would also be physical movement, 
song and music. I recall I had Raymond Williams’s unfashionable book,The 
Country and the City, at the back of my mind. I wanted to test out that great 
transition and tension, but on my own terms, in my own language and with 
characters I knew; excited young folk from a rural location shifting from their 
immersive culture into another, then quickly switching back to the countryside 
once again. I was also thinking of Muriel Spark’s novels,The Girls of Slender 
Means <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/girls-of-slender-means.html>, and of 
course,The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=The+Prime+of+Miss+Jean+Brodie&order=relevance&dir=desc>
, but, let me confess, not in a reverential way. Not at all. “Crème de la crème
?” I thought. “I could show how it really is, today!”

Just after the novel was published in 1998, I remember a potential translator 
was being lined up to convertThe Sopranos into a European language. To my 
horror, I soon realised he was appalled by these characters. He thought my 
novel was some kind of vicious, state-of-the-nation satire on a conglomeration 
of ill-educated and vivacious heathens. I had to forcefully make him understand 
that I strongly cared for these young women. That I was on their side. 
Completely. I still am. This is a journey into and through their young hearts; 
hearts that have not yet been jaded by the frictions of adulthood. This is 
their celebration, and though, like all of us, they are flawed and elbowed by 
fate, I still believe they are – like so many people in daily life – heroic. 
There are no such misunderstandings in this play and I hopeOur Ladies of 
Perpetual Succour will be encountered the way I originally dreamed: as a 
songbook of supreme human carousal, and as an affirmation.

•Our Ladies of Perpetual Succour is at the National Theatre, London SE1, from 
8 August.nationaltheatre.org.uk 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/our-ladies-of-perpetual-succour?gclid=CO_MzNi5pc4CFYTnGwodPfoBAw>
.
 