
Daniel Torres crossed the border barefooted. As he reached the white line, he 
slipped off his flip-flops and stepped on to the grass, where he began to walk 
around slowly and in silence, a mobile in his hand. In the stands were a few 
football fans who’d got there early and some bored-looking stewards; it was 
still a long time before kick-off, well over an hour until Torres would cross 
the line again, boots on. At the other end of the phone was his faith healer, 
Sandra Merino, reciting biblical verse. Joshua 1:3, Deuteronomy 11:24: “Every 
place upon which the sole of your foot treads will be yours.” Yeah, yeah, every 
place. Just not this place, surely. Not the Camp Nou.

Alavés shock Barcelona through Deyverson and Ibai Gómez
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/barcelona-alaves-la-liga-match-report>
Yes, there too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/barcelona-alaves-la-liga-match-report>
.

By the time Torres crossed back over the line for the last time a little 
before 10.30pm on Saturday night, he and his Alavés team-mates were heading to 
the dressing room having done it again, their manager Mauricio Pellegrino 
describing them as a side capable of “rebelling against football’s reality”. On 
the weekend in whichLas Palmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/07/resurgent-las-palmas-la-liga-relegation>
 arrived in Seville, their flag fluttering proudly at the front of the Sánchez 
Pizjuán’srooftop league table 
<https://twitter.com/sidlowe/status/774658733691564032>, but lost the top slot 
they’d heldfor the first time in 38 years 
<http://www.espnfc.com/spanish-primera-division/15/blog/post/2946527/las-palmas-the-tiny-club-revived-and-reborn- 
and-briefly-leading-la-liga>; Osasuna were a goal down after five Bernabéu 
minutes, conceded five and were satisfied enough; and Leganés lostfor the first 
time in La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/29/noisy-neighours-leganes-atletico-madrid-real?CMP=share_btn_tw>
, Alavés rebelled once more.

The team that spent the last decade away, slipping into the regionalised, 
18-division, theoretically amateur Second Division B and dangerously close to 
disappearance, returned to the first division and scoreda 94th-minute equaliser 
against European Cup finalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/22/manu-garcia-atletico-madrid-alaves-la-liga-blog>
 Atlético Madrid at the Calderón have now also beaten Barcelona at the Camp 
Nou, 2-1. They’d gone to the biggest stadium in Europe where their fans 
accounted for barely a hundred of the 74,237 and won – at €59 for a seat way, 
way up at the top and behind a glass screen, many had decided not to attend, 
only 60 of 300 tickets sold, but now wish they had.

They could have seen their club, one with 18 new players, whose entire squad 
cost €6.55m (£5.52m), €3.2m (£2.7m) of those on Torres, defeat one that spent 
€123m (£103.7m) on six players, five of whom subs, and that could leave Lionel 
Messi, Luis Suárez and Andrés Iniesta on the bench.

Which might have been part of the reason in happened, of course – as might the 
absence of Marc-André ter Stegen, Gerard Piqué and Sergi Roberto, and the 
presence of a whole new back four and goalkeeper. Or the fact that it came 
after an international break, when they’re so often at their most vulnerable. 
And the fact that Neymar was playing for the first time this season, having 
just returned from Brazil, Suárez was tired and Messi half- injured.

But still … this was Barcelona. Theirs was a starting XI that cost €213m and 
Messi, Suárez and Iniesta were all on early. Still, this was unexpected. So 
much so that the Spanish TV channel with the rights to show it was fielding 
subs too: they had sent their star commentary team to Manchester instead. If 
the photo atBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> was on 
the bench, the story ended up being on the pitch.

“Asterix invades Rome,” said the headline in the Vitoria-based newspaper 
Noticias de Álava. “Asterix and Obelix are blue and white striped,” it cheered. 
Well, Obelix’s trousers are, anyway, so they were right about that, but it were 
right when they called it the “perfect plan”, just as El Correo was right when 
they called it a “revelation,” “heavenly glory”, “unforgettable”, and 
“historic.” After all, Alavés had only won there once in their 95 years and 
Barcelona had not been beaten at home by a newly-promoted team since Hércules 
six years ago, when Nelson Valdez fulfilled a promise to his motherand scored 
twice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/sep/13/hercules-stun-barcelona-sid-lowe>
. On Saturday, it happened again, for only the second time in 15 years.

And here’s the thing: both times were the weekend of Catalonia’s “national” 
day, the first game after an international break, against a team in blue and 
white stripes, at the very start of the season, and both times Kiko Femenía 
played.

Back then, Femenía was a 19-year-old forward playing only his second top 
flight game. His first had seen him suffer from anxiety, team-mate Francisco 
Rufete intervening to stand up for him and tell manager Esteban Vigo, shouting 
away on the touchline,to leave the kid alone 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ARsXCnoyAis> and certainly not to take him 
off. Now, he is a defender whose been through the B teams at Real Madrid and 
Barcelona, through two promotions, and come out on the other side. He’s back in 
the first division five years on, via second division Alcorcón – where his 
manager said that he needed to be “recovered psychologically” – having been 
promoted with his Alavés team-mates in the summer. Femenía has always been 
talented, but his team-mates admitted that he hasn’t always found it easy to 
deal with the pressure. On Saturday, he did.

Nor is Femenía alone. The man who scored Alavés’s equaliser at Atlético 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/22/manu-garcia-atletico-madrid-alaves-la-liga-blog>
 was the fan who dreamed of being Manolo Serrano when everyone else wanted to 
be Romario or Laudrup; against Barcelona, Femenía provided the first. It was 
scored by Deyverson, a lolloping, rubber-limbed, big-grinned Brazilian who went 
down with Levante last season. The second was scored by Ibai Gómez, the former 
Athletic Bilbao player whose name it is impossible not to hear in a Yorkshire 
accent and who has spent almost a year fighting injury. “I’ve suffered a lot to 
be here,” he said.

Behind them was central defender Alexis, brought back from Turkey where he 
never really wanted to be but where Getafe had sent him, desperate for the 
cash. They had a full-back on loan from Atlético B and two other centre-backs 
with five top tier games between them. In front of them were Marcos Llorente, 
on loan fromReal Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> and 
impeccable on Saturday, and Torres, the man who first turned to a faith healer 
when he slipped into alcoholism – “I could drink three bottles a night on my 
own,” he admitted. Torres then introduced her to his Santa Fe team-mates and 
together they won the Colombian title for the first time in 36 years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Falaves-barcelona-la-liga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe6d3d0213b831c7498bfface420fd17ca7976ec%2F0_28_3536_2121%2F3536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alav%C3%A9s%20return%20from%20the%20abyss%20and%20rebel%20against%20reality%20to%20tame%20Barcelona%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Falaves-barcelona-la-liga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alav%C3%A9s%20return%20from%20the%20abyss%20and%20rebel%20against%20reality%20to%20tame%20Barcelona%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Falaves-barcelona-la-liga%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe6d3d0213b831c7498bfface420fd17ca7976ec%2F0_28_3536_2121%2F3536.jpg>
 Daniel Torres, left, has turned to a faith healer after his battles with 
alcohol issues but helped his side to a win over Lionel Messi’s Barcelona. 
Photograph: Bagu Blanco/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
Together with his Alavés team-mates, they won at the Camp Nou for the first 
time in 15 years, only the second time ever. And if Pellegrino conceded that 
his side didn’t deserve the point against Atlético, this time they did. In 
their third game of the season, Alavés played their third different system. “I 
didn’t anticipate five at the back,” Luis Enrique admitted, which was as honest 
as it was odd. Alavés had been working on it for a fortnight and its 
application was logical enough, Pellegrino saying: “There is an abyss between 
the two sides and when that’s the case you have to make sure that they aren’t 
comfortable playing.”

Alavés faced 27 shots against Atlético, but this time they allowed just two on 
target and had four of their own. “You suffered,” began one post-match 
question. “Well, physically, we did” came the response. “We knew that with 
order we would get chances.” There was no siege, no panic, no string of 
incredible saves from Fernando Pacheco. “This was not a titanic effort, it was 
organisation,” El País said; “Alavés did a great job,” Iniesta admitted. The 
ball was Barcelona’s but chances were limited. Neymar and Jérémy Mathieu missed 
sitters, and Messi put one wide in the last minute, it’s true, just as it was 
true that Barcelona were complicit in their defeat, poor throughout – “heavy 
and fragile” Luis Enrique said. But this was a victory earned.

Alavés didn’t fold when their moment seemed to have gone: not only did they 
take the lead on 38 minutes through Deyverson but they took it back again after 
Mathieu equalised, Ibai fighting his way through to sidefoot past Jasper 
Cillessen. At the start of their first top flight season in a decade, 
Pellegrino said that his team would need 10 games to get “up and walking”. But 
three times now Torres has walked on barefooted and three times now they have 
all walked off unbeaten, even at the Calderón and the Camp Nou. “This proves 
that sometimes hope conquers all,” Ibai said.

Talking points

• The flag flew <https://twitter.com/sidlowe/status/774658733691564032> but 
ultimately it had to come down. This morning it will be raised up the pole 
three to the right. Las Palmas took a deserved lead – Tana, the goalscorer and 
Roque Mesa were the outstanding players in a hugely impressive team performance 
at the Pizjuán – but a very questionable penalty and a 94th minute goal gave 
Sevilla the victory, to knock them off the top. Their manager Quique Setién was 
not happy, calling the penalty the typical decision that a home team gets and 
an away side never does. Off the top, he was asked, what now? “Our target has 
to be survival,” he said, “but then we’ll see if we can do anything beyond 
that, if we can be comfortable enough to play some nice games for our fans to 
enjoy.”

The winner, bundled in off a corner with the last touch of the match, was 
scored by Carlos Fernández, a 20-year-oldSevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> fan, born in the city and 
promoted from the B team. “It’s hard to put in words what I feel inside,” he 
said.

• That was one of three last minute winners this weekend – 10-man Eibar beat 
Granada with the last touch in the 93rd minute, scored by Sergi Enrich, and 
Rubén Castro helped Real Betis beat Valencia in the 91st. “I’m sad and 
resigned,” the Granada coach Paco Jémez said. That’s “am resigned”, not “have 
resigned”, although you never know with him. Carlos Fernández’s goal for 
Sevilla took his side into second. Just behind them, unexpectedly but not 
undeservedly, are Sporting Gijón, whose coach Abelardo said: “We’re playing 
very well and people are enjoying this.”

Cristiano Ronaldo leads rout of Osasuna as Real Madrid equal record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/real-madrid-osasuna-la-liga-match-report>
• At five minutes past four on Saturday, Cristiano Ronaldo had had two touches 
in over three months for Real Madrid, and both had been goals. The winning 
penalty in Milan and the opening goalon his return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/real-madrid-osasuna-la-liga-match-report>
. Asked about his contract renewal afterwards, he said: “It’s simple: if I was 
the president and I had a player like me, I would renew him for 10 years.” He 
got the first, three defenders scored (Danilo, Sergio Ramos and Pepe), and so 
did Luka Modric, who was superb again. Ultimately, this was comfortable if not 
always sparkling, mind you. Yet it was enough to take Madrid top for the first 
time in a year and a half and the message was unanimous: this season the league 
is the priority.

• That’s eased their relegation fears, at least. A fortnight after Antoine 
Griezmann complained that if Atlético Madrid carried on like that, they would 
be fighting to not go down, he scored twice as his side beat Celta Vigo 4-0. 
What was that the Ronettes said – the best part of breaking upis the making up 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iT68dj4ftaU>? I’m sorry, he said afterwards; 
after the way they played, they were bound to forgive him. “I annoyed my 
team-mates,” the headline said. “I pissed my team mates off,” the text below it 
ran. “I was annoyed after the game. I have apologised to them and now I want to 
do so publicly.” It had been reasonably even in the first half, but Atlético 
dominated the second and were unstoppable in the air. “We needed to win,” Ángel 
Correa said. As for the Celta coach Eduardo Berizzo, he insisted: “We shouldn’t 
let last season distract us. Our reality is trying to reach 40 points.” Right 
now, they have none.

Antoine Griezmann scores twice in Atlético Madrid win against Celta Vigo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/celta-vigo-atletico-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
• Nor do Valencia. They came from 2-0 down to equalise against Betis and might 
have won it – they looked much improved when Munir came on – only for Rubén 
Castro, La Liga’s top scorer so far, to get a second in the last minute. “We 
almost threw it away,” said their manager Gus Poyet . They almost did, Valencia 
actually did. That’s three defeats from three for them, their worst start in 17 
years. Added to the three defeats at the back end of last season, that’s six in 
a row – their worst ever run. Pako Ayestarán’s record is as bad as Gary 
Neville’s. It’s quite hard to put your finger on why: the performances haven’t 
been that bad. Notthat bad, anyway. But defensively they are a mess. “I 
believe,” Ayestarán said. But so few others seem to – which might be part of 
the problem, of course.

• Tonight, Matthew, I am going to be Vasily Rats. And so Raúl García was. 
Whoosh!

• So, about the Claudio Bravo debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/dec/12/victor-valdes-barcelona-real-madrid>
? Yeah, yeah, not really Spanish football, but still.

• Michu’s back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/08/michu-real-oviedo-copa-del-rey-ucam-murcia>
.

Results: Celta Vigo 0-4 Atlético Madrid; Deportivo La Coruña 0–1 Athletic 
Bilbao; Granada 1–2 Eibar; Malaga 0–2 Villarreal; Real Madrid 5–2 Osasuna; Real 
Sociedad 1–1 Espanyol; Sevilla 2–1 Las Palmas; Sporting Gijón 2–1 Leganés; 
Valencia 2–3 Real Betis
 