
Rising from an apprenticeship as a welder in Liverpool’s dockyards to a 
pinnacle of international success on the world’s opera stages, Alberto 
Remedios, who has died aged 81, traced an almost mythological career path, 
appropriate for the singer who so memorably incarnated the role of Siegfried in 
Wagner’s Ring. As a key member of the team that under the tutelage ofReginald 
Goodall 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/05/07/obituaries/reginald-goodall-84-conductor-who-mastered-wagner-is-dead.html>
 created the Ring for Sadler’s Wells (later English National) Opera – the other 
outstanding players wereRita Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/may/02/guardianobituaries> and Norman 
Bailey – he forged an identity for the character, based on geniality and an 
essentially lyrical approach to the heroic role, that remains unrivalled today.

Productions of the last three decades, by focusing predominantly – for 
understandable reasons – on the darker complexities of Wagner’s works, have 
brought to the fore singers whose forceful, virile tone and uningratiating 
demeanour all too rarely persuade the listener of the essential naivety and 
benevolent aspects of Siegfried. Remedios, drawing on natural reserves of 
glorious tone, created a likable character of youthful impetuosity, capable too 
(for example in the Forest Murmurs scene) of suggesting vulnerability.

He took with equal success the role of Siegmund in Die Walküre (The Valkyrie), 
deploying the appropriately minatory qualities of a darker middle register to 
characterise that more rugged fugitive hero, but unleashing waves of golden 
tone in the Winterstürme (Winter Storms) solo and love duet. Remedios also put 
his rapt tonal qualities and superbly shaped line to good use in Walther’s 
Prize Song in Die Meistersinger (The Mastersingers). Abetted by Goodall’s 
extremely leisurely tempo in a recording from 1968, he floats what sounds for 
once like a genuine dream inspiration. Sadler’s Wells’ literary managerEdmund 
Tracey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/apr/25/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
 reported that when Remedios first sang the Prize Song with the chorus, “it was 
so beautiful, so moving” that many were in tears.

Born in Liverpool, he was the son of working-class parents, Ida (nee 
O’Farrell) and Albert, and the grandson of a Spanish seaman who had settled in 
the city. Alberto studied singing with Edwin Francis (who also taught Hunter) 
and at the Royal College of Music in London.

Having completed his national service, he joined Sadler’s Wells Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> in 1955. He went on to sing numerous 
roles with it, including Don Ottavio (Don Giovanni), Max (Der Freischütz), 
Alfredo (La Traviata), Des Grieux (Manon) and Erik (The Flying Dutchman), 
moving on to heavier roles such as Lohengrin, Bacchus (Ariadne auf Naxos), 
Florestan (Fidelio) and Tristan, as well as Walther, Siegmund and Siegfried.

In 1958 he married Shirley Swindells. In 1965 he toured Australia and New 
Zealand in the company ofLuciano Pavarotti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/sep/07/guardianobituaries.opera> and 
Joan Sutherland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/oct/11/dame-joan-sutherland-obituary>, 
the latter having heard him sing for his supper in an Italian restaurant, and 
it was on that tour that he met Judy Hosken, who became his second wife, and 
was to remain a constant source of moral support.

Despite, or perhaps because of, his natural ability, he was a slow learner who 
struggled to read music. Goodall’s methodical insistence on line by line 
preparation over a long period of time, discussing both text and harmonies and 
what they meant, suited Remedios and paid rich dividends. His inability to 
master German and other languages terminated a too short career at Covent 
Garden, where he sang Dimitri (Boris Godunov), Florestan, Aeneas, Max, Erik, 
Bacchus, a highly praised Siegfried, and Mark inMichael Tippett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/28/michael-tippett-david-robertson>
’s Midsummer Marriage, the last of these recorded withColin Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/apr/14/sir-colin-davis-obituary>.

It was the Royal Opera’s loss, but was doubtless a factor too in Bayreuth’s 
otherwise unaccountable failure to hire him (despite a reputedly successful 
audition forWolfgang Wagner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/mar/22/wolfgang-wagner-obituary>). 
Bayreuth’s putative reasoning, that Remedios was “too bel canto” for Wagner, is 
almost certainly legendary, but neatly encapsulates the divide between his 
appealingly lyrical, open-throated tone and the more traditional heroic (and 
latterly antiheroic) modes prevalent at Bayreuth and elsewhere.

The tenor Richard Berkeley-Steele recalls expressing his own trepidation at 
approaching the heldentenor repertory, whereupon Remedios grabbed him by both 
hands, leaned across the table and shouted in his face: “We arelyric 
heldentenors, always remember,lyric heldentenors.”

Language remained a problem during his period with the Frankfurt Opera 
(1968–70), but other notable successes included a Peter Grimes at the Teatro 
Colón, Buenos Aires, in 1979 (though never on stage in the UK). Having taken 
part in the first Ring on the west coast of the US (in Seattle in the late 
1970s), he returned to help Malcolm Rivers and Paul Crook establish an 
organisation called The Mastersingers, which coached American singers in the 
Wagner repertoire. He continued to support a similar project in Britain and was 
a constant inspiration to younger singers.

In the 1980s he appeared frequently in Australia, in concert performances of 
Tristan und Isolde with Hunter, also taking the roles of Radamès (Aïda), Otello 
and Siegmund. His last appearances in the UK were in the early 1990s and he 
retired to Australia in 1999.

An amicable, generous man, he was also sensitive and endearingly modest. He 
was a keen amateur footballer until prevented from playing by injury; he 
remained a passionate supporter of Liverpool throughout his life. He also 
retained his Liverpudlian accent and an enthusiasm for all things scouse.

He is survived by Judy and their children, Tonina and Richard, and by his son 
Antony from his first marriage, which ended in divorce.

• Alberto Telisforo Remedios, operatic tenor, born 27 February 1935; died 11 
June 2016
 