
Which team do you think have the best record in the Coupe de France over the 
past five years? PSG? Monaco, Marseille, Lyon? Wrong on all counts. The only 
team to have won the trophy twice in that time come from a little market town, 
with a population of around 7,500, in rural Brittany. It's as if, say, Guiseley 
found themselves one of the unlikely kings of English football.

On Saturday night, En Avant de Guingamp beat Stade Rennais 2-0 in the final at 
the Stade de France, following up a 2-1 victory over the same opponents in 
2009. Around 80,000 trekked down to Paris for the Breton derby final, with a 
sizeable number of theGuingamp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/guingamp> 
contingent making their way by tractor.

Why do I care? Because EAG – not Barça or Inter or Borussia Dortmund – are my 
continental club. Me, my closest friend, Jeff, and our families have been on 
holiday to the town three times, the first in August 2009, when I didn't know 
it even had a team. We were wandering around the market square on a Thursday 
morning, when we noticed a disproportionate number of Germans in the town. What 
on earth could they be doing there?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F05%2Fallez-guingamp-the-market-town-in-brittany-celebrates-more-cup-glory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F5%2F1399283255553%2F36d8aa80-9ecc-4bda-8269-4274f3cbcfc1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allez%20Guingamp!%20The%20market%20town%20in%20Brittany%20celebrates%20another%20Cup%20triumph%20%7C%20Michael%20Hann&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F05%2Fallez-guingamp-the-market-town-in-brittany-celebrates-more-cup-glory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allez%20Guingamp%21%20The%20market%20town%20in%20Brittany%20celebrates%20another%20Cup%20triumph%20%7C%20Michael%20Hann&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F05%2Fallez-guingamp-the-market-town-in-brittany-celebrates-more-cup-glory%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F5%2F1399283255553%2F36d8aa80-9ecc-4bda-8269-4274f3cbcfc1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Guingamp celebrate after beating Rennes 2-0 in the final of the Coupe de 
France on 3 May 2014. Photograph: Christian Liewig/Liewig Media Sports/Corbis 
When we walked past the club shop, on that main square, we found the answer. 
EAG were to play Hamburg that night. Was it a friendly? We popped into the shop 
to find out, and got our answer. On the counter stood the French Cup – you 
could have your photo taken with it, with your own camera; you didn't have to 
pay £25 to an official photographer – which they had won the previous May, 
despite being a second division club. This had earned the club entry into the 
Europa League and their qualifier was that night. I bought a couple of tickets 
– the second most expensive in the ground, at a crippling €20 apiece – and Jeff 
and I went along that evening.

The Stade du Roudourou 
<http://cache.images.globalsportsmedia.com/soccer/venues/600x450/1223.jpg> was 
packed to its 18,000 capacity. It seemed everyone from within a 50-mile radius 
had decided to come – it was as much social event as football match. The locals 
stared at us, largely because we'd anticipated big bar queues in the ground, so 
had bought three beers each on arrival. We didn't realise getting tanked up had 
no part in the Breton matchday experience.

It was a good job the fans were in good humour, because Hamburg ripped EAG 
apart,winning 5-1 <http:>. You didn't need to be José Mourinho to see that 
Guingamp's decision to play with a narrow defence, full-backs tucked in to the 
edge of the penalty area, was unwise against a team with two wingers and a 
centre-forward who won everything in the air. In fact, you rather got the sense 
it was not going to be the home side's evening from the warm-up: Hamburg's was 
all one-touch, precision stuff; Guingamp's saw players continually jogging away 
to fetch balls accidentally hit out of the square they were trying to play 
within.

But for the whole 90 minutes, the ultras at one end of the ground kept up 
their chants, drumbeats and flag waving. No one was shouting and swearing 
whatever the Breton equivalent of "This is a disgrace!" is. It was magical.

We were back a week later to see a derby against Vannes in the league, which 
Guingamp breezed through 4-0 (we decided against trying to teach the home fans 
to sing: "My old man said follow the Vannes/And I said …").


We were impressed by a Senegalese central midfielder called Mustapha Diallo, 
who seemed to us every inch a young Patrick Vieira. Less so by a central 
defender from Burkina Faso called Bakary Koné, who would later play in the 
Africa Cup of Nations and be linked with Sunderland, making him – by inexorable 
force of logic – not quite as good as Titus Bramble, though these days Koné is 
a Champions League player with Lyon. By contrast, Diallo is still at Guingamp. 
Shows how much we know.

It turned out EAG have quite the pedigree for turning out quality players. 
Laurent Koscielny started his professional career there, and Didier Drogba, 
Florent Malouda and Stéphane Guivarc'h all spent time there on the way to 
bigger and better things. Our visits to Guingamp never again coincided with a 
home game – but we've always spent money in the club shop, so we have an 
assortment of EAG scarves and shirts at home, and the woman behind the counter 
told us that Drogba, in particular, was a lovely man, always happy to chat to 
anyone, and a real credit to Guingamp (there's a bar round the corner with an 
EAG mural outside that features Drogba heavily).

And yet they remain a tiny club. EAG were founded in 1912, making it to the 
third division for the first time in 1976, the second division for the first 
time a year later, and only turning fully professional in 1984. EAG reached 
Ligue 1 for the first time in 1995 and won the Intertoto Cup in 1996, then 
reached the French Cup final a year later. They've been in the second division 
for most of the time since, with the occasional burst into the top tier – apart 
from a season in the third division in 2010-11 – and are currently fighting to 
avoid relegation after their first season back inLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> since 2004. They are 
16th, one point and two places clear of the bottom three, though with three 
games left compared to two for most of their rivals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F05%2Fallez-guingamp-the-market-town-in-brittany-celebrates-more-cup-glory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F5%2F1399283384258%2F2c22100b-4b45-4126-aeea-a05c774162e9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allez%20Guingamp!%20The%20market%20town%20in%20Brittany%20celebrates%20another%20Cup%20triumph%20%7C%20Michael%20Hann&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F05%2Fallez-guingamp-the-market-town-in-brittany-celebrates-more-cup-glory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allez%20Guingamp%21%20The%20market%20town%20in%20Brittany%20celebrates%20another%20Cup%20triumph%20%7C%20Michael%20Hann&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F05%2Fallez-guingamp-the-market-town-in-brittany-celebrates-more-cup-glory%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F5%2F1399283384258%2F2c22100b-4b45-4126-aeea-a05c774162e9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Guingamp's Laurent Dos Santos celebrates with the trophy and supporters during 
a lap of honour at the club's Stade du Roudourou, the day after their cup 
triumph. Photograph: Jean-Francois Monier/AFP/Getty Images 
To be honest, I'm not convinced they'll manage it. The two away fixtures are 
at Monaco and Marseille, and the home game is a potentially tricky one against 
Toulouse. But what's worse is that my holiday for the summer is booked; it's in 
France and it coincides with the football season. But it's in the south. That 
said, I know how long it takes to get from where we're staying to Guingamp 
(about 10 hours' driving), and if they are at home in the Europa League when 
we're in France … well, God knows I'd be tempted.

Allez Guingamp!
 