
The cult favorite cooking show Good Eats is coming back. Well, basically.

A few weeks ago, the Food Network host Alton Brown teased a new “internet 
venture” of his. “I call it a cooking show,” he announced in a videoon Instagram
 <https://www.instagram.com/p/BLr4PkJj3kh/?taken-by=altonbrown>, and he’ll be 
taking time off from his current gig as host of the network’s Cutthroat Kitchen.

The video was filmed from inside a microwave, reminiscent of the camera angles 
on Good Eats.


Hosting your first Thanksgiving? Don't panic – just follow this plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/24/hosting-first-thanksgiving-dont-panic>
“I think those of you that are Good Eats fans know exactly, precisely, why I 
did that,” Brown said in a subsequent Facebook Live video. The cooking show he 
alluded to will be “essentially a sequel, a follow-up to a program called Good 
Eats”. It will premiere sometime next year, according toRefinery29 
<http://www.refinery29.com/2016/10/128234/alton-brown-new-show>.

Good Eats first aired on Food Network in 1999. In each episode, Brown examined 
a new recipe or ingredient, the science behind it, the proper tools to use and 
its history.

Brown said he wanted to do the show on the internet for more freedom. “I want 
freedom to do what I want and say what I want and work with the food that I 
want without being concerned about what a larger corporate entity might or 
might not want from that,” he said. When Good Eats aired on Food Network, he 
said he wasn’t allowed to cover certain subjects, such as cooking rabbit, liver 
or chicken gizzards. The channel also refused to let him use the metric system, 
he said.

With paper and pencil in hand, he took down ideas from his commenters during 
the Facebook Live video on what they would like to see covered over the course 
of an hour-long video – dishes such as steaks, homemade tofu or smoked meat.

Brown also asked fans for their opinions on him hosting a possible late-night 
variety show on Food Network. “I’m going to move forward with Food Network on 
doing a late-night variety talk show,” he said, after receiving affirmative 
responses from fans. He has hosted a few other shows on the network, in 
addition to Good Eats and Cutthroat Kitchen.

Brown’s latest cookbook 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/28/dining/alton-brown-cookbook-everydaycook.html?_r=0>
, EveryDayCook: This Time It’s Personal, came out in September. His live tour,
Eat Your Science <http://www.altonbrowntour.com/us-tour>, kicked off earlier 
this year <http://altonbrown.com/2017-eat-science-tour/> and comes to New York 
City later this month.

The Guardian has contacted Brown and Food Network for comment.
 