
There are many reasons I loved my recent visit to Killruddery House & Gardens 
<http://www.killruddery.com/> in Bray, County Wicklow. Those 17th-century long 
ponds, and the rare and intactpatte d’oie, 
<http://www.encyclopedia.com/education/dictionaries-thesauruses-pictures-and-press-releases/patte-doie>
 or goose foot, avenues. There’s the walled garden growing fine no-dig 
vegetables and salads, and a delightful tearoom. There’s alsoFionnuala Ardee 
<https://twitter.com/fionnualaardee>’s kitchen. It’s not open to the public, 
but it’s there for weary souls who need a little pick-me-up. There’s always tea 
or wine, good sense and long tales. It’s a place to linger, but unfortunately 
my lingering meant I started to catch everyone’s cold.

Ardee took out one of her many fermented jars and offered me what should be 
called nectar of the gods, because it tasted delicious and killed the cold in 
one. I think it might cure everything, including ennui.

Here is the recipe: peel two heads of garlic and cover with six generous 
spoons of raw runny honey. Seal in a Mason jar and leave for two weeks. The 
honey draws out the garlic juices, which are powerful and headily sweet. Garlic 
and honey are known for their antibacterial and antifungal properties.

To grow your own cold remedy, there are two windows for garlic planting: now 
until the end of the month, and again in February. Certain varieties are 
autumn- or spring-planted, so it’s worth checking. Garlic needs a cold chill to 
grow successfully: 30 to 60 nights below 10C is essential for clove formation. 
If you plant in late spring, you won’t get this, and instead your garlic will 
grow as one big fat bulb.

Plant cloves 15cm apart, 10cm deep; flat end down. If the ground is likely to 
be wet, plant them on a ridge. Leave about 30cm between rows. For blocks, make 
a grid, then plant 18-20cm each way.

How to turn wood chips into a great compost heap | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/05/composting-wood-chips-gardening-alys-fowler>
Plant in pots as long as they are deep; they will need regular watering in 
summer. Start your garlic off in modules if planting space is not available 
yet. Overwinter the modules somewhere frost-free and plant out in spring. Make 
sure they don’t dry out. If your soil is thin, spread organic matter on top of 
it and plant into that. Sometimes blackbirds think this great fun and uproot 
all your garlic, so cover with netting until it is rooted and showing some 
green.

There are two types of garlic: hardneck and softneck. Hardneck garlic has a 
flower spike that is hard, and tends to have fewer, fatter cloves with a rich, 
complex flavour. It doesn’t store as long as softneck garlic – the sort used 
for dried garlic. Softneck garlic produces flower stalks (also known as scapes) 
if stressed.

I like ‘Lautrec Wight’ 
<http://www.rhsplants.co.uk/plants/_/garlic-lautrec-wight/classid.2000012764/> 
(hardneck) with its pretty pink cloves and‘Chesnok Red’ 
<http://www.gourmetgarlicgardens.com/chesnok-red.html> for roasting. ‘Wight 
Cristo’ <http://www.accidentalsmallholder.net/shop/garlic-wight-cristo/> is 
reliable and has a strong flavour.‘Picardy Wight’ 
<http://www.thegarlicfarm.co.uk/product/picardy-wight-seed-x-4-bulbs> is a dual 
softneck planted in autumn or spring.The Garlic Farm 
<http://www.thegarlicfarm.co.uk/> on the Isle of Wight is an excellent supplier.
 