
It was sheer laziness that led me to fall in love with a blackbird. I’d not 
got round to harvesting all my grapes, and as I watched them shrivel and rot on 
the vine, I felt a pang at how terrible a gardener I’d become. Fruit left on 
the vine too long often harbour diseases. I’d look out at the numerous bunches 
slowly melting into one dark, drooping mass and say, “Tomorrow. I’ll do it 
tomorrow.”

Then I saw a bold blackbird alight on my outdoor table and dart into the vine, 
pluck a grape and return to the table to eat it. This task was repeated day 
after day.

I don’t know why this took me by surprise. Blackbirds like all fruit once 
they’re soft enough to eat. Still, I was delighted. I could stop feeling guilty.

There are lists upon lists of plants that are good for birds, whether because 
they attract insects, or because they are rich in berries or nuts. At the top 
of these lists are native plants such as guelder rose (Viburnum opulus 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viburnum_opulus>), dog rose (Rosa canina 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/16017/i-Rosa-canina-i-(S)/Details>), haws, 
sloes, ivy, elderberries, crab apples, rowans and hollies. There are all sorts 
of non-natives that are much loved too – cotoneaster, Oregon grape, cultivated 
honeysuckle berries and seedheads from far-flung perennials. I’ve watched 
greenfinches descend onVerbena bonariensis 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=1993> and been thrilled to find 
tits hanging off echinops seedheads.

There is a theory that fruit that are similar in colour to our native types 
are more desirable to birds, so white fruit will not be as favoured as red or 
orange. However, anyone who has grown dogwood (Cornus alba 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/search-results?form-mode=false&query=cornus%20alba>
) will know that once those yellow leaves drop to reveal deep red stems 
festooned with white berries, the birds appear to gorge upon them. They are 
very capable of learning new tricks.

What's the greenest way to feed the birds?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/mar/20/bird-feeding-ethical-living>
If you don’t have space for bigger-berried shrubs and trees, follow the 
example of Pam Lewis of wildlife gardenSticky Wicket 
<http://www.stickywicketgarden.com/> in Dorset and make attractive bird feeders 
in large pots that are no longer needed for summer bedding or vegetables. To 
give small birds some protection, weave together strong stems – dogwoods and 
willows or even brambles are ideal – to form loose cages. Into these bring 
seedheads, using the stems to hold them in place. Sunflower heads, garden 
orache, sedums, verbenas, lemon balm, lamiums, rose hips, teasels and 
ornamental grasses can be woven in. Position the pots close to the house, where 
the warmer microclimate will be a boon and you can watch them quietly from 
indoors.
 