
A few weeks ago, I bought Amazon’s latest gizmo – the Echo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/21/amazon-echo-review-the-best-combined-speaker-and-voice-assistant-in-the-uk>
. It’s a voice-activated, networked device equipped with a seven-piece 
microphone array, which means that it can pick up one’s voice from anywhere in 
its vicinity with impressive accuracy. It comes in two versions, one a 
9.25in-tall cylinder that contains a number of speakers, the other a much 
smaller cylinder that just has tinny speakers. Since the latter was a third of 
the price of the former, your cheapskate columnist bought that and hooked it up 
to his hi-fi system, which means that when he speaks to it the Echo replies in 
sultry female tones modulated by a high-end analogue amplifier and a pair of 
very fine speakers. Her name, by the way, is “Alexa”.

I bought it because it seemed to me that it might be a significant product and 
I have a policy of never writing about kit that I haven’t paid for myself. 
Having lived with the Echo for a few weeks I can definitely confirm its 
significance. It is a big deal, which explains why the company invested so much 
in it. (It’s said that 1,500 people worked on the project for four years, which 
sounds implausible until you remember that Apple has 800 people working on the 
iPhone’s camera alone). Amazon’s boss, Jeff Bezos, may not have bet the ranch 
on it (he has a pretty big ranch, after all) but the product nevertheless 
represents a significant investment. And thesales so far 
<http://www.geekwire.com/2016/amazon-echo-sales-reach-5m-two-years-research-firm-says-google-competitor-enters-market/>
 suggest that it may well pay off.

Once switched on and hooked up to one’s wifi network, the Echo sits there, 
listening for its trigger word, “Alexa”. So initially one feels like an idiot 
saying things such as: “Alexa, play Radio 4” or: “Alexa, who is Kim 
Kardashian?” (A genuine inquiry this, from a visitor who didn’t know the 
answer, which duly came in the form of Alexa reading the first lines of the 
relevant Wikipedia entry.)

For new users, the device’s most remarkable feature is its remarkably low 
latency – the gap between issuing a command and getting a response – which 
seems to be around a second. And of course there’s a lot it doesn’t know or 
gets wrong. A request to “play the latest episode of theSerial podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/serial>” comes up with the Serial 
Serial podcast, <http://www.avclub.com/features/the-serial-serial/> which, in a 
nice postmodern touch, is a podcastabout the famous Serial podcast. But because 
the cloud-computing engine behind the Echo uses machine learning, these 
glitches will be reduced as more people use the device.

The Echo looks like a really significant product for two reasons. First, its 
target market is the home, which, asBen Thompson, an astute observer of the 
tech industry, writes <https://stratechery.com/2017/amazons-operating-system/> 
“was the one place in the entire world where smartphones were not necessarily 
the most convenient device or touch the easiest input method: more often than 
not your smartphone is charging and talking to a device doesn’t carry the 
social baggage it might elsewhere”.

‘Alexa, sort your life out’: when Amazon Echo goes rogue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2017/jan/09/alexa-amazon-echo-goes-rogue-accidental-shopping-dolls-house>
Second, the Echo fits into an existing, fast-growing ecosystem: that of 
domestic networked devices in the so-called Internet of Things (IoT). But at 
the moment, most manufacturers insist that IoT devices are controlled by 
smartphones, which are clumsy in a domestic environment. Amazon has shrewdly 
constructed an interface that makes it easy to link the Echo to these devices 
and services. So you can link it to your online diary and ask: “What’s in my 
calendar for tomorrow?” And this ecosystem strategy is already paying off: at 
the recentConsumer Electronics Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ces-2016> in Las Vegas, many of the 
products on display were controllable by the Echo. So, in a way, Amazon may 
have invented what Ben Thompson calls “the operating system for the home”.

As with most technological breakthroughs, the Echo is both wonderful and 
scary. It shows that voice interfaces can really work and not be an 
embarrassing pain to use. On the other hand, it brings a networked listening 
device into the heart of the home, with appalling implications for misuse.Amazon
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> tries to dodge this issue by 
saying that the Echo is always listening, but not recording: it only starts 
transmitting data to the cloud after it hears the trigger word “Alexa”.

Some police forces in the US clearly doubt that. The cops in Bentonville, 
Arkansas, for example, have issued a warrant requiring Amazon to hand over any 
audio or records from an Echo belonging to a guy who is set to go to trial next 
year for the murder of a friend. The police are afterany audio the speaker may 
have picked up on the night of the murder 
<https://www.engadget.com/2016/12/27/amazon-echo-audio-data-murder-case/> 
because while “the Echo is activated by certain words, it’s not uncommon for 
the IoT gadget to be alerted to listen by accident”.

So Kranzberg’s First Law 
<https://thefrailestthing.com/2011/08/25/kranzbergs-six-laws-of-technology-a-metaphor-and-a-story/>
 applies: technology is neither good nor bad, but it certainly isn’t neutral 
either.
 