
A husband and wife team who have built the largest commercial theatre company 
in the world have been named the most influential people in the sector for a 
record seventh time.

Leading the annual list compiled by the trade publication the Stage 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/>, and which includes the actors Sir Kenneth 
Branagh and Imelda Staunton as well as directors, critics, producers and 
writers,Howard Panter and Rosemary Squire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/03/theatreland-atg-power-couple-stage-100-wicked-lion-king>
 are joint chief executives of the Ambassador Theatre Group (ATG), which they 
launched in 1992.

The business has a portfolio that spans regional venues in towns such as 
Bromley and Southport to the West End, where its theatres stage shows such as 
The Lion King and Wicked. It has more recently expanded into venues in Germany, 
Australia and the US.

“They are now the most successful people we’ve ever had on the list over the 
20 years it has been going,” said Alistair Smith, the editor of the print 
edition of the Stage. “It is amazing, especially bearing in mind they started 
the business from scratch. They’ve built themselves up to be this global 
powerhouse and probably are now the biggest theatre company in the world.”

ATG became a major player when it bought Live Nation theatres in 2009 for 
£90m. It currently operates 46 theatres worldwide, last year adding Sydney’s 
1,187-seat Theatre Royal. Its biggest coup, however, came last month, when it 
announced it wasto reopen Broadway’s historic Hudson Theatre 
<http://www.atgtickets.com/news/ambassador-theatre-group-to-reopen-broadways-historic-hudson-theatre/>
.

Smith said ATG’s rise may not be universally popular, but conceded that “any 
company which is so dominant in its market is never going to be universally 
popular”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fambassador-theatre-group-founders-break-stage-100-record%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a0d88ad69736e069100da8b6968e4777349fbef%2F0_0_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ambassador%20Theatre%20Group%20founders%20break%20Stage%20100%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fambassador-theatre-group-founders-break-stage-100-record%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ambassador%20Theatre%20Group%20founders%20break%20Stage%20100%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fambassador-theatre-group-founders-break-stage-100-record%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a0d88ad69736e069100da8b6968e4777349fbef%2F0_0_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Composer Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber, whose Really Useful Group owns six West End 
theatres. Photograph: Christian Charisius/EPA 
Panter and Squire have overtaken Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber, who has topped the 
power list six times. Lloyd Webber, whose Really Useful Group owns six West End 
theatres, is at number four after a year in which he successfully openedhis 
latest musical, School of Rock, on Broadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/06/school-of-rock-review-broadway-andrew-lloyd-webber>
. Ahead of him at number two is Sonia Friedman, who produced Hamlet last year 
and will produce Harry Potterthis year. Cameron Mackintosh and his righthand 
man Nick Allott are at number three.

Peter Bazalgette and Darren Henley, the chair and chief executive of Arts 
Council England, are a new entry at number five. The council’s high rating 
follows a better than expected spending review settlement last month.The arts 
world has been braced for heavy cuts but its funding was reduced by only 5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/25/arts-council-museums-galleries-relief-funding-settlement-autumn-statement>
 in real terms.

Smith said: “It was a surprise to everyone and I don’t think it can be 
underestimated how much of an achievement that was … The test is now what they 
decide to do with it.”

Some big names are noticeably low on the list. Rufus Norris, at number 12, is 
the lowest ever for an incumbent director of the NationalTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, and the first time someone in the 
role has fallen outside the top 10 since 2001. Norris succeeded Nicholas Hytner 
at the NT and has had something of a bumpy ride with Tessa Ross stepping down 
as chief executive after less than six months.

“It is always tough when there is a change at a large organisation,” said 
Smith. “They are like ships to turn around, and I think he is trying to do 
something new and maybe it hasn’t quite landed yet.”

The highest placed actors are Benedict Cumberbatch, a new entry after his 
Hamlet at the Barbican became the theatrical event of the year, and Imelda 
Staunton, whose performance in Gypsy as Rose was widely acclaimed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fambassador-theatre-group-founders-break-stage-100-record%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80f2edc429c3e4ae33c968c5b981c3301947b2a1%2F828_243_2581_1551%2F2581.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ambassador%20Theatre%20Group%20founders%20break%20Stage%20100%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fambassador-theatre-group-founders-break-stage-100-record%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ambassador%20Theatre%20Group%20founders%20break%20Stage%20100%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fambassador-theatre-group-founders-break-stage-100-record%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80f2edc429c3e4ae33c968c5b981c3301947b2a1%2F828_243_2581_1551%2F2581.jpg>
 Benedict Cumberbatch as Hamlet at the Barbican centre, London. Photograph: 
Johan Persson/PA 
Big risers include Sarah Frankcom (the artistic director of Manchester Royal 
Exchange, who is up from number 50 to 21, and who is praised for 
“re-establishing the Exchange as one of the UK’s most exciting and vibrant 
producing theatres”.

New entries to the list include Kenneth Branagh, whose company has taken up 
residence at the Garrick Theatre, at number 23; MarkRylance, who had success in 
Farinelli and the King, at number 29; and Sheridan Smith whose appearance in 
the Menier Chocolate Factory’s Funny Girl meant tickets sold out within hours.

The list is, on one level, a bit of fun, but it is also keenly pored over by 
the theatre industry. Smith said the process of compiling it was probably more 
thorough than it had ever been, with 50 leading industry figures asked to 
submit names anonymously.

That has led to fresher and more suprising names in the lower reaches of the 
list, including the playwright Chris Goode at number 86; Deborah Pearson, Andy 
Field and Ira Brand of Forest Fringe at number 88; and Rachel Edwards, whose 
Tooting Arts Clubtransferred a pie and mash shop Sweeney Todd to Shaftesbury 
Avenue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/11/sweeney-todd-transfers-tooting-pie-shop-west-end>
.

The only critics on the list are the Guardian’s Michael Billington and Lyn 
Gardner at number 82. The Stage describes them as “two of the most consistently 
respected critics in the business … [they] often inhabit different spheres of 
the industry, but both bring a wealth of experience and knowledge to their 
posts.”

 