
I am indebted to Peter Biddlecombe, the Sunday Times crossword editor, for the 
answer to my question last month about the origins of the convention that 
crossword grids must be symmetrical. The rule was established by one Margaret 
Farrar (n√©e Petherbridge) in the 1920s.

As we approach the centenary year of what is generally accepted to be the 
first modern crossword (published by the New York World on Sunday 21 December 
1913) crossword groupies are likely to know the name of Arthur Wynne, the 
Liverpudlian who devised that original 'word-cross' puzzle. But few will have 
heard of the American woman who did infinitely more than our Arthur to give the 
modern crossword its shape.

Margaret Petherbridge originally had no particular interest in puzzles, 
crossword or other. She was just, accidentally, the right person in the right 
place. Born in 1897, she was secretary to the editor of the New York World when 
she was asked to help Arthur Wynne with his proofreading. Then she started 
setting the odd puzzle herself and seems quickly to have become better at it 
than he was and to have taken over.

In 1924 two recent graduates of New York's Columbia School of Journalism 
decided that they would rather go for publishing than for journalism. Looking 
for their first book, they gambled on a collection of puzzles that had appeared 
in the New York World. They asked Margaret Petherbridge to edit it for them. 
She agreed. Their names were Simon and Schuster.

The Cross Word Puzzle Book was a massive best seller. It launched the duo on 
their careers as book publishers and, overnight, it turned the crossword puzzle 
into a coast-to-coast sensation. When Margaret Petherbridge Farrar died in 1984 
she was working on her 134th crossword puzzle book. In 1942 she had become the 
first ever crossword editor of the New York Times, which had held out against 
tide until then, when it risked a Sunday puzzle (only going daily in 1950). She 
retired from the Times in 1968.

In the course of this unintended career Margaret developed today's standard 
crossword grid: square, rather than any old shape; with a number before each 
clue and a letter count in brackets at the end; the number of black squares in 
a grid to be limited; grids to be an odd number of squares by an odd number of 
squares (eg 15 x 15 or 13 x 13), so as to have one focal square at the centre; 
no solution to be less than a three-letter word; multi-word solutions and 
solutions covering more than one box in a grid to give room for interesting 
phrases; and, above all, grids where the pattern of white and black squares had 
to be symmetrical, in order to create visual appeal.

When the crossword finally crossed the Atlantic in a big way in the late 1920s 
the grid design features that Margaret had persuaded the United States to 
follow were also imported without question.
_____

This is advance notice that Araucaria's special Christmas offering will be 
published on Saturday 22 December, with a deadline for entries of Thursday 3 
January and the solution given on Friday 4 January.

Also, for those who missed the original transmission, Radio Four is repeating 
on Boxing Day the 24 November Archive Hour programme in which Lynne Truss 
explores crosswords in the BBC sound archives and talks about what crossword 
puzzles have meant to her.
_____

May I pass on two hints for when you are having difficulty with the Guardian 
crossword site? First, there seems to be a bug affecting those of you using 
certain versions of Internet Explorer as you browser. It does not seem to 
affect other browsers, like Safari, Firefox or Google Chrome.

The technical staff is trying to locate the bug and to deal with it but, 
meanwhile, it would be worth trying another such browser. Second, there are 
several routes from the crossword home page to your chosen puzzle. You can, of 
course, click on a particular puzzle along the top or down the left-hand side; 
but you can also use either the top or bottom half of the archive search tool. 
For example on 3 December, when it seemed as if the new December Genius puzzle 
had not been uploaded, it was in fact in the system and could be accessed by 
going for Genius + December or Genius + the serial number (in this case 114, 
since November's puzzle was No 113).
_____

November's Genius puzzle (No 113 set by Crucible) only got nine correct 
entries on the first day and 220 by the deadline. (The slow start was probably 
explained by the fact that the last three down clues were initially uploaded 
wrongly.) Despite this handicap Dave H. was in at 02:15, followed by Jeremy G. 
at 04:30.

Congratulations to Janice Hauser, who is November's winner.

_____

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> .
For Observer crosswords please email crossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>
 