
It’s just below freezing in the village of Grödig on the outskirts of 
Salzburg, and a large crowd has gathered. The air is thick with the smell of 
glühwein and anticipation. Five minutes away, in a council lock-up on the main 
road, science professor Clemens Spechtler, 45, is preparing the final touches 
for his transformation from man to beast. In his shaggy goat-fur breeches he is 
already a yeti from the chest down. His son Jonas, 14, similarly attired, 
stands at his side, with the insouciance of a young Pan. Behind them more 
demons are beginning to emerge, their grotesque masks lined up menacingly next 
to a stack of water bottles, spare wheels and empty crates.
Salzburg map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/dec/2016-12-16T16:47:17.html> 
These otherworldly creatures are members of the Grödig Krampus, a 45-strong 
group who, every year during advent, metamorphose into wild spirits in horned 
masks and rugged furs, then rampage around the streets chasing away the evil 
spirits of winter. They serve as the yin to the cheerful yang of St Nicholas – 
who bears a striking resemblance to Santa Claus and often puts in an appearance 
at the same time. The effect is spellbinding. “As soon as I put on my mask,” 
says Clemens, “it’s like a switch goes on in my head and I’m not human any 
more.”

The krampus run is an ancient Alpine tradition that goes back to pre-Christian 
times and takes place in the days leading up to Christmas. For Clemens, it is 
the highlight of his year – and this year, his 29th as a krampus, begins in 
earnest with the sound of giant clanking cowbells and a puff of red smoke, as 
the fiendish figures emerge, some on foot, others aboard a wooden chariot, 
cracking their birch and horsehair whips at cowering onlookers. It’s part
Hieronymus Bosch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/11/hieronymus-bosch-review-a-heavenly-host-of-delights-on-the-road-to-hell>
, partMad Max.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falpine-festive-tradition-salzburg-krampus-run-christmas-folklore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9956614bd8c31a650da7f5cb3596bcbae0de115c%2F229_0_6080_3651%2F6080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20Alpine%20festive%20tradition%20%E2%80%A6%20going%20wild%20in%20Salzburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falpine-festive-tradition-salzburg-krampus-run-christmas-folklore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20Alpine%20festive%20tradition%20%E2%80%A6%20going%20wild%20in%20Salzburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falpine-festive-tradition-salzburg-krampus-run-christmas-folklore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9956614bd8c31a650da7f5cb3596bcbae0de115c%2F229_0_6080_3651%2F6080.jpg>
 Salzburg. Photograph: G Breitegger/Tourismus Salzburg gmbh 
Meanwhile, in the Old Town of Salzburg, another Austrian advent tradition of a 
more sedate kind has just finished – advent singing and chamber music in the 
baroque splendour ofSt Peter’s Abbey 
<http://www.visit-salzburg.net/sights/stpeter.htm>.

The line between religion and pagan folklore is curiously blurred, and a visit 
to the surprisingly compellingChristmas Museum 
<http://www.salzburg.info/en/sights/museums_in_salzburg/museums/salzburg-christmas-museum>
 (open all year round) reveals just how complex this relationship has become. 
The pagan traditions of the Christmas tree and the krampus are interwoven with 
religious depictions of St Nicholas and the “Christ Child” in intricately 
carved wooden tableaux, puppets and advent calendars.

It transpires that in this corner of Europe, on 21 December, the door to the 
other world is opened, the animals start to speak – and FatherChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> never existed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falpine-festive-tradition-salzburg-krampus-run-christmas-folklore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb29b51499947308af51a8e508d3a63a1082b2fa7%2F0_893_3840_3840%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20Alpine%20festive%20tradition%20%E2%80%A6%20going%20wild%20in%20Salzburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falpine-festive-tradition-salzburg-krampus-run-christmas-folklore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20Alpine%20festive%20tradition%20%E2%80%A6%20going%20wild%20in%20Salzburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falpine-festive-tradition-salzburg-krampus-run-christmas-folklore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb29b51499947308af51a8e508d3a63a1082b2fa7%2F0_893_3840_3840%2F3840.jpg>
 ‘I put on my mask and I’m not human any more’: Clemens Spechtler. Photograph: 
TVB Groedig 
There’s no off-season in Austria, a year-round destination for holiday makers 
– especially in Salzburg, where winter brings a full schedule of music and 
performance as well as rampaging demons.Sound of Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/02/sound-of-music-at-50> 
tourists mingle with skiers in town for the day, and Mozart fans paying homage 
to the birthplace of their mercurial hero.

Wrapped in Puffas and ear muffs against the biting cold, visitors to the 
Winterfest, one of the biggest cultural events in the city, make their way past 
tattered posters ofNorbert Hofer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
, Austria’s recently defeated far right presidential candidate, to the 
Volksgarten where three big tops host contemporary circus troupes from all over 
the world. This year’s highlight,Cirque Alfonse 
<http://www.cirquealfonse.com/en/> from Québec, has a hipster feel, with 
lumberjack outfits, axe juggling and dangerous-looking antics involving large, 
razor-toothed saws. It’s about as far from raindrops on roses as you can get – 
although, like the Von Trapp troupe, Cirque Alfonse is a family affair: brother 
and sister Antoine and Julie Carabinier-Lépine are joined on stage by their 
white-bearded father, who started performing in his 60s and must be one of the 
hippest pensioners in Canada.

In this corner of Europe the door to the other world is opened, and the 
animals start to speak

If you visit the world-renowned art space Galerie Thaddaeus Ropac 
<http://ropac.net/place_current_exhibitions/salzburg-villa-kast>, overlooking 
the ornate Mirabell Gardens on the east side of the Salzach river, you get a 
great view of the “Do-Re-Me” fountain where the Von Trapp children had their 
singing lessons. Inside the gallery, Austrian artistMarkus Schinwald 
<http://ropac.net/artist/markus-schinwald>’s kinetic sculptures combining 
dismembered Regency-style table legs and machine parts enact a rather touching 
ballet. Outside, a brooding sculpture by artworld heavyweight George Baselitz 
gives the kitsch unicorns a run for their money.

There’s more contemporary art at the Museum of Modern Art 
<http://www.museumdermoderne.at/en/home/> on top of the Mönchsberg, one of five 
mountains in the city, where many come for the restaurant alone, which is 
reached by a lift that takes diners from ground level up through the middle of 
the mountain to a panoramic terrace. As well as spectacular views over 
Salzburg, the clear beef broth with slices of pancake is the perfect savoury 
antidote to the winter chill – though for coffee and cake it’s almost 
obligatory to head for the Alter Markt andCafé Tomaselli 
<http://www.tomaselli.at/en/caf%C3%A9-tomaselli-en>, the oldest coffee house in 
Austria.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falpine-festive-tradition-salzburg-krampus-run-christmas-folklore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9296b826878316bc08c5d90f341cb7576ee5079b%2F0_212_5003_3003%2F5003.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20Alpine%20festive%20tradition%20%E2%80%A6%20going%20wild%20in%20Salzburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falpine-festive-tradition-salzburg-krampus-run-christmas-folklore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20Alpine%20festive%20tradition%20%E2%80%A6%20going%20wild%20in%20Salzburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Falpine-festive-tradition-salzburg-krampus-run-christmas-folklore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9296b826878316bc08c5d90f341cb7576ee5079b%2F0_212_5003_3003%2F5003.jpg>
 ‘Almost obligatory’: coffee and apple strudel at Cafe Tomaselli. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Under stucco ceilings and crystal chandeliers, coffee, hot chocolate and 
bracingly strong rum chasers are served by suited waiters, while waitresses in 
frilly pinafores dispense cakes and apple strudel from a giant tray, 
usherette-style. Founded in 1700 when Salzburg was still a principality, it’s a 
well-loved institution, and I made it a base during my visit to the city, 
following in the footsteps of Mozart and Haydn.

In the middle of winter, there’s a lot to be said for a cosy coffee house, and 
a chance to reflect in comfort on this city of contrasts as it gets ready for 
its biggest celebration of the year.

Way to go

Fly to Salzburg from London for around £136 return (ryanair.com 
<https://www.ryanair.com/gb/en/>). A double room at Hotel Am Mirabellplatz 
costs from £88 (austrotel.at <http://austrotel.at/>). For more information, go 
toaustria.info <http://www.austria.info/uk> and salzburg.info 
<http://www.salzburg.info/en/>.

Cirque Alfonse is at Winterfest until 8 January (winterfest.at 
<http://www.winterfest.at/>). Markus Schinwald, New Works, is on at Galerie 
Thaddaeus Ropac until 21 January (ropac.net <http://ropac.net/>)
 