
Picture an Australian Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>, and sunny barbecues at 
the beach may come to mind. But it is not uncommon for the weather to bring 
serious disruption. “It’s when there’s most energy in the atmosphere with the 
sun almost overhead, and the continent really heats up,” explains Andy Casely, 
a risk analyst working for Willis Towers Watson in Sydney.

Heatwaves are a worry, and evidence suggests that climate change is making 
Australian heatwaves hotter, longer and more frequent 
<http://www.climatecouncil.org.au/uploads/9901f6614a2cac7b2b888f55b4dff9cc.pdf>
. During the summer of 2012 to 2013 the “Angry Summer” heatwave broke hundreds 
of weather records, including the hottest day ever for Australia (averaging 
40.3°C across the entire continent) and seven days in a row when the continent 
averaged over 39°C.

And with that heat the risk of bushfires often increases too. In December 2015 
soaring temperatures led to dramatic Christmas Daybushfires breaking out on the 
Great Ocean Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/25/australias-north-braces-for-christmas-cyclone-as-bushfires-threaten-south>
, about 160km southwest of Melbourne. One-hundred and sixteen homes were 
destroyed and 2,200 hectares of land were burned.

Sometimes the excess atmospheric energy is channelled into dramatic storms, 
like the2011 Christmas Day storm 
<http://www.smh.com.au/environment/weather/tornado-hail-as-storms-lash-melbourne-20111225-1p9au.html>
, which deposited hailstones the size of tennis balls over Melbourne, and 
caused flash-flooding, power cuts and over A$700m damage.

For the northern half of the country cyclones are a concern: Broome was 
drenched by ex-tropical cyclone Yvette 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-23/record-rainfall-swamps-broome/8145556>
over the week. Back in 1974 the city ofDarwin in the Northern Territory was 
devastated by cyclone Tracy 
<http://www.australiangeographic.com.au/blogs/on-this-day/2014/12/on-this-day-in-history-cyclone-tracy>
 on Christmas Eve. Seventy-one people were killed and over 70% of Darwin’s 
buildings were destroyed, leaving around 41,000 people homeless. Today improved 
building standards mean that a Tracy equivalent would be unlikely to cause the 
same devastation.







 