
I grew up around Notting Hill when it was still pretty rundown. A lot of us 
local boys were electricians. I’d just been sacked from a job when my dad’s 
mate took me on. He knew a guy who had worked onA Clockwork Orange  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-clockwork-orange>and when they were crewing 
up forThe Shining  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-shining>they invited 
me along. It was 1979.

I’d heard of Stanley Kubrick  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stanleykubrick>
but didn’t realise how special he was. He’d do 150 takes of a simple scene. He 
knew everybody’s job. If he asked you a question and you didn’t know the 
answer, you really got it – not me so much, because I was just a spark. After 
having a go at someone he’d be walking away and give you a wink, like: “See 
that? That’s got him going.” He was more tongue-in-cheek with us workers on the 
floor than with the upper echelons. They all looked up to him so he played the 
part.

We played chess now and then. He’d slaughter me. Some people were scared of 
him because he could make or break a career. NotJack [Nicholson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jacknicholson>], though. Jack called him Stan 
to wind him up. You could call him Stanley, Mr Kubrick or Guv, just not Stan. 
But they liked each other.

He said to me: ‘You look like Jack – put on the jeans and boots.’ Those are my 
legs on screen

One time Jack said he had done his back in and needed a few days off. That’s a 
lot of time when you’re shooting a big film, but Stanley said OK. The next day 
we were in the sparks room watching Wimbledon when Stanley walks in. He asks 
what we’re up to and as he turns to look at the telly, there he is:Jack 
Nicholson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jacknicholson> sat in the crowd 
with a girl on either side. Stanley went mad.

It was a small crew and he used us for bit parts. Because they rarely shoot 
leading artists when you can’t see their face, he said to me: “You look like 
Jack – put on the jeans and boots.” In the film, when a semi-conscious Jack is 
dragged into the food store, those are my legs on screen. He asked me to be the 
guy in a bear suit with his arse hanging out and his head in a man’s lap at the 
end. But I said: “No, mate, I ain’t having that.” Could you imagine? Everyone 
at home saying: “That’s Bobby Tanswell.” Nope, sorry.

He kept a toffee hammer and a centre punch in his car. We asked why and he 
said it was for when he drove past the lake to get to his house. If he got 
pushed off the road and into the water, he had something to get through the 
window with. It seemed reasonable to him.

He was a fair guvnor. If he saw you were interested he always had time for 
you. I watched the film a few times, but it drove my wife mad because I kept 
pointing out where I was standing. I learned everything I know from working on 
that film.
 