
My first encounter with Victoria Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/victoria-wood> was as a kid watching a TV 
special where a funny lady was playing the piano and belting out the wondrous 
line: “Beat me on the bottom with a Woman’s Weekly.” It was love.

Obviously, being about seven and not an avid Woman’s Weekly reader, large 
sections of the songThe Ballad of Barry and Freda 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lNU5KVa_Tu8>, about a middle-aged couple 
“doing it” (or not), went over my head. But my appreciation for the funny lady 
became a lifelong admiration. Victoria Wood has done, and excelled at, 
everything: standup, sketch comedy, stage musicals, TV musicals, TV dramas, 
sitcoms. Whether it’s the glorious bunch of kitchen workers inDinnerladies 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W_2tktLOV3I> or the characters within 
characters in her fake TV dramaAcorn Antiques 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qEAQjJNwQf0>, the people she creates are 
memorable, nuanced and sometimes a little heartbreaking. There’s one sketch 
from her showAs Seen on TV <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i2poRHmFvLI>, in 
which she plays a pre-teen schoolgirl called Chrissie with an ambition to swim 
the Channel. In the last shot we see Chrissie all by herself on a beach, 
slathering on Vaseline and telling the camera that she’s sure she’ll find 
France because she came fourth in her geography class. She then dives into the 
water and a voiceover announces: “That was eight days ago. Chrissie hasn’t yet 
reached land.” Sob.

Edinburgh festival 2014: 10 questions for Ellie Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/09/edinburgh-festival-2014-10-questions-for-ellie-taylor>
Good comedy is about saying the thing you want to say in the most concise way 
possible. Trimming off the fat. Wood is a master of this – and her precision 
never fails to tickle me. Whether she’s writing for herself or others, her use 
of language is exquisite. She creates such clear images within a matter of a 
few words that you can’t help but explode with laughter. It’s like a comedy 
punch.

Her lines stick in my head as snippets of perfection – like in Lark Pies to 
Cranchesterford <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KDhWcLceDhk>, her satire of 
Sunday-night fuzzy period dramas, when a character excuses her lateness by 
explaining that there was a badger in her pelmet. Or in Dinnerladies, when Jean 
(played by Anne Reid) describes how her husband’s Auntie Dot, from Cockermouth, 
onceate a raffia drinks coaster <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0560673/> because 
she “thought it was a high-fibre biscuit. She had to be held back from moving 
down the table and buttering two more.”

From the start of my own standup career, this joyful use of language has 
influenced my own writing. I’ve tried never to take the first word that pops 
into my head, but to search for the alternative, the slightly bizarre, the 
ridiculous that tips a sentence from being amusing to something that viscerally 
forces an audience to laugh. Sadly, I have yet to find an opportunity to use 
the word “pelmet” in my set, but one day I will crowbar it in and think of my 
comedy hero. And if I can’t, well, I shall just eat a raffia drinks coaster.

• Ellie Taylor: Elliementary is at the Soho theatre, London, 19-21 May. Box 
office: 020-7478 0100. 
<http://sohotheatre.com/whats-on/ellie-taylor-elliementary/>
 