
The former Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> defender 
Andrea Dossena has claimed his arrest on suspicion of shoplifting in Harrods 
was due to an “oversight”, and has threatened legal action over reports which 
appeared to suggest otherwise.

The 33-year-old, who joined Leyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient> in November 2014 after 
being released by Sunderland, was detained with a 31-year-old woman at the 
Knightsbridge department store, with both bailed pending further inquiries.

A Metropolitan police spokesman said: “Police arrested a 33-year-old male and 
a 31-year-old woman on 7 April on suspicion of shoplifting at Harrods. They 
were taken to a west London police station. Both the man and woman have been 
bailed to a date in late April, pending further inquiries.”

Dossena confirmed an incident had taken place, but reacted angrily to the way 
it was reported, issuing a statement via his agent Federico Pastorello,who 
tweeted <https://twitter.com/fedepastorello>: “In regard to the news released 
today on some websites, I would like to make very clear that the story reported 
is unfounded.

“I was in Harrods with my wife and my son for some shopping and I forgot to 
pay for a honey jar and some sliced meats ​​we had previously ordered. While 
exiting the shop unaware of my oversight, I was stopped by security guards 
[who] then called the police as a standard routine procedure.

“As I wasn’t carrying with me any identity documents at the time, I was asked 
to go to the nearest police station in order to be identified, after which I 
left and went back home. Hence, I have now instructed my lawyers to protect my 
image with all necessary legal actions against those who reported this 
inaccurate and tendentious news.”
 