
Marseille have struck a deal with Toulouse to sign the striker André-Pierre 
Gignac for a reported fee of €18m (£14.7m).Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> today confirmed a deal has 
been reached, and the 24-year-old will sign a five-year contract on completion 
of a medical.

"A tentative agreement was reached Friday between Marseille and Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse> for the transfer of 
André-Pierre Gignac, president [Jean-Claude] Dassier announced this afternoon," 
read a statement released by the club.

News of the deal comes as a problem with Loïc Rémy's medical prevented 
Marseille from introducing the new recruit from Nice at a press conference 
today. The 23-year-old Rémy agreed a move yesterday for a reported fee of €15m 
and Marseille announced the player had passed his medical and signed.

However, a planned press conference this morning was initially put back until 
the afternoon and then postponed again as it emerged Rémy has a potential heart 
problem.

"We decided not to introduce Loïc Rémy because, late last night, a small 
problem was revealed reading the MRIs," Dassier said. "The news this morning is 
reassuring, but we took this decision because what matters most is the health 
of players."

The club doctor Christophe Baudot said the problem was with Rémy's heart. 
"It's a mechanical problem," he said. "Further investigations are planned for 
Monday in order to give clear answers. He will not play until all doubts have 
been erased."

Marseille are hoping to form a devastating new partnership with France 
internationals Rémy and Gignac, who scored 24 goals during the 2008-09 season 
to top the charts.

Gignac will, however, have to wait to make his debut as a slight ankle 
complaint will keep him out of this weekend's match against Lorient.
 