
Andrew Lloyd Webber <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/andrew-lloyd-webber> 
has said he fears for the survival of British theatre unless it reflects the 
diversity of the nation’s population, referring to the industry as still 
‘hideously white’.

The award-winning composer of hits including Evita, Cats and Jesus Christ 
Superstar sounds the warning in a diversity report he commissioned to address 
the lack of non-white performers and backstage staff.

In its introduction, he writes: “I passionately believe that the stage needs 
to reflect the diversity of the UK population or it risks becoming sidelined.”

The report, published on Thursday, warns: “If the situation continues, there 
is real danger that, not only willblack and Asian young people stay away from 
the theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/09/janet-suzman-black-people-theatre-white-invention>
 as a profession, they will stay away as punters. And without them in the 
audience, theatres will become unsustainable, as they are forced to compete for 
a dwindling ageing, white, middle-class audience.”


The report was commissioned earlier this year by the philanthropic Andrew 
Lloyd Webber Foundation <http://andrewlloydwebberfoundation.com/> to explore 
the absence of black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) people in live theatre.
The composer’s casting director, David Grindrod, has said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/12/arts-are-for-everyone-lloyd-webber-calls-for-more-diversity-in-theatre>
 “a vast majority” of those who audition for UK productions are “white middle 
class”.

Lord Lloyd-Webber said he was alarmed by the findings of the report, Centre 
Stage: The Pipeline of BAME Talent. He is calling for “arts sector bodies, 
drama schools, theatre producers, actors, creative teams and philanthropists to 
take responsibility and specific action” to ensure that BAME people are given 
the chance to take centre stage within the industry.

The report’s authors, Danuta Kean, an arts, media and publishing analyst, and 
Mel Larsen, an arts consultant, say “white middle classes still dominate 
audiences” and that “even in London, where the BAME population is now 44%, 
audiences outside specialist theatres and theatre groups remain overwhelmingly 
white”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fandrew-lloyd-webber-warns-diversity-crisis-british-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c7c153da06f95c660a9870d3a77bcebc46747a4%2F0_50_2425_1454%2F2425.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Lloyd%20Webber%20warns%20of%20diversity%20crisis%20in%20British%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fandrew-lloyd-webber-warns-diversity-crisis-british-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Lloyd%20Webber%20warns%20of%20diversity%20crisis%20in%20British%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fandrew-lloyd-webber-warns-diversity-crisis-british-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c7c153da06f95c660a9870d3a77bcebc46747a4%2F0_50_2425_1454%2F2425.jpg>
 Lloyd Webber said he struggled to find enough Asian actors during casting for 
his musical Bombay Dreams. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Lamenting a tendency for black and Asian actors to get “secondary roles as 
hoods, hoodlums and hookers”, they call for action to ensure such talent is no 
longer marginalised.

They say the odds are “stacked against minorities in a profession where the 
default lead is white unless specifically written for a black or Asian actor”.

Their research claims “representation of minority ethnic actors is as low as 
one student a year in some drama colleges”, while there are “far fewer 
opportunities for career-changing lead roles” for them.

The report covers theatre across the board. It says “musical theatre has 
challenged the monoculture”, with successful productions such asMotown the 
Musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/08/motown-the-musical-review-berry-gordy-shaftesbury-theatre>
, “but the success of these shows has bred another problem. The failure of 
drama schools to take in enough BAME talent has led to a shortage of actors 
suitable for the roles and, as a result, touring productions have been 
cancelled”.

The findings tally with Lloyd Webber’s own experience. In the introduction to 
the report, he recalls: “When I producedBombay Dreams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/jun/20/arts.artsnews> over a decade ago 
and was privileged to introduce the marvellous music ofAR Rahman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/apr/01/ar-rahman-slumdog-millionaire> 
to a West End audience, one of our greatest difficulties was finding enough 
Asian actors.”

Broadway hit Hamilton under fire after casting call for 'non-white' actors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/31/broadway-hamilton-musical-casting-call-nonwhite-actors>
He says BAME diversity in the performing arts has been high on the agenda this 
year, notably with “the runaway success” of theUS musical Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/18/hamilton-review-founding-father-gets-a-hip-hop-makeover>
 – a Broadway hit that will transfer to the West End and which was created and 
performed by an almost entirely non-white company. He also notes Arts Council 
England’s £4.6m funding to boost diversity.

But, he says: “Very often the discussion is focused on increasing the 
representation of diverse ethnicities on stage.” While saying this is crucially 
important, he adds: “I’ve been acutely aware that one of the biggest issues is 
the lack of trained diverse talent coming through. Casting directors and 
theatre producers alike often complain that they’d like to cast more BAME 
performers, but that they don’t get enough turning up to audition.”

He pays tribute to some of the success stories coming out of his foundation’s 
scholarship programme, including Emmanuel Kojo, an actor of Ghanaian heritage. 
Kojo spoke to the report’s authors after receiving a best supporting 
performance nomination in the UK Theatre Awards for his part inShow Boat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/20/show-boat-crucible-sheffield-review>
 at Sheffield’s Crucible theatre. He told them that equality and diversity on 
the UK stage will only exist when people stop referring to him as a “black 
actor”: “I have always just thought of myself as an actor but, since starting 
in this profession, I have been made aware that I am a black actor. We won’t be 
equal until there is no prefix when people talk about us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fandrew-lloyd-webber-warns-diversity-crisis-british-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1731171d5dffb5fbec1e5820799ef1c3e01e43f6%2F0_124_1867_1120%2F1867.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Lloyd%20Webber%20warns%20of%20diversity%20crisis%20in%20British%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fandrew-lloyd-webber-warns-diversity-crisis-british-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Lloyd%20Webber%20warns%20of%20diversity%20crisis%20in%20British%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fandrew-lloyd-webber-warns-diversity-crisis-british-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1731171d5dffb5fbec1e5820799ef1c3e01e43f6%2F0_124_1867_1120%2F1867.jpg>
 Emmanuel Kojo, centre, in the musical Showboat. Photograph: Johan Persson 
The report says the problem is even greater backstage, with only a handful of 
BAME senior executives, while makeup artists are not trained to deal with black 
skin.

Among the recommendations are calls for producers, directors and others to 
“take a lead in encouraging a more culturally diverse workforce”, with “colour 
blind” casting and more plays by BAME writers.

Do we need diversity quotas for theatre?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jun/09/do-we-need-diversity-quotas-for-theatre>
It also urges drama schools to make 50% of their places accessible to students 
from low-income backgrounds and for funding bodies such as Arts Council England 
to offer resources and initiatives to ease the BAME path into the theatre.

Kean said specific data on black and Asian actors appearing in the West End 
proved “impossible to get”. Precise figures for the ethnic breakdown of 
audiences do not exist, she said, because “there’s an assumption that black and 
Asian people don’t go to the theatre”.

She added: “Companies like Curve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jul/17/leicester-curve-theatre-ticket-sales>
 [theatre] in Leicester show that that’s completely not true … There’s a 
complete failure to acknowledge the mix of audiences.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fandrew-lloyd-webber-warns-diversity-crisis-british-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba35039dce0e6ab03c562636616f78ba0157c580%2F95_449_1822_1093%2F1822.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Lloyd%20Webber%20warns%20of%20diversity%20crisis%20in%20British%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fandrew-lloyd-webber-warns-diversity-crisis-british-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Lloyd%20Webber%20warns%20of%20diversity%20crisis%20in%20British%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fandrew-lloyd-webber-warns-diversity-crisis-british-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba35039dce0e6ab03c562636616f78ba0157c580%2F95_449_1822_1093%2F1822.jpg>
 The hit musical Hamilton has been created and performed by an almost entirely 
non-white company. Photograph: Joan Marcus/AP 
In the report, Curve’s associate director, Suba Das, talks of “a ghettoised 
perception of what diversity looks like in this country … because a lot of the 
gatekeepers think only of the lower economic groups”. He adds: “I have lost 
count of BAME actors and directors who have told me that they have said to 
agents and directors they are great at Shakespeare, but instead they are told 
they need to ‘develop a London accent’ if they are to get work.”

Being a black drama student: 'The fear of stereotyping is crippling'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/01/being-a-black-drama-student-the-fear-of-stereotyping-is-crippling>
An unnamed East Asian actor – who is Oxford educated – says that, while white 
actors are auditioned according to their suitability for a role, casting 
directors expect actors of colour to represent the perceived “oppression” of 
their race – whatever the actor’s background. “I have been to auditions where I 
have felt that the director wanted to establish whether I had ‘suffered enough’ 
and to prove my class credentials,” the actor said.

Other productions that have bucked the trend include Dreamgirls, The 
Scottsboro Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/20/the-scottsboro-boys-musical-review-garrick-london>
 andThriller Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/feb/14/thriller-live-review>. Kean said 
musical theatre in particular was challenging the monoculture. She applauded 
Opera North’s touring production ofKiss Me Kate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/25/kiss-me-kate-review-opera-north-bringing-joy-and-skill-to-frothy-cole-porter>
, which starred Kojo in a role normally given to “a default white actor”.

• This article was amended on 8 December 2016. An earlier version included a 
quote from the report and said it was from an unnamed black actor who was 
public school and Cambridge educated. The actor who contributed to the report, 
Vera Chok, is East Asian. The report incorrectly described her as South Asian, 
male, and Cambridge and public school educated.
 