
Given he is a qualified lawyer it did not come as a surprise to hear Slaven 
Bilic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/slaven-bilic> state a case after 
this match. The West Ham manager could simply and justifiably have basked in 
victory over Liverpool but instead he decided to make it clear to Andy Carroll 
following his first goal against his former club that now is the time for him 
to kick on with his career.

“He [Carroll] looks really good and fit and it’s all about him now,” said 
Bilic. “Is he going to maintain and progress and look after himself, or is he 
going to go the other way? He has history in that and I’m not his dad, I can’t 
demand things from him. But I’m expecting that to be fair.”

Andy Carroll delivers knockout blow for West Ham against Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/02/west-ham-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
Those words were delivered to a small group of journalists in a corridor just 
outside the Upton Park press room and were near identical to those the Croat 
had delivered to the general media moments earlier. A clear and intentional 
doubling up of a message, and the hope, for not just Bilic but everyone 
associated with West Ham, is that their towering No9 will take it on board.

For sure, there is the sense with Carroll that, at 26, he is reaching a 
crossroads in his career, one that has been dogged by controversies and 
injuries ever since he made his debut for Newcastle as a clean-shaven, 
short-haired 17-year-old in November 2006.

The consensus is that he simply does not care and work hard enough, one 
articulated by Sam Allardyce, who managed Carroll at St James’ Park andbrought 
him to West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/05/sam-allardyce-andy-carroll-west-ham-wilfried-bony>
 after his £35m transfer to Liverpool had turned sour, in his recent 
autobiography. “He treats life too casually,” said Allardyce. “He also gets 
himself into situations off the pitch which a manager can do without – and so 
can he.”

Allardyce went on to say that Carroll has the attributes to be “England’s 
regular centre-forward”, and with Euro 2016 looming now is the perfect time for 
a player with nine international caps to show that behind the negative 
headlines lies someone who can make a positive impact for club and country. He 
is certainly on the right track, having scored in successive Premier League 
games for the first time in 12 months, and after returning from a groin strain 
picked up just before Christmas, which was Carroll’s sixth injury of 2015.

“To talk about the Euros is wrong for him,” said Bilic when the forward’s 
international credentials were put to the manager. “He’s got the quality but he 
has to show it on a longer scale. Now he’s got a chance.”

Bilic went on to compare Carroll to his former Everton team-mate Duncan 
Ferguson, and there was certainly something Ferguson-esque about the way 
Carroll rose to power a header past Simon Mignolet. That goal followed Michail 
Antonio’s after 10 minutes – also a header – and sealed a deserved win for West 
Ham, one which extended their unbeaten run to seven games and completed a 
league double overLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> 
for the first time in 52 years.

The only sour note for the hosts on a grey day in east London was Manuel 
Lanzini’s first-half withdrawal with what appears to be a recurrence of his 
recent thigh injury. The Argentinian will undergo scans on Monday and according 
to the club’s joint-chairman David Gold,could be out for up to six weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/02/west-ham-manuel-lanzini-david-gold>
.

For Liverpool the problems run deeper. They came into this match on the back 
of successive victories and showed little determination to make it three out of 
three. Their attacking play was sloppy and lacklustre while defensively they 
were yet again undone by crosses, albeit two superbly delivered ones from Enner 
Valencia and the outstanding Mark Noble.

Jürgen Klopp was furious with his players afterwards, accusing them of giving 
only “90 per cent” effort, and must now galvanise them for Tuesday’s Capital 
One Cup semi-final, first-leg tie at Stoke and Friday’s potentially tricky FA 
Cup tie at Exeter.

“We are in a situation where we need to start playing football again,” said 
the Liverpool manager, who isclose to completing his first signing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/03/liverpool-marko-grujic-red-star-belgrade>
 with Red Star Belgrade midfielder Marko Grujic due to undergo a medical on 
Merseyside today. “That’s my responsibility.”

Man of the match Mark Noble (West Ham United)
 