
Andy Townsend is working in a consultancy role with Bolton while their 
managerial search drags on.

It is understood the 52-year-old television pundit and former Republic of 
Ireland midfielder has arrived at the Macron Stadium as an adviser tothe new 
regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/10/bolton-wanderers-takeover-completed-sports-shield-consortium-dean-holdsworth>
, who need to find a permanent successor to Neil Lennon while shaping their 
squad for a campaign in League One.

Bolton Wanderers relegated as Johnny Russell lifts Derby play-off hopes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/bolton-wanderers-relegated-johnny-russell-derby>
Speaking last week, the new chairman, Ken Anderson, had hoped to identify the 
manager he wanted by the end of this week having whittled a shortlist of 
50-plus candidates down to three.

However, the process may have been held up by the fact Anderson and the chief 
executive, Dean Holdsworth, the men whose takeover saved the club from 
financial meltdown last month, cannot agree on who they want to take up the 
post.

The former Bolton striker Kevin Davies has warned the pair to make sure they 
are on the same page when it comes to the new manager or risk an extended stay 
in the third tier.

“There’s a bit of optimism now with the new owners and I hope they can get it 
together,” he said. “There’s rumours they’re not seeing eye to eye on a few 
decisions and they really need to work together now and make the right 
appointments. I think the next manager’s crucial – they have to get that right. 
I think they need someone with a bit of know-how.

“They don’t necessarily have to have a history with the club but they have to 
get the right man. They’ve said they’ve narrowed it down to three, whoever 
those three are, you have to get the right one.

“The rebuilding starts now. It’s not a gimme that they get back with the 
budget they’re talking about. If they don’t get the manager right or the squad 
right and do all the things they need to rebuild, it could be similar to 
Preston – it took them four years. Other clubs have gone even further down. 
It’s an important period for the club.”

Bolton became the first team relegated from the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> to cap a miserable season 
where they flirted with liquidation following a series of high court dates with 
Revenue & Customs over an unpaid tax bill.
 