
A member of a theatrical family, Ann Emery, who has died of cancer aged 86, 
spent much of her working life on stage, culminating in her role in Billy 
Elliot: The Musical as Grandma to the aspiring boy dancer growing up in a 
north-east of England pit community during the 1980s miners’ strike.

The West End production, which ran for 11 years from March 2005, was based on 
the 2000 film directed byStephen Daldry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-daldry> and written by Lee Hall. 
Turning it into a stage show with music by Elton John, they successfully 
brought in front of a live audience the tensions and contradictions previously 
portrayed on screen – both universal and personal, as Billy’s elation at his 
evolving career counterpoints his community’s despair at the looming death of 
their staple industry.

Emery’s tour de force, venting her character’s disgruntlement at 33 years of 
marriage to her late husband, was Grandma’s Song, also full of contradictions, 
chronicling how “he spent the housekeeping money on whisky and beer, and never 
lifted a finger” while fondly recalling going dancing with him – “it was bliss 
for an hour or so”.

She was in Billy Elliot from its opening night at the Victoria Palace theatre 
until 2014, taking a break only to play Mother Dear in Cameron Mackintosh’s 
production ofthe short-lived musical Betty Blue Eyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/21/betty-blue-eyes-closure-interview>
 at the Novello theatre (2011). With Sarah Lancashire and Reece Shearsmith as 
her daughter and son-in-law, she was cast in the role taken by Liz Smith – to 
whom she bore a resemblance – in the 1984 film on which it was based, A Private 
Function, Alan Bennett and Malcolm Mowbray’s tale of a community fattening up a 
pig during postwar rationing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw0B2WIXPMVo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw0B2WIXPMVo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw0B2WIXPMVo&media=>
 Ann Emery in Billy Elliot: The Musical 
On television, Emery found fame with younger audiences in the children’s 
programme Rentaghost. From its second series in 1976 until it ended in 1984, 
she played Ethel Meaker, wife of Harold (played by Edward Brayshaw), who runs 
an agency hiring out phantoms to the public, among them Hazel the McWitch (
Molly Weir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/dec/01/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
) and Nadia Popov (Sue Nicholls).

Emery’s half-brother was Dick Emery, the comedy actor popular with television 
audiences for his wide repertoire of characters, from the doddering Lampwick to 
the peroxide blonde Mandy, famous for responding to double entendres with the 
catchphrase “Ooh, you are awful – but I like you!”

Ann was born in London to theatrical parents, Grace Verdie, a ballet dancer, 
and Lawrence Emery, a music-hall comedian who performed as Lawrie Howe. He had 
previously been half of the comedy double act Callen and Emery with Bertha 
Callen, the mother of Dick.

She was educated at the Misses Smiths’ School for Young Ladies, in Victoria, 
which moved to Hertfordshire during the second world war. She also attended the 
Cone Ripman school (a forerunner to the Arts Educational schools), where she 
excelled at tap dancing, and made her stage debut as one of the babes in Babes 
in the Wood, at the King’s theatre, Hammersmith, in 1942. Although her father 
insisted she took a shorthand and typing course as a fallback, those skills 
were not needed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fann-emery-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0f248cf7e9e779faafa7258c0c50f59b9bb64ae%2F0_227_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ann%20Emery%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fann-emery-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ann%20Emery%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fann-emery-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0f248cf7e9e779faafa7258c0c50f59b9bb64ae%2F0_227_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Ann Emery, right, with Sarah Lancashire in Betty Blue Eyes in 2011. 
Photograph: Alastair Muir/Rex/Shutterstock 
From 1947, she performed in shows at the Victoria Palace theatre with the 
Crazy Gang, a group of comedians and other variety artists who had become a 
phenomenon on stage and in films. She also appeared in summer seasons and 
pantomimes – often as principal boy – and on cruise ships.

Appearing alongside her half-brother between 1969 and 1976 in The Dick Emery 
Show gave the actor her television break, and Rentaghost followed. Another 
children’s series, Julia Jekyll and Harriet Hyde (1995-98), featured her as Mrs 
Rocket, a teacher and mother of the head of the Rocket Academy.

Bringing her considerable dancing skills to the role of the doting, motherly 
tabby, Jennyanddots – also known as the Gumbie cat – in the Andrew Lloyd Webber 
musical Cats at the New London theatre (1983-86), Emery worked alongside the 
dancer Wayne Sleep, the original Mistoffelees. The Royal Ballet-trained Sleep 
had asked Emery to coach him in tap dancing for his own show, Dash (1982).

Later, as Mrs Sleary in Hard Times (Theatre Royal, Haymarket, 2000), she 
memorably performed a show-stopping tap-dance routine during her character’s 
death-bed scene.

Other stage musical roles included Hortense in another short-lived musical, 
Martin Guerre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/09/cameron-mackintosh-revival-moby-dick>
 (Prince Edward theatre, 1996), and Mrs Hopkins in Trevor Nunn’s production of 
My Fair Lady (National Theatre, 2001, and Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, 2001-05).

The British Music Hall Society presented Emery with a lifetime achievement 
award in 2010. Four years later, she left the cast of Billy Elliot, suffering 
from a back problem, and said she was reluctantly retiring.

Emery is survived by her sister, Nina, her niece, Tina, and nephews, Peter and 
Nicholas.

• Ann Emery, actor, born 12 March 1930; died 28 September 2016
 