
The playwright Anne Washburn <https://www.playscripts.com/playwrights/bios/364>
 is slight and unassuming, lank of hair, pale of face. As she sits in a 
Dominican diner near her Brooklyn apartment, the most eye-catching thing about 
her is a swirl of pink pickled onions adorning her breakfast of cassava and 
eggs. If she were a superhero, this secret identity would have everyone fooled.


 Here’s the funny thing: Washburn is a superhero of sorts. She has 
distinguished herself as one of the most formally experimental and 
stylistically innovative writers of her generation. This season in New York 
she’ll premiere two wildly dissimilar plays, a relatively faithful
“transadaptation” of Euripides’s Iphigenia at Aulis 
<http://www.classicstage.org/season/greekfestival/>, which is in previews at 
Classic Stage Company, andAntlia Pneumatica 
<http://www.playwrightshorizons.org/shows/plays/antlia-pneumatica/>, a play 
that begins as aBig Chill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/sep/07/big-chill-toronto-film-festival>
-ish reunion and warms into something much stranger. It’s still in draft form, 
in anticipation of a run atPlaywrights Horizons 
<http://www.playwrightshorizons.org/> in the spring. 

From the Bard to Bart: how Mr Burns challenges our common culture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/21/bart-of-darkness-mr-burns-common-culture>
No two Washburn plays are especially alike, though to her they feel 
“embarrassingly all very similar”. Trying to find some overlap between 
Iphigenia at Aulis and Antlia Pneumatica, she posits: “Maybe they’re intimate 
stories in the context of slightly larger implications.” But there are 
commonalities: a searching intellect, a playful attitude toward genre and 
structure, and a comfort in dispensing with elements that most writers consider 
essential. Like a protagonist. Or an overarching plot. Or decent lighting. Her 
plays attempt to defamiliarise the ordinary or to make the fantastic seem 
quotidian.

She has a play that takes place in the dark; a play that takes place at 
rehearsal; a play that takes place largely in an invented language and one,Mr 
Burns, a Post-Electric Play 
<http://www.playwrightshorizons.org/shows/plays/mr-burns-post-electric-play/>, 
which imagines old Simpsons episodes as the origin stories of a 
post-apocalyptic society. It earnedfiercely divergent reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/13/mr-burns-review> and audience 
responses when it played London’s Almeida Theatre after its New York debut (the 
Telegraphdescribed it as “three hours of utter hell” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/10897824/Mr-Burns-Almeida-Theatre-review-three-hours-of-utter-hell.html>
).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDVi-pqqtF-A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDVi-pqqtF-A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDVi-pqqtF-A&media=>
Washburn’s own origin story is less imaginative. She grew up in Berkeley, 
California, and saw little theatre beyond school plays. She acted a little and 
wrote a lot of poetry, but it wasn’t until university that she ever tried any 
playwriting. As a first-year student at Reed College, she was acting in a 
senior’s thesis production, a play based on theOresteia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/22/blood-oresteia-aeschylus-tragedy-almeida-globe-home-theatre>
. She had a crush on him and so, to get his attention, she wrote a parody of 
it. Even that first sketch felt, she says, “like what my brain was meant to do”.

After school she made her way back to Portland, Oregon, and temped and wrote 
and temped some more until she was admitted to the graduate program in dramatic 
writing in NYU. Actually, it took a few more years before she could give up the 
temping. The plays that have emerged since grow from a “notion” or a “question” 
or “an experiment”. Often there are songs.

 She is taking a turn toward the classical with Iphigenia in Aulis, a 
comparatively straightforward adaptation of Euripides’s final play, which 
concerns Agamemnon’s sacrifice of his daughter at the onset of the Trojan war. 
It’s her second transadaptation, followingan earlier version of Euripides’s 
Orestes 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/02/02/AR2010020203686.html>
. She worked from previous translations (she has tried on a couple of occasions 
to learn ancient Greek and has failed) in an effort to make what would have 
been available to those Athenians available to us.

“Call it a collaboration,” she says: between Euripides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/euripides>, the son or nephew who finished 
the play when he died, the revisers a century later and everyone who has 
mistranslated or miscopied it ever since. Her adaptation is mostly faithful, 
though she allows herself the occasional “great line”, she says, “in the spirit 
that these things have been messed with for centuries and centuries and 
centuries”.

She doesn’t need to rejigger or unsettle the formation, because the structure 
of a Greek drama – with its presentational monologues and violent offstage 
action and philosophical songs – is already weird enough. “The thing that I 
love about this play is that there’s a story, which is really gripping,” she 
says, “and then there’s singing and dancing.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA10FydgYB54&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA10FydgYB54>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA10FydgYB54&media=>
She finds Agamemnon’s ambivalence particularly fascinating. “He wants two 
things that are absolutely incommensurate and in failing to really decide for 
or against one of them a decision ends up being made for him,” she says. “It 
describes how we contend with what has most meaning for us. And if we don’t get 
a grip on that, we can end up losing things that mean everything to us.”

Washburn describes this “mental dynamic” as “sophisticated and completely 
modern”. It’s a curious observation, because what Washburn doesn’t write are 
plays that are primarily about modern human psychology, modern human 
relationships. She says she is “obsessed with character”, but it doesn’t seem 
to occupy her nearly as much as story or theme or form.

That may change, she claims. She’s working on a play now, she says, “which is 
all about characters, which is all about relationships”.

 It is about Nero and Seneca – and it is 12 hours long. 
 