
Referendums resolve nothing. The campaigns that precede them are mendacious. A 
thousand factors determine the outcomes, many of them unrelated to the question 
on the ballot paper. Yet there is an overwhelming case for holding another one.

The next referendum should not be on Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/brexit-eu-deal-second-referendum>
. We have had more than enough plebiscites on that unavoidably vague and highly 
charged issue. Instead the question that needs to be placed in front of the 
electorate is more focused and precise. Aspeople live longer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/life-expectancy-in-uk-rises-but-years-spent-in-good-health-falling-ons>
 and medical technology develops, everyone agrees that, alongside structural 
reforms, higher investment inhealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/20/nhs-funding-falling-behind-european-neighbours-kings-fund-research>
 andelderly care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/10/care-for-elderly-crisis-how-to-improve-quality-of-life>
 is essential.

Taxing questions about the NHS | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/taxing-questions-about-the-nhs>
Yet no party or leader can find a way to raise the money. The scale of the 
crisis is vast and the response of government is puny. Look at the current 
incumbents, still on a buoyant honeymoon with the electorate, but struggling to 
find a means of providing a tiny bit ofextra cash for elderly care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/26/nhs-elderly-care-close-to-collapse>
 at the end of the year.

The referendum would not be about a prime minister, the government or the 
opposition. It would be about us, our priorities

The situation is perverse. Nearly all voters recognise that modern health 
provision is worth paying for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/30/people-may-be-ready-to-pay-extra-penny-on-tax-for-nhs-tim-farron-says>
 and agonise separately about the possible future costs of elderly care. Will 
we have to sell our house? Will we lose our inheritance? Why can’t we get 
access to drugs available in other countries? Why are survival rates of some 
diseases higher in other countries? Why do I have to wait a week to see a GP?

Part of the answer to all these questions is obvious. The government needs to 
raise additional revenue. It will not be cheap but in the end – for selfish 
reasons and not altruistic ones – we need the only mediating agency available 
to address the challenge, and that is a government. There is no other 
institution available that can be held to account in the same way and that can 
respond to the sheer scale of demand.

Yet the obvious cannot be delivered. The government – any government – cannot 
deliver because it is too scared to raisetaxation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/tax> or is not trusted to do so. With the 
UK’s uniquely hysterical pre-election tax-and-spend debates no party can win a 
mandate to raise taxes in order to provide the necessary levels of investment. 
Before a general election there is pressure on parties to show how they will 
cut taxes and reduce public spending.

These debates have no relation to reality and yet constrain governments 
subsequently. The last election was typical, fought on the fantasy thatGeorge 
Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/georgeosborne> would wipe out the 
deficit by the end of this parliament. Moving nervily into this fantasy 
battleground, the Labour leadership wondered fleetingly whether it could argue 
that elderly care and a modern health service were worth paying for, and 
concluded that it could not. The priorities would get lost in a frenzy of 
headlines about tax bombshells.

Even without the headlines we live in a dangerous era of extreme mistrust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/25/across-europe-distrust-of-mainstream-political-parties-is-on-the-rise>
. Some voters turn against those they elect and, most fundamentally, do not 
trust them with their money. But what if they had a direct stake in a decision 
as to how their money was spent? Suddenly the dynamic changes altogether.

The referendum I envisage would be far removed from the mad one on Brexit. A 
prime minister would offer to facilitate investment in the NHS equivalent to 
levels in similar countries and to provide a national care service for the 
elderly of the highest standards, as inNorway 
<https://www.thestar.com/news/world/2014/10/12/why_norway_is_no_1_for_seniors.html>
, where the wealthiest plead to live in state-run institutions because they are 
the best available. A government would explain the costs and the tax rise 
required to pay for them. But the referendum would not be about a prime 
minister, the government or the opposition. It would be about us, our 
priorities. The politicians would be ready to act, but equally they would be 
ready not to act. They would insist that it is up to us.

The referendum campaign would be as much a scrutiny of the providers. Are they 
efficient, will they spend every additional penny wisely? It would not be a 
highly charged campaign where political careers are at stake.

If the referendum were lost, the voters would have decided they prefer a lower 
level of taxation and poorer health provision, while being willing to busk it 
in terms of elderly care. Governments would have to start charging for more 
services, and private insurance schemes would flourish. If a majority backed a 
tax rise to pay for improvements, the entire electorate would have a stake in 
making sure that what follows delivers good value for money. The scrutiny would 
not just be on parliamentary committees, the media and the rest. The voters 
would be keeping a close eye on what happens next.

The drawbacks are many. The Treasury hates any form of earmarked taxation, let 
alone a tax rise based on the vagaries of a referendum. And why should voters 
back a tax rise in a referendum? But there is no easy way through the barriers 
towards civilised provision of health and elderly care services, and this 
provides a route. The tax-and-spend hysteria of a general election would not be 
repeated in a referendum because the stakes are less high. The campaign would 
not be about electing a government.

People may be ready to pay extra penny on tax for NHS, Tim Farron says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/30/people-may-be-ready-to-pay-extra-penny-on-tax-for-nhs-tim-farron-says>
Indeed, some anti-state newspapers with relatively elderly readers would have 
to be careful about being too vehement in their opposition. The framing of the 
argument could be transformative. Instead of the state being regarded as a 
stifling, profligate monster, voters will be asking of it: what can you do for 
us? Lost connections between those who feel “left behind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/left-behind-eu-referendum-vote-ukip-revolt-brexit>
” and the ones they elect might be rediscovered. When as chancellorGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> announced a tax rise to pay 
for NHS funding, polls suggested the move was popular. Voters make the 
connections if given the chance to do so.

Referendums on Europe are bound to be preposterous. They are about nothing and 
everything. Some people have raised the possibility of a “second” referendum on 
Europe, but we have had two already,one in 1975 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/25/britains-1975-europe-referendum-what-was-it-like-last-time>
 and the vote last year. If we have a third, we will have a fourth. The 
multi-layered complexities of Europe mean a binary referendum is doomed to 
generate further crises.

Most immediately, there is no obvious solution to Brexit. There is a solution 
to an underfundedNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and elderly care 
service. Yet no government can act without the permission of the voters. So a 
government sometime soon must seek their permission. I loathe referendums, but 
in this era of mistrust, government is paralysed. We need one urgently.
 