
Brighton climbed up to third in the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> after Anthony Knockaert, 
Tomer Hemed and Jamie Murphy secured a comfortable 3-0 victory against 
Brentford.

All the their previous 13 victories this season had been by a one-goal margin 
and this was their first clean sheet at the Amex Stadium for three months. 
Brighton have three straight wins and Knockaert produced a particularly 
impressive display, whileBrentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> have now won only one of their 
past seven league and cup games.

The match got off to a lively start with Brighton going close in the first 
minute through their French winger Knockaert. The former Leicester man shot 
wide of the goalkeeper David Button’s right-hand post after Murphy had a low 
drive blocked.

A mistake by the central defender Lewis Dunk presented the Brentford 
midfielder Alan Judge with a clear sight of goal and he put an angled shot wide 
with only the goalkeeper David Stockdale to beat.

Middlesbrough equipped to handle the pressure in frantic Championship run-in | 
Jacob Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/05/middlesbrough-pressure-championship-aitor-karanka>
Knockaert threatened again with a tremendous run through the middle which 
ended with his deflected shot going wide, before the alert Stockdale parried a 
fine goalbound effort by Judge at the other end.

Brentford had a let-off in the 25th minute when Bruno Saltor’s rasping drive 
was deflected on to the crossbar by Harlee Dean, but Brighton broke the 
deadlock two minutes later.

Knockaert fed Murphy and his cross, after good play down the left, was seized 
on by the energetic winger, whose low shot from just inside the area brought 
his first goal for the club.

Hemed should have increased the advantage soon after but shot into the 
side-netting with only Button to beat. However, the Israel striker was on 
target two minutes before the break, with his downward header from Beram 
Kayal’s cross his first goal in 11 games.

Albion withdrew Bobby Zamora for the Manchester United loanee James Wilson at 
the interval and they went close shortly after the break, when Hemed put a 
glancing header wide from a cross by Murphy. The former Sheffield United winger 
was wasteful himself moments later when he blazed a good chance over.

Brentford, with only one win since the turn of the year, were living 
dangerously again when Knockaert drove over from a cross by Wilson. They came 
close to reducing the deficit when Stockdale fumbled a corner from Josh 
McEachran and John Swift’s shot took a deflection at the far post.

However, Knockaert came close to scoring his second goal six minutes from time 
when narrowly failing to make contact with a Murphy cross.

Murphy sealed Albion’s most convincing win for 11 months in the second minute 
of stoppage time, with a left-footed finish into the corner following a pass by 
the substitute Andrew Crofts.
 