
Portmanteau seasons often seem to me more of an exercise in marketing than 
they are in art. “Thank God,” we used to say, when I ran a theatre, “we can 
call it the French Season.” Or the Father and Son Season. Or whatever tenuous 
link we could find between disparate plays. A sort of theatrical forced 
marriage. I doubt if it ever sold tickets, but it cheered up the marketing 
department no end.

However the Young Chekhov season is different. It charts the evolution of 
genius and, withThe Seagull, the birth of 20th century theatre, and by 
extension our contemporary stage. Three plays –Platonov, Ivanov and The Seagull 
– are performed in repertoire by the same company of 23 actors in revelatory 
and dazzling adaptations by David Hare, who has reshaped and refashioned them, 
while remaining entirely true to their subversive spirit. We did productions of 
bothPlatonov and Ivanov when I was at the Almeida, and it was always our 
intention to complete the trilogy. However, life got in the way and now, 15 
years later, it’s a rare and great opportunity to at last put them together.

Platonov was only discovered after Chekhov’s death and was largely incoherent. 
If performed in its entirety it would last about six hours. He wrote it when he 
was a medical student of 20, and it has all the wild exuberance and ebullience 
of youth. It celebrates the sheer joy of being young and alive, of flirting and 
teasing, of falling in love, of getting drunk and behaving badly. It is centred 
on a charismatic young man who, like a John Osborne character, is driven to 
frustrated invective and destructive anger by the hopeless lassitude and 
corruption of the society he sees around him. It is an unashamedly 19th-century 
play with its strong elements of farce and melodrama, which are both forms 
Chekhov loved. Melodrama is, I think, an underrated and unfairly disparaged 
form – used well, and at its best, it is simply heightened and exciting 
storytelling. In any case, I think that’s what life is like, in theatre we too 
often keep the gas turned down low.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fanton-chekhov-young-pretender-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbe41bfb4a346db33bfc55158c3e17f5c05b694a%2F0_183_5177_3107%2F5177.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anton%20Chekhov%3A%20the%20young%20pretender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fanton-chekhov-young-pretender-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anton%20Chekhov%3A%20the%20young%20pretender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fanton-chekhov-young-pretender-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbe41bfb4a346db33bfc55158c3e17f5c05b694a%2F0_183_5177_3107%2F5177.jpg>
 A stultifying bourgeois merchant class … Ivanov at the National Theatre. 
Photograph: Johan Persson 
The play also heralds one of Chekhov’s later themes: the arrival of 
industrialisation and capitalism into an almost medieval Russia, with its 
unscrupulous attendant chorus of entrepreneurs and merchants who are already 
starting to buy up, and dispossess, a feckless landed gentry, born to privilege 
but not prepared to take responsibility for it. By the time we get to the 
second play,Ivanov, that stultifying bourgeois merchant class is in the 
ascendancy. Chekhov was by now a very successful comic short-story writer, and 
the play is an exhilarating mix of satire, farce, monologue, melodrama. In some 
sense it’s a transitional play, preservingPlatonov’s anarchic vigour while 
introducing elements of psychological conflict and introspection. Ivanov is a 
man left marooned at the high-water mark, as his youthful idealism and 
radicalism has ebbed away. At 35, he has been broken by the prejudices and 
values of the society he once tried to defy. He is not a self-indulgent 
melancholic – he rails against his condition, he despises it. The play had a 
disastrous first production in Moscow: the actors forgot their lines, the party 
guests in Act 2 were drunk, they improvised wildly and furniture was broken. 
Chekhov left the theatre, vowing never to work in it again, but two years 
later, after he had rewritten it extensively,Ivanov was revived triumphantly in 
St Petersburg.

Nine years elapsed before he wrote another play, The Seagull, his first 
unarguable masterpiece. While there are still elements of melodrama within it, 
this really is the first play of the 20th century. It’s often said of the later 
plays that the hallmark of his brilliance and radical innovation is that he 
disappears into the fabric of his plays so that the characters speak for 
themselves, rather than for him. Here, as in the first two plays, the author is 
still discernible – the veil of his genius has not yet obscured the man. 
Chekhov engages in a debate with himself about the nature of his craft – 
throughout, the characters argue about old and new forms of art. It is almost 
as if Chekhov is reviewing his own evolution.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fanton-chekhov-young-pretender-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F560556c07f012f96a4665970c78cde5e2145af2d%2F0_57_3840_4407%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anton%20Chekhov%3A%20the%20young%20pretender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fanton-chekhov-young-pretender-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anton%20Chekhov%3A%20the%20young%20pretender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fanton-chekhov-young-pretender-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F560556c07f012f96a4665970c78cde5e2145af2d%2F0_57_3840_4407%2F3840.jpg>
 The evanescence of youth … The Seagull at the National Theatre. Photograph: 
Johan Persson 
But what emerged more and more in rehearsal is that all these plays deal in 
the evanescence of youth and its idealism.The Seagull, in spite of its 
subtlety, is possibly the most cruel of the three. Two young artists – an 
actress and a writer in their 20s – are destroyed by the middle-aged and the 
mediocre. In all these plays the young are sacrificed by the older generation. 
It seems just as potent now as it must have then.

While there is no linear narrative that links them – unlike, say, 
Shakespeare’s history plays, or theOresteia – these three plays together 
resonate symphonically, as variations on themes and characters reoccur and echo 
each other. This is thrown even more into relief by having a single company 
shift and change over the course of the trilogy. One feels privy to actors and 
acting in a way that any single production cannot offer. In the arena of the 
Olivier stage, it is a celebration of acting as much as it is of Chekhov.

In life, we teeter precariously between farce and tragedy, between the 
momentous and the absurd. Chekhov, in these early plays, knew and acknowledged 
the paper-thin fragility of it all and the unknowability of fate. But, just 
because life doesn’t make sense, it doesn’t mean that it’s not to be 
celebrated. There’s a glory and a terror in being alive, and nobody understood 
that better than Chekhov.

Young Chekhov is at the National Theatre, London SE1, until October 8. 
Jonathan Kent on Young Chekhov 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/jonathan-kent-young-chekhov> is on 15 
September, 6pm. nationaltheatre.org.uk.
 