
Antonio Conte claimed he is unaware of any transfer offer from China for Diego 
Costa and insisted that only a back injury prevented Chelsea’s top scorer from 
taking part in his team’svictory at Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/leicester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
. The Italian also refused to confirm or deny reports that he and some of his 
backroom staff were involved in adispute with Costa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/diego-costa-dropped-chelsea-row-china>
.

“I have read a lot of speculation about this topic and I can tell you if there 
are problems – and I repeat ‘if’ – with players, I am used to solving them in 
the changing room, not outside, not in press conferences,” said Conte.

Related: Chelsea bandwagon rolls on as Marcos Alonso double sees off Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/leicester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>

Speaking earlier to Sky Sports, Conte said: “Before the game I told the truth, 
I don’t lie.” Asked again later why Costa did not travel to the King Power 
Stadium with hisChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> 
team-mates, Conte replied: “If you want to know the truth, I’m ready to tell 
the truth. On Tuesday during the training session Diego stopped because he felt 
a pain in his back. From that moment he didn’t train during the week. For this 
reason today he wasn’t available. This is the reason, the truth.”

Costa is believed to have been the subject of a lucrative offer from an 
unnamed Chinese club that would earn the striker around £30m per year, but 
Conte pleaded ignorance. “I don’t know anything about this,” he said. “The club 
did not inform me about this. That can be only speculation.”

The Italian said he did not know how long it might take Costa to recover from 
his back injury, and when asked whether he expected the striker to play for 
Chelsea again he said: “Why not?”

He fended off further inquiries by suggesting it was disrespectful to discuss 
Costa when Chelsea’s other players had extended their lead at the top of the 
table by winning away to the champions. “I think that talking about this topic 
for the past five minutes is a bit of lack of respect for the other players and 
our performance,” he said. “Trust me, what I told you is the truth. If we start 
to think: ‘If an offer arrives, if, if, if…’ I don’t like to answer these types 
of questions. We must enjoy this victory. It wasn’t easy towin against 
Leicester. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/leicester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 It’s important to respect our victory and our players after a good performance.

“We started this game with great pressure after Tottenham and Arsenal’s 
victories and we had to show good experience to manage this situation.”
 