
Plans for a £19m theatre in Merseyside are one step closer to realisation, 
with architects appointed to oversee the project.

Shakespeare North, a 350-seat replica Shakespearean theatre and education hub 
in Knowsley, was awarded planning permissionin April  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/22/shakespeare-north-theatre-plans-go-ahead-knowsley>
after councillors voted unanimously in favour.

London-based Helm Architecture will design the theatre and Austin-Smith: Lord 
LLB have been appointed as the supporting architects. Scale models, artists’ 
impressions and CGI images of the new theatre have been released.


Organisers hope the project in Prescot, a town in Knowsley, will join 
Stratford-upon-Avon and the Globe in London as one of three key destinations 
for Shakespeare lovers.


Prescot is thought to have been the only English town outside of London to 
have had a freestanding, purpose-built indoor playhouse in the Elizabethan and 
Jacobean eras, and Shakespeare is thought to have belonged to a troupe of 
actors who performed there.

Mike Murphy, Knowsley council’s cabinet member for regeneration and economic 
development, said securing the firms was “a significant milestone in the 
development of the playhouse, which reiterates our commitment to delivering 
this in Prescot”.

The chair of Shakespeare North, Peter Scott, said: “Our vision to have a 
playhouse in Prescot began 12 years ago and we’re delighted at the support and 
interest we have received in turning this vision into a reality.

“These key appointments will help us to recreate a Shakespearean theatre in 
Knowsley, which was once home to the only freestanding purpose-built 
Elizabethan era theatre outside of London.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fshakespeare-north-theatre-merseyside-architects-appointed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febec360f4155e23675740add892325f19b4568a4%2F0_0_800_560%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Architects%20appointed%20to%20design%20Shakespeare%20North%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fshakespeare-north-theatre-merseyside-architects-appointed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Architects%20appointed%20to%20design%20Shakespeare%20North%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fshakespeare-north-theatre-merseyside-architects-appointed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febec360f4155e23675740add892325f19b4568a4%2F0_0_800_560%2F800.jpg>
 CGI impression of the Shakespeare North. Photograph: Shakespeare North 
The engineering company Aecom <http://www.aecom.com/> has also been recruited 
to provide mechanical and electrical engineering services to the project, 
alongside Mott MacDonald, which will provide structural engineering services.

Construction is due to begin in November 2017, creating 210 temporary jobs, 
and the theatre is expected to open in 2020. The proposed site for the project 
is on a council-owned car park, which is thought to have been the location of a 
well-known Elizabethan cockfighting pit.

The former Beatle Sir Paul McCartney and actors Dame Helen Mirren and Vanessa 
Redgrave are among the project’s patrons.


The theatre will be built to designs drawn in 1629 by the architect and 
theatre designer Inigo Jones. He designed the Cockpit at Whitehall for the 
court of King James I.

Shakespeare is believed to have been a member of the theatre company Strange’s 
Men, which had the patronage of Lord Strange, the 4th Earl of Derby’s eldest 
son. The town of Prescot borders Knowsley Hall and estate, one of the main 
residences of the earls of Derby.

The Shakespeare North Trust hopes the project will bring social and economic 
regeneration to an area that is “eager for and deserving of change”.

The trust is in discussions with Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> John Moores University to help 
develop a one-year postgraduate programme focusing on Shakespearean stagecraft 
based at the planned playhouse.
 