
The livelihood of the Nenets people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/may/04/siberias-nenets-reindeer-herders-in-pictures>
 who live along the northern stretches of the Yenisei, Russia’s longest river, 
depends on two pursuits: fishing and reindeer herding.

But locals have said both of those activities are under threat from an oil 
terminal due to be built on the Tanalau cape, near where the river empties into 
theArctic Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/extraordinarily-hot-arctic-temperatures-alarm-scientists>
. Greenpeace and the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) have protested against the high 
risk of an oil spill in difficult Arctic conditions. More than 40 people have 
signed a letter of protest to the company building the terminal, the 
Independent Petroleum Company (IPC).

“They should drill oil, but need to do so in an orderly manner,” said a 
resident of Baikalovsk, the village closest to the terminal site, who refused 
to give a name for fear of repercussions at work. “The reindeer will go further 
away, that’s OK, we’ll find them, but if we foul up the Yenisei, it will be a 
catastrophe.”

The Tanalau terminal is part of a rush to develop oil fields in the far north 
as production declines in western Siberia. President Vladimir Putinopened 
<https://sputniknews.com/russia/201605251040219522-putin-oil-arctic-terminal/> 
Gazprom Neft’s Arctic Gate in May, one of three oil terminals in the Russian 
Arctic, which ramped up shipments tonearly 250,000 barrels a day 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/gadfly/articles/2016-07-17/more-oil-is-flowing-from-one-part-of-the-arctic-than-libya>
 this summer.

The terminal is adjacent to a site where a joint venture by the Russian state 
oil champion Rosneft and BP plan to begin drilling exploratory wells this 
spring. A BP spokesman said it was too early to say whether oil discovered 
there could be transported through the terminal. IPC did not reply to requests 
for comment.

Satellite imagery and a Greenpeace expedition to Tanalau in August found 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/russia/ru/news/blogs/green-planet/123/blog/58225/> 
that much of the tundra nearby had been torn up by tank tread vehicles, which 
can’t follow the same track to a drilling site twice due to the swampy ground. 
The damage lasts for years and drives away reindeer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Farctic-oil-rush-nenets-livelihood-and-habitat-at-risk-from-oil-spills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7971d110d22eef323238b8e23827a15a220b38e5%2F0_0_2500_1667%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arctic%20oil%20rush%3A%20Nenets'%20livelihood%20and%20habitat%20at%20risk%20from%20oil%20spills&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Farctic-oil-rush-nenets-livelihood-and-habitat-at-risk-from-oil-spills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arctic%20oil%20rush%3A%20Nenets%27%20livelihood%20and%20habitat%20at%20risk%20from%20oil%20spills&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Farctic-oil-rush-nenets-livelihood-and-habitat-at-risk-from-oil-spills%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7971d110d22eef323238b8e23827a15a220b38e5%2F0_0_2500_1667%2F2500.jpg>
 Tundra torn up by tank tread vehicles near the Tanalau terminal site. 
Ecosystems may not be able to recover for decades. Photograph: Petr 
Shelomovskiy/Greenpeace 
Siberia's Nenets reindeer herders – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/may/04/siberias-nenets-reindeer-herders-in-pictures>
In addition, experts at the Institute of Arctic Agriculture and Environment 
have said construction at Tanalau “raises the danger of an outbreak of 
infection” from two graveyards containing anthrax, similar to one thatkilled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/anthrax-outbreak-climate-change-arctic-circle-russia>
 a boy in Salekhard this summer.

Even more troubling is the risk of an oil spill on the river, where ice 
typically grows up to 1.8 metres (6ft) in thickness and wind speeds can reach 
45 metres per second in the winter. In September 2013, the tanker Nordvik was
punctured by ice 
<http://barentsobserver.com/en/nature/2013/09/tanker-accident-northern-sea-route-09-09>
 while carrying 5,000 tonnes of diesel fuel in the Arctic Ocean not far from 
the mouth of the Yenisei and waitedmore than a week 
<http://barentsobserver.com/en/nature/2013/09/aid-comes-wrecked-northern-sea-route-tanker-13-09>
 for assistance.

ICP has not presented a plan for cleaning up oil spills, and its environmental 
impact report for the terminal lists safety equipment, such as containment 
booms, that is not suitable for the harsh conditions, Greenpeace and WWF said. 
A November letter from the Krasnoyarsk region government to Greenpeace said a 
cleanup plan “is being developed” by IPC for the terminal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Farctic-oil-rush-nenets-livelihood-and-habitat-at-risk-from-oil-spills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88ef1ed9c1ab39b3e9f4031b66de122bfe5b8bc2%2F0_0_2048_1365%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arctic%20oil%20rush%3A%20Nenets'%20livelihood%20and%20habitat%20at%20risk%20from%20oil%20spills&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Farctic-oil-rush-nenets-livelihood-and-habitat-at-risk-from-oil-spills%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arctic%20oil%20rush%3A%20Nenets%27%20livelihood%20and%20habitat%20at%20risk%20from%20oil%20spills&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Farctic-oil-rush-nenets-livelihood-and-habitat-at-risk-from-oil-spills%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88ef1ed9c1ab39b3e9f4031b66de122bfe5b8bc2%2F0_0_2048_1365%2F2048.jpg>
 Reflection of reindeer in a camp of herders on the left bank of the Yenisei 
River. Photograph: Petr Shelomovskiy/Greenpeace 
Last week, the WWF ranked IPC 18 out of 21 in its annual rating 
<http://wwf.ru/about/what_we_do/oil/full_list/rating/eng> of the environmental 
responsibility of Russian oil and gas companies.

“We share the worries about the high level of risk involved in building this 
terminal on the Yenisei,” said Alexei Knizhnikov of the WWF. “We are mainly 
concerned with the lack of technology to clean up an oil spill in watery 
conditions, inArctic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> conditions.”




 