
Are you an extrovert or an introvert? Normally a psychologist who wanted to 
find out would give you a questionnaire with questions of the 
Do-you-always-find-yourself-in-the-kitchen-at-parties? variety. But a recent 
study of 1,000 people suggests a more interesting, if less intuitive, way to 
answer this age-old question. So, on a scale of 0 (particularly unhappy) to 10 
(particularly happy) – with 5 representing your typical baseline level of 
happiness – how happy do you feel when doing each of the following:

a. Being at work
b. Doing sport/exercise
c. Watching TV
d. Listening to music
e. Relaxing
f. Shopping
g. Reading

The key question is the first one. Scoring less than 5 (meaning your happiness 
when working is lower than your baseline level) is associated with 
introversion; scoring more than 5 with extraversion. Perhaps surprisingly, both 
introverts and extroverts are happier than baseline when exercising though, as 
you might expect, extroverts tend to have higher scores here. Introverts and 
extroverts don’t differ for the remaining activities, with one very surprising 
exception: extroverts take more pleasure from reading than introverts. How 
come? The researchers’ answer is that extroverts have a more active reward 
system, meaning they are happiest when working towards some goal. This would 
explain why extroverts take more pleasure than introverts from working, 
exercising and reading – activities often directed towards a particular goal – 
but not from activities like watching TV or relaxing which, while enjoyable, 
tend not to have a particular aim.

A fully referenced version of this article is available at benambridge.com. 
OrderPsy-Q by Ben Ambridge (Profile Books, £8.99) for £6.99 at 
bookshop.theguardian.com <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/psy-q-306014.html>
 