
June was even more than usually punctuated by irate emails asserting that once 
again the Guardian's crossword editor was clearly unable to spell and/or was an 
incompetent proofreader.The Quick for 8 June (No 13,442) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/quick/13442> had "Ferocious fish (6)" as 
a clue for PIRANA. With this one not only I but the letters editor and the 
readers' editor were also caught up in the storm. What a howler! Any 
half-literate person surely knows that the fish is not a pira√±a but is a 
piranha. In fact Collins and Chambers give both as equally valid versions. 
(Does one fish come from Spanish-speaking South America and the other from 
Portuguese-speaking Brazil, I wonder?) Chambers goes even further and also 
offers piraya, perai and pirai was valid options.

I was also involved in an amicable discussion with a setter on whether 
"jewelry" was now an acceptable spelling for a British crossword or whether it 
still had to be "jewellery". Both spellings are given by Collins and the Oxford 
Dictionary of English, though they clearly mark "jewelry" as (US). However, 
there is evidence that the sands are shifting here. Chambers, no less, gives 
jewellery and jewelry as alternatives without making the second a solely 
American usage. The Guardian style guide, however, maintains unequivocally that
"jewelry" is "not British" <>, so for the moment at least my hands are tied on 
this one.

Some time ago a Guardian solver, Phil K., told me that his grammar school 
English teacher pointed out that many American spellings were more authentic 
than the Frenchified versions that Victorian snobs foisted on us in the 19th 
century. Words with the stress on the first syllable or with equal stress on 
two syllables (modeled, traveled, riveted, leveled) did not need double Ls or 
Ts. The globalisation of English by electronic media must mean that over time 
what we now think of as examples of American usage will become standard 
alternatives, even for us Brits. (In passing, and this may shock conservatives, 
but the dictionaries now allow more than one alternative spelling.) American 
usages will certainly continue to infiltrate British English and gradually 
become standardised for the wider English-speaking and writing world. It has 
always been the basis of British lexicography that a meaning or a spelling get 
their authenticity from evidence that they have passed into general usage. In 
the past this evidence has been drawn mainly from printed material, but also 
from letters and other private communications. It is inevitable that what is 
shared online and what appears when we Google will influence what is regarded 
as correct. I would bet, for example, that programme is fighting a losing 
battle here against program.
_____

There was also a flurry of a different kind about a Pasquale Cryptic on June 7 
(No 25,968) <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25968>, where a clue 
"Pre-eminent Heather, the woman featured in tribute after game (6,3,5)" led to 
ruling the roast [RU/LING T/HER/OAST]. "Why was the obvious typo of roast for 
roost not spotted," they asked. The answer is, perhaps, surprising: Chambers 
(under roast) is sure that the correct phrase is "rule the roast" and that 
"roost" is a mistaken corruption. Collins (under rule) is more balanced and 
says that you can rule either the roost or the roast.
_____

The June Genius puzzle (No 120 by Paul) produced 321 entries by the deadline. 
Congratulations to Ian Bartholomew from Bexhill, who is the June winner. We 
hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems with 
it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . If 
you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardian.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@guardian.co.uk>. For 
Observer crosswords pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>
 