
Gonzalo Higuaín’s agent has made it clear that the striker will not renew his 
contract atNapoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli>, with English 
clubs among those who could now decide to make a bid for the 28-year-old.

The Argentina international has enjoyed his best season ever, scoring 36 goals 
in Serie A, eclipsing the previous record of 35 goalsset by Gunnar Nordahl for 
Milan 66 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/16/gonzalo-higuain-napoli-gunnar-nordahl-record-serie-a>
.

“He came to Napoli with great enthusiasm,” his brother and agent, Nicolas 
Higuaín,told Radio Marca in Spain 
<http://www.marca.com/futbol/argentina/2016/06/29/5773ad56ca4741422f8b45f7.html>
. “However, in my opinion the project is nowhere near what Gonzalo expects,” he 
added.

Crystal Palace set to sign Andros Townsend from Newcastle for £13m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/30/crystal-palace-sign-andros-townsend-newcastle>
Napoli have not been able to mount a serious challenge to Juventus’ domination 
of Serie A, with the club from Turin having won the last five league titles.

“Gonzalo will not renew but he will respect the contract because he is a 
professional,” the agent said. “There are at least four or five teams that can 
afford Higuaín both in Spain and England and there is also PSG and Bayern 
Munich.”

Arsenal and Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> in 
particular have been rumoured to be interested in the striker. The Gunners 
failed to land him when he left Real Madrid in 2013, and ended up signing Mesut 
Özil that summer instead.

When Antonio Conte takes over at Chelsea, moreover, there are whispers that 
the Italian would be keen on bringing the Serie A striker to Stamford Bridge.

Higuaín might yet have scored more goals last season had it not been for an 
outburstduring his side’s 3-1 loss to Udinese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/05/napoli-gonzalo-higuain-four-match-ban-reaction-red-card-udinese-serie-a>
 which provoked a four-game ban.

As it is, the Argentinian scored more goals than his former Real Madrid 
team-mate Cristiano Ronaldo (35) last season. Had it not been for Luis Suárez’s 
exploits with Barcelona, the Uruguayan scoring 40 goals, Higuaín would have 
been the top-scorer in Europe.

Atlético Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> are 
another club who are said to be interested in Higuaín’s services.

“[Diego] Simeone is a great coach, in the last three years he’s been in two 
Champions League finals despite not having a huge budget,” Higuaín’s agent 
added. “[Maurizio] Sarri is also a great coach, but we’ll see in the future if 
Gonzalo will be trained by Guardiola, Conte, or Simeone,” he added.

The striker scored four goals for Argentina during the 2016 Copa América 
Centenario in the United Statesbut missed a sitter in the final which they went 
on to lose to Chile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/chile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out>
.
 