
Arjen Robben made a dream debut for Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> as he scored twice in their 
3-0 win over Bundesliga champions Wolfsburg. The former Chelsea and Real Madrid 
winger came off the bench at half-time with his side already 1-0 up thanks to a 
strike from Mario Gomez.

The Dutch international combined well with Franck Ribery to seal Bayern's 
first win of the season to take them up to seventh in the table and erase 
memories of the club's worst start to a league season in 43 years.

Wolfsburg started brightly but the home team reacted well and went ahead 
thanks to Gomez in the 27th minute.Wolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> failed to properly clear a 
corner and Hamit Altintop's long-range shot was only parried by Diego Benaglio 
to the Gomez, who welcomed the invitation for his second goal of the season.

It stayed that way until the second half when Ribery, who also came off the 
bench on his comeback from injury, sent Robben on his way into the left-hand 
side of the penalty area and the Dutchman's shot took a slight deflection off 
Andrea Barzagli on its way past Benaglio into the back of the net.

Wolfsburg tried to fight back when Dzeko hit the post in the 72nd minute, and 
moments later, Philipp Lahm had to make a goalline clearance to prevent Grafite 
from scoring.

But Robben settled Bayern's nerves with his second goal on his debut with 
Ribery again involved as the Bavarians launched a quick counter-attack which 
Robben concluded with a low shot underneath Benaglio to seal Bayern's first win 
of the season in style.

Elsewhere, Bayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayerleverkusen> came from behind to beat 
Bochum 2-1 and open a three-point lead at the top of the Bundesliga. Bochum 
took the lead when defender Manuel Friedrich deflected a shot by Joel Epalle 
into his own net, but Friedrich made amends by heading in the equaliser shortly 
before half-time.

Stefan Kiessling drove in a right-foot shot from a cross by Toni Kroos in the 
68th minute for his fourth goal in four games to ensure that 64-year-old Jupp 
Heynckes, who took over at Leverkusen after guiding Bayern in the final five 
games of last season, is enjoying a good start as the oldest coach in the 
division.

Schalke could not stay with the leaders after they were defeated for the first 
time this season, losing 1-0 at home to promotedFreiburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/freiburg>. South Korea forward Cha 
Du-ri's solo goal being the difference between the two sides.

Hoffenheim recorded their first win of the season with a 1-0 victory in 
Hannover, whileEintracht Frankfurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eintrachtfrankfurt> and Borussia Dortmund 
played out a 1-1 draw.Mohamed Zidan put visitors ahead in the 62nd minute but 
Eintracht striker Ioannis Amanatidis equalized six minutes later.

Stuttgart <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stuttgart> were held to a 0-0 
draw at home by promoted Nuremberg.
 