
Napoli survived a second-half scare to beat nine-man Milan 4-2 in an 
incident-packedSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> 
match. Milan recovered from a two-goal half-time deficit to level but their 
fightback proved in vain as Juraj Kucka and M’Baye Niang were sent off in the 
final 15 minutes and Napoli took advantage.

Sami Khedira strikes to give Juventus the edge over Lazio
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/27/lazio-juventus-serie-a-match-report>
One of their summer signings, Arkadiusz Milik, scored twice before the break, 
his first goals since joiningNapoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> from Ajax. The Poland striker 
opened his account after 18 minutes when Dries Mertens’ shot struck the post 
and fell kindly for him. Milik claimed his second after 33 minutes when he rose 
above Kucka from José Callejon’s corner and directed a firm header past 
Gianluigi Donnarumma.

Milan’s 17-year-old goalkeeper had kept his side in the game at the interval 
with two splendid saves from Mertens, and he was rewarded when his side 
restored parity after 10 minutes of the second half. Niang showed his pace and 
power before beating José Reina with a low left-foot shot and then their 
Spanish midfielder Suso struck a beauty from 20 yards.

FC Bari: Italian football alternative guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2016/aug/26/fc-bari-italian-football-ultra-platt-guide-calcio>
But Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> imploded after 
Mertens’ 74th-minute shot was pushed out by Donnarumma for Callejon to finish 
from close range. Kucka immediately picked up a second yellow card for shoving 
over Mertens and Niang was also cautioned again for preventing Reina taking a 
quick throw.

Napoli wrapped up victory in the final seconds, when Chelsea target and 
centre-half 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/chelsea-milan-defender-alessio-romagnoli-bid>
 Alessio Romagnoli handled the ball on the line to prevent an own goal. 
Callejon was on hand to turn the ball in, saving another potential red card for 
Milan, as Romagnoli escaped with a booking.
 