
Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> has 
insisted playing Alexis Sánchez in Arsenal’s weekend draw at Manchester United 
did not constitute a risk and stressed he has never asked one of his team to 
turn out against their will.

Arsène Wenger and Arsenal rescued from muddle of own making | Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/19/manchester-united-arsenal-arsene-wenger-jose-mourinho>
The Arsenal manager, whose side confront Paris Saint-Germain on Wednesday in a 
Champions League game that could decide who wins Group A, appeared riled when 
Sánchez’s fitness was mentioned in his media duties on the eve of the tie. The 
Chilean is the club’s leading scorer to date this season, with eight in all 
competitions, butplayed at Manchester United on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 with strapping on his thigh after suffering a minor hamstring strain while 
training with the national team over the recent international window.

No other player has played more for Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> than the 27-year-old’s 16 games 
this term with Sánchez, who tends to push to feature whenever he can, having 
not had a summer off since 2013. The forward had missed his national side’s 
game in Colombia but, despite Wenger having expressed concern from afar, scored 
twice in Chile’s 3-1 victory over Uruguay in Santiago last week. Arsenal’s 
medical staff scrutinised the hamstring problem upon the player’s return before 
determining he could feature at Old Trafford.

The Chilean, wearing heavy strapping on the thigh, duly completed the full 90 
minutes in the 1-1 draw. “He came back with a bit of tightness in his 
hamstring, but he was checked thoroughly before the game,” said Wenger. “I 
follow the instructions of the medical staff and the player. After that, I make 
a decision whether he can play. If they declare him capable of playing, and the 
player does as well...”

Sánchez pulled a hamstring in late November last year in a win at Norwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/alexis-sanchez-arsenal-norwich-fall-arsene-wenger>
, when Wenger had previously admitted the player was “in the red zone” and went 
on to miss the next two months. “I have never forced anyone to play in my 
life,” said the Arsenal manager. “I’ve never demanded anyone should be injected 
to play. If a player is 100%, I make a decision. But the suggestions I have 
forced him to play are wrong, completely wrong.

Alexis Sánchez scores twice as Chile come from behind to beat Uruguay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/alexis-sanchez-scores-twice-as-chile-come-from-behind-to-beat-uruguay>
“I had the luxury to give Mesut Özil a break because Germany didn’t pick him 
for their games. Anyway, Sánchez was not overloaded with games before United, 
either, as he didn’t play in Colombia.”

Wenger will be without Héctor Bellerín, Lucas Pérez and Santi Cazorla against 
PSG, with the latter potentially still at least a month away from a return to 
the first-team.

“Look, I’ve given a bit up on that,” added Wenger. “I don’t know how far he 
is, Santi. He looks like he’s making progress, but as long as the player is not 
in full-time training with the squad it’s difficult to set targets.

“It’s not a big injury that will harm his future, but it’s an inflammation at 
the back of his achilles, and it’s always difficult with inflammations to give 
a set time. My gut feeling is it will be short, two weeks, but when a player 
comes back to full training it still takes two weeks for a player to be ready 
to play again.”
 