
Arséne Wenger has admitted that Alexis Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis> is “mentally and 
physically jaded” but insisted that he was pleased to see the Chilean visibly 
distressed after Arsenal’s 3-3 draw at Bournemouth because it shows a winning 
mentality.

Sánchez proved instrumental as Arsenal scored three late goals to come back 
from 3-0 downto claim an improbable point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/arsene-wenger-arsenal-comeback-at-bournemouth>
, yet at the final whistle the 28-year-old took off his gloves and hurled them 
to the ground in frustration in front of the travelling Arsenal support before 
marching off the field without shaking hands either with the Bournemouth 
players or the officials. Earlier in the match he had also engaged in an 
argument with his team-mate Aaron Ramsey.

Arsenal set to be without Francis Coquelin for up to four weeks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/arsenal-set-to-be-without-francis-coquelin-for-up-to-four-weeks-arsene-wenger>
“I don’t look too much how people how they talk, I look how much they want to 
win,” said Wenger. “What is surprising there? You want to see that kind of 
passion. You don’t come down from 3-0 down from 70 minutes without that 
passion. We wanted to win the game and we didn’t and we’re all frustrated. 
Mentally and physically Sánchez is a bit jaded. You could see that he is tired. 
He can have sometimes emotional reactions but face to face he is always very 
respectful.”

Sánchez has 18 months remaining on his £130,000-a-week contract and 
negotiations are continuing about a more lucrative renewal, although his 
reaction at Bournemouth could suggest he is growing increasingly frustrated at 
the club. Wenger, however, said that Sánchez was “all right” in the dressing 
room after theBournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> 
draw.

“The other players care as much as he does, don’t worry,” Wenger continued. 
“Everybody has his way. There was no celebration in the dressing room; 
everybody was disappointed that they didn’t win the game. There is no hierarchy 
of intensity of desire to win at that level. Everybody wants to win.”

Sánchez played every minute of Arsenal’s festive fixtures and Wenger confirmed 
that he would be rested for Saturday’s FA Cup third-round trip to Preston. “He 
wants always to play. On one side when I don’t play him, people say: ‘Why don’t 
you play him?’ and on the other hand I am criticised for using him too much. 
But I always planned in my head, no matter what happens, in January he will 
need a breather.”

Arsène Wenger praises Arsenal’s fighting spirit after comeback at Bournemouth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/arsene-wenger-arsenal-comeback-at-bournemouth>
Olivier Giroud is again expected to lead the line at Preston, and has scored 
in each of his last three games, but was criticised for elaborately celebrating 
his injury-time equaliser at Bournemouth when there were still four minutes 
remaining for Arsenal to score a winner. As some team-mates attempted to beckon 
Giroud back to the halfway line the Frenchman continued to celebrate, mimicking 
hisscorpion-kick goal against Crystal Palace on New Year’s Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/01/donkey-scorpion-olivier-giroud-volley-arsenal-crystal-palace>
.

“Giroud is a winner. He is a fighter. I can understand Giroud. He thought the 
game was lost, it was 92 minutes. You score. You don’t lose. The 3-3, he gave 
two assists on the night. We can understand that but, ideally, you want not to 
waste time any more but he scores goal after goal and he scores important 
goals.”

Indeed, no forward in Europe’s top five leagues has a better record at 
present: Giroud has contributed either a goal or an assist every 49 minutes 
this season, seven minutes fewer than anybody else. In comparison, Lionel Messi 
has done the same once every 68 minutes.

Another attacking option for Wenger is Danny Welbeck, who could make his first 
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> appearance since May at 
Preston after recovering from a severe knee injury. “Physically Welbeck’s 
fitness is at quite a good level, but of course the ideal way is to give him 
two or three games with the under-23s,” said Wenger. “But the situation is not 
always ideal, sometimes you have to hurry up.”

With Lucas Pérez struggling with an ankle injury sustained at Bournemouth and 
with Theo Walcott and Mesut Özil also sidelined, Welbeck could make his 
comeback from the bench at Deepdale.

Laurent Koscielny is another that will be rested because of “two problems in 
his thigh”, while another injury concern is Francis Coquelin, who had a scan on 
a hamstring strain on Thursday and is expected to be out for between three and 
four weeks.
 