
Arsène Wenger described Olivier Giroud’s spectacular goal in Arsenal’s 2-0 
home win against Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/arsenal-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
 as a work of art, and said it must rank in his all-time top five over his 
20-year tenure at the club.

Giroud set Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> on their way 
to victory in the 17th minute, when he flicked an Alexis Sánchez cross, which 
was one yard behind him, with his left heel over his own head and into Wayne 
Hennessey’s net off the underside of the crossbar. He had been about 12 yards 
out at the point of the connection.

Olivier Giroud’s brilliant back-heel helps Arsenal sink Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/arsenal-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
Alex Iwobi scored Arsenal’s second to crown an impressive individual display, 
which lifted his team back into third place in the Premier League, above
Tottenham Hotspur, who had won 4-1 at Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/watford-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 earlier in the day. But the occasion at the Emirates Stadium was all about 
Giroud’s moment of magic, which carried shades ofHenrikh Mkhitaryan’s finish 
for Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/manchester-united-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
 against Sunderland on Boxing Day.

“It was an exceptional goal, because it was at the end of a fantastic 
collective movement, which is what our game is about,” Wenger said, with a nod 
towards the box-to-box counterattack.

“After that, it was a reflex. Any goal-scorer is ready to take any part of his 
body, even if it’s the little toe, to score a goal and Olivier had that kind of 
reflex. He transformed that goal, I would say, into art.

“It was art because of the surprise, because of the beauty of the movement and 
because of the efficiency of the movement. That will be remembered as the 
‘Giroud goal’, which nobody will forget. Every striker is certainly remembered 
for one or two or three special goals and that will certainly remain with him 
forever.

“Olivier brings the unexpected and we all come to football to get the 
unexpected. I have been spoiled in my career because I had many great strikers 
but that is certainly in my top five [of great goals].”

Héctor Bellerín, the Arsenal right-back, said that he “couldn’t believe it” 
when the goal went in but Giroud was modest. “I have maximum luck,” he said.

The Dozen: the weekend's best Premier League photos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2017/jan/01/the-dozen-the-weekends-best-premier-league-photos>
“I was off balance and I tried to deflect it – in this position, you can’t do 
something else. I’ve never done this before, so it’s all about luck. It’s a 
great feeling.”

Wenger was asked to list the other goals in his top five and, off the top of 
his head, he actually named five. “I remember [Dennis] Bergkamp at Leicester 
and at Newcastle; Thierry Henry at Real Madrid and at Liverpool, and Kanu at 
Chelsea. It’s difficult for me to say, over 20 years, when we score about 70, 
80 per year. By 20, it makes 1,600. It’s hard, in a second, to get the best 
five.

“The importance of the game matters, and also when it’s 0-0. What is maybe not 
acknowledged enough by people, maybe even me, is that Olivier scores important 
goals.

“He equalised at Man United this season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 [in the 89th minute] with the special header and he scored [the winner] 
against West Brom in the 86th minute. He scores goals that have weight in the 
result of the team.”
 