
Arsène Wenger angrily defended his decision to start David Ospina ahead of 
Petr Cech in Arsenal’s 3-2Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> defeat at home to 
Olympiakos, which has jeopardised their hopes of qualification to the knockout 
phase, saying it would be a “farce” to blame the goalkeeper.

Arsenal on the brink after dire defeat to Olympiakos in Champions League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report>
Ospina dropped a corner into his own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report>
 net to hand the Greek champions a 2-1 lead and, in general, failed to instil 
confidence in his backline. Wengersigned Cech from Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/29/petr-cech-arsenal-chelsea-transfer>
 for £10m in the summer and, at the time, it was expected that he would play 
him in the Champions League. The manager, though, started Ospina in the opening 
Group Floss at Dinamo Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/16/dinamo-zagreb-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 and he retained faith in him for the visit of Olympiakos. It is stating the 
obvious to say that Cech has not been happy at being on the bench.

“I do not have to sit here and give you any explanation about every decision I 
make,” Wenger said. “You are capable to judge what I do and I leave you to 
that. Cech had a slight [fitness] alert beforethe game at Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/26/leicester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 [on Saturday]. I didn’t want to take a gamble but it’s not because of that we 
lost the game. It’s a farce [to suggest that].”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fwenger-defends-david-ospina-after-olympiakos-loss-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443599676326%2FKP_505030_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wenger%20defends%20David%20Ospina%20after%20Olympiakos%20loss%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fwenger-defends-david-ospina-after-olympiakos-loss-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wenger%20defends%20David%20Ospina%20after%20Olympiakos%20loss%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fwenger-defends-david-ospina-after-olympiakos-loss-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443599676326%2FKP_505030_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Arsène Wenger defends David Ospina after Olympiakos loss 
Wenger got his numbers in a jumble when he advanced the statistics in support 
of Ospina. The Colombian played 23 matches in all competitions forArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> last season, following his £3m 
arrival from Nice and he kept 10 clean sheets. “It is always the simple thing,” 
Wenger said, when asked whether he regretted the selection of Ospina. “Ospina 
played 19 games last season and kept 14 clean sheets. Last week at Tottenham, 
he had a fantastic game. No keeper is mistake-free. It could have happened to 
Petr Cech as well.

“I make the selections for the team and I am responsible for them. And I know 
many things that you don’t know. Or that you ignore. We cannot select the team 
by making a poll before the game and getting everybody’s opinion.”

Arsenal suffer on another bleak night for Europe’s most bafflingly ineffective 
league
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league>
Wenger blamed the lack of “quality in our defensive concentration” for the 
defeat while he lamented bad luck, too.Olympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos>, he noted, had mustered only 
four shots on target but departed with three goals. “This happens once in 100 
games in the Champions League,” Wenger said.

He pointed to the visitor’s third goal as the turning point. It came less than 
a minute after Alexis Sánchez had equalised for 2-2 and it followed a massive, 
collective loss of discipline. “We got back into the game well but we gave them 
straight away the 3-2 and that was the turning point,” Wenger said. “Tonight, 
we feel guilty because we gave away easy goals.”

Wenger, though, sounded a note of defiance, ahead of the back-to-back ties 
against Bayern Munich – the first of which is at home. “This leaves us in a bad 
position but we are still in it,” he said. “We have to think we can deal with 
Zagreb and Olympiakos away, and we have to make a result in our next game 
against Bayern Munich. We are not out of it.”
 