
Arsène Wenger has admitted that he could do with Jack Wilshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jack-wilshere> in Arsenal’s depleted 
midfield at the moment although he still maintains the decision to send the 
25-year-old on a season-long loan to Bournemouth – without inserting a recall 
clause – was the right one.

After a broken fibula sidelined Wilshere for nearly all of last season, 
Wilshere has impressed for Eddie Howe with both his form and his fitness – 
featuring in 17 of Bournemouth’s 20 league games thus far – and only missed
Tuesday’s 3-3 draw with Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/bournemouth-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
because he was ineligible to face his parent club.

With Santi Cazorla, Francis Coquelin and Mesut Özil currently injured or ill, 
and Mohamed Elneny now at the Africa Cup of Nations with Egypt, Wenger finds 
himself short of options in midfield for Saturday’s game against Preston North 
End.

Arséne Wenger praises the passion of Arsenal’s ‘jaded’ Alexis Sánchez
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/arsene-wenger-praises-the-passion-of-arsenals-jaded-alexis-sanchez>
“Yes, I could use Wilshere now,” Wenger said. “What looks unfair at some 
moment in the season is that you know at some stage you could need the player. 
But even at the start you need to have the right balance between competition 
and numbers and chances for the player to play. And still today I think it was 
the right decision for him to go.”

Granit Xhaka’s role looks likely to increase in the coming weeks, but Wenger 
expressed his concern at the £35m summer signing’s tendency to concede 
penalties. Xhaka conceded one at Bournemouth and anotheragainst Stoke last month
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/arsenal-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
. “He has conceded a few and he has to stop that,” Wenger said. “But is it 
really a penalty or not? I think he was unlucky on both occasions. But he has 
to adapt.

“You can see in his game he is not a dirty player. Overall I am quite happy 
with his defensive evolution. He is less spectacular in his tackling and he 
stays more on his feet. He uses his body better to win the challenges and his 
recovery runs are stronger when the ball goes behind him. Before he was a 
little bit in the moon.”

Wenger conceded that he could not put a timeframe on Cazorla’s return, while 
the club captain, Per Mertesacker, is “still three or four weeks away” with a 
calf injury but said both players should stay at the club beyond the expiry of 
their current contracts this summer. “We have an option on both of them and I 
think we will take it,” he added.

Wenger is set to select a strong side against Preston. “I will take my 
first-choice team,” he said. “At the moment David Ospina will start and maybe 
two or three players will be rested. We will play with 90% of the squad, I will 
rest Laurent Koscielny because he came off atBournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> with two problems in his 
thigh and Alexis Sánchez I will rest certainly, but the rest will play.”
 