
Arsène Wenger believes Arsenal’s heavy investment this summer and greater 
experience throughout their squad leaves them better placed to force passage 
into the latter stages of theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> than in recent seasons 
as he prepares to lead the club into a 19th successive campaign in the 
competition.

The Premier League club, who have exited Europe in the last 16 in each of the 
past six seasons, have been handed the daunting task of competing withParis 
Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> in Group A. 
The French side, so dominant in their domestic league since being purchased by 
Qatari Sports Investments in 2011, have been quarter-finalists four campaigns 
in succession and were the highest-ranked side in the section. However, Arsenal 
will approach Tuesday’s game at Parc des Princes with some optimism because 
Unai Emery’s team are hampered by a number of injuries. They have also 
stuttered in their past two Ligue 1 games and are still adjusting to the new 
manager’s methods.

Marco Verratti says second-best not enough for PSG before Arsenal clash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/12/marco-verratti-insists-paris-saint-germain-not-second-best-arsenal-champions-league>
Whereas PSG have lost two of their more talismanic players in Zlatan 
Ibrahimovic and David Luiz to Manchester United and Chelsea respectively, 
Wenger spent close to £100m in the summer bolstering his squad. The vast 
majority of that went on experienced performers such as Granit Xhaka, Shkodran 
Mustafi and Lucas Pérez – players the manager is convinced can demonstrate 
their influence in Europe’s elite club competition.

“I was used to playing with younger squads because, when you build a new 
ground like the Emirates Stadium, you don’t have the resources,” said Wenger, 
who has entered the final year of his contract but refused to be drawn on 
whether this would be his last campaign in the Champions League.

“Now I have a team with more experienced players. There are exceptions, 
obviously, but the majority of the squad is basically between 24 and 30 in age. 
That’s where you have a good combination of physical strength and experience.

“They are not 19 or 20 years old. This is one of my strongest squads, 
certainly. And certainly one of the oldest as well. I always believed we had a 
chance, even when we had young players but, certainly, I haven’t had a squad of 
players [like this] for a long time; full of players who have enough experience 
to compete.” They will benefit from the presence of the France defender Laurent 
Koscielny after herecovered from the facial injury sustained in Saturday’s 
victory over Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/11/arsenal-laurent-koscielny-doubt-champions-league-psg>
.

Wenger is expected to hand Olivier Giroud a start up front here in a tie that 
pits him against the club that tried to tempt him away from London three times 
– in 2011, 2013 and 2014 – to spearhead the Qatari-funded project in Paris. He 
is a close friend of the PSG president, Nasser al-Khelaifi, having worked on 
the owners’ television station, Al Jazeera turned BeIn Sport, and has 
previously admitted to advising them when it emerged they were interested in 
purchasing a football club.

Asked why he was never tempted to return to France to oversee PSG, Wenger 
said: “Because I love where I am. I know well the PSG owners but I feel always 
I remained loyal toArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> 
Football Club because I think it’s a club that has the qualities I love. And 
that’s why. This is an important game but I don’t think it goes beyond two good 
sides playing against each other. There’s no symbolism to it, no symbolic 
meaning to this match. We just want to pick up the three points.”

They will have a better opportunity than originally envisaged against an 
uncharacteristically fragile PSG side who have laboured at times since Emery 
replaced Laurent Blanc over the summer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Farsenal-champions-league-arsene-wenger-psg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c030aef354386ad5671eb421c1cbe78acbc2415%2F135_0_2716_2217%2F2716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arsenal%20better%20set%20for%20deep%20run%20in%20Champions%20League%2C%20says%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Farsenal-champions-league-arsene-wenger-psg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arsenal%20better%20set%20for%20deep%20run%20in%20Champions%20League%2C%20says%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Farsenal-champions-league-arsene-wenger-psg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c030aef354386ad5671eb421c1cbe78acbc2415%2F135_0_2716_2217%2F2716.jpg>
 Mesut Özil gets in some Amy Lawrence reading as Arsenal head for Paris. 
Photograph: Stuart MacFarlane/Arsenal FC via Getty Images 
The Spanish coach has come in for considerable criticism after seeing his side 
lose at Monaco and then concede a late equaliser at home to Saint-Étienne last 
Friday. He was visibly unnerved by the tone of some of the local questioning at 
his pre-match media conference at Parc des Princes on Monday. He reverted to 
his native language three times to try to make his point, and stressed that 
managers need time to impose their philosophies on new teams, “though in 
football we are rarely given proper time”. He hopes to have Thiago Silva fit 
for the first time this season, the Brazilian having played a full part in 
training at Camp des Loges. Layvin Kurzawa, Javier Pastore, Serge Aurier and 
Maxwell – all of whom were doubtful for this fixture – hope to play a part, too.

“It’s fair to say both sides are still looking to find the right tempo and 
rhythm to their play,” said Wenger. “We had a slightly tough start with a few 
players late back after international duty over the summer. We also had a tough 
fixture list with regards to our fitness levels but thankfully we are mentally 
strong enough to make our way gradually into better form. Mentally we are 
ready. Physically we are not quite ready so far.

“PSG, too, have been missing a number of players and some had joined up a bit 
later, like us. But we’ll see. Better than all my speeches is the way we play, 
the dynamic we have and the intensity we put into the game. We play in a 
championship where, if you look at the results over the weekend, it’s very 
intense. We are used to playing with the intensity you need in the Champions 
League. That’s what we want to do. Playing well is better than talking.”
 