
Way, way back, at the start of Arsène Wenger’s first full season with Arsenal, 
a side that would win the Premier League and FA Cup double come the end of the 
campaign, endured a moment of the purest European misery. It was inflicted by 
underestimated Greek opponents. In the opening round of the Uefa Cup, Paok 
Salonika were the visitors to Highbury. AnArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> team containing the talent of 
David Seaman, Tony Adams, Patrick Vieira, Emmanuel Petit, Marc Overmars, Dennis 
Bergkamp and Ian Wright dominated, and were searching for the goal to win the 
tie when Paok’s Zisis Vryzas scythed through them three minutes from the end to 
deliver a classic sucker punch.

The home crowd, the players who knew they should have done better and an 
anguished Wenger experienced that jab of desperate deflation. Some 18 years on 
from that Paok punishment, the exact same sensation arrived as Arsenal spun 
from the elation of Alexis Sánchez’s header to the burning frustration ofAlfred 
Finnbogason’s flicked match-winner for Olympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report>
. For Wenger, that sudden sinking feeling, like leaving your stomach behind as 
a plane suddenly drops in mid-air, assailed him yet again. This was not 
supposed to happen. Every time it seems to hit Arsenal like a shock, and yet it 
happens often enough that it should not be remotely surprising.

Arsenal and Chelsea: why they imploded in the Champions League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/30/arsenal-chelsea-champions-league>
Over his 18 years of consecutive Champions League football, Wenger has 
presided over 177 games in the competition. That is a big old number. As you 
might imagine, there has been a wide spectrum of performances and experiences 
within that. Some outstanding (beating Real Madrid in the Bernabéu with a 
Thierry Henry special 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/feb/22/championsleague200506.championsleague>
), some routine (a straightforward 2-0 home win over Standard Liège for 
example) and some hideous (last season’s calamitous3-1 defeat by Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/25/arsenal-monaco-champions-league-last-16-match-report>
 sums up this batch quite well).

The trouble with making the same type of mistakes repetitively over 18 years 
and 177 games is that it becomes unacceptable that Arsenal seem unable to 
learn. To change. To adapt. To try to do things differently. With that much 
experience of Champions League football, and with – on the whole – pretty good 
players for this level at their disposal, it reveals a very deep-rooted problem 
to know all about the banana skin in front of you and still go flying. That 177 
is an admirable number in a way, reflecting consistency few others match in 
terms ofChampions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> 
qualification, but in another way it is damning. All those games. Same old 
naivety.

Arsenal’s difficulty in controlling games, this tendency for anxious football 
that makes them chase and put all their emotion into trying to force a 
situation before they fall apart, has become an unwanted hallmark in Europe. 
Any opponents who are well organised, committed, and try their luck have a 
chance of profiting if Wenger’s team slip into this self-destructive mode. This 
seasonDinamo Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/16/dinamo-zagreb-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 and Olympiakos have done it. In their past three home games in the Champions 
League Arsenal have resorted to this brand of hectic, disorganised football and 
on each occasion shipped three goals, to Anderlecht, Monaco and Olympiakos. 
These are not the clubs from the Bayern Munich, Barcelona and Juventus 
stratosphere but teams Arsenal were comfortable favourites to beat at home.

From a headline perspective, Wenger left himself open to criticism with the 
Petr Cech/David Ospina situation. Hisambiguous explanation over the selection 
of the second 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/30/arsene-wenger-david-ospina-arsenal-defeat-farce-olympiakos>
 (and weaker) choice, with the semi-disguised hint of an injury worry over 
Cech, was unhelpful. If Cech had a clear injury concern then picking Ospina was 
reasonable. If not, it begs the obvious question as to why a manager would not 
pick his only purchase of the summer in a key position for a must-win game.

But beyond that debate, the broader question boils down to why Arsenal play 
with this strung-out recklessness in the Champions League. Why they find it so 
hard to be calm. Wright called it “schoolboy” stuff, but surely they should 
know how to better control games of this nature by now. It is only when the 
causes are more or less lost, in the knockouts once they have blown the first 
leg, that they can relax and put in a heroic (but not quite good enough) 
winning performance.

Vieira said something revealing about Wenger’s management style in the 
documentary he made with Roy Keane a while ago. The manager’s biggest strength? 
“Trust,” said Vieira. “He will trust his players. He will try to make you make 
the right decision by yourself. Not him telling you what he expects or what he 
wants you to do … that can be a weakness as well.”

Wenger does trust his players to work out problems on the pitch for 
themselves, but perhaps this causes some of the anxiety when a game becomes 
complicated. Maybe the players need some more exact instruction on how to 
handle an unpredictable match, as theOlympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos> contest turned out to be. To 
concede goals straight after working their way back into the game was as much 
in the mind as in the technique.

The years of unbroken qualification from the group stage are a badge of honour 
for Wenger. He may pull it off this season again, unlikely though it seems, 
because Champions League football can be bizarre like that. The Arsenal manager 
will remember the 2003-04 campaign, when his team had only one point from their 
first three games and went on, strangely enough, to win their group.

Even if they can summon a similar near-miracle this season, Wenger’s holy 
grail of winning the Champions League one day remains improbably distant.
 