
“Well, we have a 6ft 7in centre-forward, and that might help,” Simon Grayson 
jokes in response to the inevitable question about whetherPreston North End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/preston> might be prepared to mix it up a 
little in Saturday night’s FA Cup third-round tie against Arsenal.

“We are not really a physical side though, we actually have some decent young 
players coming through and this is an opportunity for them to make a name for 
themselves. No disrespect to our lads, but we are not the finished article like
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>. Most of my squad are 
misfits and cast-offs from other clubs that we are trying to improve and mould 
into a team on the training pitch.”

Simon Makienok, the giant Danish striker on loan to Preston from Palermo, 
certainly fits that description, as in another way does Aiden McGeady, at 
Deepdale on loan from Everton after another false start with Sheffield 
Wednesday. “We’ve got Aiden until the end of the season and everyone here 
think’s he’s great,” Grayson says.

Preston named best city to live and work in north-west England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/08/preston-named-best-city-live-work-north-west-england>
“We felt we needed someone with the x-factor, and he’s got the quickest feet 
I’ve ever seen. I think he’s been a bit frustrated at his last couple of clubs, 
perhaps not being allowed to do what he does best, but at Preston we just 
encourage him to run with the ball, and if he loses it, do it again. That’s 
what makes him feel good, and the fans enjoy watching him. He’s a matchwinner, 
and hopefully he can win us the match against Arsenal.”

Grayson has come up against Arsenal before in his managerial career, when in 
charge of Leeds six years ago, and remembers the occasion principally for 
Arsène Wenger’s willingness to chat and pass on tips after the Premier League 
side had progressed. “You don’t normally get too long with opposing managers 
after games,” he says.

“Both sides have media to do and the away team usually want to get away, but I 
wanted to pick his brains after the game and Arsène gave me and my staff about 
20 minutes. He probably got fed up of us all asking questions, but he was happy 
to talk to us about the best way to organise training schedules. You are always 
looking for bits of information like that, you can learn a lot from the top 
managers.”

Grayson, now with his fourth Championship club and content to turn down offers 
from ostensibly bigger teams to continue improving Preston – “I’ve had 
opportunities to leave but loyalty is a two-way thing” – still harbours 
ambitions of being a top manager himself. Or at least working in the Premier 
League.

“People employ a lot more foreigners in the Premier League now; the only real 
chance for a manager like me to work at that level is to take a team up,” he 
says. “That’s a sad indictment of the prospects for Championship managers, but 
you just have to keep plugging away. There are some fantastic managers in this 
division but foreign owners want bigger names.

“There are some good foreign managers, without a doubt, but the balance could 
be better. I don’t think some of the owners in the Premier League are aware of 
the work being done in the leagues below, because capable English managers are 
being overlooked.”

Grayson’s target at the start of the season was simply to keep Preston in the 
division, and if possible improve on last term’s 11th-place finish, with 
Championship solidity the overall aim. All their neighbours, from Bolton to 
Blackburn to Burnley, Blackpool and Wigan, have tried life in the Premier 
League, though some of them are still bearing the scars. If Preston ever make 
it, Grayson says, it will not be through taking any short cuts.

Preston refund fans with money collected from fighting players’ fines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/preston-refund-fans-beckford-doyle-fighting-fine>
“We do have aspirations to reach the Premier League, just like every other 
team in the Championship, but we won’t be rushing it,” he says. “It’s all about 
moving forward gradually. We haven’t got the finances to do it quickly, but we 
are one of the few clubs in the country who are debt-free. We are not under any 
pressure from the people above, we just want to try to keep progressing season 
on season.

“If we do get to the Premier League one day it won’t be through throwing 
stupid money at it. That’s the one thing we will never do, and that why I will 
always look up to a manager like Arsène Wenger. He is a footballing man who has 
always had the same philosophy. You cannot knock what he has done for his 
football club over the years. He probably doesn’t need another grilling from me 
after the game but I’m sure he’ll still call in to sample our scampi, chicken 
and pies.”
 