
This was one of those occasions when what had initially appeared an 
unnecessarily risky team selection ended up feeling more like a masterstroke. 
Arsenal were overrun for long periods in Paris but still departed buoyed by the 
point pilfered from their trickiest tie of the section, and with David Ospina’s 
reputation as enhanced as Edinson Cavani’s was wrecked. The locals are growing 
used to their Uruguayan’s profligacy. Ospina, in contrast, hasrarely asserted 
such a positive influence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/13/psg-v-arsenal-champions-league-live>
on his own team’s display.

In the context of the flurry of opportunities thwarted by his goalkeeper late 
on, either choked, blocked or parried to safety, Arsène Wenger could justify 
his policy, apparently laid down in pre‑season, that the Colombian will begin 
in Champions League ties. He had done the same last year only for Arsenal to 
succumb to Dinamo Zagreband Olympiakos, where Ospina was culpable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league>
 as the team wilted. Petr Cech was duly recalled against Bayern Munich. Yet, at 
Parc des Princes in a potentially daunting contest, the 28-year-old was a man 
inspired.

Same old Arsenal, but Arsène Wenger’s team in transition earn a useful point | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/13/same-old-arsenal-but-arsene-wengers-team-in-transition-earn-a-useful-point>
He sprang from his line to smother at the feet of those Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> players marauding into 
the penalty area, whether Cavani or Serge Aurier. There were fine touches to 
deflect aside efforts from Ángel Di María, and even a willingness to charge 
from his box to nod away through-balls squeezed beyond Arsenal’s backline. 
Ospina achieved all this despite conceding after 42 seconds as his team rather 
dithered from the outset. Cavani had planted his header emphatically into the 
corner from Aurier’s glorious cross on the charge with Shkodran Mustafi 
apparently distracted by the presence of a second ball on the pitch, albeit on 
the distant touchline. The marking was more of an issue.

For a few, tantalising minutes, Cavani, a player who had shivered for so long 
in the shadow of Zlatan Ibrahimovic, must have rejoiced in the belief this 
would be finally be his coming of age as PSG’s central striker. He could 
certainly never have envisaged departing at the end haunted by the nightmarish 
memory of Ospina in his turquoise kit and that hellish flash of his fluorescent 
gloves. As Rio Ferdinand acknowledged in his role as a pundit, had Ibrahimovic 
featured in the Uruguayan’s stead, “Arsenal would have been run out of town”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fpsg-arsenal-champions-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aeb7e11b5bc0214d7d64b75634ee5c48b2d0784%2F0_101_5223_3133%2F5223.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arsenal%20behind%20after%2042%20seconds%20but%20Alexis%20S%C3%A1nchez%20rescues%20point%20at%20PSG&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fpsg-arsenal-champions-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arsenal%20behind%20after%2042%20seconds%20but%20Alexis%20S%C3%A1nchez%20rescues%20point%20at%20PSG&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fpsg-arsenal-champions-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aeb7e11b5bc0214d7d64b75634ee5c48b2d0784%2F0_101_5223_3133%2F5223.jpg>
 Edinson Cavani celebrates scoring the opening goal after 42 seconds. 
Photograph: Franck Fife/AFP/Getty Images 
The sight of the ball continually falling to Cavani in front of goal almost 
felt cruel by the end. His best opportunity to exorcise his demons had come 
just after the half-hour mark as Nacho Monreal slid on to a Marco Verratti 
through-ball and succeeded only in prodding the ball away from Laurent 
Koscielny and into the striker’s path. He edged round the goalkeeper, for one 
of the only times all night, but was off balance as the ball ran across him and 
could only skewer the shot into the side-netting with the goal gaping. His 
evening deteriorated entirely thereafter. He looked a broken man at the final 
whistle.

Lionel Messi scores hat-trick in Barcelona’s 7-0 thrashing of Celtic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/barcelona-celtic-champions-league-match-report>
There was a woeful control on his chest inside the six-yard box before the 
break, and a succession of one on ones where Ospina’s eagerness to charge out 
at pace seemed to provoke indecision in the forward’s approach. Whenever he had 
time to think, he panicked. The final miss, nine minutes from time, had the 
locals cursing wildly from the stands. Asked how he would rebuild the 
confidence of a player who finds himself in that position, Wenger said: “I’d 
tell him to keep looking for chances, and perhaps to relax a touch. He was 
actually good tonight, Cavani, and very effective in terms of his pressing. It 
would be interesting to see how much ground he covered and how many sprints he 
had.”

PSG needed more than mere industry. There is self-doubt at this club following 
the summer arrival of Unai Emery, and the departures of the charismatic 
Ibrahimovic and David Luiz. They had so yearned for a victory here to justify 
the manager’s appointment – as a figure apparently likelier to deliver a 
European trophy – in succession to Laurent Blanc, though Emery finished as 
rattled and unnerved by his team’s deficienciesas his players.

Their dismal finishing was always likely to hurt them in the end and, when 
Mesut Özil conjured a clever pass – one of his few eye-catching contributions 
all night – to find the excellent Alex Iwobi 12 minutes from time, the French 
were undone. The youngster’s shot was pushed away by Alphonse Areola but only 
as far as Alexis Sánchez, loitering ignored near the penalty shot. His finish 
was emphatic andArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> had 
their point.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fpsg-arsenal-champions-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4a8e5445f1e7d050bccb9d8ab696a1f7b690fcd%2F551_328_1852_1111%2F1852.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arsenal%20behind%20after%2042%20seconds%20but%20Alexis%20S%C3%A1nchez%20rescues%20point%20at%20PSG&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fpsg-arsenal-champions-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arsenal%20behind%20after%2042%20seconds%20but%20Alexis%20S%C3%A1nchez%20rescues%20point%20at%20PSG&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fpsg-arsenal-champions-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4a8e5445f1e7d050bccb9d8ab696a1f7b690fcd%2F551_328_1852_1111%2F1852.jpg>
 Alexis Sánchez celebrates his equaliser. Photograph: Catherine Ivill - 
AMA/Getty Images 
The skirmishes became rather fractious from then on in, PSG irritated by 
Olivier Giroud’s presence with tempers duly boiling over in stoppage time. 
Marquinhos and Verratti squabbled with Giroud near the touchline and, while the 
exchanges were more playground than truly spiteful, the Hungarian official 
flashed second yellow cards to the Arsenal substitute and the Italian 
midfielder.

Both players appeared perplexed. Both will be absent for their team’s next 
fixture when Arsenal, fitness permitting, will retain Ospina. It will seem less 
of a risk second time round.
 