
Arsenal have been here before. Goodness knows they have been here before, and 
not only to the raucous Georgios Karaiskakis Stadium in Athens, home of 
Olympiakos, for the final tie of aChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group.

Arsène Wenger says Olympiakos could be undermined by a ‘fear factor’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/08/arsene-wenger-olympiakos-arsenal-champions-league>
The club’s recent history in Europe has been marked by the demand to atone for 
disastrous first-leg performances, normally at the Emirates Stadium, in the 
knockout rounds. This remains a group stage game but the essence of it is 
precisely the same as Arsenal’s Champions League showdowns in each of the 
previous four seasons. They are head to head with Olympiakos, because of the 
way that the section has panned out, and for Arsène Wenger and his players the 
requirement is plain – they have to overturn the3-2 defeat the Greek champions 
inflicted on them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report>
 at the Emirates in September.

Wenger brought up the Monaco tie from last season, when he assessed how things 
stood with Olympiakos. His teamlost 3-1 at home to the French club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/25/arsenal-monaco-champions-league-last-16-match-report>
 in the last 16 first leg and their2-0 victory in the return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/17/monaco-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 added up to failure on the away goals rule. “The Monaco result will help us, 
although this is a different game,” the manager said.

Wenger might have mentioned any one of the previous do-or-die fixtures. In 
2013-14 they lost 2-0 in the first leg of the last-16game at home to Bayern 
Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/19/arsenal-bayern-munich-champions-league-matchreport>
, beforedrawing 1-1 in Bavaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/11/bayern-munich-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
, and the season before, at the same stage, against the same opponents, it had 
been a3-1 defeat in the first leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/19/arsenal-bayern-munich-champions-league>
 at home beforea 2-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/mar/13/bayern-munich-champions-league-match-report>
 for an away goals exit.

In 2011-12 there was a slight difference. Arsenal were beaten 4-0 by Milan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/feb/15/milan-arsenal-champions-league>
 in the first leg of the last-16 meeting away from home.At the Emirates they 
won 3-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/mar/06/arsenal-milan-champions-league>
. It was not enough. With Arsenal, hard luck stories, coloured by degrees of 
glorious failure, have become the norm.

“We have been here a few times before and we have come up short,” Aaron Ramsey 
said. “We have been close, drawing on aggregate but conceding more goals at 
home. It is really difficult but we know what we have to do and we believe we 
have enough quality to create the opportunities and score.”

Arsenal have effectively been charged with creating a piece of history because 
only once in 18 seasons of Uefa competition under Wenger have they overturned a 
first-leg deficit in a knockout tie. That was in 2009-10 against Porto in the 
last 16 of the Champions League. They lost the first leg 2-1 butwon 5-0 in the 
return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/mar/09/arsenal-porto-champions-league-bendtner-nicklas>
. The thumping victory came at the Emirates. In other words, in front of a 
rather more supportive crowd than they will encounter in Athens.

Arsenal’s Mathieu Debuchy seeks talks with Arsène Wenger over future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/08/mathieu-debuchy-arsenal-arsene-wenger>
How Arsenal have paid for their performance at home to Olympiakos. It is what 
has pressed them to the edge and it is a reflection of the depths to which they 
sunk that not even the subsequentwin over Bayern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/20/bayern-munich-beaten-as-olivier-giroud-hands-arsenal-a-european-lifeline>
 got them out of trouble. It merely served to fashion a lifeline.

It is entirely typical of Arsenal that they should beat Bayern at the Emirates 
and yet lose toOlympiakos <https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos> 
who, to put it frankly, are opponents they should be beating. Man for man, 
Arsenal are technically superior but they self-destructed on that night earlier 
in the season when David Ospina’s horrible blunder for Olympiakos’s second goal 
was not the team’s worst moment. That accolade went to the collective breakdown 
that formed the backdrop to what proved to be the visitors’ winner, which came 
one minute after Alexis Sánchez had equalised for 2-2. All around the stadium 
there were the trappings of unbearable frustration.

With a full-strength team it would be easy to fancy Arsenal to pull off the 
salvage operation in Athens – or easier – but they have travelled without seven 
injured players; most crucially,Sánchez, Santi Cazorla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/06/santi-cazorla-arsenal-knee-operation-months>
 and Francis Coquelin. At least Theo Walcott is fit again to provide a 
much-needed attacking option.

Wenger suggested the nervy 3-1 home win over Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/05/arsenal-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
 had been a relief – ending, as it did, a run of three Premier League games 
without success – and he talked about how Olympiakos would be “a different 
game, psychologically”. But it is not difficult to see a team who are groping 
for rhythm and confidence.

Football transfer rumours: Arsenal to sign Celta Vigo’s Nolito?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/08/arsenal-nolito-celta-vigo-football-transfer-rumours>
Matters rest on a knife edge. Balance and game management will be fundamental. 
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> have to score first – 
Wenger has acknowledged this – but there will be no rush. There is absolutely 
no sense in them getting ahead of themselves, and the ball, to leave themselves 
open to what could be a sucker punch.

Even if they scored the opening goal in the 80th minute, there would be time 
to find the winner. Arsenal have managed their recent second legs well and, 
apart from the 2014 tie against Bayern, they have put themselves in the 
position for a slingshot at victory. It has been their opponents who have felt 
the jitters. They have not, however, managed them quite well enough. This has 
to be the occasion when that changes.

Familiarity underpins the tie. It is the fourth time in seven seasons Arsenal 
have made the trip to face Olympiakos in December for a final group match and, 
for Wenger, the memories have come back. There was the“Tom Cruise game” in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/dec/09/arsenal-arsene-wenger-olympiakos>
, when he named the left-back with the Hollywood name as part of the youngest 
starting lineup in the history of the Champions League; Kyle Bartley and Kerrea 
Gilbert were in defence alongside him. An 18-year-old Ramsey played and he was 
excellent.

There were also shadow sides in 2011 and 2012, featuring players including 
André Santos,Emmanuel Frimpong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/dec/05/emmanuel-frimpong-arsenal-olympiakos>
, Sébastien Squillaci and Jernade Meade because Wenger had earned the right to 
rotate. On all three occasions, Arsenal had already qualified for the last 16 
and, on the first two, they were assured of top spot in the group. The other 
constant has been that, on each occasion, they lost.

Maybe, it did not matter. The stakes are somewhat higher now.
 