
Arsenal have been described as the team who “don’t want to defend” by Alfred 
Finnbogason, the Olympiakos striker, who scoredhis club’s winning goal in the 
Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report>
 match at Emirates Stadium on Tuesday night.

The Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> inquest has focused 
on Finnbogason’s 66th-minute goal, which came less than 60 seconds after Alexis 
Sánchez had equalised to make the score 2-2 and was the result of a collective 
loss of discipline that left the home side exposed.

Arsenal’s Champions League experience means nothing as same old naivety 
continues | Amy Lawrence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/30/arsenal-champions-league-arsene-wenger-naivety>
Per Mertesacker, the Arsenal defender who came on after Laurent Koscielny had 
injured his hamstring, has said his team will not qualify for the competition’s 
knockout phase if they continue to show such failings.

After losing their opening game at Dinamo Zagreb, Arsenal may need to get 
something from their home and away ties against Bayern Munich. Koscielny is not 
expected to be fit for Sunday’s Premier League game at home to Manchester 
United.

Finnbogason, the Iceland international who was a half-time substitute, talked 
of howOlympiakos <https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos> had executed 
a perfect gameplan after scrutinising Arsenal’s weaknesses, which include how 
they defend corners. Olympiakos’s first goal came from a corner which was 
drifted back to the edge of the area for Felipe Pardo to score with a deflected 
volley.

“The first corner is something we practise on the training pitch because we 
know they have no man on the edge of the box,” Finnbogason said. “When you play 
against this team you know they’re going to have a lot of the ball. You have to 
defend well, have the lines tight and use your time when you have spaces. And 
you know you’re going to have spaces because they don’t want to defend. So our 
plan worked.”

Arsenal and Chelsea: why they imploded in the Champions League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/30/arsenal-chelsea-champions-league>
Arsène Wenger had substituted the defensive midfielder Francis Coquelin for 
the more attack-minded Aaron Ramsey on the hour and Mertesacker suggested there 
had beena rush of blood and a lack of balance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/30/arsenal-olympiakos-defeat-discipline-per-mertesacker>
 after Sánchez’s equaliser.

“We rushed a bit and not everyone came back to a defensive position, like we 
should have done,” Mertesacker said. “I felt we were a bit exposed. There was 
no one on the edge of the box. We should have done much better, especially 
having come back and had a lot of possession in the second half.

“After we scored it looked like we were not ready to win this game. There was 
a lack of concentration, a lack of discipline. We need to do much better 
defensively on these occasions because these occasions decide more and more 
games in modern football. When we play like that, with that lack of 
concentration and discipline, we have got no chance [of qualifying].”

Gabriel Paulista, the other Arsenal centre-half, said it was essential the 
team regrouped before United’s visit. “It was a complicated night,” he said. 
“We only have ourselves to blame for conceding the three goals and now we have 
to rest, work harder and, on Sunday, we have a great game.

“Every game is very important and Sunday is the same. We are at home and we 
have an obligation to win at home. Things are not turning out well in the 
Champions League. In the Premier League we are fine but in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> – I don’t know what to 
say.”
 