
Arsenal have confirmed the signing of the France international striker Olivier 
Giroud <https://www.theguardian.com/football/olivier-giroud> from Montpellier 
on a long-term contract.

The 25-year-old netted 21 goals in 36 league appearances as Montpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> won their 
first Ligue 1 title last season, and will now aim to make an impact as the 
Gunners look to deliver a first trophy since 2005 and progress again in Europe.

Giroud, whose deal with Arsenal will officially commence on July 1, passed a 
medical on Monday evening and said on the club's official website: "I have 
always admired Arsenal with its great history and reputation, and I now hope to 
achieve great things here. I am very proud to be a Gunner and I will give my 
best for all theArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> fans.

"It is a huge satisfaction to join this great club and it has been a dream 
since I was young to play in the Premier League. I was attracted by the 
philosophy of football and Arsene Wenger's 'touch' at this club. I am delighted 
to be here at Arsenal and to be part of one of the great teams in English 
football."

Wenger added: "We are delighted to have secured the signing of Olivier Giroud. 
He has a very good physical presence and is exceptional in the air, with a 
great work ethic. We are excited about Olivier joining us and he will add an 
additional dimension to our attacking options next season.

"He has proved that he is capable of performing at the top level with club and 
country, and we saw what a big influence he was in Montpellier's 
championship-winning side last season. We all look forward to Olivier joining 
us and seeing him play in an Arsenal shirt."

Arsenal could also now resurrect interest in Yann M'Vila after Champions 
League finalists Bayern Munich cooled their interest in the Rennes midfielder.

The Gunners look set to to offload some of their fringe players, such as 
Morocco international Marouane Chamakh, Mexico forward Carlos Vela, Brazilian 
midfielder Denilson and Denmark striker Nicklas Bendtner - who spent last 
season on loan at Sunderland and is now attracting "global interest", according 
to his representative.

Fulham, meanwhile, are reported to be ready to step up their interest in a 
Â£5million move for Gunners midfielder Aaron Ramsey following the departure of 
their captain Danny Murphy to Blackburn.
 