
Arsenal have announced the signing of goalkeeper David Ospina from Nice on a 
long-term contract. The 25-year-old, who impressed as Colombia reached the
quarter-finals of the World Cup in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/04/brazil-colombia-world-cup-quarter-final-match-report>
, has moved for an undisclosed fee.

Arsenal’s manager, Arsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger>, told the club’s website: 
“David Ospina is an excellent goalkeeper with good experience and a proven 
record of performing with Nice and Colombia. He will add strength to our squad 
and we are very pleased that he will be joining us.”

The goalkeeper is expected to make his first appearance for Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> during the Emirates Cup friendly 
tournament, which takes place in north London next weekend.

Ospina made 189 Ligue 1 appearances during six years with Nice, having joined 
them from the Colombian club Atlético Nacional in 2008. He made his senior 
debut for Atlético at 17 and has been a fullColombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/colombia> international since 2007, 
making his first start for Los Cafeteros in a 2010 World Cup qualification 
match against Bolivia.

At Arsenal he will provide competition for the first-choice keeper Wojciech 
Szczesny while helping to fill the gap left by Lukasz Fabianski,who has joined 
Swansea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/29/lukasz-fabianski-signs-swansea-city-arsenal>
.

Speaking to Sky Sports News after a friendly defeat by Brentford, the Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice> coach Claude Puel said: “It’s 
confirmed, yes. It’s a good affair for Arsenal because he’s a very good player. 
You will see next season the quality of this player.

“It’s fantastic for him. It’s important for him to try another league, another 
club, and Arsenal is a fantastic club for him. David Ospina can take the 
goalkeeping position at Arsenal because his qualities are very strong and … 
‘magnifique’.

“You saw in the World Cup how important a goalkeeper he is. For me, David can 
impose his quality, he’s a goalkeeper who is very good with the feet, with his 
arms, he knows football and he’s a very, very good player.”

Arsenal are expected to confirm the signing of the 19-year-old Southampton 
right-back Calum Chambers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/26/arsenal-southampton-calum-chambers>
 on Monday. The transfer is believed to be worth around £11m.
 