
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> “remain in the market” 
for further additions to their squad amid rumours that Alexandre Lacazette has 
requested to leave Lyon this summer. The France striker’s agent refused to be 
drawn on speculation that he could be on the way to the Premier League.

Arsenal’s squad can compete for Premier League title, says Ivan Gazidis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/22/arsenal-squad-ivan-gazidis-premier-league-title>
Arsenal completed the purchase of the Bolton defender Rob Holding on Friday – 
the third addition to Arsène Wenger’s squad this summer followingGranit Xhaka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/26/granit-xhaka-arsenal-leader-borussia-monchengladbach>
 and theJapan striker Takuma Asano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/03/arsenal-sign-takuma-asano-j-league-football-transfer-window>
. Holding, who was part of the England Under-21 squad which won the Toulon 
tournament in the summer, was confirmed to have signed a long-term contract at 
the Emirates for a fee of about £2m.

Arsenal’s statement 
<http://www.arsenal.com/news/news-archive/20160722/arsenal-agree-deal-to-sign-rob-holding>
 rounded off with the message: “We remain in the market, so stay close to 
Arsenal.com for any further transfer news,” leading to speculation among 
supporters that Lacazette could be on his way to the Emirates.

However, when contacted by the Guardian, the 25-year-old’s agent refused to 
confirm reports in France that his client has toldLyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> he wants to leave the club. “We can 
not comment on the information that can appear in the press,” David Venditelli 
said in an email. “We have decided with the player not to say anything at this 
time.”

Lacazette, who scored 48 goals in Ligue 1 over the past two seasons but was 
not selected for France’s Euro 2016 squad, has also been linked with a move to 
Paris Saint-Germain and Barcelona. It is expected that Lyon will demand a €50m 
(£42m) fee.

Earlier on Friday, the Arsenal chief executive, Ivan Gazidis, said he believes 
the clubnow have a squad good enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/22/arsenal-squad-ivan-gazidis-premier-league-title>
 to win the Premier League for the first time since 2004 without spending big 
money on transfers.

“This approach, for us, gives us a very, very powerful balance because it’s 
not just about spending money but about how you spend your money and doing it 
wisely,” Gazidis told ESPN.

“It’s about having a strong core philosophy and values within the club that 
players buy into and fans can be proud of.

“These are all things that lead to success, and when you look at Arsenal over 
the last four or five years, there’s no question that the squad has been 
progressing in strength.

“We’ve got a squad now that we believe is capable of competing to win the 
Premier League. We came in second last year, which was disappointing. But we’re 
on the right track.”
 