
After Granit Xhaka was among Switzerland’s better performers in this 
close-fought win, Valon Behrami told of informing Arsenal’s new midfielder he 
may enjoy a drop in his yellow card count because his abrasive style is more 
suited to the Premier League.

Xhaka, 23, flew into one first-half tackle on Albania’s Amir Abrashi that 
might have been a red card, never mind a booking. Yet Arsène Wenger’s £30m 
signing escaped without sanction from Carlos Velasco Carballo, the Spanish 
referee.

Xhaka has arrived at Arsenal from Borussia Mönchengladbach and Watford’s 
Behrami, who partnered him in Vladimir Petkovic’s 4-2-3-1, pointed to how he 
could be over-zealous. “Sometimes his physicality in Germany was even 
considered too much. The first time I saw him after the signing [for Arsenal] I 
said: ‘Now you’re not going to get so many yellow cards.’ Of course it’s not 
easy,” the 31-year-old said. “The first two or three months you need a bit of 
time but he is prepared for a team like Arsenal.”

Switzerland and Fabian Schär quick to spoil Albania’s bit of history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/albania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report>
Xhaka’s willingness to hunt down anyone in a red shirt impressed and was a 
prime factorin an opening Group A victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/albania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report>
 sealed by Fabian Schär’s fifth-minute header. Behrami made a neat observation 
when stating this aspect of his game may allow him to instantly adapt to the 
Premier League hurly-burly.

“Many players take a while to get used to the physical side of English 
football but he is ready for that. He loves a tackle,” said the former West Ham 
United player.

The other side of the Basel-born midfielder suggests Wenger may finally have 
obtained an all-round operator for Arsenal’s engine room. Against Gianni De 
Biasi’s side, in what was Albania’s first game in a major finals after 70 years 
of playing international football, Xhaka also sat and controlled play. Up 
against a team containing his 25-year-old brother, Taulant, the younger Xhaka 
was as astute at pinging off passes as he was at stopping opponents and Behrami 
said: “He loves to win the ball. He’s a great character with a lot of quality 
with his feet, good control of the ball and the ability to switch the play. 
He’s the complete modern player and I think he’s a great signing for Arsenal.

“He’s definitely more responsible now. He knows his quality much better and 
that’s why he doesn’t try something different. He stays with his game and he 
reads the game very well. His strength is he is such an intelligent player. He 
knows his quality and plays on his maximum.”

Xherdan Shaqiri, whose corner was finished by Schär, is an admirer of Xhaka, 
too, though the Stoke City forward warned of difficulties ahead. “I hope he is 
physical,” said the 24-year-old, who left Internazionale for the Britannia 
Stadium. “It is not simple to play in England. Coming from Germany or Italy it 
is different. It was difficult for me, too. It is the best league in the world 
and it is the best showcase for every player. I hope he can go there and play a 
lot of games.

“Every player wants to play in England. He knows what it is like. He has 
played in the Champions League against English teams [Manchester City last 
season] – and he will find out when he goes there.”

Next season Watford will be managed by Walter Mazzarri following the departure 
of Quique Sánchez Flores – a decision that Behrami fully understood. “No. I 
wasn’t surprised,” he said. “After January the team didn’t win so much. He 
wasn’t focused all the time. We take it normally. Some will take it bad and 
some will take it good. For me it wasn’t a problem. I know how [Giampaolo] 
Pozzo [the owner] and this club works. He is not focused on the manager, he is 
focused on the team.”

Wales’ Gareth Bale expects ‘feisty’ derby against England at Euro 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/gareth-bale-wales-england-euro-2016>
Switzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> play Romania on 
Wednesday at the Parc des Princes, while Albania face France in Marseille.

Shaqiri, another of Albanian extraction, said of the win: “It was difficult, 
of course. There was a lot of pressure on us, because we have a lot of players 
fromAlbania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> and from Kosovo but 
in the end we won the game and that is the most important thing.” 
 