
Arsenal are on the brink. For the last 15 seasons their participation at the 
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> 
knockout phase has felt set in stone. Not this time. The cracks were as plain 
as the dismal defending and their astonishing naivety and it would represent a 
surprise if Arsène Wenger and his players could now wriggle out of Group F.

After the defeat at Dynamo Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/16/dinamo-zagreb-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 and with Bayern Munich up next – at home and then away – nobody who watched 
this jarring reverse could advance the case for qualification with any 
optimism. And one thing was abundantly clear: if Arsenal play again with the 
same lack of backbone, they will get nothing and deserve even less.

They were undermined by a familiar cocktail – a bit of bad luck, set-piece 
concessions, barely conceivable individual errors and, to set the seal on it, a 
lunge towards the self-destruct button. They created chances, mainly in the 
second half and with a flurry towards the end, but their sights were awry and 
they could not undo the damage already done in defence.

Arsenal v Olympiakos: Champions League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-live>
Wenger produced a few statistics to prove this was a freakish result. His team 
had enjoyed 63% of possession while they had nine attempts on target to 
Olympiakos’s four. Scoring three times from four decent efforts, Wenger 
suggested, was a 100-1 shot in this competition. But Wenger’s protestations 
rang hollow given the nature of the goals his side conceded.

Olympiakos’s second was a personal disaster for David Ospina, the goalkeeper, 
who had been preferred by Wenger to Petr Cech, the marquee summer signing from 
Chelsea. Ospina dropped Kostas Fortounis’ corner under no pressure and was 
horrified when the goal-line assistant spotted that the ball had crossed the 
line.

But the Greek champions’ decisive third highlighted the flimsiness of 
Arsenal’s collective mentality. Alexis Sánchez – the player to whomArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> turned to bail them out – looked 
to have done precisely that when he headed home from Theo Walcott’s cross. Less 
than one minute later Ospina was picking the ball out of his net again.

It was shocking to see the room that Fortounis found inside the Arsenal area 
and when he shot, only the substitute Per Mertesacker’s lunging block denied 
him. But the danger had not passed. With Arsenal’s defensive structure in 
tatters, Esteban Cambiasso worked the ball wide to Felipe Pardo, in space on 
the right, and his low cross was touched home by the substitute, Alfred 
Finnbogason.

The carelessness on Arsenal’s part was breathtaking but there had been signs 
of it in the first-half, and the impression all along that this would not be 
the straight-forward home win that many people had imagined. After Alex 
Oxlade-Chamberlain had shot into the side netting from Sánchez’s pass on the 
break, Ospina curiously stayed on his line following a whipped Fortounis 
free-kick on 12 minutes. Happily for him, a flag went up for an offside in the 
middle.

Maicon downs Chelsea as Mourinho’s return to Porto ends in defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/29/porto-chelsea-champions-league-match-report>
Then there was the mix-up between Laurent Koscielny and Gabriel Paulista, when 
the latter crashed into his partner in an attempt to win a header and, when 
Brown Ideye worked the ball back to Fortounis, the midfielder’s shot was 
deflected over for a corner.

From it, Olympiakos <https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos> went 
ahead. Cambiasso’s delivery was angled back to the edge of the area and Pardo 
struck a first-time shot. The connection was true and he caught a break when 
the ball deflected off Oxlade-Chamberlain to beat Ospina.

Arsenal response was positive and immediate. The relentless Sánchez tricked 
past two blue shirts and he weighted a pass forward for Theo Walcott, who 
opened up his body to curl his shot at goal. Roberto, the Olympiakos 
goalkeeper, made a hash of things when he allowed the ball to slip underneath 
him.

It was Ospina, though, who dropped the most nightmarish of clangers and it 
shone a harsh light on Wenger’s decision to persist with him in this 
competition at the expense of Cech. There was some muttering about Cech having 
had a slightly tight calf but, make no mistake, his absence was down to 
selection and not injury.

Fortounis’s corner from the left was whipped in and it also caught the breeze 
back towards Ospina’s goal. The goalkeeper jumped and appeared set for a 
routine take only to fumble the ball and, almost in slow motion, watch it drop 
over the line.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Farsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a6d30a361d65737d9f0d5b6453d930e03355b86%2F81_0_1950_1171%2F1950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arsenal%20on%20the%20brink%20after%20dire%20defeat%20to%20Olympiakos%20in%20Champions%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Farsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arsenal%20on%20the%20brink%20after%20dire%20defeat%20to%20Olympiakos%20in%20Champions%20League&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Farsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a6d30a361d65737d9f0d5b6453d930e03355b86%2F81_0_1950_1171%2F1950.jpg>
 Arsenal’s David Ospina puts his head in his hands after scoring an own goal 
against Olympiakos in the Champions League. Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
Sánchez had grown frustrated towards the end of the first half and he was 
booked for dissent when he argued that a corner ought to have gone in his 
favour. But he was sharp and purposeful throughout, and the player to whom 
Arsenal invariably turned in possession.

There was frustration for Wenger when he lost Koscielny to a hamstring pull 
after a sliding challenge on 57 minutes and, shortly afterwards, the manager 
sacrificed his defensive midfielder, Francis Coquelin, for a more attacking one 
in Aaron Ramsey.

Arsenal ramped up the pressure. Roberto denied Mertesacker and, from the 
rebound, Omar Elabdellaoui somehow headed Santi Cazorla’s blast off the line. 
Roberto also punched clear another well-struck Cazorla effort.

Sánchez’s equaliser had been signposted but it was merely the prompt for 
Arsenal to self-combust and the questions about their character to rage.

There was time for Mesut Özil, Sánchez, Cazorla and Walcott to threaten but in 
their hearts, the Arsenal support knew that there would be no way back.
 