
Per Mertesacker has analysed the moment that cost Arsenal so dearly in the 3-2 
defeat to Olympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report>
on Tuesday and said that his team had no chance of reaching the Champions 
League knockout phase if they continued to demonstrate such failings.

Arsenal and Chelsea: why they imploded in the Champions League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/30/arsenal-chelsea-champions-league>
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> equalised for 2-2 
through Alexis Sánchez in the 65th minute but they left themselves horribly 
exposed at the back immediately afterwards, which allowed the Greek champions 
to score the winner. The substitute Alfred Finnbogason’s goal came less than 60 
seconds after that of Sánchez.

Arsène Wenger, the Arsenal manager, had substituted the defensive midfielder 
Francis Coquelin for the more attack-minded Aaron Ramsey on the hour and 
Mertesacker suggested that there had been a rush of blood and a lack of balance 
after Sánchez’s equaliser.

“We rushed a bit and not everyone came back to a defensive position, like we 
should have done,” Mertesacker said. “I felt we were a bit exposed. There was 
no one on the edge of the box. We should have done much better, especially 
having come back and had a lot of possession in the second half.

“It looked like we rushed ourselves and that is very disappointing. After we 
scored, it looked like we were not ready to win this game. There was a lack of 
concentration, a lack of discipline. We need to do much better defensively on 
these occasions, because these occasions decide more and more games in modern 
football.”

Arsenal killed themselves with three soft concessions but Mertesacker also 
felt that their attacking game lacked speed and incision. “At home, we should 
be much more aggressive from the start and be more dynamic,” he said. “That is 
what our game is all about. Possession but also, dynamic-wise, we should do 
much better. The tempo, the speed.

“We need to come back to that if we want to be more successful in the 
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>. If we 
want to qualify, we need to do much better. When we play like that, with that 
lack of concentration and discipline, we have got no chance.

Arsenal suffer on another bleak night for Europe’s most bafflingly ineffective 
league | Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league>
“Everyone is disappointed because this was not good enough. They took the lead 
three times easily and that is something that should not happen, especially 
when we are at home.”

Arsenal’s hopes of qualification hang by a thread and it is likely that they 
will need to take points off Bayern Munich, whom they meet at home and then 
away in the next two ties.

“Everyone is disappointed but we will get up and fight for a minimal chance,” 
Mertesacker said. “Bayern Munich is a big chance for us to show what a great 
team we are. We have to prove that we can show up with another performance. 
Play more aggressive, be more direct to the goal and be more convincing.”
 