
Arsenal have called off tonight's Premier League game against Bolton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/boltonwanderers> at the Emirates Stadium 
after weather conditions in London worsened this afternoon.

The club had been hopeful that, despite the weather which led to the early 
postponement of tonight's Carling Cup semi-final derby between Manchester City 
andManchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>, 
the game could go ahead. However, heavy snowfall during this afternoon meant 
that safety around the ground could not be guaranteed.

City and United will now try again on 19 January, the date originally 
scheduled for the second leg, with the return on 27 January. United and City 
have had league clashes against Hull City and Stoke City respectively postponed 
as a result. A new date for the other semi-final is set to be announced later 
today.

With no immediate end in sight to the current cold spell, the disruption could 
continue into the weekend. AllPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> grounds are required to 
have undersoil heating, but frozen pitches are likely to be a problem at lower 
levels and in Scotland.

The Scottish Football Association has urged clubs to make early pitch 
inspections ahead of their Scottish Cup fourth-round ties, and Celtic's match at
Morton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morton> has been postponed.

An SFA spokesman said: "Under the Scottish FA cup competition rules, pitch 
inspections can be carried out no later than four hours prior to kick-off but 
given the weather forecast for the week ahead, it is prudent for inspections to 
be carried out as quickly as possible."

It is not just football which has been hit by the cold snap. Racing and rugby 
union have also been hit hard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jan/06/snow-racing-fontwell-lingfield-kempton>
.
 