
Jack Wilshere has revelled in the buzz of his Arsenal return after a 17-month 
injury lay-off. Now, he has once again felt the unique charge of a goal. The 
midfielder's timing was in here, and not only because he last found the net 
almost two years ago. Arsenal had laboured in the first half of a tie that they 
sorely needed to win to ease theirChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> nerves.

Wilshere burst on to Olivier Giroud's header and, when his touch and composure 
had to be perfect, he lifted the ball over the advancingMontpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> goalkeeper, 
Geoffrey Jourdren. The 20-year-old could not conceal his delight. Tongue out, 
he beat the club crest on his shirt before sliding on his knees towards the 
corner flag.

The evening's real beauty, though, was still to come. If Wilshere's goal 
represented the turning point, then Lukas Podolski's was the one that thrilled 
the home crowd.

They will not tire of watching the reruns of such a sumptuous volley, which 
carried shades of those that Robin van Persie used to dispatch in this arena. 
The crowd even serenaded him with Van Persie's old song, about scoring when he 
wants, with the names changed.

Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> emerged as comfortable 
victors, which is not something that has happened for a good few weeks and, by 
way of a footnote, Ars√®ne Wenger had no trouble with a team of European 
officials. It became a gloriously stress-free occasion after Wilshere's goal 
and, with Schalke beating Olympiakos, Wenger could savour qualification for the 
last 16 with a game to spare.

The trip to Olympiakos in December has been rendered largely meaningless, 
although Wenger said that he was determined to get the victory with which his 
team could leapfrog Schalke to finish as group winners.

"Statistically, it's better to finish top of the group," said Wenger, who 
could feel pride at reaching the knock-out phase of Europe's elite competition 
for the 13th season in succession. "It's not the most glamorous thing but it's 
not as easy as it looks. There's not that many teams that do it."

Wilshere's performance mirrored that of his team: difficult at the start but 
growing inexorably in confidence. "It was great to see Wilshere scoring after 
being out for so long and the other one was fantastic for Podolski," Wenger 
said.

"In our last game against Tottenham, after 60 minutes, Wilshere lacked a bit 
of petrol but I didn't feel that tonight. He is not far away from being at his 
best but I must still manage him and not overload him with too many games."

The first half was no spectacle, despite the busy promptings of Santi Cazorla 
and it felt as though it might not be Podolski's night. Twice, he had sightings 
of goal and on each occasion he failed to work Jourdren. Arsenal's best 
first-half moment had come on 11 minutes when Laurent Koscielny timed his run 
to meet Thomas Vermaelen's whipped left-wing cross. His free header crashed 
against the crossbar. Montpellier flickered, with Mapou Yanga-Mbiwa an imposing 
presence, and Wojciech Szczesny needed to leave his line to thwart Anthony 
Mounier.

Arsenal had to raise themselves in the second half from what had been a 
curious flatness. The football turmoil had been elsewhere in the capital at 
kick-off time, chiefly at Chelsea, but there could be no doubting the urgency 
for Wenger's team to get the job done.

They located the tonic. Podolski linked with Vermaelen on the left and the 
defender's cross invited Giroud to show his aerial power against his former 
club. He obliged and Wilshere read the knock-down. He was not going to miss 
with his left foot from the edge of the six-yard box, despite the pressure from 
Jourdren and he enjoyed his first goal since the 4-2 victory at Aston Villa on 
27 November 2010.

Arsenal were up and running, and the sense of liberation was writ large over 
Podolski's volley. From another Giroud assist, this one a chipped return flick, 
the striker showcased his technique and the power in that left foot.

It was a moment to illuminate any game, let alone one that largely failed to 
excite. Cazorla and Giroud had the chances to extend the lead but the damage 
was done. Montpellier went with a whimper. Arsenal march on.
 