
Amid the euphoria of Arsenal’s Champions League progress at Olympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/arsene-wenger-greatest-escape-arsenal-champions-league-olympiakos>
 on Wednesday night, there was the underlying sense of reprieve; a feeling that 
the club had got away with it.

This was the footballing equivalent of Indiana Jones reaching back and 
grabbing his hat before the wall descends 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ui85HwTX1s>. At the very last moment Arsenal 
had found their focus. The standout line after theOlivier Giroud-inspired 3-0 
win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/olympiakos-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 at the Georgios Karaiskakis Stadium, which squeezed Arsenal into the last 16 
at the expense of Olympiakos on the head-to-head tie-break, came from Theo 
Walcott.

The forward looked ahead to Monday’s draw for the first knockout round and he 
remembered what had happened last season. After a rather more comfortable 
qualification Arsenal might have been drawn against Real or Atlético Madrid, 
Barcelona, Bayern Munich, Porto or Monaco in the last 16. To everybody’s relief 
they got Monaco –and Arsenal lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/17/monaco-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
.

Arsenal’s recovery complete after Giroud treble sinks Olympiakos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/olympiakos-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
“Whoever we end up playing this time, we must respect them,” Walcott said. 
“Monaco, obviously … we didn’t respect them at all.”

If Arsenal did not respect Monaco – at all – it is no great leap to suggest 
they did not respect Dinamo Zagreb and Olympiakos when the draw was made for 
this season’s group stage. The club took their eye off the ball in the opening 
two ties,losing 2-1 in Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/16/dinamo-zagreb-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 and3-2 at home to Olympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report>
, and the requirement for what the manager, Arsène Wenger, described as the 
“greatest escape” on the final night in Athens was set in train.

Arsenal fashioned their lifeline with the home wins over Bayern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/20/bayern-munich-beaten-as-olivier-giroud-hands-arsenal-a-european-lifeline>
 andDinamo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/arsenal-dinamo-zagreb-champions-league-match-report>
, and they clutched it and hauled themselves to safety in Greece. It was a 
momentous occasion and to put it into some sort of context, it is worth noting 
that during the Wenger years the club have overturned a first-leg deficit only 
once in Uefa competition.

That was in 2009-10 when, after a 2-1 loss at Porto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/feb/17/porto-arsenal-champions-league>
 in the last-16, first leg, theywon 5-0 in the return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/mar/09/arsenal-porto-champions-league-bendtner-nicklas>
. It was still a group phase tie against Olympiakos but, because of the 
permutations, it had the trappings of a two-legged knockout.

Walcott talked about the “fantastic attitude” the team had shown with their 
backs to the wall and in extremely hostile surrounds. Unlike in Monaco last 
season, when they fought back to level on aggregate in the second leg, albeit 
with fewer away goals, they did not rush things at 1-0 up againstOlympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos>. The performance was marked 
by icy cool.

The victory has the capacity to ignite Arsenal’s season, both at home and 
abroad. They have been determined to dig in during their injury crisis, to stay 
in touch, particularly in the Premier League, and, when everybody is fit, the 
hope is they can lengthen their stride. They showed what was possible with 
their fine form over the second half of last season.

Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> are not only through in 
Europe, they sit two points off the top of the domestic table. This, however, 
has to be a turning point, the moment when their mentality hardens into that of 
champions.

One thing is clear. They will not always qualify with three Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group stage defeats; 
playing fast and loose might sting them in the future.

“I think this result can lift our season,” Walcott said. “The amount of 
confidence in that dressing room is spreading out to all the players. That’s 
what you want going into the Christmas period because the Christmas period in 
the Premier League really maps out where you are going to be at the end of the 
season.”

Every one of the club’s 1,200 travelling supporters will remember Wednesday 
for a very long time. It was an occasion when everything came together and 
every last detail was, in Wenger’s opinion, “perfect”. Giroud was magnificent, 
completing his personal transformation from red-card villain in Zagreb to 
hat-trick hero, while even Wenger’s psychological tricks paid off.

He told the press on Tuesday night Olympiakos could be gripped by a “fear 
factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/08/arsene-wenger-olympiakos-arsenal-champions-league>
” if they fell behind because they would become painfully aware of what they 
stood to lose – which ensured that a message was sent out via the headlines. He 
then reinforced it to his players in the dressing room.

“That first goal was key, we just had to unsettle the fans,” Walcott said. 
“You could tell by the atmosphere here that they are a massive part of this 
team. Once we got them quiet and got them on the team’s back we knew we had the 
game won. The manager told us that at the start of it.

“It was one of the great European nights. We made it so difficult for 
ourselves, no one really gave us any chance but the attitude in that dressing 
room was fantastic. We knew what we had to do and we always felt that if we 
kept a clean sheet we would win. The great thing with this game compared to
Monaco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> last season was that we 
were very patient with the buildup play. Even when we scored we didn’t go 
all-out attack. We were calm and relaxed because there was plenty of time.”

Arsenal will face one of Real, Atlético, Barcelona, Wolfsburg or Zenit St 
Petersburg in the last 16 and Walcott reflected the burgeoning confidence.

“I’m sure none of them would like to play us after this result,” Walcott said. 
“Whoever you get in the draw is going to be difficult. You’ve seen teams 
struggle when they should go through and should be winning. It’s the way the 
set-up is now. Even in the Premier League you see every team is getting much 
better.

“But it doesn’t matter who we get. If we all contribute and play like that 
then we can beat anyone on our day. If we get a few of our players back as well 
then our squad will be even stronger than it is now. I’d just like to make the 
job a bit easier next time.”
 