
Arsenal are facing the prospect of being without the influential Alexis 
Sánchez and Santi Cazorla for their decisiveChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group game against 
Olympiakos next week, though initial assessments of Laurent Koscielny’s fitness 
are more promising.

Premier League: 10 talking points from the weekend’s action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/30/premier-league-10-talking-points-weekend-action>
Sánchez was substituted after an hour of Sunday’s draw at Norwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/29/norwich-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 having pulled up with hamstring trouble in his right leg. He had felt 
tightness in a muscle afterthe midweek win over Dinamo Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/arsenal-dinamo-zagreb-champions-league-match-report>
 but tests had indicated he could play at Carrow Road, only for the forward to 
hobble off signalling to the bench he had felt something tear. If he did suffer 
a tear, he can expect to be out for at least a month.

Cazorla suffered a kick from Gary O’Neil on his left knee which appeared to 
jar the joint and ensured he played the second half, according to Arsène 
Wenger, “on one leg”.Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> 
fear the Spaniard has sustained ligament damage.

The club will compile a more detailed assessment of both players’ injuries in 
the next 48 hours but already rate them serious doubts for the games against 
Sunderland and, more significantly, in Greece next Wednesday. Arsenal need to 
beatOlympiakos <https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos> by two goals – 
or 3-2, 4-3 and so on – to guarantee qualification for the knockout phase. They 
have played the Greek team three times in final group ties since 2009 and lost 
them all, albeit they had already qualified on each occasion.

The news on Koscielny is far more encouraging despite Wenger having said after 
the match that the France centre-half “could not walk” after suffering a hip 
spasm eight minutes into the game. It led him to clutch at his lower back and 
depart the pitch after 11 minutes – he was replaced by Gabriel Paulista – to 
join an already lengthy list of walking wounded. Yet, from those worrying early 
signs, the hope is Koscielny will return to training before the end of the week 
and should be in contention to play against Sunderland at the Emirates on 
Saturday.

His availability would represent a boost for Arsenal, fourth in the Premier 
League table. Before the draw at Norwich they were already without Kieran Gibbs 
(calf), Jack Wilshere (hairline fracture of his left leg), Danny Welbeck 
(knee), Theo Walcott (calf), Francis Coquelin (knee), Mikel Arteta (calf) and 
Tomas Rosicky (knee). The hope is Walcott is closest to a first-team return, 
possibly this weekend.
 