
An androgynous figure moonwalks through Manhattan at night. It's a simple 
thing,this fleeting performance by artist Klara Lidén 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/browse_results.php?criteria=O%3ADE%3AI%3A41|G%3AHI%3AE%3A1&page_number=8&template_id=1&sort_order=2>
; recorded in lo-fi digital video, it only lasts the length of a YouTube clip. 
Yet as the artist shimmies backwards and the traffic flashes past, her body 
seems to rub against the city fabric, speaking briefly of strange alternatives 
to the urban grind.

Impromptu dance is but one aspect of Lidén's work. She has recycled waste 
packaging into makeshift hideaways, turned old posters into paintings, piling 
them up in layers like geological strata, along with many other kinds of 
creative vandalism. Sometimes her exploits are unseen and anonymous, like 
setting up her own free postal delivery service with a stolen postbox. 
Occasionally they're bracingly anarchic – as with her one-woman dance show on a 
commuter train.

In recent years, Lidén's attentions have increasingly focused on art spaces. 
She's had a string of acclaimed shows, including atNew York's MoMA 
<http://www.moma.org/visit/calendar/exhibitions/316>, while for the 
much-discussedNordic pavilion 
<http://www.danish-nordic-pavilions.com/_pag/news.html> at last year's Venice 
Biennale, assembled by fellow artistsElmgreen & Dragset 
<http://www.victoria-miro.com/artists/_32/>, she created a fictional teenager's 
bedroom that offered an unusual form of escape – an emergency axe as well as a 
hole in the wall.

More generally, though, Lidén's compelling work is covert, containing an 
illicit, even erotic charge. Take 550 Jamaica Avenue, an early video from 2004, 
which featured the artist breaking into an abandoned Brooklyn flat, stripping 
off her top, and playing the piano. And in another work, she dug a kind of 
refuge on the banks of Berlin's Spree river, accessible via a trapdoor to 
anyone who wanted to hide.

Why we like her: An installation, punningly entitled Unheimlich Manöver 
(2007), currently fills the entrance to the Serpentine gallery – a vast 
blockade assembled from the contents of the artist's flat. If in previous 
works, Lidén was the intruder, here it's the gallerygoer, forced into a 
voyeuristic encounter with her personal possessions.

Now you see it: In 2002, when Klara Lidén was a student, she conducted a raid 
on downtown Stockholm, removing advertising posters from walls and bus 
shelters, leaving only small stickers, bearing the text U TRY MME (a pun on 
"space" in Swedish). The next morning this quarter of the city awoke to a 
white-out.

Where can I see her? Klara Lidén is at the Serpentine gallery 
<http://www.serpentinegallery.org/>, London, until 7 November.
 