
Arts Council England <http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/> (ACE)’s new theatre 
report,published this morning <http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/theatreinengland>, 
offers a snapshot of the current state of production across the country, 
particularly in light of the changes that have taken place over the past 15 
years. The Arts Council has also published a response that includes some 
interesting proposals, including changes to support touring, the creation of 
three regional hubs, and new leadership and workforce development programmes to 
increaseskills and diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jan/06/diversity-creativity-british-theatre-2015>
, particularly at senior levels.

The report probably doesn’t tell us a great deal that we didn’t already know – 
such as that London dominates, accounting for 47% of all theatre performances 
in England in 2014; that local authority funding has fallen by 50% in the years 
leading up to 2014-15; that theatre audiences and workforces both lack 
diversity of all kinds, and that a small number of hit shows – often musicals – 
accounted for a large proportion of box office income, with 36 out of 1,864 
accounting for 56% of box office income.

Orwellian nightmare or fairer system for all? What Quality Metrics will mean 
for arts funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/04/quality-metrics-arts-council-england-funding>
Yet even when the report appears to say the obvious, it’s useful to be 
reminded of the state of play. Particularly that there is a direct connection 
between supply and demand. Lots of people go to the theatre in London because 
there are lots of theatres and shows on offer, which are easily accessible in 
terms of transport links. Underserved parts of the country have seen a drop in 
attendances, sometimes dramatically, in recent years.

There are fascinating findings on unearned income, including philanthropy. 
Large organisations with 50 or more permanent staff generate 78% of all 
unearned income, while those with fewer than 10 staff generate just 1% of all 
unearned income. We’ve always known the arts are not a level playing field, and 
that the rich get richer, but these stats point to the fact that the more 
marketised theatre becomes, the more that benefits the bigger, better-funded 
organisations, which are often based in London or big cities. The report also 
raises interesting questions about what happens tocore values 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2013/aug/04/mark-ravenhill-home-truths-funding-edinburgh>
 as theatres in the subsidised sector look to other funding sources, and become 
more entrepreneurial and reliant on philanthropy. Does it change the sort of 
work they make, and the level of risk they are willing to countenance? It makes 
me wonder what it will be, in the future, that really distinguishes these 
theatres from the commercial sector.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Farts-council-england-releases-report-on-british-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70b6d571e5ea37a1bf5f51f5b074113d959c0bbb%2F0_74_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arts%20Council%20releases%20report%20on%20state%20of%20English%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Farts-council-england-releases-report-on-british-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arts%20Council%20releases%20report%20on%20state%20of%20English%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Farts-council-england-releases-report-on-british-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70b6d571e5ea37a1bf5f51f5b074113d959c0bbb%2F0_74_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Wicked at the Apollo, London. ACE’s report confirms that a small number of hit 
shows, often musicals, account for a large proportion of box-office income. 
Photograph: Matt Crockett 
The report does not give nearly enough attention to the independent sector, 
and the increasing impossibility of sustaining a career as a theatre-maker 
beyond one’s 20s. But it does identify some key trends and knotty problems. One 
is the crisis in touring because of the stagnation in fees earned, and the way 
that venues have shifted riskaway from themselves and on to companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/feb/04/arts-funding-paines-plough-redistribution>
. ACE has said it will explore a long overdue guarantee-against-loss scheme, 
and look at ways that thatGrants for the Arts 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/funding/grants-arts> could be used to respond to 
demand for additional performances, particularly on the small scale.

It will require organisations to stop thinking competitively and start 
thinking differently
Neil Darlison on the arts hubs model 
The change to the 2012 national portfolio organisation agreements, which meant 
that those withnational portfolio organisation (NPO) status 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/our-investment-2015-18/national-portfolio-organisations>
 were no longer able to apply to the already hard-pressed Grants for the Arts, 
has had the unintended consequence that NPOs with successful shows have been 
unable to remount them for touring. It seemed a sensible decision, as Grants 
for the Arts is ridiculously oversubscribed, but to solve the problem, ACE will 
now look to both thestrategic touring 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/funding/strategic-touring> programme and using 
grant-in-aid 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/about-us/how-and-where-we-invest-public-money> 
funds to respond quickly. That’s smart thinking. Grants for Arts is already 
buckling under pressure.

The report notes that the way theatres operate is changing, and so is what we 
mean by a producing theatre. In many cases, theatres are moving closer to an 
arts centre model of mixing produced and presented work, which renders the old 
idea of an artistic director with a singular artistic vision obsolete, and 
requires instead ADs skilled in the art of curation. In many of the most 
interesting venues – and that is often the ones that are daily questioning 
their civic and community role, such as Derby theatre – that is already 
happening. But there are venues where the repertoire still feels as if its 
stuck in the 20th century.

Clearly, ACE sees this shift towards a different producing model as the 
future, and says that, where appropriate, it will encourage building-based 
companies “to consider how they might best serve their communities and the 
wider theatre ecology and support them to evolve their producing role into one 
that has more of a focus on commissioning and talent development allied to a 
wider range of presented work”.

There is a danger in this, that it would simply create another layer of 
gatekeepers, but if it were done with care it could bring change to a situation 
where too many buildings still operate like silos, foregrounding their own 
survival and health over everybody else’s interests. Instead, these venues 
could and should operate as platforms, creating capacity for others with good 
ideas, looking for the points where interests can align that serve the 
community and ecology best, and acting as facilitators.

Do we need diversity quotas for theatre?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jun/09/do-we-need-diversity-quotas-for-theatre>
Which brings us to probably ACE’s most radical proposal: the creation of three 
arts hubs outside of London. The idea has been in the wind for some years, but 
will be implemented when the current round of NPO funding is settled in 
February. ACE will be looking to invest in three hubs, bid for by a mixture of 
collaborating partners of different scales, that could be buildings but are as 
likely to be companies, festivals or arts centres, to “test a place-based 
approach to supporting artistic risk-taking and developing and strengthening 
talent and audiences as the basis of building vibrant local theatre ecologies … 
across a defined geographical area”.

The danger of the hub approach is that, once again, the bigger organisations 
hold the power and the money. But from what Neil Darlison, director of theatre 
at ACE tells me, there is a strong understanding that this can’t be allowed to 
happen, and bidders will have to demonstrate that they are genuinely willing to 
work collaboratively and to the benefit of the greater good. “It will require a 
mindset of altruism,” he says, “and require organisations to stop thinking 
competitively and start thinking differently.” He points out that a bid might 
not be led by the biggest and best funded partner but by much smaller 
companies, with the bricks-and-mortar building as just one partner on an equal 
footing with all the other collaborators. Of course, if a big building in a 
particular area declines to be involved, that would also speak volumes about 
how it views itself and its place in the local and wider theatre ecology.

I’ve long thought the hub idea was worth exploring, to see if it really can 
deliver more opportunities for independent artists, and Darlison says that 
there will be a stringent evaluation of the way the three hubs operate and 
develop. Watch this space.
 