
The key moments in football are so often defined by rivalries. The clash of 
personalities, the season’s crucial fixture. The sweetest victory, and the 
bitterest defeat, will almost always be the away match at the ground of your 
biggest rival. Your greatest win there, or biggest loss, will remain lodged in 
your memory.

Even so, there is also a shared understanding among fans from all sides. While 
you want to beat your rivals, you also understand how much their fans love 
their team, and how their club’s identity matters as much to them as your own 
does to you. The beautiful game is a huge part of all fans’ lives.

That is why, even though I am a Blackburn Rovers fan, I was saddened to read 
about the prospect of Millwallbeing forced to leave their home ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/millwall-having-to-move-heartbreaking-lib-dem-leader>
, the Den, as Lewisham council consider pursing a compulsory purchase order on 
land around the site. I love Ewood Park, and the idea of Rovers being pushed 
out against our will is heartbreaking. And I know that for Millwall’s fans the 
idea of being wrenched from the Den will be just as bad.

Millwall admit council scheme could force club to leave Lewisham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/millwall-admit-council-scheme-leave-lewisham>
Because football isn’t just about sport. It is about community too – the 
people you go to matches with, the chip shop you grab a bite to eat in before 
the match and the pub you pop into for a quick pint afterwards. You don’t 
forget your first match: mine was Blackburn against Oxford United and despite 
it being a 1-1 draw, it is a match I’ll never forget. Because it matters – it 
is one of life’s great moments.

And football is also about the jobs in the community that the club creates, 
the character it brings to an area and the local initiatives it supports – like 
theMillwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> community trust, 
which offers local people sports classes, educational workshops, disability 
sports classes and children’s soccer schools. If the club were to go, what 
would happen to that? What about the people employed by it? What about the 
businesses in the area that have, in Millwall’s case, grown up around a club 
that has been playing in the area for over 100 years?

Too many clubs over the years have suffered from events outside fans’ hands – 
Portsmouth, Leeds, Wimbledon being three prominent and differing examples. But 
while fans sometimes worry about how their club is being run or who may take it 
over, they shouldn’t be faced with the prospect of the local council taking 
decisions that could destroy its future in their home ground, as seems to be 
the case with Millwall.

So what can be done? Well, in this case much power rests in the hands of the 
council, so the fans, community and those who want to see the club’s future 
secured at the Den must do all they can to make their voices heard to their 
elected representatives. More broadly, government must start recognising that 
football isn’t just a game – it is a huge business and clubs are a community 
asset.

In 1997 the government set up a Football Task Force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/1999/dec/22/newsstory.sport1> to look at 
the future of the sport – I believe it is time for another. There should be an 
independent commission, representative of the whole game, to comprehensively 
review governance to make it more effective, inclusive, and no longer subject 
to conflicting vested interests.

For our part, Liberal Democrats believe fans must be given a real say 
<http://www.libdems.org.uk/f29_reclaiming_the_people_s_game> in the major 
decisions that affect the future of their club – every league club should have 
a formally recognised supporters’ trust to represent their views.

The big money that goes into Premier League TV should also be better spread 
into the lower leagues, with a tithe on the amount received used to strengthen 
the sport’s grassroots. There must be better transparency about club ownership, 
and a new deal for fans with a commitment that 10% of all tickets for matches 
at English Premier League, English Football League and Scottish Premier League 
level to be made available at an affordable price. I’m a backer of theFootball 
Supporters’ Federation’s “Twenty’s Plenty” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/02/twentys-plenty-premier-league-football-supporters-federation-ticket-prices>
 campaign that would cap away ticket prices at £20.

I have huge admiration and respect for the work of the late Brian Lomax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/02/brian-lomax-death-supporters-direct-northampton-town>
. He was a lifelong Liberal Democrat activist and significantly was the 
inspiration behind the supporters’ trust that would buy shares in Northampton 
Town and see him serve as the first supporter-elected director of a football 
club. It was his work – and the work of the fans and local community who 
rallied around – that saved Northampton Town in 1992. He went on to pioneer a 
model of fan ownership as first managing director ofSupporters Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/supporters-direct>.

Brian saw that football was so more than sport, through the role it played in 
communities, and what it means to fans.He put this beautifully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/02/brian-lomax-death-supporters-direct-northampton-town>
, saying: “It’s about emotion, about sharing and comradeship, about the whole 
being greater than the sum of its parts. These are very deeply rooted human 
needs and I believe that that is at the root of people’s love for football and 
loyalty for their clubs.”

Football clubs matter – it is time for politicians to realise that and take 
the game’s future seriously.
 