
Belgians, says Brian Eno, have got a thing for repetition. As evidence, he 
offers the listening habits of his Flemish mother. “When I was young, she fell 
in love with a Roy Orbison song calledBlue Bayou 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HiMl4yX1JiA> … We had one of those record 
players that could play again and again – the needle would pick up and go back 
to the beginning. I remember going to school one morning. She played Blue Bayou 
all through breakfast time. I went to school and I came back in the evening – 
and Blue Bayou was still playing.”


Eno – famous for creating his own loops on albums such as Music for Airports – 
leans back in his Notting Hill studio and smiles. He is joined in laughter by 
the woman peering out from the laptop screen in front of us. “It’s probably 
also the origins of your ambient music,” deduces the choreographer and dancer
Anne Teresa de Keersmaeker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/sep/08/dance-anne-teresa-de-keersmaeker-rosas>
, who is Skyping us from her Brussels office.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_OpXS_Ap3hs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_OpXS_Ap3hs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_OpXS_Ap3hs&media=>
 Watch a trailer for Golden Hours (As You Like It) 
If Eno wanted further proof for his theory, then you need look no further than 
De Keersmaeker, who in the 1980s forged a formidable reputation for 
contemporary dance in Belgium that continues to this day. De Keersmaeker’s 
signature work is the relentless and hypnoticRosas Danst Rosas 
<http://www.rosas.be/nl/production/rosas-danst-rosas> (1983), performed to a 
bruising industrial score mimicking pistons, which features a quartet of 
uniformly dressed women going through a set of gestures that alternately 
suggest ennui and ecstasy. The piece provokes similarly split emotions among 
spectators.When it was revived at Sadler’s Wells in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/sep/09/rosas-review>, with De 
Keersmaeker herself in the ensemble, the dancers’ flinching in their seats on 
stage was mirrored by plenty of audience members, restlessly shifting about in 
their rows. But the potency of the piece is undeniable and the show proves that 
no matter how many times you watch a dancer perform the same move, each will 
always look and feel different.

When she was creating Rosas Danst Rosas, De Keersmaeker developed her own 
musical addiction, not to the Big O like Eno’s mum, but to Roxy Music and the 
solo albums Eno made after he left the group. She was hooked in particular on 
his haunting Golden Hours, which features Eno on vocals as well as what the 
credits call “choppy organs” and “uncertain piano”. The track captures the 
warmth, melancholy and gentle menace of the album on which it appears: Another 
Green World (1975). “I love this song so much,” says De Keersmaeker. “I have a 
really childish but very honest relationship with it.” She gestures excitedly 
when explaining how it makes her feel: “Play it again, Sam! Play it once more …
Encore une fois! Another time. Again and again and again until the record is 
kaputski!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D82pqDvbPtx4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D82pqDvbPtx4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D82pqDvbPtx4&media=>
 Watch Rosas Danst Rosas 
From the start, De Keersmaeker choreographed pieces to a huge variety of 
musical styles. Like Eno, she was influenced early on in her career by the 
minimalist master Steve Reich. Her workFase 
<http://www.rosas.be/en/production/fase-four-movements-music-steve-reich> 
(1982) comprises a solo and three duets danced to four of his repetitive 
compositions. Reich features in her later works too, as does music by Bartók, 
Bach, Gérard Grisey, Arnold Schoenberg and John Coltrane. Her moves have also 
inspired musicians – most famously Beyoncé,whose video for the song Countdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2011/oct/11/beyonce-de-keersmaeker-dance-move>
 featured moves so similar to Rosas Danst Rosas that they were once deemed by 
De Keersmaeker to be an act of “pure plagiarism”.

De Keersmaeker has a particular love for pop, which she describes as our most 
direct and daily relationship with music. “It is pulse-related, so generally 
good dance music,” she says, drawing a comparison with contemporary classical 
music. “Have you ever tried to dance to Anton Webern?” she asks. I have not.

In 2009, she created The Song, a piece for 10 dancers which used the Beatles’ 
White Album as a framework (she describes it as an “iceberg which is under the 
water”) but didn’t feature much music. She had thought about using Eno’s Golden 
Hours for The Song but put the track “in the fridge” instead. It was brought 
out again when she had the idea to use music from Another Green World in a 
loose adaptation of As You Like It, where the lines of the play would be danced 
rather than spoken.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fas-you-like-it-brian-eno-anne-teresa-de-keersmaeker-golden-hours-shakespeare-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1caafeff4b6279256ccdc35163ef951caf9491fb%2F0_0_2161_2800%2F2161.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20you%20dance%20it%3A%20Brian%20Eno%20and%20Anne%20Teresa%20de%20Keersmaeker%20do%20Shakespeare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fas-you-like-it-brian-eno-anne-teresa-de-keersmaeker-golden-hours-shakespeare-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20you%20dance%20it%3A%20Brian%20Eno%20and%20Anne%20Teresa%20de%20Keersmaeker%20do%20Shakespeare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fas-you-like-it-brian-eno-anne-teresa-de-keersmaeker-golden-hours-shakespeare-sadlers-wells%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1caafeff4b6279256ccdc35163ef951caf9491fb%2F0_0_2161_2800%2F2161.jpg>
 Ennui and ecstasy … Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker and Samantha van Wissen in 
Rosas Danst Rosas at Sadler’s Wells in 2009. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for 
the Guardian 
The dancers might hum or sing snatches of Eno’s songs as they perform, but 
they do not speak a single line of Shakespeare – the meaning comes primarily 
from their movements, although certain speeches from the play are projected 
against a screen in the production. Nevertheless, the dancers have learned the 
words of the speeches they are dancing. Reviewing the show in Brussels,Roslyn 
Sulcas of the New York Times wrote 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/26/arts/dance/anne-teresa-de-keersmaekers-golden-hours-at-kaaitheater-in-brussels.html?_r=0>
: “It’s clear, watching the dancers, that they know the language of the play 
intimately, and that their movements are generated by its rhythms and meaning.”

Shakespeare’s comedy, the Eno of the 70s and Roxy Music share certain themes 
that are immediately obvious – not least an interest in gender-bending and 
cross-dressing. There’s also the “green world” of Eno’s album and As You Like 
It’s forest of Arden, whose wild freedom is contrasted with the French court in 
the play. And both the play and the album have an interest in time: As You Like 
It contains Jacques’ famous speech about the “seven ages of man”, and Golden 
Hours opens with the lines, “The passage of time / Is flicking dimly up on the 
screen / I can’t see the lines / I used to think I could read between.”

De Keersmaeker has always concentrated on notions of “space, the organisation 
of space, geometrical patterns that underline the choreography”, but she wanted 
to resume her early interest as a choreographer in different perceptions of 
time, particularly the stretching and compression of time. (In Eno’s Golden 
Hours, he asks “How can moments go so slow?” yet then sings: “Several times / 
I’ve seen the evening slide away.”) Once Eno and De Keersmaeker had decided to 
collaborate, Eno returned to the album and made “several variations of it – 
like backwards and upside-down and stretched so that it was very long … There 
are a lot of those. Some of those are quite good pieces actually. I was 
listening to a couple of them the other day. They might have a life some day.” 
But not, it seems, in De Keersmaeker’s show, which predominantly uses the 
original tracks – Golden Hours is played several times in a row at the start 
and acoustic versions of songs are played on the guitar by one of the dancers, 
Carlos Garbin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fas-you-like-it-brian-eno-anne-teresa-de-keersmaeker-golden-hours-shakespeare-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff98d2fc1a471d3352329fd76f684a70f768a1060%2F0_345_7360_4567%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20you%20dance%20it%3A%20Brian%20Eno%20and%20Anne%20Teresa%20de%20Keersmaeker%20do%20Shakespeare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fas-you-like-it-brian-eno-anne-teresa-de-keersmaeker-golden-hours-shakespeare-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20you%20dance%20it%3A%20Brian%20Eno%20and%20Anne%20Teresa%20de%20Keersmaeker%20do%20Shakespeare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fas-you-like-it-brian-eno-anne-teresa-de-keersmaeker-golden-hours-shakespeare-sadlers-wells%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff98d2fc1a471d3352329fd76f684a70f768a1060%2F0_345_7360_4567%2F7360.jpg>
 ‘How can moments go so slow?’ Golden Hours (As You Like It). Photograph: Anne 
Van Aerschot 
“Work at a different speed” was the instruction on one of the famous Oblique 
Strategies <http://www.rtqe.net/ObliqueStrategies/> cards that Eno used to aid 
the artistic process and help him avoid creative blocks when he was recording 
Golden Hours. (Others read: “Try faking it” and “Is it finished?”) He recalls 
entering the studio with nothing prepared in advance. “I had already made two 
albums by that time. On the second one a lot of the songs started as very, very 
basic sketches and I developed them really in the studio, in relation to the 
people I was working with, the technologies that were there, the possibilities 
that were around … Those things had a spontaneity and a life to them that was 
much more exciting to me than the pre-written pieces. So I decided on that 
third album, that’s what I was going to do. The first week was so disastrous I 
nearly gave up … I remember very clearly standing and working on one of those 
pieces and weeping as I did.” Eno says that he would “never dare” to release 
Golden Hours now. “Listen to the rhythm: it’s so sloppy! But a lot of the 
character of the piece is that you can hear it’s somebody making it up. It 
doesn’t sound like a bunch of machines. It sounds like someone trying hard.”

Would De Keersmaeker ever use the Oblique Strategies method when 
choreographing? “Not for this. I was considering that. But I’m stubborn with my 
own things … I’ve a ‘formalist strategy’!” She says she goes slowly day-by-day, 
but always has a plan. She is used to responding to music scores and finding 
“choreographic answers” to composers such as Bach, but the challenge with 
Golden Hours was embodying Shakespeare’s words rather than music. “It was 
really a long searching process. I have not been crying in the studio but 
pulling my hair.” She yanks away to prove her point.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fas-you-like-it-brian-eno-anne-teresa-de-keersmaeker-golden-hours-shakespeare-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc668cf8055f5d6ba07cfa9be2fef3dd6494af70b%2F0_0_3581_2497%2F3581.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20you%20dance%20it%3A%20Brian%20Eno%20and%20Anne%20Teresa%20de%20Keersmaeker%20do%20Shakespeare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fas-you-like-it-brian-eno-anne-teresa-de-keersmaeker-golden-hours-shakespeare-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20you%20dance%20it%3A%20Brian%20Eno%20and%20Anne%20Teresa%20de%20Keersmaeker%20do%20Shakespeare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fas-you-like-it-brian-eno-anne-teresa-de-keersmaeker-golden-hours-shakespeare-sadlers-wells%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc668cf8055f5d6ba07cfa9be2fef3dd6494af70b%2F0_0_3581_2497%2F3581.jpg>
 Brian Eno in his studio in 1974. Photograph: Erica Echenberg/Redferns 
The European tour of Golden Hours stops off at Sadler’s Wells in London next 
week. It was at Sadler’s Wells that, in 1992, Eno gave his memorably entitled, 
three-part performance lecturePerfume, Defence and David Bowie’s Wedding 
<http://www.frieze.com/issue/review/brian_eno_perfume_defence_and_davis_bowies_wedding/>
. It was, he says, a “terrifying” experience. The last part concerned Bowie and 
Iman’s nuptials in Florence that year, reflecting on Hello! magazine’s 
exclusive coverage of the ceremony. The middle bit touched on defence spending. 
The opening section of the speech concerned one of Eno’s longtime interests. He 
reminds De Keersmaeker of her visit to a mysterious-sounding laboratory he has 
at his studio. “The most interesting thing about perfume is that we don’t 
really have anywhere near a language to speak about it,” he says, drawing a 
contrast with our understanding of colour through paint blocks and Pantones. 
This instantly intrigues De Keersmaeker, an expert in finding moves to express 
what words can’t. “That’s true,” she says excitedly, in what feels like a 
light-bulb moment. And the idea hangs in the air with – who knows? – the whiff 
of a future collaboration.

 * Golden Hours (As You Like It) is at Sadler’s Wells, London, 8 and 9 March 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/anne-teresa-de-keersmaeker-rosas-golden-hours/>
.
 