
My privet hedge seems to be dying. It’s at least 40 years old, but I thought 
you couldn’t kill them. What should I replace it with if it does die?
Privet is definitely on the tough-as-old-boots list, but I have no idea what 
ails yours. If I come across something that’s dying and the cause is not 
obvious, I first check the backs of leaves (any fungi, insects, strange spots, 
nibbled edges?) and nooks and crannies (anything hiding there?), then scratch 
the stem with my thumbnail, to see how much green is under the fresh bark. 
If there’s none, it’s dead.

Then I look at the feet. Is there compaction, a source of pollution, or 
mushrooms sprouting? Has the stem been severed or ringbarked, or has a nearby 
large tree or shrub been cut down recently? Is there a new source of light 
pollution at night?

Ask Alys: how can I look after my tree echium?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/08/ask-alys-tree-echium> 
You can’t replace it until you’ve worked out what went wrong, then it’s worth 
giving the soil a bit of renewal.Mycorrhizal fungi 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?pid=633>, usually sold in granule form as
Rootgrow 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?client=safari&rls=en&q=Rootgrow&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8&gfe_rd=cr&ei=jF8bWP6kJ6yE8QfWjoGICg>
, is well worth adding. It’s a form of beneficial fungi that helps with uptake 
of water and nutrients, as well as protecting against diseases and pests. 
Likewise, a good mulch with well-rotted organic matter will help boost soil 
health.

As for what to replace it with, I like a hornbeam hedge (Carpinus betulus 
<https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting-woods/trees-woods-and-wildlife/british-trees/native-trees/hornbeam/>
), because the autumn leaves persist into winter, but if you want something 
evergreen, try English yew (Taxus baccata 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/18001/Taxus-baccata/Details>). Or go for a mixed 
English native hedge, which can be cheap, quick to establish and 
wildlife-friendly.

• Got a question for Alys? Email askalys@theguardian.com <>
 