
Aston Villa’s hopes of bringing in Rémi Garde as their next manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/25/aston-villa-target-remi-garde-tim-sherwood>
 may have been hampered by the Frenchman’s former club Lyon.

Garde has been heavily linked with the managerial vacancy at Villa Park but is 
reportedly keen to take with him two members of his old backroom staff. Those 
coaches, Bruno Génésio and Gérald Baticle, are still working atLyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> and the Ligue 1 club has said they 
will not be allowed to leave.

The Lyon president, Jean-Michel Aulas, told Le Progrès: “Remi, I hope, will go 
toAston Villa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>, he deserves a 
big English club. But an assistant under contract cannot leave. And a deputy 
cannot ask that.”

Villa are searching for their third manager in eight months after sacking Tim 
Sherwood last Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/25/tim-sherwood-sacked-aston-villa-manager>
. Sherwood paid the price for a poor start to the season in which Villa won 
only one of their opening 10 Premier League games. They are bottom of the table 
and four points from safety before Monday’s trip to Tottenham.

Garde, a former Arsenal midfielder, has emerged as the frontrunner for the 
position this week. The initial favourites, David Moyes and Brendan Rodgers, 
have drifted in the betting while there does not appear to have been 
significant movement concerning another potential candidate, the former 
Leicester manager Nigel Pearson, in recent days. The former Sunderland manager 
Gus Poyet is now out of the reckoning having agreed to take over at AEK Athens.

The Villa captain, Micah Richards, has said the next manager must make an 
instant impact to turn around the club’s season. Richards told Sky Sports News: 
“The manager who comes in needs to be able to get us going straight away. We 
haven’t got any time to settle in or blend in. We need to get going from the 
start. Whoever it is, whether it is Garde, let’s hope they can do that.

“If they speak French obviously it is going to be easier for them [the French 
players] to understand how they want to play. Let’s hope he speaks just as good 
English as French because we’re in England. When I went to Fiorentina I had to 
learn Italian and I had to try to adapt.”
 