
Aston Villa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> have signed the 
Ghanaian striker Jordan Ayew for an undisclosed fee with the 23-year-old 
signing a five-year contract at Villa Park after leaving the Ligue 1 club 
Lorient.

Premier League 2015-16 preview No2: Aston Villa | Stuart James
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jul/27/premier-league-preview-2015-16-aston-villa>
The Villa manager, Tim Sherwood, told the club’s website: “I’m really pleased 
to bring Jordan to the football club. He is a fantastic young player who is 
perfectly suited to the Premier League.”

Before the move was completed, Ayew had accused Lorient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lorient> of pricing him out of his 
expected transfer. claiming that the Ligue 1 club raised their demands at the 
last minute. “They said I could go for €10m or €12m,” he told L’Equipe, “but 
now they want £10m with £2m in add-ons, which makes it about €17m. It’s 
nonsense! I’m really annoyed, it’s amazing what they are doing to me. They 
pointed out how many millions Villa paid for [Jordan] Amavi [£10m] but I’m not 
Amavi. We’re two different players.”

The 23-year-old, whose brother André joined Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/10/swansea-city-andre-ayew-signs-ghana>
 this summer from Marseille, scored 12 league goals last season and is the 
third player to join the club from Ligue 1 during the summer transfer window 
after the arrivals of Jordan Amavi and Idrissa Gueye.
Aston Villa FC (@AVFCOfficial) 
NEW RECRUIT: All-smiles as Tim Sherwood meets up with new boy Jordan Ayew. 
#AVFC <https://twitter.com/hashtag/AVFC?src=hash> #WelcomeJordan 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/WelcomeJordan?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/MPHnHPC9EP 
<http://t.co/MPHnHPC9EP>
 <https://twitter.com/AVFCOfficial/status/625666998555529216> July 27, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/AVFCOfficial/status/625666998555529216> 
Earlier on Monday, Córdoba announced that they have reached an agreement with 
to Aston Villato sell José Ángel Crespo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/27/aston-villa-cordoba-jose-angel-crespo>
. The 28-year-old, a full-back who can play on either side, represented Spain 
at under-21 level and made 27 appearances for the Andalusian club last season
 