
Supporters’ behaviour dominating the headlines usually signifies a most 
unwelcome story. And it was no different this weekend, with bad news – two 
deaths and local elections that resembled a blocked Autobahn services toilet, 
bringing plenty of stinky, brown stuff to the fore – all around. But the 
considered way that fans, so often derided as unthinking lemmings, reacted to 
these personal and collective tragedies was truly remarkable.

What happened in Dortmund, Darmstadt and, to a lesser extent, Munich, put 
football in the shade. Down in Bavaria, the placards regularly held up in the 
Südkurve can be a bit hit and miss, like the former terrace legend Adolfo 
Valencia. On Saturday night, however, the Bayern ultras proved astute political 
commentators unafraid to “put the finger in the wound”, as they say in Germany. 
They didn’t chose the easy route of attacking thefrighteningly successful 
right-wing parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/13/anti-refugee-party-makes-big-gains-in-german-state-elections>
 or their voters but instead focused on the enablers at the top of the 
political tree, stoking the populist surge.

German football united in mourning after Borussia Dortmund fan dies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/13/football-borussia-dortmund-tribute-fan-dies-westfalenstadion>
“Politicians use incendiary words, the mob throws the molotov cocktails. 
Pathetic racists - we hate you ” read the first banner, followed by “The 
intellectual arsonists can be found in [the Bavarian] regional government, too: 
Seehofer and Herrmann!” The Bavarian prime minister Horst Seehofer, of the 
conservative CSU, has been one of the harshest critics of the chancellor Angela 
Merkel’s refugee policy, his interior minister Joachim Herrmann has demanded a 
cap on the number of people let into Germany.

You can argue about cause and effect, of course, but not about the shocking 
extent of the xenophobic crime wave. In 2015, 76 refugee and asylum seeker 
homes were targeted in arson attacks. The crowds’ intervention during the 
regulation5-0 win over Werder Bremen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/12/bayern-munich-werder-bremen-bundesliga-match-report>
 showed just how far the most diehard Reds supporters have come since the 
mid-90s, when “Sieg Heil!” chants or the no less catchy “SS, SA, Bavaria!” 
could still be heard on the terraces. The game against Werder – the club led by 
the combative Social Democrat Willi Lemke, the arch enemy of Uli Hoeness – used 
to bring political differences into sharp contrast. FCB and CSU, the 
all-conquering, conservative Christian Social Union, still both rule with an 
absolute majority in the Bundesliga and the Bavarian parliament, respectively, 
but they are no longer interchangeable synonyms with overlapping personnel.

One of the perhaps most welcome effects of the club’s hard-nosed drive toward 
internationalisation has been the marginalisation of local politicians on the 
board. They have been mostly edged out by businesspeople, certainly in terms of 
relative importance. The club have become a lot more politically neutral, while 
their organised supporters have firmly moved to the centre-left and now often 
make a stand against homophobia, anti-semitism and fascism of any ilk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fat-dortmund-darmstadt-and-munich-fans-lead-the-way-in-divisive-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fd6d9cdde25b043040cd933e8107d55227182ae%2F0_62_4080_2447%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20Dortmund%2C%20Darmstadt%20and%20Munich%2C%20fans%20lead%20the%20way%20in%20divisive%20week%20%7C%20Raphael%20Honigstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fat-dortmund-darmstadt-and-munich-fans-lead-the-way-in-divisive-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20Dortmund%2C%20Darmstadt%20and%20Munich%2C%20fans%20lead%20the%20way%20in%20divisive%20week%20%7C%20Raphael%20Honigstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fat-dortmund-darmstadt-and-munich-fans-lead-the-way-in-divisive-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fd6d9cdde25b043040cd933e8107d55227182ae%2F0_62_4080_2447%2F4080.jpg>
 A sign informs the crowd of the death of a fan during the Borussia Dortmund v 
Mainz match. Photograph: Sascha Schuermann/AFP/Getty Images 
While the Bayern fans raised their voice, the 81,000 strong Dortmund crowd 
made the 2-0 win over Mainz on Sunday themost silent, eerily moving game 
imaginable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/13/football-borussia-dortmund-tribute-fan-dies-westfalenstadion>
. Two fans at the Westfalenstadion had suffered heart attacks during the first 
half. Medics were able to save a 55-year-old but another man, 80, died. News of 
the tragedy spread via social media during the break, and the Yellow Wall 
decided to stop all singing as a mark of respect in the second half. The Mainz 
fans joined in. At times, you could hear the proverbial pin drop in the huge 
ground, as sound levels reachedGeisterspiel (a game behind closed doors) 
levels. “On the pitch, we didn’t know what had happened,” said the Dortmund 
captain Mats Hummels. “Suddenly, the cheers stopped and it was really quiet in 
the ground. It wasn’t easy to keep your concentration, you suddenly felt like 
being in a test game, with 30 or 40 people on the sidelines.” Worst of all, 
however, was the sense that “something bad happened,” added the 27-year-old.

Sevilla live in the moment to show La Liga there can be glory in every game | 
Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/14/sevilla-live-in-the-moment-to-show-la-liga-there-can-be-glory-in-every-game>
The situation was similar to that in the Stade de France in November, Hummels 
thought, whenGermany had played the hosts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/14/france-players-praised-outstanding-camaraderie-germany-terrorist-attacks-paris>
 on the evening of the Paris attacks. At the end of the game, the Dortmund fans 
started singing “You’ll never walk alone”, the club’s unofficial hymn, in 
memory of the departed, holding up their flags. The BVB players listened with 
tears in their eyes. Süddeutsche Zeitung’s Freddie Röckenhaus was reminded of 
“days in the past, when there were many accidents in the former city of steel 
and mining. The sons and daughters of the miners and steelers no longer face 
the dangers of heavy industry but a part of the special togetherness that 
exists in the cities of the Ruhr has steadfastly remained in Dortmund’s 
stadium.”

“We were all touched,” said the Mainz manager Martin Schmidt, who said he had 
felt “strange” shouting out instructions in the silent night. “It was still a 
football game,” said the Swiss coach, but he and the players invariably “felt 
that they were doing something wrong” when the noise stopped. As it was, 
everyone did exactly the right thing, a feat that was all the more impressive 
when you consider the size of the crowd and the fact that it was pulled off 
organically, instinctively, without anyone following any orders.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fat-dortmund-darmstadt-and-munich-fans-lead-the-way-in-divisive-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2183e0b498255e66d454da23a4cbb7fed9e0ad1%2F0_2_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20Dortmund%2C%20Darmstadt%20and%20Munich%2C%20fans%20lead%20the%20way%20in%20divisive%20week%20%7C%20Raphael%20Honigstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fat-dortmund-darmstadt-and-munich-fans-lead-the-way-in-divisive-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20Dortmund%2C%20Darmstadt%20and%20Munich%2C%20fans%20lead%20the%20way%20in%20divisive%20week%20%7C%20Raphael%20Honigstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fat-dortmund-darmstadt-and-munich-fans-lead-the-way-in-divisive-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2183e0b498255e66d454da23a4cbb7fed9e0ad1%2F0_2_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Darmstadt fans hold up a photo of the late fan Jonathan ‘Johnny’ Heimes, who 
died after a long battle against cancer. Photograph: Frank Rumpenhorst/EPA 
The Darmstadt fans’ tribute to the late Johnny Heimes before the 2-2 draw with 
Augsburg was, by contrast, very much pre-planned but no less touching for it. 
Heimes, 26, was a supporter of the Lilies and a talented tennis player who 
suffered from a malign brain tumour. Through his fight for survival and 
charitable activities – he collected money to help other cancer patients – he 
became a symbol of Darmstadt’s unlikely rise from third division to top flight. 
Heimes died on Tuesday last week. “Without him, we wouldn’t be talking about the
Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> here,” 
said the manager, Dirk Schuster. A huge banner with Heimes’ face was held up at 
the Böllenfalltor before kick-off, there was minute’s silence and the fans 
chanted his name instead of those of the players.

The Augsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/augsburg> team and 
supporters, too, joined in the commemoration. It was a heartfelt public 
demonstration combining sorrow and optimism, the very thing that football does 
best. Everybody knows that the Bundesliga can be a hotbed of tribalism and 
aggression. But this weekend, the game proved that it can also be ahead of the 
curve with the spirit of solidarity and empathy for others which it generates. 
God knows an increasingly polarised and toxic Germany could certainly do with 
more of the same.

Results: Hertha 2-0 Schalke, Gladbach 3-0 Frankfurt, Hannover 0-2 Köln, 
Hoffenheim 1-0 Wolfsburg, Ingolstadt 3-3 Stuttgart,Darmstadt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/darmstadt> 2-2 Augsburg, Bayern 5-0 
Bremen, Leverkusen 1-0 HSV, Dortmund 2-0 Mainz.


The latest Bundesliga standings. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball/table>
 