
Stadium: Stadio Atleti Azzurri d'Italia, Bergamo, capacity 24,642

Atalanta play in the Stadio Atleti Azzurri d'Italia and the atmosphere is one 
of the most heated in Italy. The ground is often referred to as a relic of 
Mussolini's Italy and is now deemed to be fairly outdated. With no roof and 
some obstructed views there is no doubt that some modernistation would not go a 
miss, but the atmosphere needs no improvement andAtalanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> have some of the loudest and 
the most loyal fans on the Penninusla. They offer an away day that many 
opposing teams and fans do not enjoy. TheCurva Nord is home to the Ultra group 
Curva Nord 1907 and they often choreograph displays with flares, huge banners 
and fireworks. There may be bigger and better stadiums in Italy, but few are as 
inflammatory as this one can be on match day.

The Ultras
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvXTNum0Pilo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvXTNum0Pilo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvXTNum0Pilo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It is July 2013 and the Ultras of Atalanta are partying at their pre-season 
festival. A tank – yes, a tank – is in the process of crushing both Brescia and 
Roma. Well not literally, the tank is actually crushing two cars, one painted 
the white and blue of Brescia and the other painted the red and yellow of Roma.

Fans, family and players have come to join this annual celebration of the 
football club, known asLa Festa della Dea (Festival of the Goddess). On board 
the tank with a number of Atalanta supporters is new signing Giulio Migliaccio, 
who later claimed he was "inadvertently the protagonist" in what one might, at 
first glance, mistake for a tribal celebration of a goddess of war. ActuallyLa 
Dea is Atalanta and its tribes are the Ultras.

Bergamo, which lies in the shadow of the Alps, is a city of two parts, Upper 
Bergamo and Lower Bergamo, or in local dialectBerghem de Sura e Berghem de Sota
. It is famous for its musical history and enchanting medieval ambience, yet 
take a trip down to the Stadio Atleti Azzurri d'Italia, and the Ultras of 
Atalanta compose music of an altogether different pulse.

Atalanta's Ultras have long been associated with left-wing politics and images 
of socialist icon Che Guevara could often be seen in theCurva Nord (or Curva 
Pisani). Their first group, Brigate Neroazzure – black and blue brigade (BNA) – 
were formed in 1976. Sub-groups such asWild Kaos Atalanta (WKA), Nomadi 
(Nomads) andNuova Guardia (New Guard) formed from BNA. 

Over the years these Ultras earned themselves a fierce reputation and were 
renowned for using only "fists" and "boots". In 1995, following the death of 
Genoa fan Vincenzo Spagnolo, who was stabbed by AC Milan Ultras, the Atalantini 
issued a statement entitled "basta lame, basta infami" ("cut out the knives, 
cut out the infamy").

In 1998, under the leadership of Claudio "Il Bocia" Galimberti members from 
Nuova Guardia, BNA, WKA and later the whole of Nomadi came together to form 
dell'Atalanta Supporters (or Curva Nord Atalanta). This group is now largely 
apolitical.Il Bocia is well known within the Ultra circle, infamous for his 
fearless and violent past. Despite this, he greatly respected for his work 
within the Atalanta and Bergamo community.

As a capofamiglia figure, he organises fundraising and family events such as 
the aforementionedFesta Della Dea. And the respect does not stop in Bergamo. In 
2005, the Ultras of Brescia, Atalanta's local and fiercest rivals, issued a 
statement regardingIl Bocia's stadium ban: "Nemico leale, Boci non mollare!" 
("Bocia our loyal enemy, don't give up!").

However, one small group have resisted the call to unite. When the BNA 
disbanded due to internal conflict regarding ideology and territory on theCurva
, some members decided to form Forever Atalanta. These Ultras reside in the
Curva Sud, or Curva Morosini, and their members are thought to be predominately 
leftist.

In recent years the Atalantini have been involved in significant riots and 
protests. On 11 November 2007, before Atalanta's game against AC Milan, news 
travelled to Bergamo that Lazio fan Gabriele Sandri had been shot by police. 
After seven minutes of play, a pocket of theCurva Nord tried to break down a 
glass perimeter fence. Players on both sides attempted to calm fans but they 
were warned that the violence would continue if the game was not abandoned.

There were two notable protests in 2009. The first concerned the club and 
captain Cristiano Doni's role in a matchfixing scandal, the second was a 
protest in Rome opposingLa Tessera Del Tifoso (ID cards for football fans). 
NeitherCurva Nord nor Forever Atalanta have accepted La Tessera, and are 
therefore unable to follow Atalanta on the road.

Atalanta's Ultras have few friends and many enemies, a fact they thrive on. "
Ci stanno sul cazzo tutti" ("we hate everybody"), as Il Bocia aptly puts it. 
The stabbing of threeAtalantini by Roma fans in 2006 has created a particularly 
heated rivalry. The few "friends" they have include Ternana and Eintracht 
Frankfurt, based on old political affinities.
 Atalanta fans. Photograph: Paolo Magni/Ansa/Corbis 
On match days the Curva Pisani is a concoction of flares, smoke, flags and 
banners. On special occasions it is engulfed by a huge blue and black flag. The 
infamous standing of the Atalanta Ultras lives on and although their reputation 
has been earned through many a bloody battle they are also admired for 
upholding Ultra values and their close relationship to the Bergamo community.

As Il Bocia puts it: "What Ultras do is bring the city together. It is our 
duty to preserve the real values of this sport and while we are around, we will 
carry that passion forward till the bitter end."

Classic player: Claudio Caniggia
 Claudio Caniggia poses with Atalanta president Ivan Ruggeri in August 1999 
after signing for the club from Boca Juniors. Photograph: Beppe Bedolis/AP 
El Hijo del Viento (Son of Wind) was the justifiable nickname bestowed on one 
of the quickest players inSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> in the early 1990s. There 
was not a more electrifying sight than seeing Claudio Caniggia in full flight, 
floating past defenders with a graceful ease.

The Argentinian began his Serie A career at Hellas Verona in 1988 and went on 
to play for Roma, but he is remembered for his time with Atalanta, where he 
played 102 games and scored 27 goals in two spells (1989-1992 and 1999-2000).

Caniggia was extremely quick, with an ability to glide from deep, shimmying 
past defenders and then providing ice cool finishes, normally followed by white 
hot celebrations. He is best remembered for his goal against Brazil in the 
second round of Italia 90, a goal which he described as "the most important 
goal of my career, because we were really on the back foot and because of the 
rivalry we have with them".

Fans of the Italian game who can recall those heady days in the early 1990s 
remember a player with breathtaking pace and long blonde hair that flowed in 
the wind as he darted forward, but he was also a poacher with great ability in 
the air.

Claudio Caniggia was unforgettable. In a time when Calcio ruled the world, he 
had his own special place in it.

• This blog first appeared on The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://thegentlemanultra.tumblr.com/>
• Follow Richard Hall on Twitter <https://twitter.com/Gentleman_Ultra>
• Follow Guardian Football on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>
 