
At last, a decision. A week after sacking Frank de Boer, Inter appear to have 
settled on Stefano Pioli as his replacement – though for how long is anyone’s 
guess. He will become the club’s 10th manager in less than six and a-half years 
since José Mourinho left for Real Madrid – counting the caretaker Stefano 
Vecchi, who has presided over the last two games.

From a statistical standpoint, De Boer will go down as the second-worst boss 
in this grim stretch. He won only five of his 14 matches in charge – a 
miserable 35.7%. But if the Dutchman was looking for solace, then he might want 
to take a glance at the latest achievements of the one man who fared even worse.

Gian Piero Gasperini was doomed at Inter before he had even begun. Appointed 
to succeed Leonardo in the summer of 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jun/24/internazionale-gian-piero-gasperini-coach>
, he was instantly defined as inadequate by the Milanese press. Gasperini was 
too inexperienced, too provincial, too insistent on a three-man defence – 
which, the talking heads all agreed, was fine for a smaller club but not a 
contender like Inter.

That last point sounds preposterous today, with such tactics being deployed by 
top sides all across Europe, but frankly it was a ridiculous suggestion even 
back then. Napoli and Udinese had just barged past the likes of Juventus, Roma 
and Lazio to secure Champions League berths using a 3-5-2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/may/23/udinese-champions-league-qualifying-round>
.

Nevertheless, Gasperini was openly mocked and undermined. And perhaps he was 
guilty of rising to the bait. As the season began, he chopped and changed 
incessantly, to the point that players were seen arguing on the pitch about 
what formation they were even playing in.

Mohamed Salah hat-trick keeps Roma in touch with leaders Juventus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/mohamed-salah-roma-juventus-bologna-milan-serie-a>
The manager had been hamstrung in the transfer market, too. He prefers not to 
play with a No10, and came away from his conversations with the club’s owner, 
Massimo Moratti, believing Inter would sell Wesley Sneijder to raise funds for 
players that suited his systems better. But Moratti changed his mind, and the 
Dutchman stayed, leaving Gasperini to fit a square peg into round holes.

He was sacked after just five games in charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/sep/21/internazionale-sack-gian-piero-gasperini>
 – which yielded one draw and four defeats. Gasperini had made plenty of 
mistakes but, in common with De Boer, it was hard to shake the sense that he 
had never truly been given a fair crack of the whip.

Life moves on, though, and so does football. Inter gave hope for a post-De 
Boer revival as they beat Crotone 3-0 on Sunday, but Gasperini is unlikely to 
have paid the result any mind. Earlier on the same afternoon, he had led 
another team ofNerazzurri to victory by the exact same scoreline away at 
Sassuolo. Whilst a win moved Inter up to ninth, Gasperini’sAtalanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> climbed all the way to fourth.

The front page of Monday’s L’Eco di Bergamo captured the story in five words: 
“Bonkers, incredible, but marvellously true”. Gasperini’s Atalanta are not just 
a team in form, but Serie A’s form team. They have won six of their last seven 
games, drawing the remainder – a better record even than Juventus over the same 
stretch.


That would be an impressive achievement under any circumstances for a club of 
modest resources, but in light of the way they began this campaign it is 
utterly extraordinary. Gasperini, appointed in the summer, began almost as 
disastrously in Bergamo as he had five years earlier in Milan.

His first five league matches with Atalanta yielded one win and four defeats. 
By the end of a 1-0 loss at home to Palermo in September, his job was once 
again said to be at risk. Crisis talks were held with the team’s president. But 
where Moratti had abandoned the manager at an almost identical juncture, 
Antonio Percassi held firm. Instead of sacking Gasperini, he doubled down on 
his support.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fatalanta-rise-gasperini-serie-a-blog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b68b633503b83a9ed543290e3b1d6c0ba02e13c%2F0_7_2694_1617%2F2694.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Atalanta's%20rise%20a%20reward%20for%20keeping%20faith%20in%20Gasperini%20%E2%80%93%20a%20man%20with%20a%20romantic%20plan%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fatalanta-rise-gasperini-serie-a-blog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Atalanta%27s%20rise%20a%20reward%20for%20keeping%20faith%20in%20Gasperini%20%E2%80%93%20a%20man%20with%20a%20romantic%20plan%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fatalanta-rise-gasperini-serie-a-blog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b68b633503b83a9ed543290e3b1d6c0ba02e13c%2F0_7_2694_1617%2F2694.jpg>
 Atalanta coach Gian Piero Gasperini hopes to build a fine team using talented 
young players. Photograph: Elisabetta Baracchi/AP 
As L’Eco di Bergamo told it at the time, Percassi showed up at the club’s 
training ground and ordered the whole first-team squad into the gym. There he 
commanded the players to “prick your ears up”, before reading them the riot 
act. “I have no doubts about Gasperini,” Percassi reportedly said. “He is our 
manager, the best manager possible, and untouchable. So now let’s see what you 
want to do about it.”

Gasperini had his own plans for shaking things up. He had inherited a bloated 
squad at Atalanta, with 27 players competing for places, and initially put his 
faith in the senior members of this group. After validating Percassi’s vote of 
confidence with an important but stuttering win over last-placed Crotone, he 
reasoned that the time had come to gamble on the kids.

Atalanta’s youth system is renowned as one of the very best in Italy, 
consistently turning out players who go on to successful careers, but even so 
this was a bold departure. For a match at home to Napoli, he picked a team 
featuring four Italy under-21 internationals.

Mattia Caldara was to make his first-ever Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> start at centre-back, and 
Roberto Gagliardini only his second in midfield. Wing-back Andrea Conti and 
centre-forward Andrea Petagna had a little more experience under their belts, 
but could still only count three league starts this season between them.

There is an opportunity to build something truly homegrown at the fittingly 
named Stadio Atleti Azzurri d’Italia

Gasperini informed Percassi of his intended selection on the night before the 
game. The president became so anxious that he could not sleep a wink, but the 
gamble would be vindicated with a stunning 1-0 win. Neither Gasperini, nor 
Atalanta, have looked back since.

The team that lined up against Sassuolo this weekend was even younger, with 
the 19-year-old Ivorian Frank Kessié – who missed the Napoli game through 
suspension – joining Gagliardini in central midfield. TheNeroverdi have 
themselves been standard-bearers for developing young domestic talent over the 
past few seasons, but here they were simply swept away.


It was Petagna who set up the first goal, squaring a pass across the six-yard 
box for Papu Gómez, who forced the ball home at the second attempt. Gagliardini 
then set up Caldara for the second, a well-taken close-range volley. Conti 
smashed home a loose ball for Atalanta’s third shortly before half-time. The 
rout was already complete.

How far can these crazy kids go? Gasperini, unsurprisingly insisted at 
full-time that it was still too soon to talk of European qualification. “But if 
we are still in this position once three-quarters of the games are gone,” he 
added, “then maybe we can discuss this again.”

He himself is planning even further ahead. Gasperini is not one to tell you 
that his focus as manager is only on the next game coming up. He is thinking 
beyond this season, about building on these foundations to create a club that 
can compete at a higher level in the long run.

“It can be done,” he told Gazzetta dello Sport last week, “because the club is 
serious, the structures ideal, the fans passionate, and I have already seen 
interesting players in the youth sector. The project is clear and focused on 
those players in the academy: on building really strong identification with our 
region. An Atalanta styled after Athletic Bilbao, maybe without reaching quite 
those excesses – because if there is a good kid who doesn’t speak with a 
Bergamese dialect I’d take him all the same …”

The vision is an appealingly romantic one. Both Gagliardini and Caldara were 
born in Bergamo, and Conti barely 25 miles away in Lecco. Their birth 
certificates all show the year 1994. There is an opportunity to build something 
truly homegrown at the fittingly named Stadio Atleti Azzurri d’Italia – 
literally, the Blue Athletes of Italy Stadium.


For now, it is enough to savour the moment. Gasperini insists he feels no 
lasting bitterness towards Inter. Four consecutive wins over his former club 
have helped him to get all that out of his system. Even so, there must be a 
certain satisfaction in having the opportunity to demonstrate so vividly the 
rewards that a little patience can bring.

Results: Pescara 0-4 Empoli, Sassuolo 0-3 Atalanta, Chievo 1-2 Juventus, Genoa 
1-1 Udinese, Palermo 1-2 Milan, Fiorentina 1-1 Sampdoria, Inter 3-0 Crotone, 
Roma 3-0 Bologna, Torino, 5-1 Cagliari, Napoli 1-1 Lazio.

Talking points

• Gagliardini’s impressive performances for Atalanta received an unexpected 
acknowledgement on Monday, when he was added to the Italy squad for games 
against Lichtenstein and Germany. One player who will not be joining him, 
though, is his team-mate Papu Goméz. Giampiero Ventura had expressed an 
interest in calling up the 28-year-old after a bright start to this season, 
only for the Italian Football Federation to learn that the player is not 
eligible to represent them. Although Goméz has obtained Italian citizenship, he 
did not hold it at the time when he represented Argentina’s under-20 team – 
prohibiting him from making the switch.

• The path to Pioli was not straightforward for Inter, with representatives of 
the club’s Chinese owners, Suning, arriving in Milan over the weekend to kick 
off a series of internal debates, interviews and even contract negotiations 
with more than one candidate. At one stage Gianfranco Zola was in the picture, 
then a deal was said to be close for the former Villarreal boss Marcelino, 
before excessive wage demands pushed Inter back in Pioli’s direction. At time 
of writing, there is still more wrangling to be done - with Pioli still under 
contract at Lazio - but to me it feels like the right choice for right now. He 
is familiar with the league, and took a less talented Lazio team to third place 
and the brink of a Coppa Italia win two years ago.

• Meanwhile, the mood in San Siro’s Curva Nord remains dark. Ultras criticised 
Inter’s leadership with a series of banners on Sunday, with one sequence 
reading: “Only those who step out onto the pitch are doing a worse job than 
this non-existent club [leadership]. All the necessary premises are in place to 
dishonour 108 years of history. Look out, because the situation is about to get 
heavy.” Another followed with black humour: “There’s an Englishman, a Chinese 
man and an Indonesian… And together they want to make us into the butt of 
Italy’s jokes once more.”

• Making none of this easier for Inter supporters is the sight of rejuvenated 
Milan, tightening their grip on third spot. Summer signing Gianluca Lapadula, 
who banged in 30 goals for Pescara in Serie B last season, sealed a 2-1 win 
over Palermo with his first for the Rossoneri –an extremely cheeky backheel 
flick barely two minutes after he was sent on as a sub 
<https://twitter.com/RossoneriBlog/status/795378390731722752>. 

• Roma remain Serie A’s top scorers, after sticking three past Bologna, but 
Torino are not far behind following a 5-1 thrashing of Cagliari. It is the 
second time this season that theGranata have put five past an opponent and 
Marco Benassi’s strike, in particular, was a peach 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/795322290321887233>. Joe Hart did 
have an iffy afternoon – reacting late to Federico Melchiorri’s header for the 
Cagliari goal,and almost dropping one dinked cross into his own goal 
<https://twitter.com/TransfersCalcio/status/794958631049564160>, but he seems 
to be enjoying himself all the same 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BMcWNxCgepp/?hl=en>. 

• Cutting a less happy figure of late is Napoli manager Maurizio Sarri, who 
took out his frustrations on the dugout wall during a 1-1 draw with Lazio 
<https://twitter.com/TransfersCalcio/status/795012737294336000>. The breaks 
just aren’t going his team’s way, but tensions have also been raised by public 
remarks made by the club’s owner, Aurelio De Laurentiis, who suggested during a 
radio interview that his manager should try some different formations following 
the injury to Arkadiusz Milik. Sarri was measured but firm in his response at 
full-time on Saturday, saying: “He can give any suggestions he wants, I can 
choose whether to listen to them or not. This time I don’t agree with him. 
However, I would have preferred that he spoke about certain things with me in 
private.”

• Welcome back to the 2016-17 season Empoli, who ended a 766-minute goal 
drought by smashing four past Pescara. They had previously scored two all 
season.

• And congratulations on yet another career landmark, Gigi Buffon – who made 
his 600th Serie A appearance during Juventus’s win away at Chievo. He is fourth 
on the league’s all-time appearances list – seven behind Francesco Totti, and 
47 behind first-placed Paolo Maldini.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Juventus 12 16 30 
2 Roma 12 17 26 
3 AC Milan 12 4 25 
4 Lazio 12 10 22 
5 Atalanta 12 6 22 
6 Napoli 12 8 21 
7 Torino 12 11 19 
8 Fiorentina 11 3 17 
9 Inter Milan 12 2 17 
10 Genoa 11 2 16 
11 Cagliari 12 -9 16 
12 Chievo 12 -2 15 
13 Udinese 12 -3 15 
14 Sampdoria 12 -4 15 
15 Bologna 12 -7 13 
16 Sassuolo 12 -8 13 
17 Empoli 12 -7 10 
18 Pescara 12 -11 7 
19 Palermo 12 -14 6 
20 Crotone 12 -14 5  