
Papua New Guinea’s 2017 budget 
<http://www.treasury.gov.pg/html/national_budget/2017.html> takes big steps in 
resource tax reform. Following suggestionsthat I made together with former 
Labor minister Craig Emerson 
<https://pngnri.org/portfolio/proceedings-of-the-2014-png-tax-review-and-research-symposium/>
, starting next year resources companies operating in Papua New Guinea will pay 
a revamped resource rent tax, as well as the existing royalties and company 
taxes.

With Australia’s budget deficit worsening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/australia-budget-deficit-beyond-2021-scott-morrison>
, following Papua New Guinea’s lead may help us bring in more revenue from 
natural gas, sooner.

The different ways of taxing resources

Companies in Australia operating large gas-to-liquefied natural gas (LNG) 
projects pay a resource rent tax (a tax levied on above-normal profits) as well 
as the regular company tax. Above-normal profits from these new projects are 
perhaps a decade away, which is why there has been a recent drop inresource tax 
revenue 
<https://theconversation.com/australia-is-missing-out-on-tax-revenue-from-gas-projects-62899>
.

Natural gas lobby plans campaign to convince Australians of 'long-term 
necessity'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/natural-gas-lobby-plans-campaign-to-convince-australians-of-long-term-necessity>
This resource rent tax has replaced royalties for most of these LNG projects. 
While the resource rent tax is paid on profits, royalties are paid directly on 
the value of a resource as it is extracted, long before profit or loss is a 
factor.

A reintroduction of some level of royalties would not increase the tax burden 
for industry, but would more immediately provide much-needed revenue for 
government.

Our tax system wasn’t designed for current gas production

Australia’s petroleum resource rent tax 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/prrtaa1987452/> (PRRT) 
applies to oil and gas projects but it was not originally fine-tuned for gas.

My recently published PRRT working paper 
<https://taxpolicy.crawford.anu.edu.au/publication/ttpi-working-papers/8697/petroleum-resource-rent-tax-overview-primary-documents-and>
 provides an overview of newly available archival documents that give insight 
into the political and consultative processes of the Hawke-Keating government 
(1983-1991), which passed the PRRT.

Back in 1984, gas production was for domestic consumption and the technology 
for LNG exports was underdeveloped. The archival papers show that gas design 
considerations were excluded because projected PRRT revenues could not match 
gas royalties. So instead the Hawke-Keating government focused on generating 
PRRT revenues from oil.

The gas industry is important

There are now more gas than oil reserves in Australia. The image below shows 
the large integrated gas-to-LNG projects in Australia: offshore natural gas in 
the west, and onshore coal seam gas in the east. The focus of resource tax 
reform should be on gas projects in commonwealth waters off Western Australia. 
They include Woodside’s Pluto, Chevron’s Wheatstone and Gorgon, and Inpex’s 
Ichthys.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Faustralia-must-catch-up-with-other-countries-on-how-it-taxes-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F317fe24ba9c219bce23585269d00d9c290c0414d%2F0_54_754_452%2F754.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20must%20catch%20up%20with%20other%20countries%20on%20how%20it%20taxes%20gas%20%7C%20Diane%20Kraal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Faustralia-must-catch-up-with-other-countries-on-how-it-taxes-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20must%20catch%20up%20with%20other%20countries%20on%20how%20it%20taxes%20gas%20%7C%20Diane%20Kraal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Faustralia-must-catch-up-with-other-countries-on-how-it-taxes-gas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F317fe24ba9c219bce23585269d00d9c290c0414d%2F0_54_754_452%2F754.png>
 Photograph: Santos 
The table below shows the current taxation of selected LNG projects. Company 
tax and the PRRT apply to all these projects. But only coal seam gas and the 
North West Shelf projects need pay royalties.

Industry has not complained about the payment of these royalties.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Faustralia-must-catch-up-with-other-countries-on-how-it-taxes-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9da03b19643f5d030c93489a0f4ee37ba2765f18%2F0_0_754_565%2F754.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20must%20catch%20up%20with%20other%20countries%20on%20how%20it%20taxes%20gas%20%7C%20Diane%20Kraal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Faustralia-must-catch-up-with-other-countries-on-how-it-taxes-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20must%20catch%20up%20with%20other%20countries%20on%20how%20it%20taxes%20gas%20%7C%20Diane%20Kraal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Faustralia-must-catch-up-with-other-countries-on-how-it-taxes-gas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9da03b19643f5d030c93489a0f4ee37ba2765f18%2F0_0_754_565%2F754.jpg>
 Photograph: The Conversation 
The way we tax our gas needs reform

All countries with petroleum resources levy additional resource taxes, which 
result in industry paying high taxes. For example, look at Norway and the 
United Kingdom. In both those countries, the accepted justification for 
additional resource taxes on petroleum is due to the finiteness of mineral 
resources: extraction can only occur once.

As the Turnbull government scrambles to fix the budget deficit, the media has 
focused on the low revenue forecasts fromthe PRRT on gas for LNG export 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-10/oil-and-gas-tax-may-raise-no-extra-revenue-for-decades/7917682>
. No wonder, given Australia’s export gasindustry has invested $200bn 
<http://industry.gov.au/Office-of-the-Chief-Economist/Publications/Documents/remp/REMP-April-2015.pdf>
 in new infrastructure.

Pressure is building for a parliamentary inquiry into the PRRT. At a recent 
Senate economics legislation committee hearing, the finance minister, Mathias 
Cormann, and the tax commissioner, Chris Jordan, found it difficult to answer 
questionsposed to them on the PRRT <https://youtu.be/1TBMoWWXoGU>.

How should the natural gas for LNG be taxed?

The PRRT has its place in the tax mix. However, given the different 
infrastructure needs and lower pricing characteristics of natural gas, the PRRT 
for gas needs to be modified. This has been highlighted before, most notably 
the 2009 Henry Review of Australia’s tax system, whichcriticised the design of 
the PRRT for gas 
<https://taxreview.treasury.gov.au/Content/Content.aspx?doc=html/home.htm>.

The Turnbull government should assess whether the sole PRRT in relation to LNG 
projects in commonwealth waters is sufficient to meet the objective of sharing 
the benefits from resource projects. Australia’s 2016 federal budget figures 
show a projected decrease in PRRT revenues to $800m per annum in 2020, which 
suggests that the community couldwait decades for benefits from PRRT on gas 
<http://www.budget.gov.au/2016-17/content/bp1/html/bp1_bs4-02.htm>.

A more equitable arrangement would require more prompt payment to the 
government for gas extraction, such as production-based royalties paid on the 
coal seam gas and North West Shelf projects, as well as a modified PRRT design.

Paul Keating famously described the 1990s recession as “the recession we had 
to have” 
<http://www.theage.com.au/news/business/the-real-reasons-why-it-was-the-1990s-recession-we-had-to-have/2006/12/01/1164777791623.html>
. Likewise, taxation reform of the PRRT applicable to natural gas processed for 
LNG export is an absolute necessity. It’s a reform we “have to have”.


• Diane Kraal <https://theconversation.com/profiles/diane-kraal-14610> is a 
senior lecturer at the business law and taxation department of Monash Business 
School. This article wasoriginally published on the Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/australia-must-catch-up-with-papua-new-guinea-on-how-we-tax-gas-68813>
 