
Australian gas is being shipped and sold to wholesale customers in Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> for 40% less than it is sold to 
Australian customers, despite the extra costs of liquefying and shipping the 
gas there.

The commitment to exporting Australian gas has left fewer companies selling 
gas to the Australian market, meaning both retail and wholesale gas prices have 
risen sharply,pushing up local electricity prices up too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/01/windfarms-unfairly-blamed-for-south-australias-high-energy-prices>
.

Those price rises are a result of a lack of competition and cartel-like 
behaviour, not any shortage of actual gas supply, according to finance and 
energy analyst Bruce Robertson from the Institute for Energy Economics and 
Financial Analysis.

The analysis comes just ahead of a meeting of state and federal energy 
ministers at the Coag Energy Council on Friday.

Electricity price spikes caused by energy companies 'gaming' the system, 
report finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/electricity-price-spikes-caused-by-energy-companies-gaming-the-system-report-finds>
Since May, the wholesale price of gas on the east coast of Australia overtook 
the price of gas in Japan. But because of long-term contracts signed by Santos, 
Shell and Origin Energy, the companies have been obliged to continue exporting 
to overseas markets, including Japan.

“Bearing in mind the high costs of transport and liquefaction, it makes no 
sense that Australian gas should be cheaper in Japan, one of the highest-cost 
markets in the world. Australian consumers would be correct to question why 
this is the case,” said Robertson.

Robertson said all the available evidence suggested there was no shortage of 
gas locally but there was a severe lack of competition, he said.

Gas <https://www.theguardian.com/business/gas> companies are not obliged to 
release information about the capacity or production of their wells, so 
Robertson pointed to public statements about their supply levels.

In 2012, for example, BHP Billiton’s petroleum chief Mike Yeager was reported 
as saying 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/nsw-to-press-on-with-coal-seam-gas-hartcher-20120515-1yo6c.html>
 that they had so much gas supply in eastern Australia they could supply those 
areas “indefinitely”. The comments were made when gas use was forecast to grow, 
and since then it has declined. Robertson said that means Australia must be 
“swimming in gas” supply.

Gas suppliers used market restructure to hike prices, watchdog says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/22/gas-suppliers-used-market-restructure-to-hike-prices-watchdog-says>
He said the remaining major players controlling the domestic market – BHP 
Billiton and ExxonMobil – were then allowed to cooperate in “joint marketing 
ventures,” which Robertson said could be compared to a legalised cartel.

The lack of competition in the east-coast gas market was examined by the 
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) in April. The commission
released the results of the inquiry 
<https://www.accc.gov.au/media-release/release-of-east-coast-gas-inquiry-report-into-the-increasingly-complex-and-uncertain-gas-market>
 and chairman Rod Sims said: “There are currently very few constraints on 
monopoly pricing by pipeline operators.”

Since recent spikes in the price of electricity have been blamed on the rising 
price of gas, the new federal minister for the environment and energy, Josh 
Frydenberg, indicated more gas was needed in Australia. “We need more gas 
supply and more gas supplies in Australia, and gas is an important part of the 
energy mix,” Frydenbergtold ABC’s Lateline 
<http://www.abc.net.au/lateline/content/2016/s4508656.htm>.

Robertson said since the price hikes are a result of low competition rather 
than low supply, opening up new supplies that are owned by the same companies 
controlling current supply would do nothing to lower prices.

But with little public information about gas supplies, Robertson said it was 
impossible for policymakers to make informed decisions about the supply of gas.

“You have policymakers suggesting policy responses to a problem they can’t see 
the dimensions of. And that’s a very dangerous situation.”

That lack of available information was also highlighted by the ACCC’s inquiry 
in April. “The lack of consistent, publicly available data on the sector is an 
impediment to participants, investors and policymakers,” Sims said.

Robertson said he was concerned that without more information the wrong 
decisions would be made at the Coag Energy Council meeting on Friday. “They’ve 
set the agenda for more gas production and that ain’t the solution,” he said.

Robertson was critical of the ACCC’s report for recommending more gas supply 
be opened up, since that report itself pointed out there was a lack of 
information about current levels of supply.

“It’s appalling they suggest that solution when they have no bloody idea of 
the productive capacity of existing wells,” said Robertson.
 