
The former Liberal leader John Hewson has issued a warning to the treasurer, 
Scott Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, as 
he puts together his mid-year budget review.

“The fact we are going to lose the triple-A credit rating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/13/third-major-credit-agency-keeps-australias-aaa-rating-but-with-concern>
 is a foregone conclusion, it’s just a question of timing,” Hewson told Sky 
News on Sunday.

The professor of economics believes the government is just muddling through 
and is a long way off getting a deliverable path to surplus by the end of the 
decade.

Yes, Malcolm Turnbull, you've Got Things Done. You've tidied your sock drawer 
| Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/03/yes-malcolm-turnbull-youve-got-things-done-youve-tidied-your-sock-drawer>
“I don’t see any realistic debate by either side … to deliver that sort of 
outcome,” he said.

Morrison will hand down his mid-year economic and fiscal outlook on 19 
December.

A recent independent analysis anticipates the budget will have blown out by 
about $24bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/australias-combined-budget-deficit-will-grow-by-149bn-fiscal-outlook-shows>
 over the next four years, partly due torecord low wages growth hitting tax 
revenues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/australian-wages-growing-at-slowest-rate-on-record-statistics-show>
.

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, said the government was persisting with 
measures that will never get through the parliament – the so-called zombie 
measures – while ignoring structural changeslike Labor’s plan to reform 
negative gearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/03/mike-baird-regains-ground-in-new-south-wales-poll-shows>
.

The government is adamant that altering negative gearing would be harmful to 
the economy, a view it took to the last election, but fellow Liberals NSW 
premier Mike Baird and planning minister Rob Stokes have said theynow believe 
it is time for a review of the concession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/mike-baird-breaks-with-federal-liberals-over-negative-gearing-changes>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fnegative-gearing-explainer-a-pre-election-crash-course-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Negative%20gearing%20explainer%3A%20a%20pre-election%20crash%20course%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fnegative-gearing-explainer-a-pre-election-crash-course-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Negative%20gearing%20explainer%3A%20a%20pre-election%20crash%20course%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fnegative-gearing-explainer-a-pre-election-crash-course-video&media=>
Negative gearing explainer: a pre-election crash course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jun/30/negative-gearing-explainer-a-pre-election-crash-course-video>
“The government just looks ridiculous,” Bowen told Sky News.

“They should adopt a sensible approach [for the next election] … I don’t hold 
out much hope, but they should.”

Liberal frontbencher Arthur Sinodinos said neither wages or corporate tax 
revenues had grown strongly since the economy reaped the benefits of the mining 
investment boom.

“What we’ve got to do on the one hand is continue to promote strong growth in 
the economy,” Sinodinos told ABC television.

Why government debt isn't the biggest threat to Australia's credit rating | 
Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/oct/23/why-government-debt-isnt-the-biggest-threat-to-australias-credit-rating>
That was why the government was pursuing a 10-year plan to cut company taxes, 
which would reduce the cost of doing business and lead to higher jobs growth, 
he said.

The former Labor frontbencher Craig Emerson said the problem both sides of 
politics had faced in recent years was the way budget forecasts for the 
four-year estimates were put together.

The first two years are forecasts made by Treasury and the third and fourth 
years are technical assumptions.

“You can’t get to surplus on assumptions and this is what has dogged both 
sides of politics all the way through from about 2012 onwards,” Emerson told 
Sky News.
 