
The Australian Workers’ Union has been told to audit its membership numbers 
after concerns over inaccurate reporting of membership for six years.

The Fair Work Commission last week ordered the audit after the union admitted 
it had published incorrect historic membership numbers in financial reports 
from June 2009 to 2014.


The FWC discovered the problem after reviewing the AWU’s annual returns and 
financial reports.

Chris Enright, the director of the Fair Work Commission’s regulatory 
compliance branch, has warned the AWU it may have contravened the Registered 
Organisations Act.

In correspondence seen by Guardian Australia, Enright told the AWU on 15 
November that the “integrity” of AWU historical membership reporting had become 
an issue.

He said that, between 2009 and 2014, the AWU’s financial report for each year 
cites the exact number of members as the union’s annual report from six months 
earlier, something he said was “inherently unlikely”.

Are you next? From mining to academia, workers face increasingly insecure 
conditions | Van Badham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/22/are-you-next-from-mining-to-academia-workers-face-increasingly-insecure-conditions>
“For example, in the June 2014 financial report, the union reported 120,289 
members, the identical number as had been reported in the annual report for 31 
December 2013,” he wrote. “This pattern has occurred in each of the years 
between 2009 and 2014.

“The AWU has a financial year which ends on 30 June and it is of course 
inherently unlikely that the number of financial members of any registered 
organisation, including the AWU as at 30 June each year, would be exactly the 
same as the number of members as at 31 December the preceding year over a 
period of years.

“While I do not propose to speculate about what might have been occurring at 
this stage, I advise that the integrity of AWU historical membership reporting 
has become an issue.”

The AWU admitted the error in November, saying the financial reports for 2009 
to 2013 were prepared by a financial controller who no longer works for the AWU.

It said a new financial controller began working for the AWU in April 2014 and 
changes were made later made to the AWU’s reporting processes, leading to an 
abandonment of the practice in its 2015 financial report.

But Enright wrote to the AWU last week warning his concerns had not been 
resolved simply because the AWU had acknowledged the error.

He said the commission did not have a “sufficient level of confidence” in the 
statutory membership reporting of the AWU, and he has asked them to prepare for 
an audit.


“I request that the AWU begins immediate preparations to conduct an internal 
audit of its membership, for both financial and calendar year periods, between 
2009 and 2014 inclusive for correcting the errors,” Enright says, in a letter 
dated 20 December.

“There are a range of regulatory options open to the commission to ensure that 
the AWU meets its statutory obligations and the commission intends to consider 
those options.”

The correspondence shows the AWU claimed a membership of 129,981 in its 2009 
annual report, which was replicated in its 2010 financial report.

It then claimed an increased membership of 132,956 in its 2010 annual report 
(and its 2011 financial report) and 139,329 in its 2011 annual report (and 2012 
financial report).

But its recorded membership then fell to 121,448 in its 2012 annual report 
(and 2013 financial report) and 120,289 in its 2013 annual report (and 2014 
financial report).

The recording practice changes after that. Its 2014 annual report shows a 
membership of 103,678, followed by 98,763 in its 2015 annual report and 92,798 
in its 2015 financial report.

Scott Ryan, the special minister of state, said on Tuesday that the issue 
showed the importance of legislation recently passed through the Senate “to 
ensure those who claim to represent workers actually do, and in this case 
represent the number of people they claim to actually exist”.

In November the Senate passed the Turnbull government’s registered 
organisations commission bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/one-nation-senator-shoots-down-labor-bid-to-amend-anti-union-bills>
, one of the industrial relations bills that triggered the double-dissolution 
election.
 