
At first glance, the progress reports on the Great Barrier Reef released last 
week by theAustralian 
<http://www.environment.gov.au/marine/gbr/long-term-sustainability-plan> and 
Queensland 
<http://www.tmr.qld.gov.au/-/media/busind/Transport-sectors/Ports/maintenancedredgingstrategy/Maintenance-Dredging-Strategy---November-2016.pdf?la=en>
 governments might seem impressive.

The update on the Reef 2050 Plan 
<http://www.environment.gov.au/marine/gbr/publications/reef-2050-plan-update-on-progress>
 suggests that 135 of the plan’s 151 actions are either complete or on track.

The Australian government’s apparent intention in releasing five recent 
reports is to reassure Unesco that the Great Barrier Reef should not be listed 
as “world heritage in danger” (as the world heritage committee haspreviously 
threatened <http://whc.unesco.org/en/decisions/6049>).

Sadly, behind the verbosity and colour of these reports, there is 
disappointingly little evidence of progress in the key areas needed to make a 
significant difference to a world heritage area that is incrisis 
<https://theconversation.com/how-much-coral-has-died-in-the-great-barrier-reefs-worst-bleaching-event-69494>
.

The government's report on the Great Barrier Reef is a 'dog ate my homework' 
moment | Larissa Waters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/the-governments-report-on-the-great-barrier-reef-is-a-dog-ate-my-homework-moment>
Poor baseline

The government framework for protecting and managing the reef from 2015 to 
2050, theReef 2050 Plan 
<http://www.environment.gov.au/marine/gbr/publications/reef-2050-long-term-sustainability-plan>
, has beenwidely criticised 
<https://theconversation.com/the-plan-to-save-the-great-barrier-reef-is-destined-to-fail-unless-33542>
 as failing to provide a sound basis for the necessary long-term protection of 
the reef.

As well as providing a shaky basis to build effective actions, the Reef 2050 
Plan has few measurable or realistic targets. It is therefore not easy to 
report on the actual progress.

Several of the actions that will have the greatest impacts on the overall 
health of the reef are shown in the progress reports as “not yet due”. In some 
cases, such as climate change, the Reef 2050 Plan is silent, instead simply 
referencing Australia’s national efforts on climate change.

Instead, the plan is to “[improve] the reef’s resilience to climate change by 
reducing local pressures”. Besides addressing water quality, there are many 
things that should also be considered but they involve making some really hard 
decisions, such as choosing betweencoal and coral 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/conl.12208/full>.

Progress versus reality

The overview of progress 
<https://www.environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/e2b70193-91fa-49e6-95b2-b1aa8adb1d7c/files/annual-report-imp-plan-reef-2050-plan.pdf>
 claims that 135 of the 151 actions in the Reef 2050 Plan are either completed 
(dark green) or are on track for their expected milestones (light green), as 
shown below.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Faustralia-must-choose-between-coal-and-coral-the-great-barrier-reef-depends-on-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F308e4d92aee3744b370614593f47cdac8186345b%2F0_0_1914_732%2F1914.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20must%20choose%20between%20coal%20and%20coral%20%E2%80%93%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef%20depends%20on%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Faustralia-must-choose-between-coal-and-coral-the-great-barrier-reef-depends-on-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20must%20choose%20between%20coal%20and%20coral%20%E2%80%93%20the%20Great%20Barrier%20Reef%20depends%20on%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Faustralia-must-choose-between-coal-and-coral-the-great-barrier-reef-depends-on-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F308e4d92aee3744b370614593f47cdac8186345b%2F0_0_1914_732%2F1914.jpg>
 Reef 2050 Plan: Update on Progress, 2016, CC BY Photograph: None 
The reality, however, is that many of the 103 of the actions described as “on 
track/underway” have not progressed as initially proposed when the Reef 2050 
Plan was submitted toUnesco <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unesco>, and 
that the definition of “underway” is far too loose to be meaningful.

Our rapid assessment of the status of actions indicates that the level of 
progress reported for at least 32 of these 151 actions (around 21%) has been 
overstated. The following are just some examples:

The unfortunate truth is that neither Unesco nor the International Union for 
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has the time or resources to conduct their own 
comprehensive assessment of theGreat Barrier Reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/great-barrier-reef>. They rely heavily 
on these reports when deliberating on what to recommend to the world heritage 
committee, including whether the reef should be placed on the world heritage 
in-danger list.

Our rapid assessment indicates there are real concerns with relying on the 
government to self-report accurately. It would appear the only way that Unesco 
will receive an accurate update is if that assessment is done independently of 
government. Fortunately, Unesco and IUCN do consider other evidence.

Great Barrier Reef: Australia's 'response plan' draft contains no new action 
or funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/30/great-barrier-reef-australias-response-plan-draft-contains-no-new-action-or-funding>
It is also concerning that the members of the government’s independent expert 
panel and the Reef 2050 advisory committee were not involved in making the 
final assessments for the 2016 update report.

Despite pronouncements that the Great Barrier Reef remains healthy, the 
evidence of the2015 water quality report card 
<http://www.reefplan.qld.gov.au/measuring-success/report-cards/2015/>, along 
with numerous expert opinions (for example,Jon Brodie 
<https://theconversation.com/great-barrier-reef-report-to-un-shows-the-poor-progress-on-water-quality-69779>
 on water quality;Terry Hughes 
<https://theconversation.com/how-much-coral-has-died-in-the-great-barrier-reefs-worst-bleaching-event-69494>
 on coral health; theQueensland government 
<https://www.daf.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/854449/Scallop-consultation-fact-sheet.pdf>
 on scallops; and theGreat Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority 
<http://www.gbrmpa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/21746/gbrmpa-VA-Snub-IPhumpback-11-7-12.pdf>
 on inshore dolphins) shows that the real situation is not as rosy as Unesco 
and the Australian public are being told.

Some real progress, but not enough

It is important to recognise some progress is being made – but sadly too 
little and not enough to reverse the declining trend for many of the values for 
which the reef was listed asworld heritage <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/154>.

We should also question some of the priorities in the Reef 2050 Plan given the 
widely acknowledged critical issues (see page 252 in the government’s 2014
outlook report <http://elibrary.gbrmpa.gov.au/jspui/handle/11017/2855>). 
Adopting best practice for water quality from point sources such as sewage 
discharge (action WQA11 under the plan) and protecting habitat for coastal 
dolphins (BA12) should be immediately addressed.

Whether we have the money to do what’s necessary is another question. The 
government’s pledge to spend $2bn over 10 years is the current collective 
yearly spending ($200m) of four federal agencies, six state agencies and 
several major research programs, extrapolated over the coming decade.

While the level of funding is significant compared with many other world 
heritage areas, the amount and priorities must be questioned, given that many 
of the reef’s values are continuing to decline.

So far most funding has been spent on addressing water quality, and while this 
has achieved some positive results, it has not managed to stop the 
deteriorating trends.

As Jon Brodie recently wrote 
<https://theconversation.com/great-barrier-reef-report-to-un-shows-the-poor-progress-on-water-quality-69779>
 on the Conversation:

The best estimate 
<https://theconversation.com/the-8-2-billion-water-bill-to-clean-up-the-barrier-reef-by-2025-and-where-to-start-62685>
 is that meeting water quality targets by 2025 will cost $8.2bn … If we assume 
that … $4bn is needed over the next five years, the amounts mentioned in the 
progress report (perhaps $500-600m at most) are … totally inadequate.

More action needed

The reef is unquestionably of global significance. Given its sheer size and 
location, no other world heritage area on the planet includes such biodiversity.

The worst-known bleaching event in the Great Barrier Reef  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
demonstrates the limitations of the Reef 2050 Plan, which is silent on the 
impact ofgreenhouse emissions from Queensland’s coalmines 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/conl.12208/full> and the effects of 
climate change more generally.

The Great Barrier Reef: a catastrophe laid bare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
Governments have an obligation to protect all the reef’s values for future 
generations. To do this they must recognisegrowing global moves to address 
climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/15/global-climate-change-action-unstoppable-despite-trump>
, and the widespreadnational 
<http://www.wwf.org.au/get-involved/eyesonthereef/eyesonthereef> and 
international <http://wwf.panda.org/wwf_news/?248412> expectations that more 
needs to be done 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/to-save-the-great-barrier-reef-we-must-phase-out-fossil-fuels--and-fast-20161123-gsvq72.html>
 to protect the reef.

Australia is a relatively rich country and has the technical capability to 
address the issues. This provides an opportunity to show some global leadership 
for managing such a significant part of the world’s heritage.

Listing the reef as world heritage in danger won’t in itself fix the problems 
– but it will certainly focus the spotlight on the issues.

As the world heritage committee prepares for its next meeting in July 2017, 
and considers once again whether to officially list the reef as in danger, it 
will need to study all the evidence, not just the government’s reports.

Certainly the true picture is more complicated and dire than the most recent 
government reports imply.

• Jon C Day, Alana Grech and Jon Brodie are from the ARC Centre of Excellence 
for Coral Reef Studies at James Cook University. This article was originally 
published in the Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/great-barrier-reef-needs-far-more-help-than-australia-claims-in-its-latest-report-to-unesco-69882>
 