
Soaring commodity prices have helped Australia record its first trade-balance 
surplus in almost three years.

The $1.2bn trade surplus, recorded in November, comes at a crucial time for 
the treasurer,Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, who is preparing 
his next budget due in May.

The trade figures also suggest the economy might avoid a technical recession – 
a serious concern afterlast year’s shock three-month contraction in economic 
activity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/07/australian-economy-shrinks-by-05-in-september-quarter>
.

They could also help Australia record its smallest current account deficit 
since early 1980, which could reassure rating agencies worried about the 
external balances.

Australian Bureau of Statistics figures 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/5368.0Main%20Features1Nov%202016?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=5368.0&issue=Nov%202016&num=&view=>
 show the country enjoyed its biggest positive turnaround in the balance of 
trade since April 2010, with surging iron ore and coal prices swinging it from 
a $1.1bn deficit in October to a $1.2bn surplus in November.

Australian GDP: economy shrinks by 0.5% in September quarter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/07/australian-economy-shrinks-by-05-in-september-quarter>
The trade balance compares the total value of exports and the total value of 
imports (taking account of prices and volumes).

Exports rose 8% in November, helped by rising commodity prices and coal export 
volumes, while imports were flat.

Coal exports were $900m higher than in the previous month, metal ores and 
minerals were up by $700m, and rural goods by $600m.

LNG exports, mainly in volume terms, are 20% higher than a year ago. 
Economists believe there will be another 40% rise in LNG exports by mid-2018 
when all plants hit their peak export output.

 The Turnbull government is preparing to begin its formal review of the 
petroleum resource rent tax regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/petroleum-tax-review-announced-by-coalition-after-revenue-plunges>
 (PRRT), announced in November.

 Morrison, who wants the tax to be reviewed in time for the budget, is 
concerned that revenues from the PRRT have halved since 2012-13, while crude 
oil excise collections have fallen by more than half.

“The stars are finally starting to align for Australia’s trade numbers,” Paul 
Bloxham, HSBC Australia’s chief economist, said.


“Up to this point, much of the positive impact on the economy from the boost 
to export volumes, from newly built capacity, has been offset by declining 
commodity prices.

“As Australia, and others, have put more iron ore, coal and other materials 
onto the global market, commodity prices had been falling, weighing on local 
incomes.

“But commodity prices now appear to be past the trough and Australia still has 
more capacity coming on line. As a result, resources exports are now also 
picking up strongly in value terms, not just volumes.”

Petroleum tax review announced by Coalition after revenue plunges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/petroleum-tax-review-announced-by-coalition-after-revenue-plunges>
Bloxham said this had positive implications for the economy, because nominal 
GDP – the income received from the goods the country produces – would get a big 
boost.

“This should lift local incomes, corporate profits, tax revenues and flow 
through to wages growth [which] should support inflation and keep the Reserve 
Bank from needing to cut further,” he said.

The NAB economist Tapas Strickland said the strong trade numbers should dispel 
fears that Australia could repeat the surprisingly weak GDP figure in the 
September quarter.

“The increase in trade volumes in November ... if repeated in December should 
see the trade balance add to fourth quarter GDP growth,” Strickland said.

“This should eliminate fears out there that Australia was at risk of recording 
a ‘technical recession’ after the weak third quarter GDP figures.”

Michael Workman, a senior economist at Commonwealth Bank, said trade surpluses 
should continue for the next six months.

“Australian producers will benefit, along with the state and federal 
governments as profits and tax payments rise,” he said.
 