
Dundee United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> became the 
latest victims of Ayr United's penchant for raising their game against Premier 
League teams as their First Division visitors twice came from behind to hold 
the Tangerines to a 2-2 draw.

Ayr's first Scottish Cup fifth-round setback came after just six minutes, when 
David Winters headed in a Jamie McCunnie cross. They equalised within two 
minutes, though, with Scott Crabbe capitalising on poor United defending, and 
although Craig Easton put them behind again, Pat McGinlay deservedly steeredAyr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ayr> to a replay 16 minutes from the end 
with an excellent header from a corner.

United's problems increased when substitute Derek Lillee was sent off for a 
foul on Paul Lovering. United's manager, Alex Smith, criticised the decision. 
'To me, Lovering went for the ball,' he said. However, he could have no 
complaints about the result. 'I thought we outplayed United in the second 
half,' said Ayr manager Gordon Dalziel.

Is it possible that even Rangers - who, of course, face Ayr in the CIS 
Insurance Cup Final next month - will be embarrassed when they visit Forfar 
today?

Their manager, Neil Simpson, does not think so. Despite Berwick's draw against 
Rangers in the third round, and the possibility that the visitors' manager Alex 
McLeish might bring some fringe players into his team for the clash with 
Forfar, Simpson says: 'I cannot believe Rangers will be as poor as they were in 
that match,'

Even Forfar's chairman, David McGregor, prefers to adopt a realistic stance - 
at least publicly. Though Forfar have come agonisingly close to causing an 
upset against Rangers in the past, he points out: 'There is a bigger gap 
between the two teams now than when we played them before.'

Celtic, who face a rather tougher looking Scottish Cup hurdle at Aberdeen 
tomorrow, are sweating on the fitness of Henrik Larsson, whose training has 
been curtailed because of a hamstring injury. 'We will wait until the morning 
of the game before making a decision,' said the cup holders' manager, Martin 
O'Neill.

He admitted that he is less hopeful in the case of Joos Valgaeren, whose 
recovery from a long-standing groin problem seems likely to take another week.

Â· You've read the piece, now have your say. Email your comments, as sharp or 
as stupid as you like, to the <a 
href="mailto:football.editor@theguardian.com">football.editor@theguardian.com.
 