
As The Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off> signs off 
its final BBC series with record viewing figures, Channel 4 executives will be 
plotting how to recoup their controversial £75m outlay on the UK’s most popular 
TV show.

A peak of almost 15 million viewers, more than half of the public who were 
watching TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/27/great-british-bake-off-viewers-final-candice-brown>
, tuned in to seeCandice Brown win the Bake Off crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/candice-brown-takes-great-british-bake-off-crown>
 in the final of the baking show phenomenon on Wednesday night.


Channel 4 will be buoyed by the rise in viewing, but must now begin the tricky 
task of selling the revamped format to sponsors and advertisers, shorn of
presenters Mel Giedroyc and Sue Perkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/13/sue-perkins-and-mel-giedroyc-to-leave-great-british-bake-off>
 andjudge Mary Berry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/22/mary-berry-leave-great-british-bake-off-paul-hollywood-bbc-mel-giedroyc-sue-perkins>
.

ITV’s director of television, Kevin Lygo, said recently that Channel 4 had 
paid for“baking powder and a tent” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/20/itv-bake-off-sue-perkins-mel-giedroyc-mary-berry-paul-hollywood>
 by failing to secure the full current star line-up in its deal to take the 
show off the BBC.

The broadcaster must rebuild what will inevitably be a new-look show around 
remaining judge Paul Hollywood. The comedians Jennifer Saunders, Dawn French 
and Richard Ayoade have all dismissed rumours linking them to the show. The 
popular 2015 winner Nadiya Hussain recently ended speculation that she might 
join bypledging to remain with the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/14/bake-off-nadiya-hussain-bbc-paul-hollywood-channel-4>
.

However, the show will almost certainly be Channel 4’s biggest commercial 
brand, provided the transition from theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> is handled adroity, and could rival the 
value of the once sprawling Big Brother franchise.

Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> insiders point to the 
success of the Bake Off format in more than 20 countries, with a range of 
different presenters, and its advertiser-friendly audience profile of young and 
upmarket viewers, as reasons for optimism.

Channel 4 said: “The Great British Bake Off is a hugely successful format, 
both in the UK and around the world, and it will help Channel 4 cross-fund 
public service remit delivering programming like the 2020 Paralympics, British 
film, Channel 4 News and original comedy and drama.”

Bake Off will make its Channel 4 debut in 2018 unless a contractual issue 
between its maker Love Productions and the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/26/channel-4-still-pursuing-2017-great-british-bake-off-launch>
 is resolved. But it is understood that demand is such that bidding for the 
headline sponsorship slotcould start at as much as £8m per year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/23/channel-4-to-start-sponsorship-bids-at-8m-for-the-great-british-bake-off>
.


This would put Bake Off in the same price bracket as ITV’s The X Factor, the 
biggest show on commercial TV, which commands£10m a year  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/06/x-factor-signs-talktalk-deal-simon-cowell-itv>
in a wide-ranging sponsorship deal with TalkTalk.

The broadcaster is yet to approach advertisers about deals. But if Channel 4 
could attract BBC levels of viewing, it would easily surpass The X Factor as 
the biggest drawcard on commercial TV.


Advertising <https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> industry sources 
believe that the hit show, which would command a premium of perhaps 40% on 
typical TV ad rates, could charge close to £200,000 for a 30-second ad, and as 
much as £280,000 for the final, if it was to attract BBC1 levels of 14 million 
viewers.

The final alone would fetch more than £4m and the main 10-hour series would 
rake in well in excess of £30m in TV ad revenues, on top of sponsorship money.

However, TV and media buying agency executives are predicting that on Channel 
4 the show is likely to attract an audience significantly lower than BBC1, 
forecasting about 4 to 5 million.




“Channel 4 won’t be able to command a Bake Off audience comparable to the BBC 
but that doesn’t mean it isn’t a good decision,” said Phil Hall, chief 
commercial strategy officer at media buying agency MediaCom UK. “The halo 
effect on surrounding shows will be considerable and the extra hours of 
Bake-Off-related programming will be valuable to advertisers.”


Under the terms of the deal, Channel 4 will be able to broadcast up to 40 
hours of Bake Off programming a year, with spin-off shows including 
professional and celebrity specials as well as the main series.

Based on the lower level of expected audience the main series might make more 
like £1.6m an episode and more in the range of £15m for the whole run. 
Thirty-second ad rates would come in at more like £100,000 for a typical 
episode and £200,000 for the final.

Big franchises are a rarity on commercial TV. Channel 4’s highest-rating show 
is Gogglebox, which attracts 4 million to 5 million viewers, and sources say 
that the broadcaster could make money from the franchise as a whole even if the 
main show managed only about 3 million viewers.

With another 30 hours of Bake-Off-related programming to exploit, the halo 
effect boosting audiences for programmes that follow Bake Off in the schedule 
and new advertisers potentially lured, Channel 4 will be confident it can more 
than recoup its outlay.
 