
Mary Berry has said she will keep working with The Great British Bake Off 
presenters Mel Giedroyc and Sue Perkins afterthis year’s final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/great-british-bake-off-candice-brown-jane-beedle-andrew-smyth-bbc-finale-channel-4>
, and joked they could swap baking for gardening.

Berry told Chris Evans on Radio 2 on Wednesday morning that no decisions had 
been made but that the trio “will do something because we’re good pals”.

Finalists Andrew Smyth, Jane Beedle and Candice Brown will compete on 
Wednesday evening for the seventh Bake Off crown, and Berry said the pressure 
on the last instalment of the series made it the “most difficult” yet.

Great British Bake Off stars to cook up a storm in tense BBC finale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/great-british-bake-off-candice-brown-jane-beedle-andrew-smyth-bbc-finale-channel-4>
“It really is the most difficult we’ve ever had, because you know, [it is] 
series seven and the showstopper is ... we are wanting sheer perfection and 
they will be very nervous because they have watched every series.”

Giedroyc and Perkins said last month they wouldn’t “follow the dough” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/13/sue-perkins-and-mel-giedroyc-to-leave-great-british-bake-off>
 whenBake Off moves to Channel 4 as part of a £75m three-year deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/12/bbc-loses-great-british-bake-off>
.Berry swiftly followed suit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/22/mary-berry-leave-great-british-bake-off-paul-hollywood-bbc-mel-giedroyc-sue-perkins>
, with only her fellow judge Paul Hollywood deciding stay with the programme 
when it moves to the commercial broadcaster.

Channel 4 has since faced criticism for failing to make sure the show’s top 
talent was signed up before agreeing the deal. The BBC isthought to be 
considering options to replace Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/25/bbc-could-launch-bake-off-rival-before-channel-4-show-source-says>
 with a show starring Berry, Giedroyc and Perkins, which could launch before 
Channel 4 gets its version off the ground.

Berry told Evans she had gone with her “gut feeling” in making the decision to 
stay with the BBC. “I made it straight away for myself, having discussed it 
with my family and others. I’m very happy I’ve stayed with the BBC. Everything 
I’ve done has been with theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> and I 
wanted to stay with them.”

“I’m sure the programme will go on to be a little bit different, but it will 
still be wonderful.”

Berry said of Perkins and Giedroyc: “We have made no decisions whatsoever, we 
haven’t actually all three got together, but we will do something because we’re 
good pals, and who knows what it would be?

“Well, it may not be baking, you never know, it could be gardening. I’m a very 
keen gardener you know.”

Wedneday evening’s final will see Rolls-Royce aerospace engineer Smyth, garden 
designer Beedle and PE teacher Brown face some of the toughest baking 
challenges ever set on the show, including producing a British classic without 
measurements, and tackling the most complex showstopper seen on the show.

Last year’s final, which was won by Nadiya Hussain, was the most-watched 
programme of the year with more than 13 million viewers.

Hussain was tipped as a possible judge or presenter for Channel 4’s Bake Off 
until she released a statement last month saying she had agreed a deal to make 
the BBC her “home” and develop new projects.
 