
The most complaints last month were provoked by a clue in Quick crossword No 
12,818 <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quick/12818> for 10 June, where 
15 down had 'Balkan country (7)' for ROMANIA. 'I didn't know Romania was in the 
Balkans ...' was the ironically helpful tone of most of the messages. The 
Balkans is a group of countries that has historically always caused problems. 
And, if you define them as being those countries wholly located on the Balkan 
Peninsula (the area bounded by the Adriatic, the Mediterranean and the Black 
Sea to the west, south and east and by the Danube, Sava and Kupa rivers to the 
north) then Romania is not of the group, since only Albania, 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Macedonia and Montenegro fit that bill. But, 
together with Coatia and Serbia, Romania is substantially within the peninsula.

I would never make the mistake of claiming Wikipedia as an unassailable 
authority on matters of fact but, for what it is worth,its entry on the Balkans 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Balkans> says: 'The term "The Balkans" covers 
not only those countries which lie within the boundaries of the "Balkan 
Peninsula", but may also include Slovenia and Romania. ... Prior to 1991 the 
whole of Yugoslavia was considered to be part of the Balkans.' This would also 
add Croatia and Serbia (and Kosovo) to the list. According to Wikipedia, in the 
English-speaking world all these countries, plus Moldova and sometimes Hungary 
and Turkey are commonly included in the Balkan region. It adds the further 
information that August Zeune, the German academic who is credited with coining 
the term 'the Balkans' in 1808, defined it as those areas of south-east Europe 
that remained under Turkish rule after 1699. On this basis I am reasonably 
comfortable with Romania being called a Balkan state for crossword purposes.
_____

On last month's topic of "the pudding" I was rightly taken to task by Alan 
from Madrid for not using the Google search properly. My assertion was that the 
correct version of the phrase 'the proof of the pudding is in the eating' 
produced only just over 1 million search results, while the shorter (incorrect) 
version, 'the proof is in the pudding', scored over 12 million hits. If I had 
put double quotes around each phrase for my search, thus limiting it to 
examples of the exact wording, the results would have been different, he said. 
Indeed they are, but the incorrect one still scores higher (2.3 million) than 
the longer correct one (1.4 million).
_____

May I use this opportunity to give you advance warning of a couple of imminent 
changes (I hope that you will think of them as improvements once you have got 
used to them) on the crossword home page? The first concerns registering and 
signing in to submit entries online for the monthly Genius puzzle. Until now 
you have been able to bring up and complete or download the month's puzzle 
without registering. But, if you are not already registered with and signed in 
to theguardian.com, when you try to submit an entry online you are met with a 
frustrating "error" screen that prevents you from getting any further. I know 
that this has infuriated many of you, which is why we have been running a 
regular warning note about it with the special instructions attached to each 
Genius puzzle. The change will be implemented in time for August's Genius 98 
and first noticeable when that puzzle is published. From then on, when you use 
any link to click on to the latest Genius puzzle you will be asked to sign in 
to theguardian.com, if you are already registered with the system (or to 
register if you are not). Thereafter you will/should have no problem submitting 
your entry online.

The second upcoming change is to the archive search facility on the right-hand 
side of the home page. This will be offered in future in two forms: you will be 
able to search 1) by type of puzzle + date of publication (and optionally 
setter) or 2) by type of puzzle + serial number. This change is to deal with 
the problem that the archive search tool has until now only allowed you to find 
'normal' Cryptic and Saturday prize puzzles. This had meant that old Genius 
puzzles have not been available via the search tool. Also from time to time we 
run complicated Cryptics (particularly the Bank Holiday specials), which the 
interactive software cannot handle and which are offered to you only as 
downloadable PDFs. When searching for these by serial number or date you have 
incorrectly been told that no such puzzle exists. With this change both these 
problems will disappear. Incidentally, you will still be able to search all of 
a particular setter's puzzles by name by using the 'all puzzles' link 
underneath the latest of each type of crossword on the left-hand side of the
homepage <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords>.

_____

I expected more reaction to Araucaria's 'Printer's Devilry' Genius puzzle for 
June <https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/java/new/0,,-27071,00.html>. In 
fact there were only three emails in total on the subject. One was a rave 
review in the middle of the month from Mark in Leeds: 'Just finished. Absolute 
class'. The other two were less complimentary: 'Not what I would call a proper 
crossword because the answers often bear no relation to the clues' from Nora B; 
and 'This month's Genius is beyond the pale ... I don't think ... that the 
puzzle is fairly within the rules of modern setting' from Gordon M. 
Incidentally, Araucaria was not inventing a new puzzle format but using one 
with a long history. This type of puzzle was 'invented' by Ximenes and has been 
used subsequently by Azed in the Observer. A note on the PD can be found at
volecentral.co.uk <http://volecentral.co.uk/pd/intro.htm>, which starts:

'Printer's Devilry (or PD) clues are a popular type of non-standard crossword 
clue. They will never appear in an ordinary cryptic crossword. Usually, a 
crossword in which some or all the clues are PD will have some rubric which 
tells you to expect them; usually it will also give an example. A few extreme 
crosswords, such as the Listener puzzle, are liable to inflict PD on you 
without warning â€“ but if you're doing the Listener you are an experienced 
enthusiast who deserves all (s)he gets, and you don't need to read this 
introduction anyway. Uniquely among clue types, the PD clue does not contain a 
definition of the answer.'

As might be expected the June entries were fewer than in recent months and 
slower to come in, but by the deadline we had 152 (compared with 337 for the 
previous month). There was an almost correct submission at 04:00 on the first 
day from Ben in Ilkley, which was remarkable. In the event the first correct 
solution arrived two days later from David in Victoria, Australia. I would 
value more reaction as to whether such 'non-standard' puzzles are a good thing 
or not in the Genius slot.

Congratulations to Christine Thomas from Aberdare, who is June's Genius winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com> 
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 