
Ask any ballet dancer about the film Black Swan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jan/05/black-swan-natalie-portman-tamara-rojo>
 and you’ll immediately get a groan that falls somewhere between disdain and 
disgust. They’re tired of the myths about ballet being a world of competition 
and cruelty, of freakishly talented and freakishly driven dancers – never mind 
that there’s some truth in that.

Ballet both feeds on its myths – of it being exceptional and otherworldly – 
and is constantly trying to demolish them. And each new fiction adds another 
layer in the popular imagination, even an unassuming, entertaining children’s 
animation such asBallerina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/15/ballerina-review-elle-fanning-animation>
, the French-Canadian film which follows orphan Félicie on her quest to be a 
dancer.

This is a film that takes its dance seriously. The choreography is modelled on 
real performances by ballerinaAurélie Dupont 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/15/paris-opera-star-ballet-dancer-aurelie-dupont-to-take-her-final-bow>
 – former Paris Opera étoile (star), now artistic director of the company – and 
fellow dancerJérémie Bélingard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/06/wheeldon-mcgregor-bausch-review-pierre-boulez-birthday>
. The result is ballet XXL, a little faster and higher than humanly possible, 
but the steps are real.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fballerina-animated-kids-film-ballet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf25ea2ea232efdcab2e5da7c6f9462349f7965d%2F357_376_1293_776%2F1293.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ballerina%3A%20the%20animated%20kids'%20film%20that%20gets%20to%20the%20pointe%20of%20ballet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fballerina-animated-kids-film-ballet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ballerina%3A%20the%20animated%20kids%27%20film%20that%20gets%20to%20the%20pointe%20of%20ballet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fballerina-animated-kids-film-ballet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf25ea2ea232efdcab2e5da7c6f9462349f7965d%2F357_376_1293_776%2F1293.jpg>
 Aurélie Dupont and Jean-Guillaume Bart in La Bayadère at the Lowry, Salford 
Quays, in 2000. Photograph: Don McPhee for the Guardian 
It’s also a film that idolises not just the role of the ballerina but also the 
world’s oldest ballet company, theParis Opera <https://www.operadeparis.fr/en>. 
Set in Paris in 1879, with the first iron girders of the Eiffel Tower beginning 
to rise in the background, Félicie’s mecca is the Palais Garnier, home of the 
Paris Opera and as important a character as anyone in the film. Its grand dome 
glows amid the rooftops, the building’s grandeur is rendered in fine detail, 
its sweeping staircases and gilded candelabras, the iconic circular windows of 
the ballet studio.

Ballerina review – city of light feet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/01/ballerina-observer-film-review> 
Founded in 1669 at the court of Louis XIV, the Paris Opera Ballet is deeply 
entrenched in tradition. WhenBenjamin Millepied resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/04/benjamin-millepied-paris-opera-ballet>
 as director last year, the subsequent fallout emphasised a rigidly 
hierarchical institution resistant to change. The company’s exacting regime is 
certainly in evidence in Ballerina. By way of luck and subterfuge, Félicie 
finds her way into the Paris Opera Ballet School (these days it has its own 
building but back then students, nicknamed thepetit rats, trained in the opera 
house itself) and the merciless discipline of ballet master Mérante. The film’s 
makers might well have read the2002 report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/dec/08/france.arts> criticising the 
severity of the school’s culture and its regime of “psychological terror”.

Initially, Félicie gets by on the Billy Elliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/02/how-we-made-billy-elliot-the-musical>
 formula: spirit over technique. But she soon learns there’s no substitute for 
hard work and it takes 5am starts to push her body to perfection – plus some 
Karate Kid-style training methods applied by her mentor, like jumping into a 
puddle of water without making a splash.

But the ultimate lesson is that Billy Elliot is right, at least once you’ve 
mastered the steps: to be a great dancer is about the spirit you communicate on 
stage. “Passion is more important than technique,” Félicie is told. “How you 
deliver it, musicality, emotion. Every sound, every harmony needs to leave your 
body vibrating from the ends of your hair to the tips of your toes.” And that 
really isn’t a myth.

 