
So, where to start? With the fond farewell for Voro, Valencia’s very own Mr 
Wolf? With Paco Jémez’s long Granada goodbye, a death so foretold he got up at 
5.30am and waited for the boat the bishop was coming on? Or with the three 
last-minute goals that decided three games in a row, Saturday serving up 
justice one match at a time, for Sevilla, Las Palmas and Deportivo? With Aritz 
Aduriz’s lovely goal? Sergio León’s better goal? Or Kévin Gameiro’s even better 
one? With Iago Aspas and Ryan Babel? Or even Carlos Vela? Remember them? “I’ve 
never been away, I just played at clubs where I didn’t get so much attention,” 
Babel said after his return at Riazor.

How about with Diego Alves doing it again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/26/valencias-diego-alves-shows-penalty-prowess-yet-again-against-sevilla>
? Twice, in fact: two penalties saved in a game, three in a week, seven of his 
last 11, more spot-kicks stopped than let in since he’s been in Spain. With 
Leganés,Primera’s best debutants in almost 50 years, or Eibar’s historic 
afternoon? With the two points that separate the top five or the five points 
that separate the top 11? The 26 goals and 10 games, only one of them won by 
more than a goal? With that one, even? A game that still ended with a relieved 
Diego Simeone, winning coach and league leader, puffing out his cheeks and 
waggling his hand like he’d trapped it in a door.

What about at the Rosaleda where one got sent off, two probably should have, 
Mikel Balenziaga and Roberto Rosales karate kicking each other, and two goals 
in a minute ended Spain’s best run, pulling Málaga from the relegation zone and 
Athletic Club off the top? At the Sánchez Pizjuán, with its four injured 
players, one injured ref and two brilliant back-heels; at the Calderón, where 
there was no game but a party anyway; the Bernabéu where, asked if there’s a 
crisis, Zinedine Zidane said: “no, but …”; or Cornella-El Prat, where Marca 
said there was a “miracle”. Actually, no, not there; not when the “miracle” was 
Espanyol’s first clean sheet, the weekend’s only 0-0 draw.


Better to start at the end: late on Sunday night, with Marc-André ter Stegen 
saying sorry. Only even there it’s not easy to know where to start. The weekend 
when everything happened (the second in a row, too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/26/athletic-bilbao-mikel-balenziaga-la-liga-weird-weekend>
, only even better this time) ended with a gamein which everything happened and 
seven goals were scored 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/barcelona-beaten-4-3-by-celta-vigo-as-atletico-madrid-go-top-of-la-liga>
, one that will be picked over for days yet and for 90 minutes was breathless 
and fun.


Barcelona beaten 4-3 by Celta Vigo as Atlético Madrid go top of La Liga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/barcelona-beaten-4-3-by-celta-vigo-as-atletico-madrid-go-top-of-la-liga>
Barcelona, given the chance to go top after Real Madrid had drawn 1-1 with 
Eibar at the Santiago Bernabéu, went to Vigo. “If anyone can hurt us, it is 
Celta,” Luis Enrique had warned, and as it turned out he was right. One down 
after 21 minutes, two down after 31 minutes and three down after 32, trailing 
3-0 at half-time, on came Andrés Iniesta and up stepped Gerard Piqué, sweeper, 
midfielder and centre-forward rolled into one. Theolés soon became ohs. 
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> made it 3-1 after 57 
minutes and 3-2 after 63. A comeback didn’t so much look on, more nailed-on. 
Aspas, scorer of Celta’s second, admitted that his team were “running low on 
petrol” and feared the worse.


But then, after 76 minutes, Ter Stegen tried to clip a pass over Pablo 
Hernández’s head only to clip it on to his head instead, the ball bouncing back 
into the net. Still it wasn’t over. On 86 minutes, Piqué got his second to make 
it 4-3. And on then on 88, he headed just wide. The ball slipped away, the 
chance too: Barcelona had been beaten for the second time this season, slipping 
to fourth. El Mundo Deportivo turned Celta’s ground Balaídos intoBad-aídos, 
while the front of Sport ran on: “What gifts!” Itshumor gráfico – more graphic 
than humour, as usual – showed skinned players, muscle, skull and flesh 
revealed,alongside the comment 
<https://twitter.com/sidlowe/status/782905024036864000>: “some people’s faces 
should fall off with the shame.”

“The first goal came from us losing it, the second came from us losing it a 
long way from goal, the third was an own goal, and the fourth I don’t even want 
to talk about,” Luis Enrique said. He was a little tetchy, and no wonder. Ter 
Stegen’s loose pass to Sergio Busquets and his sluggish reaction had seen Sisto 
Pione score the opener; a ball out of Celta’s area and Busquets’ misjudged 
header led to Aspas running at a backtracking Piqué to score the second; and 
Jérémy Mathieu slid the third into his own net. The fourth was that “assist”, 
just when there was hope. Barcelona had shot themselves in the foot, repeatedly 
and from close range. As Santi Giménez put it in AS, they played Russian 
roulette, only with five chambers full instead of one.

Who is to blame for the Barcelona’s defeat in Vigo, asked Estudio Estadio, 
TVE’s round-up show? Luis Enrique for resting players, leaving both Ivan 
Rakitic and Iniesta out of the starting XI? Mathieu – always a Camp Nou 
scapegoat, cigarette in mouth in that Sport cartoon – for being Mathieu? 
Busquets, who has been baffling bad lately? One man who had no doubt was Ter 
Stegen himself, even if his coach insisted: “we’re not going to kill him for 
this” and Piqué said: “Could he have risked less? Yes, but he should carry on 
playing his way” – which, of course, he should, if in moderation: for all the 
implicit risks it’s notthe idea of a goalkeeper playing that’s the problem, per 
se 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/dec/12/victor-valdes-barcelona-real-madrid>
.

Ter Stegen recently said he was sorry if he made people nervous; he was 
sorrier that he had made them lose on Sunday night. “It’s my fault; we lost 
because of my mistake,” he said.


As ever, though, there were suspects missing. The usual suspects, too. The 
Others. Madrid have dropped points three times this season, Barcelona three 
times, and Atlético three times; which is a roundabout way of saying that 
Villarreal, Las Palmas, Eibar, Leganés and Alavés have picked up points, but so 
few say that. Who was responsible for Barcelona losing? How about Sisto, for a 
start?Or Aspas 
<http://www.espnfc.com.au/blog/espn-fc-united-blog/68/post/2630720/iago-aspas-the-talisman-of-celta-vigo>
, hyperactive and superb again: “pure magic” one local newspaper called him. Or 
Theo Bongonda. Or Daniel Wass, suffocating Busquets.

How about Toto Berizzo, the coach who has now defeated Luis Enrique three 
times – more than anyone else – and whose side are recovering from a dreadful, 
unexpectedly bad start to the season? On Sunday, a familiar formula from last 
year was repeated, for as long as Celta had fuel left. The pressure was applied 
deliberately and relentlessly. High too; Barcelona were not allowed a way out. 
“When Barcelona don’t have the ball, they’re not Barcelona,” Berizzo said. “And 
every robbery was an automatic attack.” So they kept coming, until they could 
barely run any more, and even then they ran. Ter Stegen gave it away, Barcelona 
got it badly wrong, but not in isolation: without Hernández there nothing would 
have happened, just as when Busquets made a mess of the first, the four players 
closest to him wore light blue.


And so at the end of a weekend that finished with Madrid drawing, Barcelona 
losing and Atlético top; with Sevilla joint second and Villarreal level with 
the current champions, Luis Enrique’s side conceded four for goals the first 
time in 67 games. For the first time sincethey were last at Balaídos, in fact 
<http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/24/la-liga-celta-vigo-barcelona-attacking-trio-msn>
. There was a reason why Luis Enrique said that Celta de Vigo could hurt 
Barcelona: because they’re good.

Talking points

• “Diego Alves has a gift,” Voro said. Simeone called him “extraordinary”. 
Mestalla sang his name. Back in Madrid, where fans watched on giant screens at 
the Calderón, celebrating the stadium’s 50th anniversary in its farewell 
season, they cursed him. He did it again. And again. The Valencia goalkeeper, 
who stoppedAlexander Szymanowski’s penalty against Leganés last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/26/athletic-bilbao-mikel-balenziaga-la-liga-weird-weekend>
, saved a penalty from Antoine Griezmann on Sunday lunchtime – and “saved” 
really is the word. There was pretty much nothing wrong with the shot, high and 
to Alves’s right, but he produced a barely believable stop, somehow reaching 
out his left hand to push it away. Then when Atlético got a second penalty in 
the second half, he only went and saved it again – this time from Gabi 
Fernández.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbarcelona-marc-andre-ter-stegen-la-liga-celta-vigo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbffb27616e8c702f9e5260288a4a7e5383872a2c%2F0_49_2658_1595%2F2658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bar%C3%A7a's%20Marc-Andr%C3%A9%20ter%20Stegen%20accepts%20blame%20as%20La%20Liga%20continues%20to%20confound%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbarcelona-marc-andre-ter-stegen-la-liga-celta-vigo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bar%C3%A7a%27s%20Marc-Andr%C3%A9%20ter%20Stegen%20accepts%20blame%20as%20La%20Liga%20continues%20to%20confound%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbarcelona-marc-andre-ter-stegen-la-liga-celta-vigo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbffb27616e8c702f9e5260288a4a7e5383872a2c%2F0_49_2658_1595%2F2658.jpg>
 Diego Alves is congratulated by his team-mate Mario Suarez after saving 
another penalty for Valencia. Photograph: Juan Carlos Cardenas/EPA 
As Gabi turned away, he didn’t even look that distraught; instead he wore a 
resigned expression that seemed to say: “Well, that was inevitable.” Not long 
afterwards, Aderlan Santos made a daft, clumsy challenge in the area, 
presumably thinking to himself: “it doesn’t matter; if he gives it, Diego’ll 
save it anyway.” Which was fair enough: Alves has now saved penalties from 
Messi, Ronaldo, Griezmann, Kanouté and Costa, and fewer than half of those he 
faces go in. He has faced 45 penalties in Spain; only 21 have been scored and 
he has now saved 22 in all competitions, 19 in the league (from 41 penalties), 
three more than the previous record holder Andoni Zubizarreta – who faced more 
than twice as many, 103 in all.


But Alves said afterwards: “It means nothing.” Griezmann had finally scored, 
Carrasco, Torres and Gameiro making the goal not long after the first missed 
penalty and just 22 seconds after Torres had come on. Yet somehow Alves had 
kept Valencia in the game – and not just from the spot – and in the 88th minute 
Mangala had a great chance to equalise only to head wide, before Gameiro raced 
through in the last minute to make it 2-0. Gameiro’s first touch was wonderful, 
the run lightning, and the goal deserved. Atlético suffered but they were 
impressive;ever more attacking 
<http://www.espnfc.com/spanish-primera-division/15/blog/post/2962621/atletico-madrid-prove-again-they-are-not-just-a-defensive-unit>
, they’re top now and deservedly so, the most convincing of the candidates.

• “Thank you Voro, our Mr Wolf,” the banner at Mestalla ran. After 11 games as 
caretaker coach spread over four different spells, he steps down now to let 
Cesare Prandelli take over. He’ll be back on the bench next game but as 
match-day delegate, not manager. He lost just two of them, winning eight, but 
still no one offered him the job full time and he didn’t ask for it either. “I 
hope I never appear here again,” he said afterwards as he got up to leave the 
press room. At which point there was a smattering of applause. Voro, bashful, 
was half way out the door and would have kept going if the director of 
communications hadn’t pushed him back in to see it.

• “This is a new sensation for me, for Eibar, for everyone,” José Luis 
Mendilibar said, while in the dressing room his players were piling into the 
Jacuzzi.Which was a bit of a squeeze 
<https://twitter.com/danigarcia16/status/782639006886531072>. Eibar scored 
their first ever goal against Real Madrid and got their first ever point 
against them too. They are the first Basque team to get a point from the 
Bernabéu in a decade and you couldn’t say that it wasn’t the right result 
either. Instead it was just reward; bold and well organised, they limited 
Madrid to very little and created chances of their own. Pedro León, in 
particular, was superb.

• That’s four draws in a row now for Madrid. “Is it a crisis?” Zidane was 
asked. “No,” he said, pointing at the calendar. It’s only October, after all. 
“But it can’t go on like this,” he added. It’s not so much that Madrid are 
playing badly as that they are hardly playing at all right now.


• A gorgeous backheel from Ganso set up Wissam Ben Yedder for the first for 
Sevilla against Alavés. Another gorgeous backheel from Ben Yedder gave them the 
winner in the 90th minute after Víctor Laguardia had equalised for Alavés. 
Sevilla are chaotic but usually fun and dominated the second half; the goal had 
been coming. It was the right result. As it was when Las Palmas came back from 
2-0 down to draw with Osasuna, the equaliser coming in the 91st minute. “When 
all you do is defend as they did you tend to concede chances,” Las Palmas coach 
Quique Setién rightly said. And it was a similar story in Coruña, where Babel 
belted in a great last-minute winner for Depor. “We deserved more,” Sporting 
coach Abelardo said, but they didn’t, not really. “I suppose it was my night,” 
Babel said, cautiously. “I had had two opportunities and didn’t think I would 
get another.” When it came, the finish was fantastic.

• Six weeks seems a bit early to sack Paco Jémez, it is true, but he had been 
asking for it week by week since the opening week, pretty much inviting Granada 
to get rid of him. And when his team lost last Monday he knew that time was up. 
Not that getting rid of him helped: Granada seemed to have decided that, having 
been accused of over-playing with Paco, their plan now was not to play at all 
and basically to boot the ball as far away as they could every time they got 
it. Which still didn’t mean that they can defend, as they found when they 
obligingly allowed Szymanowski to run through and score 15 minutes from the 
end. They’re the worst team in Spain, and not just in terms of results right 
now. Seven games in, Leganés meanwhile are the best debutants for half a 
century … despite picking up a single point at home, against Atlético, 
Barcelona andValencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia>. Cool as 
cucumbers.

Results: Real Sociedad 1–0 Betis, Granada 0–1 Leganés, Sevilla 2-1 Alavés, 
Osasuna 2–2 Las Palmas, Deportivo 2–1 Sporting, Valencia 0–2 Atlético, Real 
Madrid 1–1 Eibar, Espanyol 0–0 Villarreal, Málaga 2–1 Athletic, Celta 4–3 
Barcelona.
 