
The Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> coach, Luis 
Enrique, was clearly delighted with Thomas Vermaelen’s first goal for the club 
on Saturday and said he was not surprised the Belgium defender was finally 
coming good after a long struggle with injury.

Vermaelen struck the winner 17 minutes from time in a 1-0 La Liga success 
against Málaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/29/barcelona-malaga-la-liga-match-report>
 at the Camp Nou, which maintained the champions’ perfect start to their title 
defence with a maximum six points from two matches.

Barcelona maintain perfect start after Thomas Vermaelen sinks Málaga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/29/barcelona-malaga-la-liga-match-report>
The ball dropped kindly for the 29-year-old, who barely featured last season 
after joining from Arsenal, at a corner and he showed excellent technique to 
smash it first time into the net, later saying his subdued reaction was down to 
the fact he did not know how to celebrate. Vermaelen was only in the side due 
to Gerard Piqué’s suspension but his accomplished performance suggests he could 
get regular playing time this term as Barça seek to defend their Spanish league 
and cup and Champions League titles.

“I’m not surprised by his level of play,” Luis Enrique told a news conference. 
“He is still not 100% and has to keep accumulating minutes. He is a big asset 
at set pieces, he has a lot of character and is an expert player.”

Vermaelen sustained a hamstring injury at last year’s World Cup finals in 
Brazil before he signed for Barça, prompting some to question why the club 
completed the deal, which cost the Catalan club just under €20m. He eventually 
needed surgery and did not make his club debut until the final weeks of last 
season.

Vermaelen’s partner in central defence on Saturday, Javier Mascherano, said 
the Belgian’s goal againstMálaga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/malaga> 
was a reward for his effort in getting himself fit again. “The goal is huge for 
Thomas,” Mascherano said. “Especially with everything he had to fight against 
last year when he couldn’t really demonstrate how good he was. I am very happy 
for him.”
 