
Barcelona were beaten in their opening match of 2017 by nine-man Athletic 
Bilbao <https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao>, who held on to 
win a feisty Copa del Rey last-16 first leg at San Mamés Stadium 2-1.

Transfer window January 2017: all the latest moves and news – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Two goals in four first-half minutes from Aritz Aduriz and Iñaki Williams gave 
Bilbao a 2-0 half-time lead. Lionel Messi scored a free-kick in reply seven 
minutes into the second half and hit the post with the last act of the game as 
the hosts withstood a Barça bombardment despite the numerical disadvantage.

Raul García was sent off for two bookable offences and his midfield colleague 
Ander Iturraspe followed late on, while Aduriz avoided punishment despite 
appearing to catch Samuel Umtiti in the throat at a corner.

Ernesto Valverde’s side played with high intensity from the start, pressing 
their more illustrious counterparts – current holders of the trophy – and 
trying to force errors.

The former Liverpool defender Mikel San José headed wide from an early corner 
but the best chance of the early exchanges fell to Gerard Piqué, who headed 
wide from Messi’s cross.

Bilbao took the lead when García and Aduriz exchanged passes. The striker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/03/aritz-aduriz-better-age-athletic-bilbao>
, who at 35 became Spain’s oldest goalscorer in the World Cup qualifying win 
over Macedonia in November – continued his run and beat Marc-André ter Stegen 
with a glancing header.

The hosts were not content to sit back on their lead and gained reward when 
Williams found the net with a fine strike.

Real Madrid’s James Rodríguez gives Sevilla rude awakening in Copa del Rey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/real-madrid-sevilla-copa-del-rey-match-report>
Barça tried to respond before the break but Umtiti had a shot blocked and 
Messi was denied by Gorka Iraizoz in the Bilbao goal. The visitors twice 
appealed for penalties in first-half stoppage time, first for a challenge on 
Neymar and then for one on Luis Suárez, but their calls were dismissed.

García fouled Neymar early in the second half, presenting Messi with an 
opportunity from the set piece. The Argentinian curled in the free-kick from 
the left, the ball bouncing down off the crossbar and crossing the line.

García received his first booking for a foul on Messi and was sent off 20 
minutes later, receiving a second yellow for a late challenge on Neymar. 
Iturraspe’s dismissal also came for a foul on the Brazilian forward.

Suárez’s attempted lob of Iraizoz failed to come off before Messi hit the post 
at the death as Barça’s attempts to restore parity fell short.

The second leg takes place at the Camp Nou next Wednesday.
 