
Luis Enrique has dismissed reports that striker Luis Suárez threatened 
Espanyol players in the tunnel afterBarcelona’s 4-1 Copa del Rey victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/06/barcelona-espanyol-copa-del-rey-match-report>
 at Camp Nou on Wednesday.

Espanyol <https://www.theguardian.com/football/espanyol> finished the first 
leg of the last-16 tie with nine men after Hernán Pérez and Papakouly Diop were 
sent off, while there were accusations that goalkeeper Pau López stamped on 
Lionel Messi.

But with ill-feeling still hanging over from the 0-0 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/02/barcelona-espanyol-la-liga-match-report>
 between the city rivals at the weekend when Barça players accused opposition 
fans of racially abusing Neymar, it was Suárez’s clash with Diop that caused 
problems after the final whistle.

The Question: what is attacking football? | Jonathan Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/06/the-question-what-is-attacking-football-jonathan-wilson>
According to referee Juan Martínez Munuera’s report, which has been quoted by 
Catalan newspaper Sport 
<http://www.sport-english.com/en/news/barca/suarez-waited-for-espanyols-players-the-camp-nou-tunnel-4797730>
, the Senegal international told Suárez, “I shit in your whore mother”, and was 
shown a red card in the 75th minute.

“At the end of the game, once in the tunnel, Barça’s No9, Suárez while the 
Espanyol players were coming up the stairs, waited for them and shouted at them 
on various occasions,” read the report. “He said: ‘I’m waiting for you, come 
here! You’re a waste of space’. It provoked a confrontation between players of 
both clubs and the security guards had to get involved, as did coaches of both 
teams.”

Asked about the incident, Luis Enrique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/luis-enrique> dismissed the accusation as 
“Christmas carols”, presumably in reference to the fact the match was being 
played on Dia de Los Reyes (Three Kings Day). “It isn’t down to the coaches or 
the players to keep the peace,” the Barcelona manager added. “It’s down to the 
referees to ensure we play football and not American football. There was some 
tension. I’d like it if there were more football, fewer interruptions and no 
injuries.

“When someone oversteps the mark, it’s down to the referees to keep order. Of 
course there’s tension in these games. The players know each other, they’re two 
teams with a special rivalry but that rivalry has to remain positive.”

But Diop, who launched into a dance routine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/04/papakouli-diop-racism-atletico-levante>
 in May 2014 when playing for Levante in response to racist chanting from 
Atlético Madrid fans, insisted Suárez should have been sent off as well.

“We both insulted each other. He said swear words to me, and me to him, and I 
get sent off. The referee told me he didn’t hear us both, only me,” Diop told 
Carrusel Deportivo.

“[The press] have spent all week saying we are violent and this has had its 
effect. [Barcelona’s players] are really good and if you cannot even touch 
them, they can do what they want.

“You cannot say we were violent. There wasn’t any blood – if we had wanted to, 
the Barça players would have gone off on stretchers.”

Espanyol received eight yellow cards and two reds during the match, although 
Andrés Iniesta dismissed suggestions things had gone over the top. “Violence is 
a very strong word, in games like this there’s a lot of rivalry and contact,” 
he said.
 