
La Liga champions Barcelona were stunned by a rampant Celta Vigo attack as 
they lost 4-3 in a chaotic encounter on Sunday. Barça had the chance to go top 
of the table afterReal Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> 
drew 1-1 at home to minnows Eibar but instead let in four goals at coach Luis 
Enrique’s former side and slumped to their second defeat of the season. 

Atlético Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> go top 
of La Liga on 15 points, leading Real on goal difference, while Barça are 
fourth on 13, one point behind Sevilla in third. Luis Enrique heavily rotated 
his side after the hard-fought 2-1 win at Borussia Mönchengladbach in the 
Champions League on Wednesday and his side paid dearly for the changes, falling 
behind to Pione Sisto’s low strike in the 22nd minute. 

Cesare Prandelli confirmed as Valencia manager after signing two-year contract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/01/cesare-prandelli-confirmed-valencia-manager>
Iago Aspas finished off a quick counter to double the home side’s advantage in 
the 31st and two minutes later Barçaa were hit again, Jeremy Mathieu bundling 
into his own net. 

András Iniesta came on at the start of the second half to mark his 600th 
appearance for Barça and nearly engineered a dramatic turnaround, assisting 
Gerard Pique’s headed goal and helping to win a penalty which Neymar coolly 
converted. 

Barça were quickly on the back foot again following an embarrassing error by 
goalkeeper Marc-Andre ter Stegen, who kicked the ball against Pablo Hernández 
and watched it go straight into the net. 

Pique reduced the deficit to a single goal in the 87th minute but could not 
undo the damage done by Barça’s shaky defence. 

Earlier on Sunday, Fran Rico stunned the Bernabéu by heading Eibar into the 
lead in the sixth minute, scoring the side’s first goal against Real inLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>. 

Gareth Bale headed home a Cristiano Ronaldo cross to level in the 17th minute 
and score his 50th La Liga goal but could not prevent a fourth straight draw 
for the European champions in all competitions. 

“We did not play in the first half and our opponents did. The second half was 
much better, which is something we’ve been saying too much lately,” said Real’s 
coach Zinedine Zidane. 

Antoine Griezmann made amends for missing a second penalty in as many games by 
hitting the opening goal for Atlético and Kevin Gameiro sealed the points with 
a close-range finish at the death, while captain Gabi also had a spot kick 
repelled by Valencia’s penalty-saving expert.
 