
Lionel Messi was largely anonymous as Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> suffered a costly 1-0 home 
defeat to Málaga in La Liga. A victory would have put Luis Enrique’s side two 
points clear at the top of the table, with Real Madrid playing at Elche on 
Sunday. But Málaga held on to their surprise seventh-minute lead when Dani 
Alves tried to nonchalantly side-foot volley a back‑pass but Juanmi nipped in 
and rounded Claudio Bravo before slotting into an empty net.

Messi was at his scintillating best during Barca’s 11-match winning streak but 
the prolific striker, who had scored 26 league goals before this weekend, 
resembled a pale imitation of his usual self and was largely off the pace, 
giving the ball away frequently.

Real Sociedad 4-3 Sevilla | La Liga match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/22/real-sociedad-sevilla-la-liga-match-report>
Luis Enrique, however, refused to single out any particular player. The 
Barcelona coach said: “It would be wrong to point to individuals and 
particularly after a defeat. The team wasn’t at the necessary level and that is 
it. We were not good enough individually or as a team and all our attacks in 
the second half turned into breakaways for the opposition.

“We tried to attack too much through the centre and this is now a damaging 
result for us.Málaga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/malaga> played well 
and I would like to think this was just an accident but we will see what 
happens over the next few weeks. On other occasions we have been able to 
respond quickly to going a goal behind but it is not always the case. We found 
it difficult to create chances and we were too disorganised. It is crucial to 
keep your order so as to win games.”

Barca need to quickly bounce back as they face Manchester City on Tuesday in 
the last 16 of the Champions League.

“We will see what happens. Defeats are painful and it is not easy to overcome 
them,” said Luis Enrique.

Later, Antoine Griezmann struck twice as Atlético Madrid swept aside Almería 
3-0 to move to within four points of neighbours Real.
 