
9.52pm GMT 

Full-time: Barcelona 3-0 Malaga

Peeeeeeep! That is that. An easy enough win for Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> thanks to goals from Pedro, 
Piqué and Alexis. That victory means they go back on top of the La Liga table. 
Thanks for all your tweets and emails. Bye!


9.49pm GMT 

90 mins But three minutes seperate Barcelona from all three points.


9.48pm GMT 

88 mins Barça have had 73% possession this evening. Is that even legal?


9.48pm GMT 

87 mins While we were waiting for that sub to happen, a wonderful pass over 
the top found Fabregas free in the box. He was offside but his shot still 
forced Willy into a very good save. Without him, Malaga would be another three 
of four behind.


9.46pm GMT 

86 mins Another sub for Barça. After a far too long lay-off, Afellay comes on 
for Alexis. He gets a great reception.

9.43pm GMT 

84 mins Something tells me Malaga are not going to get anything from this game.


9.42pm GMT 

82 mins Darder on for Tissone. 


9.41pm GMT 

81 mins Alexis juggles the ball in the box and, with his back to goal, knocks 
it over the head of Antunes. He spins and is muscled out of it by the Malaga 
man. He wants something for this alleged foul but he gets nothing.


9.39pm GMT 

79 mins One hundred and fourty feckin' eight!

MESSISTATS (@MessiStats) 
148 ― Messi has now given 148 assists in his career for club & country: 123 
for Barcelona and 25 for Argentina#fcblive 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23fcblive&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/MessiStats/statuses/427554808401498112> January 26, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/MessiStats/statuses/427554808401498112> 
9.37pm GMT 

78 mins Sergi Roberto is about to come on but not before Barça take this 
corner. Malaga clear it but only as far as Tello and then Busquets. A free-kick 
is awarded and the pause in play sees Sergi replace Xavi.


9.35pm GMT 

76 mins A free-kick about 40 yards out to Malaga. The big boys go up but it is 
sent straight in to the hands of Valdés. What a waste.


9.33pm GMT 

74 mins The camera has just panned to Bernd Schuster on the sideline. He looks 
sad, like someone they have cancelled his favourite TV show or that someone has 
shot his favourite dog.


Updated at 9.34pm GMT

9.31pm GMT 

71 mins Another yellow card, another free-kick. This time it is for Flávio for 
a foul on Messi. It is dead centre about 4 feet outside the box. Xavi steps up 
to take it. He bends it around the wall and around the wrong side of the post.


Updated at 9.32pm GMT

9.30pm GMT 

70 mins Speaking of Alexis, he was almost put through on goal there only for a 
last-ditch interception by the Malaga defense.


9.28pm GMT 

68 mins He has been much better this season, no? Maybe Messi being out for a 
while has helped him grow a bit. Now if only he could cut out that diving stuff.

barcastuff (@barcastuff) 
Alexis has scored his 12th Barcelona goal this season #fcblive 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23fcblive&src=hash> All 12 in the Liga [via 
@barcastat <https://twitter.com/BarcaStat>]
 <https://twitter.com/barcastuff/statuses/427553138694815744> January 26, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/barcastuff/statuses/427553138694815744> 
9.24pm GMT 

64 mins Some housekeeping. A few moments ago, Barça decided not to risk Pedro 
and have replaced him with Tello. Malanga have made a change too. Pérez goes  
and Morales comes.


Updated at 9.27pm GMT

9.21pm GMT 

62 mins Messi may not have scored in a while, but he doesn't half help set a 
few up. He picks the ball up with his back to goal but he turns quickly and 
strides forward. Once again he spots Pedro free on the left. Pedro plays the 
ball across the goal and Alexis taps it home from close range.


Updated at 9.54pm GMT

9.20pm GMT 

Goal! Barcelona 3-0 Malaga (Alexis)

60 mins Game over?

 Alexis Sánchez taps in Barcelona's third goal. Photograph: ALBERT OLIVE/EPA 
Updated at 4.52am GMT

9.19pm GMT 

59 mins "Never mind the pint," says Matt Dony, "there's a jar of white powder 
on the table! Call the narcs! You're nicked, Bryant ..." 

9.17pm GMT 

58 mins Pedro is now down. This does not look good.


9.17pm GMT 

57 mins Barcelona stride forward. Alves has it then Messi has it on the edge 
of the box. A short pass of his finds Pedro in the box. He takes a touch, skips 
inside a defender and then curls the ball into the far corner of the net. 
Delicious.

barcastuff (@barcastuff) 
Pedro scores his 16th Barcelona goal of the season #fcblive 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23fcblive&src=hash> Liga 12, Cup 3, Cup 1 
#fcblive <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23fcblive&src=hash> [via @barcastat 
<https://twitter.com/BarcaStat>]
 <https://twitter.com/barcastuff/statuses/427550579875790848> January 26, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/barcastuff/statuses/427550579875790848> 
Updated at 9.24pm GMT

9.15pm GMT 

Goal! Barcelona 2-0 Malaga (Pedro)

55 mins This is nice yo ...

 Note in background: exasperated shorts pull and helpless defender lying on 
ground. Photograph: David Ramos/Getty Images 
Updated at 4.50am GMT

9.14pm GMT 

53 mins Busquets is down but Barcelona continue on with Fabregas being played 
into the box. Through on goal, he forces Willy into yet another fine save. From 
the corner, Piqué hits the post with a header. Who need Messi?


9.12pm GMT 

51 mins And now we are down the other end. Alexis gets some time and space and 
he tries to make Malaga pay for their mistakes. However, once again, Willy, eh, 
stands tall and saves the day for his side.


9.10pm GMT 

49 mins Jordi Alba must be wearing his Superman undies tonight as he is saving 
Barça's ass on the regular. A lovely one-two, a fabulous delivery and all off a 
sudden Barça are open like a turkey on Xmas. Luckily for them, Pawlowski's 
effort is stopped by the full-back, who boots the ball to safety.

Updated at 9.10pm GMT

9.07pm GMT 

48 mins My colleague and all-round jerk Tom Bryant has sent me a picture of 
what he is up to.

 This is a pint of beer. Photograph: Tom Bryant 
Updated at 9.08pm GMT

9.06pm GMT 

46 mins Barcelona get the first attack of the second half. Pedro is bundled 
over in the box but a corner is given instead of a  penalty. From that Piqué 
almost doubles his side's lead via his head.


Updated at 9.54pm GMT

9.04pm GMT 

45 mins And we are back. No changes to tell you about just yet.


Updated at 9.04pm GMT

8.48pm GMT 

Half-time: Barcelona 1-0 Malaga

45 mins A free-kick to Barcelona on the edge of the box. Messi hits it but the 
wall does its job. A corner ensues. And another. Malaga clear it and canter 
forward but Barcelona recover and the referee calls an end to 
first-half-proceedings. Back in 15 minutes.


Updated at 8.57pm GMT

8.46pm GMT 

44 mins  Messi gets the ball on the edge of the box. Up he looks and up he 
scoops the ball, over the Malaga defence and into the path of Fabregas. It's a 
tight angle but he aims for goal. Willy, positioned well, pulls off another 
good save at his near post.

Updated at 8.57pm GMT

8.43pm GMT 

42 mins This is too easy for Barcelona. A simple corner is sent over. Alexis 
rises and flicks it on. Piqué has enough time and space to build a boat, give 
it a name, carry it down to the harbour in Barcelona and sail twice around the 
world. Instead he just fires the ball into the net to give his side the lead.

barcastuff (@barcastuff) 
Pique has for the 2nd time scored in 2 consecutive Liga rounds #fcblive 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23fcblive&src=hash> First time was in games 4 
and 5 of 2009-2010 season [via misterchip]
 <https://twitter.com/barcastuff/statuses/427544015265730560> January 26, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/barcastuff/statuses/427544015265730560> 
Updated at 8.51pm GMT

8.42pm GMT 

Goal! Barcelona 1-0 Malaga (Piqué)

40 mins It was coming ...

 Gerard Piqué celebrates Barcelona's opener. Photograph: Josep Lago/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Updated at 4.40am GMT

8.38pm GMT 

35 mins Mascherano, meanwhile, has gone in all two-footed. It is high enough 
and his studs are showing.  He is a lucky boy to still be on the pitch. Down at 
the action end of things, Pedro has just fired wide.


8.36pm GMT 
34 mins "I suppose Willy is a big fella. I mean, in order to play in goal," 
honks Zachary S. Taylor. "I'll get my own coat." Be gone with you. 
8.35pm GMT 

33 mins Some housekeeping. A few moments ago, Duda was booked for a reckless 
foul on Alexis.

8.34pm GMT 

32 mins Barça are really going to miss Valdés when he leaves in the summer. He 
is perfect for their style of play.


Updated at 8.58pm GMT

8.33pm GMT 

30 mins Pawlowski goes down like an Olympic diver just outside the Barça box 
on the left-hand side. Piqué, somehow, gets a yellow card for this ghost 
challenge. The free-kick is fired in and Pawlowski fires his head at it. Valdés 
pulls off a great reaction save.


8.31pm GMT 

29 mins "I'm aware this is fairly predictable ground, but are the commentators 
having much fun with the Malaga goalie's name?" wonders Jon Taylor. "I don't 
think I could resist the temptation. Willy flops over the ball, Willy makes 
himself big, Willy was taken out there, etc and so on. I am 31 years old." Not 
yet but give it time.


8.29pm GMT 

27 mins Once again, Barcelona give up a great chance to score. Fabregas works 
his way into the box on the right hand side. He runs along the line before 
cutting the ball back to Pedro, who is careering into the box. He slips just as 
he was about to pull the trigger.


Updated at 8.29pm GMT

8.28pm GMT 

25 mins Alves finds himself in acres of space at the back post. He could send 
the ball back across the goal to the 1000s of team-mates in the box who are 
waiting to give their isde the lead but instead he takes a touch and tries to 
lob Willy from a few yards out. Unsuccessful he is.


Updated at 9.00pm GMT

8.26pm GMT 

24 mins Santa Cruz is done for the day. Not quite sure what is wrong with him. 
He certainly doesn't limp off. Pawlowski will come on and replace him any 
moment now.


8.25pm GMT 

22 mins It's been 120 days since Messi scored in the La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> say the chaps on Sky. Is 
that right? Surely not, eh?


Updated at 9.00pm GMT

8.24pm GMT 

20 mins Another corner to Barcelona. Messi. Xavi. Busquets. Mascherano. A long 
ball to Piqué running into the box. He's offside.


8.21pm GMT 

18 mins Willy sends  the ball direct from his goal to Piqué and Barcelona go 
into attack mode. That soon breaks down and Malaga hit Barcelona on the break. 
Pérez look to be through on goal but a burst of speed from Jordi Alba sees the 
full-back nip in and steal the ball away at the crucial moment.

Updated at 9.00pm GMT

8.19pm GMT 

16 mins And here is the first yellow card of the day. And boy is it deserved. 
Pérez is late on Busquets and down his name goes in the naughty book.


8.18pm GMT 

15 mins Another corner to Barcelona. Xavi takes, Sánchez clears.

barcastuff (@barcastuff) 
Picture: First game for new Barcelona president Bartomeu 
pic.twitter.com/akt3DHtzHf <http://t.co/akt3DHtzHf> [via @barzamorocco 
<https://twitter.com/BarzaMorocco>]
 <https://twitter.com/barcastuff/statuses/427535462488494080> January 26, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/barcastuff/statuses/427535462488494080> 
8.16pm GMT 

14 mins "Barca are a tall CB and a defensive tall LB away from being 
Invincible," reckons Yuvraj Chaure. I would double that amount of centre backs 
and maybe think about a right back too.

8.14pm GMT 

12 mins Malaga have yet to score in 2014. Eeeep!


8.13pm GMT 

10 mins Down the other end, Alexis skips past a defender or two and holds off 
another one to set up Pedro, who has made a smart run into the box. The Malaga 
defence get to the ball before he does and it's a corner to Barça. It comes to 
nothing.


Updated at 8.14pm GMT

8.12pm GMT 

8 mins Right under the nose of the ref, Pérez is tough tackled by Busquets. 
Said referee reckons it is a free-kick – it isn't – and blows his whistle. It's 
about 25 yards out, and just off centre. Duda sends it towards the top corner 
but Valdes is equal to the challenge.


Updated at 8.14pm GMT

8.09pm GMT 

7 mins Just moments before that last free-kick, by the way, Alexis was played 
though by Cesc – Malaga thought he was offside but he wasn't – and he dinked 
the ball over Willy and off the post.


Updated at 8.16pm GMT

8.08pm GMT 

6 mins Another free-kick to Barça after Angeleri takes Messi down about an 
inch outside the box on the left. Xavi fires it in but Willy punches it clear.


8.07pm GMT 

5 mins  Dani Alves gets bashed out of it by Tissone, wide on the left. Messi 
stands over the free-kick. It is he who sends it in but it is Flávio who gets 
it out. 

8.05pm GMT 

3 mins "Hi Ian," cheers Patrick Michael Hull. "Today, due to the rain, I 
played in a Sunday league match that was switched to an astro-turf pitch. While 
the playing field was full-size, for some unexplained reason we had to use 
hockey goals (which as a goalkeeper was quite a pleasing development). Is it 
too late for Malaga to request a similar change to get something out of the 
game?" Not sure even that would stop Barcelona.

8.04pm GMT 

2 mins Barça get an early attack on via Pedro on the left wing but he is soon 
snuffed out at the sideline. It's a throw to Malaga but they soon give up the 
ball and Barcelona get going on their passing vibe.


8.02pm GMT 

1 min And it's off we go. The away side get us going, playing right to left. 


7.52pm GMT 
 So Atlético put four past Rayo to jump over their Madrid rivals and go top of 
La Liga once again. Pressure is on Barça now. AS English (@English_AS) 
Full time. Rayo 2-4 Atleti. Atlético move to the top of the league, for at 
least a little while.
 <https://twitter.com/English_AS/statuses/427528810364284929> January 26, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/English_AS/statuses/427528810364284929> 
7.47pm GMT 

The Rayo Vallecano jersey is superb, no?
 As seen in action during their defeat to Atlético Madrid. Photograph: Getty 
Images 
Updated at 7.49pm GMT

7.36pm GMT 

Pre-match reading

Here is Sid Lowe on how Neymar's transfer has tarnished a club that has long 
prided itself on its spotless reputation in Catalonia and around the world. 
Enjoy.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>

Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> football club, the 
pride of Catalonia, has recently exhibited some of the finest teamplay the 
world's number one sport has ever seen. But its glittering global reputation is 
also because of how it conducts itself.Més que un clube, goes the phrase – 
"More than a club".

As befits the ideal of Catalonian independence, Barcelona shirts, for several 
years, did not bear the name of commercial sponsors. Instead, the club paid the 
United Nations Children's Fund (Unicef) £1.25m a year to carry the name of the 
charity, before switching to Qatar Foundation in 2011. Barca was good off the 
field as well as on it. Or that's what the world thought.

So the club's admission on Saturday that it had been, at best, disingenuous 
over the circumstances of the signing of Brazilian aceNeymar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/neymar> has tarnished Barcelona's image 
and dismayed its legions of fans. For president Sandro Rosell, the revelation 
has been a public humiliation.

Signing Neymar, who is almost certain to be a star of this summer's World Cup 
in Brazil, should have been the greatest triumph of Rosell's presidency. 
Instead, it has been his downfall. Rosell resigned last week, after a judge 
admitted a lawsuit against him following a report from the public prosecutor 
that asked the courts to investigate a possible case of "simulated contracts".

He departed insisting that Barcelona had done nothing illegal. But his claim 
that signing Neymar from Brazilian club Santos had cost "€57.1m full stop" has 
come under intense scrutiny. The day after his resignation, Barcelona's new 
president, Josep Maria Bartomeu, admitted that the total cost of securing him, 
which is not the same as a "transfer fee", was in fact €86.2m.

A further €44m in salary will be payable during his contract. That is 
surprisingly low. The investigation will now focus on the €29.1m difference and 
the beneficiaries of a €40m payment to Neymar's father's company, N&N.

Rosell did not take questions as he presented his resignation, insisting that 
he was walking away in order to prevent what he called "unjustified attacks on 
the club" from affecting Barcelona. He insisted that the operation to sign 
Neymar was "correct" and implied that the unravelling of the case was due to 
the "jealousy" of the club's rivals. He also revealed that he had suffered 
threats. "I cannot put my family in danger," he said.

Bartomeu will, in principle, continue until the end of Rosell's term in 2016, 
although opposition groups will mobilise to push for elections earlier. Joan 
Laporta, the former president and Rosell's rival, is planning a return. The 
pair began as friends, campaigning partners and president and vice-president 
but fell out spectacularly and have been sworn enemies since. Charismatic and 
hugely successful during his previous term, Laporta remains extremely popular 
with supporters. In contrast, Rosell's presidency has been marked by poor 
communication and mistakes that have seen his popularity diminish rapidly.

Rosell had repeatedly avoided demands to clarify the exact figures beyond the 
€57.1m sum that the club had already made public, citing confidentiality 
clauses. But on Friday Bartomeu was joined by the club's director of football, 
Raúl Sanllehí, as they sought to explain the outlay. Bartomeu admitted that it 
was a "mistake" not to have explained the full figures before and that the 
actual transfer fee remained €57.1m.

According to those figures, Barcelona paid €17.1m to Santos and €40m to a 
company called N&N, owned by Neymar's father, who held the player's economic 
rights. Bartomeu insisted that N&N is separate from the player himself. Those 
€40m were registered in the original contracts as a "penalty" clause that 
referred to an agreement made well before a deal was reached with Santos.

There is a further €2m bonus payable to Santos should Neymar be a finalist in 
the Ballon d'Or vote. Because Santos did not own 100% of Neymar's rights, the 
money they received had to be divided among their Brazilian partners, which 
includes an investment fund.

According to Barcelona, the rest of the money is made up of a €10m signing-on 
bonus, a €2.7m agent's fee paid to Neymar's father, €2.5m in social work with 
Neymar's foundation, €7.9m on collaboration with Santos, €4m on marketing 
rights (€0.8m a year for the duration of his contract), and €2m to N&N for 
scouting work to be done by Neymar's father. Neymar would also earn €8.8m a 
year in wages. Even if those figures are accepted, there remain serious doubts 
as to the true destination of the money and the reasons why the package was put 
together in such a complex and seemingly opaque manner.

For Barca admirers, perhaps the saving grace in the episode lies in how the 
scandal came to light in the first place. Barcelona prides itself on being a 
members club, with a elected president.

Rosell's unravelling started with a formal, legal complaint made by a member, 
Jordi Cases, who had questioned the real beneficiaries of the €40m paid to N&N. 
The public prosecutor then expressed doubts about the amount received by Santos 
and requested that all the paperwork be handed over, with which Barcelona 
complied.

Rosell leaves still insisting that neither he nor the club has done anything 
wrong. But even if the courts do find in his favour, it will be too late to 
save his presidency.

7.30pm GMT 

The teams are in

Barcelona: Valdés;  Alves, Piqué, Mascherano, Jordi Alba; Xavi, Busquets, 
Fabregas; Alexis, Messi, Pedro. Subs: Pinto, Bartra, Afellay, Tello, Adriano, 
Sergi Roberto, Dongou.

Malaga: Willy; Angeleri, Sánchez,Flávio, Antunes; Juanmi, Camacho, Tissone, 
Duda; Pérez, Santa Cruz.Subs: Kameni, Portillo, Pedro Morales, Eliseu, 
Pawlowski, Casado, Darder.

And take a look at this rather fancy way of showing your team of the night.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FMubZWbXWj11&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FMubZWbXWj11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FMubZWbXWj11&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FMubZWbXWj11&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FMubZWbXWj11>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FMubZWbXWj11&media=>
close  And the team is ... 
And take a look at this if you are wondering who is out injured for Barcelona.

barcastuff (@barcastuff) 
Injured: Cuenca (knee), Dos Santos (knee), Oier (hand), Iniesta (knee), Neymar 
(ankle), Puyol (leg), Montoya (ankle), Song (calf)#fcblive 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23fcblive&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/barcastuff/statuses/427526443661549568> January 26, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/barcastuff/statuses/427526443661549568> 
Updated at 7.41pm GMT

2.40pm GMT 

Good evening

Mes que un club goes the slogan and it's mes que a two-horser in the La Liga 
title race this season.They are still in it, of course, as is the other one, 
but the refreshing revival of Atlético Madrid has provided a welcome antidote 
to all those (not-without-truth) accusations that Spain was just a jazzed-up 
version of the Scottish Premiership. All of which means, unlike previous 
season, Barcelona can ill-afford any slip-ups. But slip up is exactly what they 
did last week. 


After going behind to a Loukas Vyntra header from a set-piece after just 10 
minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/19/levante-barcelona-la-liga-match-report>
 they thumped the life out of Levante but only found the net once, via Gerard 
Piqué. Luckily for them, Atlético choked like Jana Novotna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/19/atletico-madrid-sevilla-la-liga-match-report>
 in the 1993 Wimbledon Final and could only muster a similar scoreline against 
Sevilla. Unluckily for them,Madrid played the Steffi Graf role rather well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/18/real-betis-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
 and they demolished Real Betis. That's not where the bad luck ends. Yesterday,
Cristiano Ronaldo and Karim Benzema combined to see off Granada, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/25/real-madrid-cristiano-ronaldo-granada-la-liga-match-report>
 which means Barcelona are no longer perched on top of La Liga. BeforeAtlético 
went a few up against Rayo Vallecano this very night, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2014/jan/26/rayo-vallecano-v-atleticomadrid>
 Madrid were top and Barcelona were the unfamiliar position of third. All of 
which leads us nicely on to tonight's game. 


Hey, remember when Malaga were good and they finished top of their Champions 
League group (ahead of Milan!),knocked Porto out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/mar/13/malaga-porto-champions-league-match-report>
 in the next round and came this oh so agonisinglyclose to doing the same to 
Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/09/borussia-dortmund-malaga-champions-league>
 in the quarter-finals?Those were the days but they are certainly not these 
days. This season, however, has been something of a mare. They currently reside 
in 16th spot in the league table, just two  points above the danger zone and 
with just five points from their last six away games. And it is not about to 
 get any easier for them. Barcelona may have slipped away from home last week 
but at the Camp Nou they are almost beyond imperious. All nine league games 
they have played at home this season they have won, scoring 31 goals in the 
process and letting in just six. 


Westlife's version of the Barry Manilow classic Mandy was top of the pops when 
Malaga last got their leg over Barcelona. Given their home form and the fact 
that Barça have won 29 of the 32 games against Malaga at the Camp Nou (losing 
their last three league trips 4-1), that doesn't look to be changing any time 
soon. But sure let's stick around and see what happens, eh? Team news is on its 
way.

Updated at 6.47pm GMT
 