
The Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> defender Dani 
Alves launched a foul-mouthed tirade on social media on Friday over football 
coverage by the Spanish press.

The outspoken full-back hit out at what he described as sensationalism by the 
mediain a message on Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BARzwkNuHzl/?taken-by=danid2ois>.

Spanish prosecutors want Neymar to be charged with fraud and corruption
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/neymar-counts-fraud-corruption-barcelona-santos-dis>
He did not refer to any specific incident, although he also posted a 
photograph from Barça’s fiery derby againstEspanyol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/espanyol> on Wednesday.

“Truly each day I feel more embarrassed to be a part of this sport, the way we 
are used and the way they play with us,” Alves wrote. “We are objects used by 
the press for their benefit, so they sell newspapers. Less and less they talk 
about football, strategy, play, the runs to score goals, the saves and the 
spectacle,” he added before using an expletive to condemn the media in general.

Barça quickly distanced themselves from the comments.

“Dani Alves published on Instagram a very critical message where he used 
offensive language,” the club said in a statement. “While these are the views 
of the player, which they are free to express, Barcelona feels it necessary to 
clarify that it does not share these offensive expressions that have been 
published.”

Barça have played Espanyol twice in the last week and tension has been rising 
since the La Liga clash that ended 0-0 on Saturday when there were complaints 
from Barça players over their opponents’ physical play.

Barça won the first leg of the Copa del Rey last-16 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/06/barcelona-espanyol-copa-del-rey-match-report>
 clash on Wednesday 4-1 and Espanyol had two players sent off.

There was a confrontation in the tunnel after the game which led to Barcelona 
striker Luis Suárezreceiving a two-match ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/luis-suarez-suspended-barcelona-espanyol-copa-del-rey>
 for using provocative language.

It is not the first time Alves has criticised the media. During a news 
conference last May he refused to listen to a question from Radio Marca which 
he said was biased towards Madrid clubs.
 