
Barcelona have invited Chapecoense to play in a friendly at the Camp Nou in 
August 2017, as a tribute to the victims of the plane crash in Colombia that
killed several Chapecoense players and staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/plane-carrying-brazilian-footballers-team-chapecoense-crashes-en-route-to-medellin>
, the Spanish champions announced on Thursday.

“FC Barcelona want to pay homage to the 71 people that died in the accident 
and to their families so it is working on making the 2017 edition of the Joan 
Gamper Trophy a homage on behalf of the world of football to all of them,” said 
a statementon the club’s official website 
<https://www.fcbarcelona.com/club/news/2016-2017/fc-barcelona-invites-chapecoense-to-the-2017-joan-gamper-trophy>
.

Eidur Gudjohnsen offers to play for the stricken Brazilian club Chapecoense
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/eidur-gudjohnsen-brazil-chapecoense-ronaldino-riquelme>
“With this invitation to Chapecoense, Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> wants to collaborate with the 
institutional and sporting restructuring of the club to help it recover the 
competitive level it had,” the statement continued.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fchapecoense-plane-crash-alan-ruschel-survivor-return-brazil-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chapecoense%20plane%20crash%20survivor%20plans%20return%20to%20Brazil%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fchapecoense-plane-crash-alan-ruschel-survivor-return-brazil-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chapecoense%20plane%20crash%20survivor%20plans%20return%20to%20Brazil%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fchapecoense-plane-crash-alan-ruschel-survivor-return-brazil-video&media=>
Chapecoense plane crash survivor plans return to Brazil – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/08/chapecoense-plane-crash-alan-ruschel-survivor-return-brazil-video>
The Joan Gamper Trophy is Barcelona’s traditional season curtain-raiser, with 
the game against an invited team taking place each year at the Camp Nou a week 
before the start of the La Liga season. Sampdoria were Barça’s opponents in the 
2016 edition, while other recent participants include Napoli, Santos and 
Manchester City.

Nineteen Chapecoense players were killed in the crash on 28 November with club 
directors, coaching staff and journalists also among the victims. The team were 
travelling to the first leg of the final of the Copa Sudamericana against 
Atlético Nacional, whosubsequently campaigned for the trophy to be awarded to 
their opponents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/chapecoense-copa-sudamericana-champions>
.
 