
And so to the final day. Barcelona have not yet won the league title and they 
may still be denied next Saturday butthey took one step closer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/08/barcelona-real-madrid-atletico-madrid-la-liga-clockwatch-live>
 after they defeated Espanyol 5-0 at the Camp Nou while Real Madrid, a point 
behind, beat Valencia 3-2 at home but Atlético Madrid lost 2-1 at Levante, 
350km south on the east coast, ruling them out of contention.

A victory for Barcelona at Granada, whose 4-1 victory at Sevilla means they 
are now safe, would makeBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> champions for the sixth time 
in eight years and they will also take the title if they can match Real 
Madrid’s result at Deportivo La Coruña.

Two goals from Luis Suárez and one each for Lionel Messi, Neymar and Rafinha 
took them to within touching distance of a league that most thought they had 
tied up a month ago. Instead a single point from 12 turned this into a 
five-match, three-team sprint for the title.

Real, Barcelona and Atlético won three in a row but Atlético fell at the 
penultimate hurdle with Sunday’s defeat at the bottom club, who have been 
relegated. Real’s pursuit continues, though, and Barcelona must hold them off 
for one more week. At least they do not do so against a team fighting for its 
life.

All games kicked off at 5pm and Diego Simeone’s Atlético climbed ahead of 
them, as it stood, after two minutes when Fernando Torres scored at Levante. 
But Barcelona went back to the top five minutes later, when Messi lifted a 
free-kick over the wall and beyond Pau López.

Not until the second half could Barcelona really feel comfortable. Word came 
through thatReal Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> had 
taken the lead against Valencia but there was better news for Barça when 
Atlético conceded an equaliser and Granada were clearly rolling over Sevilla.

As long as the lead was a single goal there would still be concerns for the 
Catalans. No one had forgotten 2007 when, on the penultimate game of the season,
Espanyol <https://www.theguardian.com/football/espanyol> got an 89th-minute 
equaliser here to cost their city rivals the title. But this time the margin 
was not a single goal for long.

Timid Manchester City suffer as Real Madrid reach final thanks to own goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/04/real-madrid-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
Barcelona got the second early in the second half and added a third soon 
after. Both came from Suárez, his 36th and 37th league goals of the season, 
slotting past López at his near post and then heading in Neymar’s corner. López 
then made a dreadful mistake to allow Rafinha to score and Suárez laid on a 
cross for Neymar to make it five. A moment later Levante scored a late winner 
against Atlético.

Though the title slipped from Atlético’s reach, it was not yet beyond Real’s 
and Valencia were unable to get the equaliser that would have made Barcelona 
champions on Sunday night. There are still two teams in it with a week to go.

Antoine Griezmann fires Atlético Madrid into final at Bayern’s expense
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/bayern-munich-atletico-madrid-champions-league-match-report> 