
Another night, another nightmare for Real Madrid, as the team who were crowned 
European club champions less than 18 months ago suffered a new humiliating 
defeat, this time at the hands ofLas Palmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laspalmas>.

And as if sinking to 14th position in the table, one point from the relegation 
places, wasn't enough, Real's arch rivals Barcelona were, in the words of 
George Costanza, riffin' and scattin' on their pain: the Catalans swaggered to 
the top of the Primera Division with a 3-0 home win over Real Mallorca.

The day's events were enough to send coach Vincente Del Bosque into a flat 
spin. "You could say that we are in crisis in the league," he told Spanish 
sports daily Marca, pearly beads of cold sweat covering both forehead and 
moustache.

"Things aren't going right for us and we are clearly going through a bad patch 
at the moment, but we have to stay calm and remain patient because there is 
still a long way to go. We have to work out what we are doing wrong and try to 
correct it so that we are back where we belong."

Where Real think they belong is one thing, where they deserve to be is 
another. Missing Luis Figo, Roberto Carlos and Steve McManaman because of the 
upcoming World Cup qualifiers, Real struggled in the first half, twice falling 
behind and relying on a thumper of a free-kick from Zidane four minutes before 
the break to go in level.

The sense of relief didn't last. Pedro Munitis, who had scored Real's first 
equaliser, used up all his moral credit by recklessly clattering Tomas Olias 
ten minutes into the second half. Las Palmas substitute Ruben took advantage of 
the extra man to score twice - the second a long-range lob over Iker Casillas - 
to add to Pablo Lago and Jorge's first-half goals and secure a 4-2 victory.

Proud Madrid's third league defeat of the season leaves them nursing the worst 
defensive record in the Primera Division, and sends Del Bosque sailing close to 
the wind. Rumours abound that Real chairman Florentino Perez is lining up 
former Juventus coach Carlo Ancelotti to take over.

Barca bound to the top

Barcelona's unbeaten start to the season continued as they wrapped up a 3-0 
win within the first 32 minutes of their home game against Mallorca.

Luis Enrique scored two before 19-year-old Argentinian Javier Saviola, a 
Â£15.7m capture from River Plate, knocked in the third, much to the delight of 
his former team-mate, Ariel Ortega. "There is not another forward like him in 
the world," the springy-haired one told onefootball.com. "Javier could win a 
championship on his own."

In true Barca style, chance after chance went begging after that, with the 
home side even unable to capitalise on the 64th-minute sending-off of 
Mallorca's Fernando Nino.

And the day ended on a slightly sour note for Barcelona, when captain and 
defensive rock Sergi suffered a badly torn thigh muscle. "The injury is 
serious," Nou Camp quack Ricard Pruna said, as he confirmed Sergi would be out 
of action for a few weeks. "It is an unusual one as he wasn't challenging 
anybody. He did the injury to himself."

The top

Barca depose Real Betis, who slipped to second place after a dull goal-free 
game at Athletic Bilbao. Villarreal could have denied Barca's ascension, but 
despite taking an early lead through Victor at home to fifth-place Deportivo, 
they let Donato smash in a free kick to force a draw. Both Betis and Villarreal 
are a point behind the leaders.

Celta Vigo, in fourth, will go top if they take all three points at home to 
Valencia tonight.

Alaves stay in the top six after seeing off Malaga with a controversial Carlos 
Llorens penalty, awarded after Jurica Vucko was adjudged to have been felled in 
the box.

The bottom

New Rayo Vallecano manager Gregorio Manzano's honeymoon period was ended after 
one minute by Osasuna's Mariano Armentano. The Argentine forward's early goal 
was enough to settle a poor game.

Manzano can take heart from the fact he isn't rock bottom, however. John 
Benjamin Toshack's Real Sociedad side bear the full weight of the division, 
after being truly sickened in Zaragoza.

Turkish forward Tayfun Korkut opened the scoring for Sociedad in the battle of 
the Reals, but saw his team fall behind to goals from Marcos Vales and Yordi. 
It looked like Igor Gabilondo had won a precious point for Tosh's strugglers, 
but Mikel Aramburu was sent off for a second yellow card, and his indiscipline 
was punished as Martin Vellisca poked home an injury-time winner.

Other results

Sevilla 2 - 0 Tenerife
 Valladolid 0 - 1 Espanyol
 