
Lionel Messi suffered a groin injury as Barcelona were held 1-1 by Atlético 
Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> at the Camp Nou 
last on Wednesday night and the club said he would be out of action for at 
least three weeks.

Barcelona’s coach Luis Henrique said afterwards: “To lose Messi means that 
football loses. With Messi we are stronger, but we will continue being strong”

Barcelona 1-1 Atlético Madrid: La Liga – as it happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/21/barcelona-v-atletico-madrid-la-liga-live>
If the Argentinian’s early departure was not bad enough, Barça failed to make 
up ground on theLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> 
leaders Real Madrid, whose unbeaten start had been halted earlier in the 
evening when they could only draw at home with Villarreal.

Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> seemed to be on 
course to cut Real’s lead to one point when Ivan Rakitic headed home a cross by 
Andres Iniesta in the 41st minute. But Diego Simeone’s side were dogged 
opponents and scored the equaliser their efforts deserved when the substitute 
Ángel Correa got the better of Javier Mascherano to slide a precise shot past 
Marc-Andre Ter Stegen in the 61st minute .

Messi had Barcelona’s first effort in the 14th minute but it was comfortably 
saved Jan Oblak while for Atlético, who were content to play on the break, 
Yannick Ferreira Carrasco tested Ter Stegen with an angled drive after a 
quarter of an hour.

Mascherano, who had been so sloppy in the home defeat by Alaves, then produced 
a goal-saving tackle to deny Kevin Gameiro a tap-in.

Barcelona were finding it difficult to break down Atlético’s defence and when 
Jordi Alba’s low cross from the left found Luis Suárez, Diego Godín was able to 
snuff out the danger.

Real Madrid’s perfect start ends with draw at home to Villarreal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/21/real-madrid-villarreal-la-liga-match-report>
Then, after Antoine Griezmann had denied Messi after he had wriggled past 
three players and exchanged passes with Sergi Roberto, Barcelona made the 
breakthrough.

Iniesta received the ball on the left from a short corner before whipping in a 
fast right-footed cross for Rakitic to beat Oblak with a glancing header from 
six yards.

After half-time, Barcelona’s cause was set back when they lost Sergio Busquets 
to injury and Messi soon afterwards.

Their withdrawal, with André Gomes and Arda Ruran respectively replacing them, 
was compounded when Atlético equalised. A quickly taken free-kick was flicked 
on by Fernando Torres, also a substitute, and Correa made a clever feint that 
left Mascherano on the ground before firing home via a post.
 