
Barnsley will return to Wembley for the second time this season to contest the 
League One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> play-off 
final after overcoming Walsall 6-1 on aggregate.

Barnsley, the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/03/barnsley-oxford-united-johnstone-paint-trophy-final-match-report>
 at the national stadium just last month, had acomfortable 3-0 lead from the 
first leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/14/barnsley-walsall-league-one-play-off-semi-final-first-leg-match-report>
 in Yorkshire on Saturday but they did not rest on their laurels at the Banks’s 
Stadium and had chances to extend their overall advantage before Adam Hammill 
did so after 18 minutes.

The chances continued to come for the visitors, with Conor Hourihane Walsall’s 
chief tormentor, but they had to wait until the 66th minute before Ashley 
Fletcher extended their lead.

Sam Winnall at the double to give Barnsley first-leg lead over Walsall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/14/barnsley-walsall-league-one-play-off-semi-final-first-leg-match-report>
Jordan Cook’s superb long-range goal five minutes from time was a strike 
deserving of more than mere consolation but Josh Brownhill scored late on to 
make it 3-1 on the night – a repeat of Barnsley’s win atWalsall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall> in the league in March.

Barnsley will be back at Wembley on 29 May where they will bid to become the 
first team since Grimsby in 1998 to win the Football League Trophy and clinch 
promotion via the play-offs. They will face either their Yorkshire rivals 
Bradford or Millwall, who resume their semi-final tie at The Den on Friday 
night withMillwall 3-1 ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/bradford-city-millwall-league-one-play-off-semi-final-match-report>
.

Walsall survived a scare in the eighth minute when an unmarked Alfie Mawson 
mistimed his header inside the six-yard box following a Hourihane corner.

Walsall went close as Andy Taylor narrowly missed the top corner with a 
free-kick on the edge of the box before another superb delivery into the 
penalty area from Hourihane fell to Hammill’s feet and the winger kept his cool 
to slot the ball past Neil Etheridge.

It all but settled the tie but Barnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> looked to turn the screw 
regardless and Hourihane almost forced James O’Connor to put the ball into his 
own net but Etheridge reacted quickly to block. Another Hourihane cross from 
the right found Sam Winnall at the far post but Etheridge denied him at 
point-blank range.

Walsall were really riding their luck but came into the game a little more 
either side of the half-hour mark. Tom Bradshaw scuffed his shot wide and then 
Jordy Hiwula directed Rico Henry’s driven cross just wide.

And when Walsall did register an effort on target they found Adam Davies on 
top form as he dived at full stretch to his right to push away Bradshaw’s 
header. Back at the other end, Etheridge twice had to deny Fletcher before 
half-time.

Walsall began the second half brightly but came within a whisker of falling 
further behind when Paul Downing poked the ball inches wide of his own net.

Davies produced another fine save to push away Adam Chambers’ 20-yard strike 
on the hour before goalscorer Hammill turned creator with a cross which 
Fletcher controlled inside the penalty area before firing the ball home.

Davies was finally beaten by Cook’s inch-perfect curler into the top corner of 
the net before a defensive mix-up in the final minute allowed Lloyd Isgrove to 
set up Brownhill to smash home Barnsley’s third goal.
 