
In any other season, Barnsley’s promotion from League One, achieved after they 
defeated Millwall 3-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/29/barnsley-v-millwall-league-one-play-off-final-live>
 in the play-off final at Wembley, might be considered the most implausible and 
remarkable story it is possible to imagine. They were bottom of the table in 
November, in Februarylost the manager who started their revival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/06/bristol-city-appoint-lee-johnson-new-head-coach-championship>
 and now they are in the Championship. Our credulity has been recalibrated by 
Leicester City – but do not let that obscure what an extraordinary achievement 
this is.

Barnsley v Millwall: League One play-off final – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/29/barnsley-v-millwall-league-one-play-off-final-live>
“Survival,” Paul Heckingbottom, the manager, said on what Barnsley’s realistic 
aim was at the nadir of their campaign. “We were playing quite well in some 
games but we weren’t getting the results. Then we tightened up and from that we 
built up little bits of confidence, and here we are now.”

Here they are indeed. An opener from Ashley Fletcher, a third by Lloyd Isgrove 
and a peach in between from the returning hero Adam Hammill, who re‑signed at 
Oakwell this season four years after leaving for theoretically bigger things, 
were enough to beat aMillwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> 
side who were largely disappointing – but perhaps they were not allowed to be 
anything else.

To say both teams raced out of the blocks would be slightly inaccurate because 
it was more like all 22 players were already sprinting at full pelt before 
kick-off. However, it was Barnsley whose pace was more intense, all part of 
Heckingbottom’s gameplan that succeeded inthe semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/19/walsall-barnsley-league-one-play-off-match-report>
. “It’s something we tried earlier in the season and it didn’t go that well,” 
he said. “But against Walsall we found something that really worked, trying to 
start [at pace] in the first half and then again in the second.”

Barnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> took the lead in only 
the second minute: Adam Davies launched a goal-kick downfield and Sam Winnall 
flicked it on for the Manchester United loanee Fletcher, who created a yard of 
space and shot across Jordan Archer, and into the corner of the net. Fletcher 
uses the United gym on his days off to show his face at his parent club: 
hopefully José Mourinho took notice of this one. Heckingbottom said: “When 
Ashley came here he’d been playing under-21s football but now he’s playing like 
a man. I don’t know what the pecking order there was at the time but it 
could’ve been him making his debut instead of Marcus Rashford. They must be 
impressed with him.”

Barnsley continued their ferocious pace, seemingly playing in some sort of 
dead-eyed, highly focused trance, hypnotised into the firm belief that anything 
other than victory for them was neither possible nor acceptable. It was two 
after 19 minutes, Hammill tiptoeing towards Carlos Edwards, who politely 
allowed the winger to cut in on his strong right foot, the Barnsley man then 
demonstrating exactly why that was a bad idea by curling a perfect effort into 
the top corner. Twenty-four hours earlier Mohamed Diaméwon promotion for Hull 
City to the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/hull-city-sheffield-wednesday-championship-play-off-final-match-report>
 with a strike cut from similar cloth: this was better.

Millwall pulled one back before the break, when the centre-back Mark Beevers – 
a Barnsley fan as a boy – gathered a loose ball from a corner, used his body 
superbly to turn on the six-yard box and swept home – but after the break 
Barnsley came again. The pace remained relentless, both teams tearing into each 
other as if this was the last game either were ever going to play, an almost 
reckless disregard for nerves or much subtlety. It was like two motorcyclists 
having a high-speed race along a narrow cliff path, the difference being 
Barnsley had much greater control.

They used that control to score a third and kill the game. Conor Hourihane, 
perhaps their outstanding player over the season and on the day, curled an 
inswinging corner from the right to the near post, where the winger Isgrove – 
listed perhaps a little optimistically at 5ft 10in – nipped in front of 
everybody to glance a header home. From there it was a case of hanging on, 
which in the end they did with relative ease to secure their second win at 
Wembley this season, havingalready lifted the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/03/barnsley-oxford-united-johnstone-paint-trophy-final-match-report>
.

For his part, the Millwall manager, Neil Harris, admitted the better team won. 
“We came full of hope and expectation, and leave with nothing but pride at a 
brilliant season,” he said. Harris had to make a late change to his starting XI 
after Byron Webster was injured in the warm-up, replaced by the club captain, 
Tony Craig. Did that have an effect on his team? “I think clearly it did,” 
Harris said. “No excuses, Barnsley deserved to win the game but I think it 
probably did subconsciously affect us.”

For Heckingbottom, next on the to-do list is a chat with the chairman, Maurice 
Watkins. Remarkably, the Tykes fan – “I’d have been watching if I wasn’t here,” 
he said – is still only the caretaker manager, appointed on a temporary basis 
when Lee Johnson left for Bristol City, after which Heckingbottom promised not 
to discuss his future until the season was over. With the manager and chairman 
keen on a permanent deal, one imagines those negotiations will not take too 
long. What a season.
 