
With Jaap Stam on the touchline and Roy Keane watching in the stands, Barnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> felt like a place to be, even 
if their fine start to the season stuttered with a 2-1 defeat by Reading.

“Big names, big clubs, big players on the pitch, big crowds. It’s what you 
want,” the Barnsley head coach and local boy, Paul Heckingbottom, said after a 
match that included a penalty, two excellent goals and an amusing red card. 
“We’re enjoying it greatly.”

Football League your thoughts: 31-match unbeaten run ends for Northampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/sep/17/football-league-your-thoughts-31-match-unbeaten-run-ends-for-northampton>
The south Yorkshire club have been on quite a run. Bottom of League One in 
December last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/conor-hourihane-barnsley-millwall-league-one-play-off-final>
, with just 18 points from their opening 20 games, they could have gone top of 
the Championship on Saturday with a win and other favourable results.

Instead they sit fourth, level on points with Newcastle United and Birmingham 
City, and comfortably the division’s top scorers with 19 goals from eight 
games. No wonder optimism abounds at Oakwell, reflected by supporter and 
blogger Neil Richardson’s pre-match poem:

“Our only expectation was survival to establish and build.

Realistic hope we hope is fulfilled.

But now as we hope that we can achieve so much more.

Is it unrealistic to think that we can finish in the top four?”

Barnsley have not played in the Premier League since 1998, when Redfearn, 
Watson, Fjortoft et al were unable to prevent an immediate slide back to the 
second division. Yet the club can now dream again, following an unlikely rise 
in the last year including victory overMillwall in the League One play-off final
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/29/barnsley-millwall-league-one-play-off-final-match-report>
 andsuccess in the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/03/barnsley-oxford-united-johnstone-paint-trophy-final-match-report>
.

The club have assembled a group of young, talented ball players and are 
encouraged to attack. Keane was present to watchthe captain and Irishman Conor 
Hourihane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/conor-hourihane-barnsley-millwall-league-one-play-off-final>
, while the former Liverpool apprentice Adam Hammill –in his second spell at 
Barnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/oct/17/barnsley-adam-hammill> – is 
an old head at 28.

They played 23 games and won 15 from New Year’s Day until the end of last 
season, an ascent that was started by Lee Johnson and continued by 
Heckingbottom when the former manager had left for Bristol City.

They have been one of the most in-form sides in Europe and, asked how such 
success has arisen, Heckingbottom, right, said: “The players. We try and make 
it really clear what their jobs are, try and set high standards for them and 
they try to achieve them. That’s been it and nothing will change on the back of 
a defeat, like nothing changes when we win games.

“The process is the same, we keep improving, keep aiming to perform in the 
next game.

“Today I think we suffered by not getting the first goal, we’ve been getting 
that in the other games. We pressed and pressed but they defended well.”

It was a fixture that had everything, and one that Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> deserved to win. They were the 
more physical team, in a tempestuous game that provided seven yellow cards and 
one red.

Garath McCleary put Reading in front, finishing into the roof of the net after 
his penalty was initially saved by Adam Davies, before a moment of madness from 
the winger in the 34th minute. Hourihane went in hard on the impressive Daniel 
Williams, and McCleary charged in to put the Barnsley captain on his backside à 
laPaul Alcock. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/sep/27/paolo-di-canio-premierleague>

Stam was prowling on the touchline throughout, even after John Swift had 
scored a second from 25 yards, admitting his stress when Adam Armstrong pulled 
one back with a late volley.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbarnsley-paul-heckingbottom-defeat-reading-championship-jaap-stam-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d10e0b9abecbcb1e99a8d5f97a268f34f45dba1%2F0_43_1326_795%2F1326.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barnsley%E2%80%99s%20ascent%20is%20checked%20but%20Heckingbottom%20still%20looking%20upwards%20%7C%20James%20Riach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbarnsley-paul-heckingbottom-defeat-reading-championship-jaap-stam-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barnsley%E2%80%99s%20ascent%20is%20checked%20but%20Heckingbottom%20still%20looking%20upwards%20%7C%20James%20Riach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbarnsley-paul-heckingbottom-defeat-reading-championship-jaap-stam-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d10e0b9abecbcb1e99a8d5f97a268f34f45dba1%2F0_43_1326_795%2F1326.jpg>
 Jaap Stam celebrates with his players at full-time. Photograph: Jason 
Dawson/Rex/Shutterstock 
“Of course it’s never easy if you’ve got to play 55-60 minutes with 10 men. 
Sometimes people talk about a heart attack, I’m not going to have one but it 
was a stressful situation in the box. We did well, but they gave us a hard time 
in the second half,” the former Holland defender said.

“Every time you want to step on the pitch and help the players out. That’s how 
I try to coach, you see certain things before the opponent has played the ball 
and you want to warn the players about where to go in certain times. That’s how 
I am, I don’t think I’m going to be changing that.”

Tammy Abraham: the brightest light among Chelsea’s 38 loan stars | Ben Fisher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/tammy-abraham-chelsea-loan-bristol-city>
Barnsley will not be changing anything, either. In the next month Aston Villa 
andNewcastle travel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/qpr-newcastle-championship-match-report>
 to Oakwell, and there are also trips to Brighton and Leeds, more of the “big 
names” that Heckingbottom is hoping to upset.

It marks a significant improvement for the Tykes who not so long ago were 
scrapping at the bottom of the third division. As Richardson writes, hope has 
been restored.

Talking points

• It was a battle of two men under pressure at the Cardiff City Stadium in the 
Championship’s early fixture on Saturday, but Garry Monk was the one smiling at 
full-time rather than Paul Trollope. Leeds United’s head coach bristled last 
week when asked if he was under pressure, ending a radio interview prematurely 
amid questions about his relationship with Massimo Cellino, the owner. Yet two 
wins from two have lifted Leeds out of danger while Cardiff sit rock-bottom. 
Trollope said “patience is key” and insisted he retained the support of Vincent 
Tan, the owner, despite four defeats in succession.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbarnsley-paul-heckingbottom-defeat-reading-championship-jaap-stam-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe43b2a023c5694db82c148d433c9b39305690ee3%2F0_72_3931_2718%2F3931.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barnsley%E2%80%99s%20ascent%20is%20checked%20but%20Heckingbottom%20still%20looking%20upwards%20%7C%20James%20Riach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbarnsley-paul-heckingbottom-defeat-reading-championship-jaap-stam-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barnsley%E2%80%99s%20ascent%20is%20checked%20but%20Heckingbottom%20still%20looking%20upwards%20%7C%20James%20Riach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbarnsley-paul-heckingbottom-defeat-reading-championship-jaap-stam-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe43b2a023c5694db82c148d433c9b39305690ee3%2F0_72_3931_2718%2F3931.jpg>
 Chris Wood opened the scoring for Leeds at Cardiff. Photograph: CameraSport 
via Getty Images, 
• The tumultuous nature of the Championship was exemplified at St James’ Park, 
where Wolves beat Newcastle 2-0 following an own goal from Chancel Mbemba and 
strike by Hélder Costa. It was a remarkable result when looking at both sides’ 
previous matches in midweek. Newcastle won 6-0 at Queens Park Rangers while 
Wolves were thrashed 4-0 by Barnsley. Rafa Benítez was highly critical of his 
team, lamenting their “mistake after mistake”.

• Undoubtedly the strangest incident of the weekend came at Valley Parade. 
Bradford City’s 1-1 draw with Bristol Rovers was paused briefly by the referee 
in the 65th minute after a drone was spotted flying overhead. Players 
congregated by the touchline and play restarted after three minutes, once 
officials had guaranteed their safety. The Sky Sports reporter, Brian Beard, 
said: “I’ve never ever seen anything like it – it’s all very strange.”

• Coventry City have endured a terrible start to the season. The Sky Blues 
drew 0-0 with Oldham Athletic and have yet to secure a win under Tony Mowbray 
this term. It means Coventry have sunk to the bottom of League One and adds to 
the growing malcontent surrounding the club. There have been more protests 
against the hedge fund owners, Sisu, who have struggled to progress the club 
since a buyout in 2007 and temporarily moved the team’s home matches to 
Northampton.

• Plymouth Argyle stayed top of League Two after a 2-0 victory over Exeter 
City in the 104th Devon derby. Five supporters were arrested during the match, 
and although much of the build-up focused on Reuben Reid – the former Plymouth 
striker who has signed for Exeter – he did not feature until the 64th minute. 
Exeter slipped into the bottom two after a contrasting start to their rivals.
 