
Joey Barton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/joey-barton> is to begin 
training with Rangers’ under-20 squad after the club concluded its disciplinary 
procedure against the midfielder.

It is almost certain that the Englishman will not play for Rangers again, with 
a move in January the most likely outcome. The 34-year-old was suspended after a
training ground row in mid-September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/joey-barton-rangers-fallout-after-celtic-defeat>
, then returned to Ibrox for a hearing with club officials last week. That 
impasse moved on slightly with Rangers’ statement on Wednesday, which referred 
only to the club’s training ground rather than to the first-team scene.

It read: “Joey Barton has been told he will return to full-time training 
following the conclusion of a disciplinary procedure. The Auchenhowie 
management team will inform the player of appropriate training arrangements to 
which he must adhere for as long as he remains aRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> player.”

Fifa regulations assert that training facilities have to be made available by 
clubs to contracted players.

Barton signed a two-year contract at Rangers last summer, worth in the region 
of £20,000 per week. Understandably, for financial reasons, there has been no 
appetite at the club to pay off the remainder of that deal. Barton’s last game 
was the 5-1 defeat to Celtic on 10 September.

Last month, the Burnley manger, Sean Dyche, suggested there may be a route 
back to the club for Barton.

Barton will be subject to a disciplinary hearing by the Scottish FA on 17 
November after beingcharged with placing 44 bets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/05/joey-barton-sfa-charged-placing-44-bets-football-matches>
 on matches.

Meanwhile Warburton has been dealt an injury blow with confirmation that 
another of his marquee pre-season signings, Niko Kranjcar, will be out of 
action for six months. The Croatian midfielder damaged knee ligaments in 
training.

Joey Barton: ‘If someone is looking for conflict I won’t shy away from it – 
ever’ | Donald McRae
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/19/joey-barton-interview-conflict-rangers> 