
After helping his brother Christopher wring self-serious morality tales out of 
such seemingly upbeat subjects as space travel (Interstellar), magic (The 
Prestige) and a man who dresses up as a winged mammal (The Dark Knight), 
screenwriter Jonathan Nolan put his po-faced talents to further good use this 
year inWestworld <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld>, a 
prestige-baiting HBO saga sombrely detailing the day-to-day operations of a 
gargantuan theme park where millionaires go to shoot and shag costumed robots.

Labyrinthine in plot, and packed with enough mysteries to see Nolan through at 
least half a decade of begrudging renewal orders, Westworld takes its goofy 
story of an android-populated wild west and plays it relentlessly straight, in 
order to probe the nature of free will, the meaning of life and other Big 
Questions.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpmbYjVy9Xcg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpmbYjVy9Xcg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpmbYjVy9Xcg&media=>
The result is a show so focused on the long con – and the demands of a 
hardcore fan base already theorising about next season – that it scarcely 
bothers to engage with the short-term goal of crafting a watchable TV show. 
Instead, each scene delicately lays the groundwork for a future reveal while 
rendering the present moment so vague as to be banal, baffling or both.

In other words, the Westworld of today couldn’t be less like the Westworld of 
1973, a zippy standalone feature film written and directed by Michael Crichton. 
Opportunistically added to the Amazon Video catalogue this week just as fans 
mourn the conclusion of its TV adaptation’s first season, the original film is 
less a lofty meditation on sentience and more a straightforward tale of human 
hubris and robot revolt. Unsurprisingly, it’s also twice as fun as the HBO 
version and 800% more rootin’ tootin’.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJctIuZfSsa4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJctIuZfSsa4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJctIuZfSsa4&media=>
In fairness, however, it does lack some of the nuance of Nolan’s drama. Where 
his Westworld reveals the details of its universe slowly and methodically, its 
source text quickly introduces us to a naive protagonist and then has the other 
characters bluntly explain everything to him. But as a result, the former takes 
10 hours to reach anything that could be described as a climax, while the 
latter takes 58 minutes to arrive at the words, “Sir, we have no control over 
the robots at all.”

From there, we’re treated to a half-hour set piece more gripping than anything 
the first season of HBO’s Westworld could muster. An extended showdown between 
man and machine, the sequence may lack the higher meaning of its more 
sophisticated cousin, but it doesn’t skimp on the kind of simple pleasures the 
show just hasn’t got time for.
 