
Thomas Müller scored twice as Bayern Munich warmed up for Juventus in the 
Champions League with a 5-0 rout ofWerder Bremen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/werderbremen> in the Bundesliga on 
Saturday. Thiago Alcantara opened the scoring after nine minutes when he beat 
his marker to Kingsley Coman’s sharp cross. Coman was again provider for the 
second in the 31st minute, beating a defender on the left and crossing for 
Müller to convert past Werder Bremen’s goalkeeper, Felix Wiedwald.

Bayern had around 80% ball possession as Bremen failed to threaten in a flat 
first half. Thiago struck the crossbar from distance after the break.

Bayern Munich have ‘no problem’ with Pep Guardiola meeting Txiki Begiristain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/10/bayern-munich-pep-guardiola-meeting-txiki-begiristain>
Mario Götze, playing for the first time since getting injured on international 
duty in October, had two efforts on goal, and went off shortly after his second 
attempt after 50 minutes.

Müller sealed the game with his 19th goal of the season in the 65th minute, 
converting the rebound after Wiedwald saved Franck Ribéry’s volley from 20 
yards.

Robert Lewandowski, who came on for Müller after 74 minutes, claimed his 24th 
goal of the campaign in the 86th minute, and there was still time for Thiago to 
complete the scoring in the final minute, again set up by former Juventus 
player Coman.

Bayern, who host Juventus on Wednesday after drawing 2-2 in their Champions 
League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/23/juventus-bayern-munich-champions-league-match-report>
 last 16 first leg, moved eight points clear of Borussia Dortmund who play 
Mainz on Sunday.

Werder Bremen were missing top-scorer Claudio Pizarro to injury, as well as 
their captain, Clemens Fritz, and midfielder Zlatko Junuzovic after they 
intentionally picked up yellow cards to incur suspensions which they hoped 
would make them available for later games. The German Football Association 
(DFB) decided to fine the pair €20,000 each for deliberately picking up yellow 
cards but not to give them additional suspensions.
 