
Bayern Munich eased into the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> knockout stages after 
demolishing Olympiakos 4-0 on Tuesday to secure top spot in Group F with a game 
to spare.

Alexis Sánchez strikes twice as Arsenal beat Dinamo Zagreb to keep hopes alive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/arsenal-dinamo-zagreb-champions-league-match-report>
The German champions, who had Holger Badstuber sent off early in the second 
half, were unstoppable in the opening 20 minutes, scoring three times to put 
the game to bed early.

Douglas Costa struck after eight minutes, Robert Lewandowski doubled the lead 
after 16 minutes with Thomas Müller adding another four minutes later as dazed 
Olympiakos found no answer to the continuous attacks. Kingsley Coman headed in 
the fourth goal in the 70th minute as Bayern moved up to 12 points in the group 
before their final game at Dinamo Zagreb on 9 December. Olympiakos, in second 
place on nine, now need a point from their last game, at home to Arsenal – who
beat Dinamo Zagreb 3-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/arsenal-dinamo-zagreb-champions-league-match-report>
 on Tuesday night – to secure a spot in the last 16.

Bayern, in spectacular form this season and having lost just once in all 
competitions, putOlympiakos <https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos> 
under early pressure and it quickly paid off with the Brazilian Costa drilling 
in on the rebound after Roberto’s weak save from Jérôme Boateng’s long-range 
effort.

Lewandowski doubled their lead with his fifth goal in five games in the 
competition, picking up a Coman effort to fire in eight minutes later while an 
easy tap-in by Müller from an Arjen Robben header that caught the defence 
completely off guard made it 3-0.

With Badstuber making his first start in defence following his muscle injury 
in April, Bayern were never threatened from open play in the first half and 
kept pounding the Greek goal at will. Olympiakos, who had won their previous 
three games in the group after theiropening loss to Bayern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/16/olympiakos-bayern-munich-champions-league-match-report>
 in September, had to wait until the 44th minute for their first chance, with 
Luka Milivojevic sending a free-kick from the edge of the box narrowly wide.

Badstuber, however, was too slow for Brown Ideye early in the second half, 
holding on to the quick Nigerian forward outside the penalty area to get his 
marching orders on a miserable comeback for the injury-plagued Germany 
international.

The Greeks enjoyed a bit more possession but Coman got in on the act heading 
in Müller’s nod-down for Bayern’s 14th goal in their three group home games.
 