
The Bundesliga table makes for uncomfortable reading, except for those of a 
Bavarian persuasion or who happen to support TSG Hoffenheim. (Thanks for 
reading this, Dieter. Much appreciated).Record champions Bayern Munich, 4-0 
winners over Hannover 96 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/04/bayern-munich-hannover-bundesliga-match-report>
, seem to be heading for another championship milestone, having won five of 
their seven opening games (two draws) – despite the absence of Messrs 
Schweinsteiger, Thiago Alcantâra and Franck Ribéry, despite post-World-Cup 
fatigue and despite Pep Guardiola’s new tactical knack of switching between 
three at the back and four at the back, via an occasional none at the back, 
every 90 seconds or so.

Bayern were supposed to be vulnerable at the start of their season but all 
their problems have proved inconsequential in the light of opposition issues 
that are vaguely familiar. A depleted Dortmund struggle to get regular domestic 
wins but turn it on in Europe. Jens Keller’sSchalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> are a byword for inconsistency 
and lack of sustained progress, Leverkusen play good stuff but cannot quite 
close the deal. It is all a bit Stan Smith: so last season, darling.

Some things have changed, however. Second-placed Hoffenheim, last campaign’s 
chief purveyors of amusingly retro scorelines ( 6-2! 2-6! 4-4! etc) have 
cleaned up their defensive act. They still score a lot (11) but concede at only 
half the rate (6) and at opportune moments. Markus Gisdol’s plucky, 
billionaire-bank-rolled side from a village in nowhere (Rhein-Neckar, the 
locals call it) are still unbeaten. It is the best start since their first ever 
appearances in the top flight resulted in a spectacularWintermeisterschaft 
(they were top of the table at the winter break) and equally spectacular 
collapse in the second half of the 2007-08 season.

“We have more depth in the squad and the players get on very well,” Gisdol 
explained after the 2-1 win over Schalke on Saturday. He could have also 
mentioned an impressive attack line with the former S04 striker Adam Szalai 
(who very much celebrated his strike to make it 2-0), the Brazilian 
playmaker/false No9 Roberto Firmino, a superstar in the making, the German 
international Kevin Volland and Norwegian Tarik Elyounoussi (four goals). The 
26-year-old had once compared himself to a “ketchup bottle”, the general 
manager, Alexander Rosen, told Bild: “You keep whacking it but nothing comes 
out at first. And then everything comes all at once.”

If you like your symbolism heavy and your narrative monochrome, second-placed 
TSG’s resistance against the Red Machine fromSäbener Strasse fits with the 
troubling idea that the big, storied clubs are either too slow or too stupid to 
keep up with Bayern.

“I feel sorry about the traditional clubs,” Ralf Rangnick, the sporting 
director of Red Bull-infused RB Leipzig (Bundesliga 2) said recently. His 
comments came in the wake of Nürnberg ultras forcing their players to hand back 
their shirts (“these people have been given too much power,” Rangnick said) but 
could just as well have applied to the often confused, capricious and volatile 
way a lot of the big boys do their business.

Werder Bremen, Hamburger SV and Stuttgart, the trio leading the depth-charge 
at the wrong end of the table, have more championships (15) than points (14) 
between them. Dortmund, Schalke and Hertha are not faring much better and 1.FC 
Köln will have their work cut out staying up.

Some observers feel that Bayern’s dominance is such that only new or newish 
money teams like VfL Wolfsburg (owned by Volkswagen), Hoffenheim (effectively 
owned by SAP boss Dietmar Hopp), Leverkusen (owned by Bayer) or indeed RB 
Leipzig will be able to challenge them in the long run. Hoffenheim’s good run – 
third-placed Gladbach could only draw 1-1 with Mainz and Sunday and do not look 
well-equipped to take up theBayernjäger (Bayern hunters) mantle – feeds this 
dystopian vision.

But then again, things are not that simple. Bayern’s lead at the front is 
smaller than Chelsea’s in the Premier League, for starters. And the points 
difference between them and 18th-placed Werder is only 13. No major European 
league is currently as balanced and permeable.

Two seasons ago Hoffenheim were battling relegation; this year they might make 
the Champions League or slip down to mid-table again. Nobody knows. Neither new 
nor old money has been able to have the upper hand consistently, and even the 
status quo of the recent “elite”, comprising Bayern, Dortmund, Schalke and 
Leverkusen, is constantly being challenged. From the second spot down, at least.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhdz0Dm4ggtg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhdz0Dm4ggtg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhdz0Dm4ggtg&media=>
 Disaster in Dortmund | Bundesliga | Talking Points 
Talking Points

• “This is the low point,” said a visibly shaken up Jürgen Klopp after the 1-0 
defeat by Hamburg. Pierre-Michel Lasogga, who had been insulted by former HSV 
great Uli Stein in midweek (“he wouldn’t have carried the ball net in our 
team”) hit back with his first and Hamburg’s second goal of the season to 
inflict yet more pain on the Black and Yellows. Four defeats in seven games 
marked the worst start to aBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> campaign since the 
Kloppo era began in 2008. Marcel Schmelzer’s broken hand (four weeks out) added 
injury to insult.

• Klopp will get plenty of time to turn things around but Keller might not be 
afforded the same luxury. The defeat at Hoffenheim was typical of his 
stop-start-reverse-forward reign at the Veltins-Arena. Whenever his S04 look as 
if they have turned a corner, they keep on turning until they are back where 
they started.

“This can’t go on,” said the sporting director Horst Heldt. There is another 
of those crisis meetings scheduled on Tuesday. Meanwhile Keller might check the 
Yellow Pages for rapid pest control: a dressing-room mole has given Bild a 
blow-by-blow account of Sunday’s team meeting. Moments of inactivity by Julian 
Draxler had been discussed, among other things, the man from the tabloid 
revealed on the Sky 90 talk show – with Keller sitting right next to him. It 
was quite tough to watch.

• Augsburg’s Tobias Werner complained to the assistant referee that Kevin de 
Bruyne had stepped on his heel. What came next was plain odd. Werner flipped up 
his leg –“I wanted to catch the (loose boot) but tried too hard,” he explained 
later – and the boot came off to hit De Bruyne right where it hurts. 
<https://amp.twimg.com/v/af7db69d-5ff1-4a3a-9a82-6f37689c4673> The Belgian’s 
remarkably non-plussed reaction saved Werner from a sending-off. Wolfsburg won 
1-0, by the way.

“These people are stupid,” thundered Lucien Favre, “who comes up with these 
laws of the game?” A handball from Julian Korb (Mainz’s Jonas Hofmann converted 
the penalty) enraged the Swiss coach; Gladbach’s defender had only slightly 
extended his arm and handled the ball completely inadvertently. This made for 
one of those “the rules need to change” debates that Germans really love but 
the bigger story, in many ways, was Gladbach not taking advantage of their 
rivals’ weakness.

Max Kruse’s fine opener remained their only successful attempt despite a few 
good opportunities. The 26-year-old forward has been duly recalled by Joachim 
Löw for the national team. He had missed out on the World Cup, the story went, 
after an unscheduled team hotel visit by unauthorised service personnel in 
London back in November 2013.

Results: Hertha 3-2 Stuttgart, Dortmund 0-1 HSV, Werder 1-1 Freiburg, 
Leverkusen 2-2 Paderborn, Hoffenheim 2-1 Schalke, Bayern 4-0 Hannover, 
Frankfurt 3-2 Köln, Wolfsburg 1-0Augsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/augsburg>, Gladbach 1-1 Mainz.

Latest Bundesliga table 
<http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=12&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 