
Don’t reach for your glasses, do not adjust your monitor, no need to check the 
calendar. It might be vaguely funny, along the lines of last month’s Dutch 
Youtube spoof in which one guyinfiltrated the Schalke training session 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Asqfy9w-mdM> and yet, it is not a prank: 
Hertha BSC, yes Hertha BSC are in fourth place! That is the Hertha BSC, of sexy 
but perennially incompetent Berlin of the Federal Republic of Germany’s 
Bundesliga, just to be clear. Football’s historically least profitable 
capitalists (insert canned laughter here) find themselves in a Champions League 
spot and bravely batting away questions about European ambitions after their 
3-0 win over Hamburg on Saturday, a game that attracted a crowd of 62,000.

Pal Dardai’s men owe their unexpected success to good planning – “our idea was 
to take the lead in the first 20 minutes,” revealed the coach – and the help of 
Hamburg’s two centre-backs Emir Spahic and Johan Djourou, memorably described 
as “destabilisers” by Kicker on Monday (the magazine also, disconcertingly, 
wrote that the former Arsenal man Djourou seemed to “apply for a role as 
escort-service” in the run-up to Hertha’s first two goals. The author must have 
got the English term mixed up with ‘player escorts’, the child mascots who 
accompany the teams on to the pitch. Or perhaps he did in fact want to 
insinuate the Swiss defender was secretly craving a career as one of those 
high-class, well-paid professionals who let anyone score).

Hertha’s flight of fancy is not the only unforeseen development a quarter into 
the 2015-16 season. Köln and Ingolstadt are tied on the same number of points, 
14, immediately below BSC in the table, and even Darmstadt (9th) and HSV (10th) 
might allow themselves a little bit of Europapokal day-dreaming over the 
international break, as both are only four points from fourth themselves. With 
so many teams in the mix, there is clearly an element of randomness at play; 
successive wins are enough to make somebody else the surprise packagedu jour 
come the end of the month, replete with shiny new media narratives and new 
management philosophies (“our plan was to score three goals today”) offered up 
by way of explanation. It is not an exaggeration to say that almost no team 
have a firm idea where they will end up in the league in May.

Robert Lewandowski scores twice as Bayern thrash Borussia Dortmund
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/04/bayern-munich-borussia-dortmund-match-report>
This bewildering flux of affairs, this sense of the team bus iPod stuck on 
shuffle mode, erratically alternating the Champions League anthem with hoarse 
“we want to see you fight” cries of war in the relegation zone, has been a 
constant theme in recent years. Dortmund’s black swan season last year 
epitomised the extent of an in-built volatility that’s surely unmatched by any 
other major league. BVB started as the second-best team in the country, crashed 
to bottom of the table by Christmas and finished back up in seventh after the 
final final whistle. The fortunes of Borussia Mönchengladbach and FC Augsburg 
have followed similar trajectories in the opening weeks of the current campaign.

For reasons that will be discussed more fully below, it is worth remembering 
all of that today, the day afterBayern Munich’s 5-1 demolition of Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/04/bayern-munich-borussia-dortmund-match-report>
 plunged German football into a state of “shock”, if Bild and many other media 
commentators are to be believed. Pep Guardiola’s men did not just win the 
Klassiker on Sunday night, they administered a masterclass that had Thomas 
Tuchel waving the white flag – “Guardiola has lifted the club to top level 
again,” gushed the 42-year-old, citing his opponents’ “commitment, humility, 
joy and sharpness” – and others mournfully recall long forgotten fears of 
so-called “Spanish conditions”, a Bayern-BVB duopoly. Where there were two from 
2011 to 2013, there is currently only one. “Of course they cannot be stopped,” 
exclaimed Tuchel, when asked whether Bayern’s historic seven-point lead after 
only eight games was already decisive for the championship. Dortmund CEO 
Hans-Joachim Watzke quipped that the Bavarians might perceivably win all of 
their games this season.

102 points from 102 might possibly even please even Matthias Sammer but it is 
not a given. The Bayern sporting director spent Sunday night warning everyone 
off the dangers of over-rating a game that his team had won by “too high a 
margin”. Thomas Müller, meanwhile, happily vowed to make the title race “as 
unexciting as possible”. Ha! What title race, exactly?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fbayern-munich-dominance-bundesliga-stuck-on-shuffle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444069810577%2Fd9f05191-4e46-46f1-9de5-7a3884536ff7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bayern%20Munich%E2%80%99s%20rule%20the%20one%20constant%20in%20a%20Bundesliga%20stuck%20on%20shuffle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fbayern-munich-dominance-bundesliga-stuck-on-shuffle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bayern%20Munich%E2%80%99s%20rule%20the%20one%20constant%20in%20a%20Bundesliga%20stuck%20on%20shuffle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fbayern-munich-dominance-bundesliga-stuck-on-shuffle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F5%2F1444069810577%2Fd9f05191-4e46-46f1-9de5-7a3884536ff7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hertha Berlin are fourth after beating Hamburg and retain a strong, solid 
support in an inconsistent league. Photograph: Thomas Eisenhuth/Thomas 
Eisenhuth/dpa/Corbis 
The real question is this: how damaging is it that Bayern are in a league of 
their own, untouchable, infallible under football pope Pep, protected by their 
wealth and not even arrogant enough to lose the odd game out of complacency any 
more? The inequality between the league’s 1% club and everybody else has 
certainly never felt greater. But does it matter? The quick answer is: not 
apparently. Dortmund, for one, do not truly care whether Bayern will win the 
league by five, 15 or 25 points, as in 2013, when the rivalry was at its peak. 
They have their own ambition, which is getting into the Champions League again. 
Furthermore, none of the other 16 teams below are affected in the slightest by 
the extent of Bayern’s lead.

The emotive theme of inequality pushes people’s buttons and directs populist 
wrath at the nasty moneybags. But whether Bayern hoard 72 or 102 points is far 
less relevant to the lives of the other 99% – their own standard of living, or 
in a football sense, their own chance to succeed and to get ahead. As long as 
people believe that doing what a newly promoted Bayerndid 50 years ago 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1965%E2%80%9366_FC_Bayern_Munich_season> is 
theoretically possible, or that you can go from being a second division team 
(Augsburg) into the Europa League in five years or from mid-table mediocrity to 
the Champions League final as Dortmund did under Klopp, they will continue to 
tune in and fill the seats.

Despite Bayern’s third title procession in as many years, TV ratings and 
crowds were up last season (average attendance was 42,685, the second-highest 
in the league’s history). It does not make too much of a difference if there 
are 18 or 17 teams in competition. There is plenty of hope and fear to go 
around to keep everyone hooked.

If the Bundesliga was an exclusively domestic product, catering only to those 
who have a dog in the fight, there would not be much of a problem. But it is 
not. And that is where it gets complicated.A McKinsey report 
<http://www.mckinsey.de/sites/mck_files/files/mckinsey_bundesliga_as_a_growth_engine.pdf>
 commissioned by the league in the summer emphasised that real revenue growth 
can come only through internationalisation. The Bundesliga has doubled its 
foreign TV income – albeit from a fairly low level – since 2012. How much of 
that boom has been fuelled by the emergence of Dortmund as title winners, 
though? Will neutrals want to continue watching unscripted entertainment where 
the biggest issue appears pre-determined?

More teams to challenge Bayern are sorely needed but the existing, organic 
model makes them almost impossible to come by. Contenders are hemmed in by 
their lack of consistency and the inflationary pressures on star players’ wages 
radiating from Munich, and even more so from abroad. The obvious way out would 
be to allow mega-take overs by foreign investors but there’s simply no appetite 
for selling out. The other option is for clubs to grow their international fan 
base, to make them loyal consumers who, like their domestic counterparts, will 
demand “the product” irrespective of their team’s position in the table or 
there being a title race to speak of. One might call that the “Liverpool 
strategy” but it, too, needs trophies as a starting point. Dortmund under Klopp 
won some, by exploiting Bayern’s historic weaknesses: serial follies in the 
transfer-market and a culture of entitlement. Now that both have been replaced 
by relatively quiet professionalism, breaking through the red-and-white glass 
ceiling has become a darn lot harder for everybody else.

Results: Darmstadt - Mainz 2-3, Hoffenheim - Stuttgart 2-2, Hannover - Bremen 
1-0, Ingolstadt - Frankfurt 2-0, Gladbach - Wolfsburg 2-0, Hertha -HSV 3-0, 
Bayern - Dortmund 5-1, Leverkusen - Augsburg 1-1, Schalke - Köln 0-3.
 