
Bayern Munich opened up an 11-point gap at the top of the Bundesliga after 
goals from Thomas Müller and Kingsley Coman eased them pastHertha Berlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/herthaberlin> 2-0, for their 13th win in 
14 league games.

The champions, looking for a record fourth straight Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> title, are on 40 
points and, with three games left, will go into next month’s winter break in 
top spot if second-placed Borussia Dortmund, on 29, fail to beat VfB Stuttgart 
on Sunday.

A day after reporting record profits, Bayern were equally sparkling on the 
pitch, looking freshafter their midweek 4-0 mauling of Olympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/bayern-munich-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report>
 in the Champions League and despite key injury absences including Arjen 
Robben, Douglas Costa, David Alaba, Mario Götze and Thiago Alcântara.

Pep Guardiola fielded his 14th different starting XI in 14 league games this 
season but they were dominant from the start, striking twice late in the first 
half with Müller nodding in from a Medhi Benatia header in the 34th minute to 
take his league goal tally to 13 in 14 matches.

The Frenchman Coman added another four minutes before half-time and the Poland 
striker Robert Lewandowski, who hit the woodwork in the first half, had a 
golden chance in the 53rd, having been left unmarked in front of goal but was 
betrayed by a poor first touch.

Bayern’s domination can be gauged by the fact they enjoyed more than 70% 
possession and had 24 shots on goal to Hertha’s four.

“The team deserves a big compliment because we had a lot of injured players,” 
Guardiola said. “We only allowed them one chance in the entire game. We did it 
really well in the first half. I know how difficult it is to be ready every 
three days.”
 