
It's not quite true that history had never been made in Sinsheim before. Older 
readers of this column will undoubtedly recall that the Prussian king Frederick 
the Great (18) was caught in the town during his attempted flight to England 
with his favourite page, Keith (13), in 1730. But Friday's Bundesliga game 
between Hoffenheim and Bayer Leverkusen at the Rhein-Neckar-Stadion seemed 
somehow bigger than that. It will go down in the annals of German football for 
theghostliest ghost goal ever – "Phantom-Tor" 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AxekQcBH3pc> is the technical term – and maybe, 
just maybe, as the game that pushed everybody over the line, if you pardon the 
pun, towards goal technology.

Here's what happened. Leverkusen were 1-0 up in the 68th minute when the 
national manager, Joachim Löw, was caught sitting in the stands, looking away 
from the game with mixture of boredom and slight revulsion. A Bayer corner came 
in from the left, Stefan Kiessling came across his man is classic striker mode 
at the near post and hit the side-netting with his header. He then turned 
around, hands on his head in disappointment.

But by now, some team-mates were cheering. And the TSG keeper Koen Casteels 
was picking the ball out of the net. The referee, Felix Brych, had awarded a 
goal. Replays showed that the ball had indeed hit the side-netting but at the 
very spot where a string had come loose. So it went in from the outside. 
Kiessling sheepishly raised his arms.

Brych was later called over to inspect the faulty net but the goal stood. 
Hoffenheim were awarded a penalty – Roberto Firmino missed – before Sven 
Schipplock made it 2-1. Cue pandemonium after the final whistle. "We could be 
happy that it was Hoffenheim v Leverkusen," said the Bayer midfielder Stefan 
Reinartz, "we probably wouldn't have made it out in one piece in any other 
stadium."

Curiously, the Hoffenheim players had offered only minimal protest in the 
immediate aftermath of the goal – were they already thinking about a replay? – 
but Kiessling's behaviour was later called into question in very strong terms. 
"His whole body language suggests that he clearly saw that it went wide," said 
the former Hoffenheim coach Ralf Rangnick. "I think he missed a great chance to 
do something for fair play." Kiessling had been asked about his version of 
events by Brych and replied that he "wasn't sure".

Bild helpfully hired the services of a lipreader, Judith Göller, who looked at 
a conversation between the Leverkusen press officer Dirk Mesch and the striker. 
"He told Kiessling: 'You have to say that you didn't see it'," Göller said. 
Mesch confirmed the accuracy of that version but added that he had simply told 
Kiessling to tell the truth. "We both hadn't seen it," Mesch said.

In days gone by, the fourth official would have been able to have a sneaky 
peek at a monitor but screens were banned from the touchline after a number of 
coaches had repeatedly argued with each other over the right to hold the remote 
control. (Only joking. They were banned from the grounds after too many 
managers had illicitly watched replays).

Bayer's sporting director, Rudi Völler, defended his player: "All those 
know-it-alls who are now having a pop at him should look in the mirror and 
sweep in front of their own courtyard. I don't know of a more decent player 
than him. He's never dived."

Völler joked about the Hoffenheim benefactor neglecting to invest in the nets 
but went on to offer Hoffenheim to replay the last 22 minutes only. 
"Impossible," was the German FA's reply.

The DFB vice-chairman Dr Rainer Koch said that Hoffenheim's appeal would be 
decided next week, with the help of Fifa. In the past, the German FA has 
ordered replays in similar circumstances but Fifa was not best pleased. They 
want the referee's decision to be final at all times.

Eleven out of 18 Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> officials told Kicker 
magazine that they want goalline technology to come in as soon as possible. The 
DFL, however, look set to stick with its decision to introduce such measures in 
2015-16 at the earliest. Their argument is a typical German one, you might say. 
"We find the current fault tolerance of three centimetres too high," said the 
DFL chief executive Andreas Rettig.

Results: Hoffenheim 1-2 Leverkusen, Bayern 4-1 Mainz, Bremen 0-0 Freiburg, 
Braunschweig 2-3 Schalke, Dortmund 1-0 Hannover, Frankfurt 1-1 Nürnberg, Hertha 
BSC 1-0 Gladbach, Hamburg 3-3 Stuttgart, Augsburg 1-2 Wolfsburg.

• Bundesliga table  <http://guardian.touch-line.com/?Lang=0&CTID=12>
 