
Bayern Munich moved a step closer to a third straight Bundesliga title thanks 
to a 3-0 win overEintracht Frankfurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eintrachtfrankfurt>.

Robert Lewandowski boosted his own chances of winning the golden boot award at 
the end of his first season with Bayern, and a second in a row after finishing 
the league’s top-scorer with Borussia Dortmund last season, by netting two 
goals in a commanding victory for Pep Guardiola’s men.

Bayern also had a goal disallowed and they struck the woodwork before Thomas 
Müller added a third, with few doubts from start to finish that they would pick 
up all three points once again.

It was downhill all the way for Bayern after Lewandowski gave them the lead 
after only 15 minutes.

Müller put him in position to shoot, but it took a sweet, unstoppable volley 
to beat Kevin Trapp into the top left-hand corner.

Lewandowski could have had a second goal 10 minutes later, but Trapp reacted 
well to deny him.

Bayern had the ball in the back of the net again shortly before half-time, but 
after consultation with his linesman, the referee ruled out Müller’s effort for 
offside, even though the ball came to him from an opponent.

Bayern were again close to a second on the hour mark when Mario Götze struck 
the post, with the ball rebounding out to safety.

The hosts did not have long to wait for their second, though, with Götze’s 
shot blocked by Makoto Hasebe, but the ball fell kindly for Lewandowski to tuck 
in his 16th of the season. He is now just three behind Eintracht Frankfurt’s 
Alexander Meier.

Bayern scored their third with Müller netting from a tight angle in the 82nd 
minute, setting the Bavarians up in style for their Champions League 
quarter-final with Porto.

Bayern remain 10 points clear, after Wolfsburg won 2-0 at Hamburg to remain 
seven points ahead of Borussia Mönchengladbach, the third-place side also 
winning, 3-1 at home to Borussia Dortmund.
 