
The final instalment of the 2015-16 season offered an instructive tale of two 
pitch invasions, at either end of the table and Germany.

Down south, in Munich, the first beer showers had barely been administered 
when supporters gatecrashed the carefully choreographed party with former 
Bayern players and 99 red balloons for every championship won in the last 100 
years. (Correction: it’s only been 26 since 1932).

How Barcelona lost La Liga, then won it all over again | Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/16/how-barcelona-lost-la-liga-title-then-won-it-again>
The mass audience participation caught everybody by surprise. Bayern’s crowd 
are among the more docile ones in the Bundesliga; with the exception of 
ecstatic post-match frolics after the televised showing of the 2013 Champions 
League final at the ground, no fan had ever set unauthorised foot onto the 
Allianz Arena lawn before. Secondly, winning the fourth consecutive 
championship had been more or less a given at the outset, a procession that 
made the sudden eruption of joy all the more unexpected.

There was undoubtedly an element of rebellion at play, a friendly protest 
against the overly sanitised official ceremony, a symbolic act of supporters 
reclaiming the pitch (and with it, the game) from those who are in charge. But 
there was some pure, unadulterated happiness, too. Some kneeled down to kiss 
the ground, others took selfies for the internet and pieces of the goal net for 
themselves.

The emotional end to Bayern’s victorious league campaign was in marked 
contrast to the rather temperate goodbye that Pep Guardiola had received before 
the fun kick-about against the relegated Hannover 96 (it finished 3-1, by all 
accounts). Bayern’s executive chairman Karl-Heinz Rummenigge found nice enough 
words (“German football owes him a lot, he’s taken the game to the highest 
level, tactically and strategically,” he wrote in the stadium programme) and 
the Arena applauded generously, but the vibe was that of an office leaving-do 
for a brilliant but unloved CEO, replete with a useless, hideous parting gift 
destined to gather dust in the attic. “Guardiola doesn’t deserve that!”wrote 
Bild am Sonntag’s art-collecting Walter M Straten 
<http://www.sueddeutsche.de/sport/fc-bayern-ein-typischer-guardiola-zum-abschied-1.2994335>
, of the colourful sculpture of Bayern mascot Berni and the stadium. “His era 
wasn’t so bad that it warranted this sort of self-made present.”

Rummenigge later doubled down on the praise for the Catalan, eulogising him as 
“a coach like no other at Bayern in terms of intensity and quality”. He had 
always be considered a “great friend” of the club, Rummenigge added, to 
standing ovations from players and VIPs at the post-season gala event. 
Guardiola replied with a silent wave. Earlier, he had thanked Bayern for making 
him “a better coach” and apologised for not winning the Champions League with 
the 2013 treble winners: “I’m sorry for the fans and especially for the 
players.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fbayern-munich-bid-pep-guardiola-farewell-like-a-brilliant-but-unloved-ceo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89db6613366a1e68f2135554784cefabe3df3e49%2F0_73_2944_1767%2F2944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bayern%20Munich%20send%20off%20Guardiola%20like%20a%20brilliant%20but%20unloved%20CEO%20%7C%20Raphael%20Honigstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fbayern-munich-bid-pep-guardiola-farewell-like-a-brilliant-but-unloved-ceo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bayern%20Munich%20send%20off%20Guardiola%20like%20a%20brilliant%20but%20unloved%20CEO%20%7C%20Raphael%20Honigstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fbayern-munich-bid-pep-guardiola-farewell-like-a-brilliant-but-unloved-ceo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89db6613366a1e68f2135554784cefabe3df3e49%2F0_73_2944_1767%2F2944.jpg>
 Karl-Heinz Rummenigge, right, hands over a unique gift to Pep Guardiola. 
Photograph: Christof Stache/AFP/Getty Images 
It was hard to say whether the 45-year-old was entirely genuine or softly 
rebuking his critics with this admission. Thomas Müller, to be sure, was 
adamant that that the coach had no case to answer. “I find it crude and and 
inconsiderate that people blame him (for not winning the Champions League),” 
said the forward. “It seems to me that those who do haven’t been paying 
attention for the whole three years, and not seen how the team have developed 
and played football”.

Guardiola, despite his aloofness, was the perfect manager for Bayern, a club 
whose whole raison d’être is trophies, because his brand of football virtually 
guaranteed them. He averaged 2.52 points in the league and won 80% of matches – 
figures unprecedented in theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>. The stats are 
important because they measure how close both he and the Bavarians came to 
achieving their fundamental, shared goal: an end to all defeats.

For the players, who understand that winning the league is a non-negotiable 
part of their job, Guardiola’s obsessive attention to detail made their job as 
easy as never before. The club, too, appreciated thePlanungssicherheit 
(planning security) that Guardiola delivered, results wise. There was much fear 
inside Säbenerstrasse that performances would tail off after the 2013 treble, 
that the team would start to run out of steam. But that didn’t happen. Next 
month, every single employee will receive a 13th monthly salary as a bonus for
the Meisterschaft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/07/bayern-munich-win-bundesliga-title-ingolstadt>
, for the fourth year running.

For the fans, though, the wins, and the football, and Bayern’s higher profile 
by virtue of their glamorous coach (“he was an ambassador for the club and for 
the Bundesliga,” Rummenigge said) wasn’t quite enough. Neither would have been 
another treble. What they wanted was something that Guardiola would not and 
probably could not deliver: some emotional investment, a sense of connection 
and concern for the people in the stands. Guardiola was too vain to explain 
himself or his ideas to the public, he kept his distance at all times, the 
Lederhosen never rubbed off on him in three years. The crowd felt that all his 
energy and passion was spent on perfecting Bayern’s football, almost as an 
abstract exercise. He surely loved his team but never the club, never them. 
That lack of empathy has made it a lot harder – but not impossible – to 
appreciate his work.

Up north, in Bremen, the opposite is probably true. The coach Viktor Skripnik, 
a club icon, was one of the heroes in Werder’s great escape, a thrilling run of 
three home wins that secured another season in the top flight next year. The 
Weserstadion saw a “pitch invasion of love,” as Sport 1 put it, a wave of mass 
euphoria unseen since the last of the glory days a little over a decade ago.

Stuttgart relegated from Bundesliga for first time in 41 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/14/stuttgart-relegated-bundesliga-first-time-41-years>
The whole city had come together in support of the club and the team, and two 
minutes from the end in the game against Frankfurt, the Chelsea loanee Papy 
Djilobodji forced in a winner that consigned the visitors to a relegation 
play-off and underlined the positive power of collective endeavour and spirit. 
“What happened in the last few weeks between SV Werder and the town of Bremen 
could set a precedent,” wrote Süddeutsche Zeitung. “It’s possibly the first 
relegation battle that’s been won on the terraces, not on the pitch.”

No one can quantify the value of support – perhaps Werder simply got lucky. 
But unlike in Stuttgart, whose VFB were relegated following the 3-1 defeat at 
Wolfsburg, and other countless cities with big, traditional teams, the fans 
didn’t turn on the team or the coach in the hour of despair but redoubled their 
efforts to scream them to victory. “Save our arses,” Skripnik had implored the 
substitute Anthony Ujah on the touchline. He did, making the goal with a 
powerful run.

Not everybody is quite convinced that Skripnik is the right man for the job; 
65 goals conceded could suggest otherwise. Winning on little more than emotion 
might not be a promising strategy in the long run, either. For all the green 
and white love-fest and bromantic feelings gushing through the Weserstadion on 
Saturday, the club will secretly wonder if they would be better served by one 
of those younger, cooly calculated “laptop coaches” (Mehmet Scholl) of which 
Guardiola has been the most prominent and successful representative the league 
has ever seen.

Results

Bayern 3-1 Hannover, Bremen 1-0 Frankfurt, Dortmund 2-2 Köln, Leverkusen 3-2 
Ingolstadt, Wolfsburg 3-1 Stuttgart, Augsburg 1-3 HSV, Hoffenheim 1-4 Schalke, 
Mainz 0-0 Hertha, Darmstadt 0-2 Gladbach.
 