
Pep Guardiola has warned that his Bayern Munich side must find a way past “the 
best defence in Europe” when they face Benfica in the first leg of their
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> 
quarter-final on Tuesday.

Guardiola, who is aiming to win the tournament in his final season at the 
German club before he takes over at Manchester City in the summer, saw Bayern
come back from trailing 4-2 on aggregate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/16/bayern-munich-juventus-champions-league-match-report>
 against the Italian champions Juventus in the last round to secure their place 
in the last eight.

Champions League quarter-final first legs: how they shape up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/02/champions-league-quarter-final-first-legs-how-they-shape-up>
However, despite facing the threat of the 32-goal striker Jonas and the 
emerging central midfielder Renato Sanches, the Spaniard admitted that it was 
the Portuguese league leaders’ back four which concerned him more.

“I’m impressed with the condition of Benfica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica>,” Guardiola said. “They possibly 
have the best back four in Europe, so it will be an interesting game. They are 
not a defensive team, though, they defend very high up the pitch.

“We have two games to reach the semi‑finals and we want to focus on our own 
game, of course a victory is better for us than a defeat. For Bayern it’s all 
about being the best, but it will be a very even match with Benfica, they have 
had a very good season.”

Manuel Neuer, the goalkeeper who was beaten three times by England in the 3-2 
friendly defeat of Germany in Berlin last week, also admitted that Benfica 
represented a real threat to their hopes of progressing. “We expect Benfica to 
be desperate to score a goal. Jonas and [Kostas] Mitroglou are a fire hazard 
inside the box,” Neuer said.

“Benfica will defend very high. That will give us some room but they will want 
to score a goal.”

Having arrived at the club after Jupp Heynckes led Bayern to the Champions 
League title in 2013, Guardiola’s two attempts to emulate him have both ended 
in defeat in the semi-final. He admitted that his spell in Germany may be seen 
as a failure if he does not put that right although the 45-year-old 
acknowledged that it will not be an easy task.

“Everyone at Bayern wants to win the treble, but it’s the same in Barcelona 
and Madrid also,” he said.

“I realise that my job is not fulfilled in your eyes if we do not win three 
titles. If that happens, I have to live with it, but I will know I have given 
everything. Bayern is the best club in the world, but has only won the treble 
once.”
 