
Bayern Munich have been warned they cannot afford to relax as they prepare to 
to defend a 1-0 lead in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> against Benfica in 
Portugal.

Victory in Munich  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/05/bayern-munich-benfica-champions-league-match-report>
last week has put the Bavarians ahead in the tie but they must successfully 
navigate a further 90 or 120 minutes if they want to advance to a fifth 
consecutive semi-final and the 2013 European champions are well aware they 
cannot celebrate yet.

“It was a good result but it was not a cushion we can relax on,” Bayern’s 
director of sport Matthias Sammer said at a press conference in Munich. “We 
still expect a very difficult challenge. There’s definitely a lot of pressure, 
also for us.”

Bayern Munich beat Benfica after Arturo Vidal’s second-minute winner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/05/bayern-munich-benfica-champions-league-match-report>
Bayern had looked set to cruise into the last four when Arturo Vidal’s 
second-minute strike put them ahead at the Allianz Arena last week.

However, Benfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> showed their 
battling qualities to restrict Pep Guardiola’s side to just that one goal and, 
buoyed by the achievement of their compatriots Porto in beating Bayern 3-1 in 
Portugal last season, will be confident of pulling off a shock by reaching the 
semi-finals for the first time since 1990.

“They have one of the best defences in Europe,” the Bayern defender Javi 
Martínez said of Benfica. “They defend very high up the field and are very 
aggressive and tight, which makes it hard to pass the ball through. But we will 
try to win the game because that is the Bayern mentality.”

A draw would do for Guardiola’s men, while Benfica will be forced to come out 
of their defensive shell to attack them, which could play into the German 
club’s hands.

“If we get a goal, then there’s a big chance that we will go through,” their 
captain Philipp Lahm said. “I have no doubt about it.”

Benfica’s hopes could be dented by the absence of two of their attacking 
talents. Jonas, who has scored 18 goals in 18 appearances this season, will 
definitely miss out through suspension, and Nico Gaitán is rated doubtful after 
missing training on Tuesday because of a muscular problem.
 