
The Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off> and 
Strictly Come Dancing have helped the BBC dominate 2016’s TV ratings, with 31 
of the top 40 programmes so far this year showing on BBC1.

The best TV shows of the year – as voted by you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/20/the-top-five-tv-shows-of-2016-as-voted-by-you>
Bake Off episodes occupied all but one of the top 11 slots once catchup 
viewing was included, with the final attracting an audience of almost 16 
million, making it the most watched programme of the year.

The second episode of Planet Earth II was the only other programme to make it 
into the top 10, ranking at number eight with more than 13.1 million viewers, 
and a further four episodes were in the top 40. The documentary, narrated by 
Sir David Attenborough, is themost watched natural history programme for at 
least 15 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/07/planet-earth-ii-bbc1-most-watched-natural-history-show-for-15-years>
. Strictly, with the help of Ed Balls’ eye-catching appearances, appeared in 
the top 40 13 times, more than any other programme.

The figures from ratings agency Barb will buoy the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> at the end of a year in which its role 
as a mass market broadcaster was questioned. However, the reliance on Bake Off 
for its biggest audiences will create concern now that it has it lost the 
series to Channel 4, which paid a reported £75m for a three-year deal with 
producers Love Productions.

Charlotte Moore, the BBC’s director of content, said: “I’m proud that BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> continues to unite us as a nation with 
shows that feel modern, fresh and in touch with our audience, entertaining 
millions every week of the year.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbbc1-shows-dominate-2016-tv-ratings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe216fea46bced57be8c2307d5c3d6eb17438b760%2F0_33_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BBC1%20shows%20dominate%202016%20TV%20ratings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbbc1-shows-dominate-2016-tv-ratings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BBC1%20shows%20dominate%202016%20TV%20ratings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbbc1-shows-dominate-2016-tv-ratings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe216fea46bced57be8c2307d5c3d6eb17438b760%2F0_33_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Planet Earth II took one Top 10 place. Photograph: BBC 
However, ITV provided different figures showing that audiences for its Euro 
2016 coverage were repeatedly among the largest of the year if measured from 
kick-off to final whistle, rather than including pre- and post-match coverage. 
Under ITV’s measurement, it would have had at least a further three entries in 
the top 40, including England’s defeat by Iceland, which would have been the 
second most watched programme of the year with more than 15 million viewers.

Christmas TV: the 50 shows to watch this festive season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/17/christmas-tv-2016-50-shows-to-watch>
Outside the Euros, the biggest ITV audiences tuned in for I’m a Celebrity … 
Get Me Out of Here and Britain’s Got Talent.The X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> failed to make the top 
40 for the second year running, having suffered its worst launch ratings in a 
decade and being comprehensively beaten by Strictly.

The commercial broadcaster recently confirmed a three-year deal with TV and 
music mogul Simon Cowell to keep showing Britain’s Got Talent and The X Factor, 
and has signeda “golden handcuffs” deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/14/ant-and-dec-sign-30m-golden-handcuffs-deal-itv>
 with I’m a Celebrity and Britain’s Got Talent presenters Ant and Dec 
reportedly worth £30m until 2019.

Despite its lack of top-ranking shows, ITV said that its share of total 
viewing had risen by 3% over the year, compared with 0.5% for BBC1 and 2% for 
BBC2. It pointed to the success of Coronation Street, which is the UK’s most 
watched soap, and the large audiences pulled in by new dramas including 
Victoria and the revival of Cold Feet.

The only drama to feature in Barb’s top 40 was BBC1’s Sherlock special on New 
Year’s Day, with 11.6 million viewers, making it the 24th most popular show of 
the year to date. A new three-part series begins on 1 January.

The BBC will hope to continue its success at Christmas, with special editions 
of Strictly and Bake Off anda new Agatha Christie adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/15/kim-cattrall-toby-jones-bbc-agatha-christie-witness-for-the-prosecution>
 from the writer of last year’s And Then There Were None.

Last Christmas, the BBC had the 10 most watched shows on Boxing Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/27/bbc1-sweeps-board-with-10-most-watched-shows-on-boxing-day-tv>
, but was beaten to the top slot on Christmas Day bythe final episode of 
Downton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/26/downton-abbey-hands-itv-christmas-day-ratings-victory>
 on ITV1. Though the commercial broadcaster does not have another long-running 
drama to rely on this year, soaps Coronation Street and Emmerdale regularly 
pull in big festive audiences, as does the BBC’s EastEnders.
 