
The BBC has reacted to the record viewing figures for Salford City’s shock FA 
Cup win against Notts County by choosing to screen their second round match 
againstHartlepool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> United on 
Friday 4 December.

A peak audience of 3.5 million tuned in to watch the non-league team’s heroics 
last Friday night onBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Two, the 
highest audience for a first-round match on record and the most watched club 
game of the season so far across all channels.

Class of ’92 revelling in pie-and-chips football at Salford City | Daniel 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/07/class-of-92-salford-city>
Much of the interest stems from the Manchester United connection and the 
documentaryClass of ’92: Out of Their League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/06/class-of-92-out-of-their-league-neville>
, which traces the fortunes of a club bought by the former Old Trafford players 
Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes, Gary and Phil Neville and Nicky Butt.

Salford, who are in the seventh tier, claimed League Two Notts County’s scalp 
with adramatic 2-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/06/salford-city-notts-county-fa-cup-match-report>
 and are now looking to make it into the third round for the first time, which 
would open up the mouthwatering prospect of being drawn against Manchester 
United.

The BBC football editor, Mark Cole, said: “We are delighted to have the 
stand-out fixture of the second round, live on BBC Two. It kicks off a busy 
weekend of FA Cup programming including Football Focus live from non-league 
Stourbridge on Saturday ahead of their tie with Eastleigh, Final Score 
showcasing all the goals from all the games on Sunday and theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> draw live from Cardiff on Monday 
night.

“We’re pleased that we have been able to take our coverage of the FA Cup 
around the country, last season we went from Warrington to Weston-super-mare 
and Hartlepool to Hull. This year we started our coverage in Bradford and the 
opening rounds have featured live programmes from Wealdstone and west London.”

• Salford v Hartlepool will be shown at 7.30pm on Friday 4 December on BBC Two.

• BT Sport will broadcast Rochdale v Bury on Sunday 6 December at 11:30am and 
Grimsby v Shrewsbury on Monday 7 December at 7pm.

The remaining eight second round matches will be moved to Sunday 6 December 
and will be announced at a later date.
 