
Not since Delia Smith retired from TV cookery has an era of British baking 
come to such a dramatic and nationally-mourned close. On Wednesday night, theBBC
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> will broadcast its final ever episode 
of the Great British Bake Off, the show that over seven seasons has become 
nothing short of an institution and elevated its former contestants to 
television royalty.

The tensest battle in baking will be fought between PE teacher Candice Brown, 
jet engine engineer Andrew Smyth and garden designer Jane Beedle, who, over 
seven weeks, have had regular audiences of more than 10 million gripped with 
sagas of leaking fish pies, collapsed meringues and flat yorkshire puddings.

The end of the BBC era of Bake Off means the revered title of Bake Off winner 
comes with added sentimental value this year. After negotiations between the 
show’s creator, Love Productions, and the BBC broke down last month, it was 
announced that the series would be moving to Channel 4, who had agreed a 
£25m-a-year deal.

It was a decision that proved controversial and costly for Bake Off. The 
show’s beloved presenters Sue Perkins and Mel Giedroyc swiftly announced they 
would not be “following the dough”, and their departure was mirrored by judge 
Mary Berry, who said her allegiance was with the BBC. Of the original Bake Off 
line-up onlyPaul Hollywood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/paul-hollywood> will be appearing in 
its new incarnation on Channel 4 in 2018.

Yet one thing remains certain, a lucrative future lies ahead for whoever is 
crowned the Bake Off winner on Wednesday night, and even possibly for the two 
runners-up.

Bake Off’s greatest celebrity so far has been Nadiya Hussain, the 2015 winner 
whose popularity has grown from strength to strength. After signing a reported 
£1m book deal, her recipe book has sold almost 25,000 copies since its release 
in June, while her children’s cookbook has hit the hardback non-fiction top 20 
twice already, and she has a three-book fiction deal with Harlequin in the 
works.

Hussain was also the subject of a BBC documentary, The Chronicles of Nadiya, 
and has proved so valuable to the corporation that they have recently given her 
a contract to make the BBC her home for good.

She was not alone in being in demand. Frances Quinn, who won Bake Off in 2014 
– the year before it moved to BBC One and “really exploded” – recalled the 
clamour by publishers and agents to sign her up immediately. “Agents were 
telling me they’d had publishers already on the phone asking if they had signed 
me because they were so keen to publish my book,” she said. “So I know there 
was a really hungry appetite for people to collaborate and create the book for 
me. It was more a case of not grabbing them all unthinkingly and picking ones 
that wouldn’t just be a 15-minute flash in the pan.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbbc-gets-ready-for-last-ever-slice-of-bake-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff50f18570b63621c3242c05c45a13d35fbdb7a21%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BBC%20gets%20ready%20for%20last%20ever%20slice%20of%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbbc-gets-ready-for-last-ever-slice-of-bake-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BBC%20gets%20ready%20for%20last%20ever%20slice%20of%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbbc-gets-ready-for-last-ever-slice-of-bake-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff50f18570b63621c3242c05c45a13d35fbdb7a21%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 The Great British Bake Off Winner Frances Quinn with Paul Hollywood and Mary 
Berry. Photograph: BBC/PA 
And it is not just recipe book offers that the next cohort of Bake Off 
contestants can expect. John Whaite, who won in 2013, was made the resident 
chef on ITV’s Lorraine and is filming his own ITV cooking show, Chopping Block, 
as well as releasing two very successful recipe books. Jo Wheatley, winner of 
the second series, started up her own cookery school after winning and 2014 
runner-up Ruby Tandoh and 2015 runner-up Tamal Ray both landed newspaper 
columns after the show. Ray, who returned to life as a doctor after his stint 
on Bake Off, will also be hosting Channel 4 show Be Your Own Doctor, which 
starts this week.

Already a 2016 contestant, Selasi Gbormittah, who was eliminated this week, 
has voiced plans to open a bakery in west London and release his own recipe 
book off the back of his Bake Off popularity.

Yet when Edd Kimber won the first series, such fame was not a guarantee. His 
book, The Boy Who Bakes, became a bestseller but not without some personal risk 
– and it took three months for him to get a book deal.

He said: “For me, it was nothing like the phenomenon that it is now; there was 
no frenzy to get me to sign a book deal. But I was 25 and I had nothing to 
lose. I quit my job the day I won the show and a couple of months later I moved 
to London with no money and slept on a friend’s couch. Thankfully, a month 
later I got a book deal and haven’t really looked back.”

Bea Carvalho, cookery book buyer at Waterstones, said that some of their 
biggest-selling recipe books over the past few years had been by Bake Off 
contestants, and cited Hussain, Tandoh’s Crumb and runner-up James Morton’s 
bread book as the most popular.

“By far the most successful Bake Off book so far has been Nadiya’s, it’s blown 
the others out of the water in terms of popularity,” said Carvalho. “It’s still 
in our top 10 cookbooks having been out since June, which is just incredible 
sales.”

She added: “There have been some fantastic books coming out of the series. 
Being on Bake Off does give them a terrific platform but, beyond those 
first-week sales, it does still depend on the quality and the book has to speak 
for itself. And that’s where Nadiya’s has really succeeded, first because she 
had such an incredible following and she gained a status of celebrity like none 
before her, but also that it’s a fantastic recipe book and didn’t rely on her 
status as a Bake Off winner. She’s become a food personality in her own right.”

Following the Wednesday finale, it is still unknown what the future format of 
the Great British Bake Off will look like once it jumps ship to Channel 4. 
Jennifer Saunders and Dawn French have described the rumours they will be the 
next hosts as “complete bullshit” and comedian Richard Ayoade told the Guardian 
there was “no truth” to the rumours he was also in the running.

But for Quinn, the departure of Perkins, Giedroyc and Berry means “the end of 
the vintage Bake Off family – it’s almost like we’re going to have second 
cousins once removed once it goes over to Channel 4.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbbc-gets-ready-for-last-ever-slice-of-bake-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb30cd4364c8b012f3957307fc19f27ed77cb8ed3%2F0_0_4282_2855%2F4282.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BBC%20gets%20ready%20for%20last%20ever%20slice%20of%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbbc-gets-ready-for-last-ever-slice-of-bake-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BBC%20gets%20ready%20for%20last%20ever%20slice%20of%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fbbc-gets-ready-for-last-ever-slice-of-bake-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb30cd4364c8b012f3957307fc19f27ed77cb8ed3%2F0_0_4282_2855%2F4282.jpg>
 Sue Perkins, and Mel Giedroyc. Photograph: Des Willie/BBC/Love Productions 
Quinn added: “Mel and Sue are absolutely instrumental to that show and it’s 
almost like the key ingredients have all been taken apart. A lot of dough has 
obviously been chucked into the mix and you can’t create a cake with what feels 
like the ingredients for making bread. It seems to me like it can only be a 
very different show now.”

2016 Finalists

Candice Brown, a secondary school PE teacher from Bedfordshire, has won star 
baker three times. Brown’s series high came in the quarter-final with her 
flamboyant peacock showstopper cake, while her series low was an uncooked bread 
loaf in episode three.

Andrew Smyth, an engineer from Northern Ireland, has won star baker twice. His 
greatest success was his ice cream mousse cakes in dessert week, which made up 
for his disappointing cake in botanical week.

Jane Beedle, a garden designer from London, has won star baker once. Beedle’s 
best week came with her botanical showstopper cake, while she had a low point 
when she rolled her roulade.
 