
For some reason, it has been a quiet month on the complaints front. I shall, 
no doubt, regret these words and look back on November as the lull before the 
storm. But the only two serious complaints have been about wherries and my own 
use of English.

Quick No. 10,785 had a "vessel" theme running through it and WHERRY was the 
required answer to the clue "Light rowing vessel for passengers (6)". This 
clearly caused distress, particularly to solvers living in Norfolk. A typical 
fulmination read: "The clue and answer are nonsensical. A wherry is a large 
sailing vessel weighing several tons and cannot be rowed. Suggest your compiler 
visits the Norfolk Broads to see at first hand examples of these fine vessels. 
The wherry was used in the 19th century for the transport of heavy commercial 
cargoes and their means of propulsion was a huge distinctive black sail. Under 
no-wind conditions they were propelled by means of a large quant."

Not being an expert in naval construction and terminology, my only defence 
lies in the dictionaries. My Collins and Chambers certainly support the views 
of Disgusted of King's Lynn by respectively defining a wherry as a half-decked 
commercial boat and a kind of barge. But Collins also gives as an alternative 
definition "a light rowing boat used in inland waterways and harbours" and 
Chambers gives "a light shallow boat sharp at both ends for speed". Does 
"wherry" mean one thing on the Norfolk Broads and another elsewhere?

Then, I was taken to task for writing in this column last month that our 
policy of mixing hard, middling and easier puzzles "begs the question of how to 
decide which compilers are harder, middling or easier". This sentence made one 
subscriber wince, which is something I regret. She points out not only that 
"begging a question" and "raising a question" mean different things, but also 
that the difference is stressed by the Guardian's very own stylebook. She 
apologises for seeming to be a pedant.

No one, in my view, should ever feel the need to apologise for being a pedant 
over the use of words, especially not to a crossword editor. Of course, I agree 
that the two phrases do not mean the same thing. "Begs the question" means 
"evades the issue" or "assumes that the point at issue is already decided". But 
that, I think, is what I was trying to say.

___________

Today marks the end of Crispa's more than 50 years as a Manchester Guardian 
and Guardian compiler. Sandy Balfour has written a delightful tribute to her in 
today's paper (Read it here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/g2/story/0,,1367164,00.html>). Crispa has led an 
extraordinarily eventful life and her many fans will miss her. The final down 
clue in her final Guardian puzzle (No. 23,318) is "A hollow farewell! (4)"*

___________

I should like to wish all subscribers to the Guardian Unlimited crosswords the 
compliments of the season. If by any chance you are still racking your brains 
for some suitable present for anyone, what about a gift subscription? The place 
to get one ishttp://www.theguardian.com/competitions/page/0,13349,-235,00.html 
<https://www.theguardian.com/competitions/page/0,13349,-235,00.html>, which is 
a bit of a mouthful, but you can always copy and paste it. And there are also 
the three new books of Guardian crossword selections (cryptics, quicks and 
Araucaria), published by Atlantic Books and available at the Guardian Bookshop 
(tel: 0870 836 0749,theguardian.com/bookshop <http://theguardian.com/bookshop>).

___________

* The answer is: VALE

Â·  Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor.
 