
Scott Laird has such a sunny personality it is difficult to imagine him in 
angry mode but even Scunthorpe United’s resolutely upbeat left-back becomes a 
little cross when football’s chattering classes sneer at the FA Cup. “If you 
could have seen me jumping around my living room when the draw happened you 
would have known the magic of the Cup’s still there,” says Laird, who could 
well find himself marking Willian when Mark Robins’s sideface Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/15/fa-cup-roundup-scunthorpe-chelsea-salford-city>
 at Stamford Bridge on Sunday afternoon. “Anyone who says it’s losing its magic 
is mad.”

The 27-year-old speaks with some authority. From participating in the 
competition’s earliest qualifying rounds as a non-league novice, to helping 
Stevenage subject Newcastle toa third-round giantkilling in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/08/stevenage-newcastle-united-fa-cup>
 andscoring for Preston North End against Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/16/preston-north-end-manchester-united-fa-cup-match-report>
 in a fifth-round defeat last year, Laird has clocked up some fairly extensive 
FA Cup experience.

FA Cup roundup: Scunthorpe United earn trip to Chelsea but Salford City exit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/15/fa-cup-roundup-scunthorpe-chelsea-salford-city>
“For me to be able to say to my grandkids that I’ve scored against Manchester 
United is amazing,” says the one-time Tiverton Town full-back. “What makes this 
competition so special is that it really is David v Goliath. You get to see 
non-league players who work nine-to-five pitting their wits against Premier 
League regulars.

“For lower-league and non-league players to test themselves, and their skills, 
against the best in the world is fantastic. It gives people chances to really 
show what they can do, get themselves noticed and maybe earn a chance to play 
in a higher division. TheFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> 
can change lives.

“There’s no escaping the fact that there’s a big gap between the Premier 
League and the lower leagues but I do think it’s getting smaller. The standard 
down here is definitely rising. There are lotsof Jamie Vardys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/20/jamie-vardy-top-goalscorer-premier-league-leicester-city>
 in the lower leagues who, given a bit of luck, could make it at the top level 
– catching the eye of a bigger club while playing in the FA Cup could get them 
there.”

Similarly, knocking Chelsea out would do wonders for local morale in this 
corner of north Lincolnshire. In October Tata Steel, the principal local 
employer, placed 900 steelworkers’ jobs – and those of several hundred 
contractors – at risk byannouncing it was pulling out of Scunthorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/20/tata-steel-expected-to-announce-1200-job-losses-in-uk>
. Shortly before Christmas 88 years of steel production in the town ceased when 
the local plant was mothballed. Although Greybull Capital, a private equity 
firm, seems on theverge of buying the business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/22/tata-steel-eyes-sale-long-products-business-investment-group>
 after producing a last-ditch rescue plan, the future remains uncertain.

“With all that’s gone on with the steelworks, people here have been having a 
hard time lately,” says Laird in his soft Somerset accent. “So it’s great for 
the whole town to come together, descend onChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> and have a really good time. 
That’s the special thing about football, it unites people and acts as a 
diversion from their problems.”

As the man behind a proposed £40m community leisure development centred around 
a brand new ground forScunthorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scunthorpe>, the chairman, Peter Swann, 
also hopes to make a more material difference. “The owner’s blueprint for the 
club, and the whole town, was a big reason why I came here,” says Laird.

This attempt to embrace a wider vision has led Scunthorpe to shun shirt 
advertising, with players instead wearing the Prostate Cancer UK logo on their 
chests. Swann hopes to be able to negotiate another charity deal next summer as 
a Championship chairman but the team’s current position,mid-table in League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball/table>, remains a 
source of frustration.

“With the squad we’ve got, we’ve definitely under-achieved,” says Laird. 
“Hopefully Sunday can really kick us on and convince us we can get the points 
needed to push into the play-offs. Playing for Mark Robins is really enjoyable 
but we haven’t been at our best for him yet. We need to put that right.”

As Laird sits in a function room overlooking the rain-drenched Glanford Park 
pitch, Robins occupies an office down the corridor. Inside it, he is embarking 
on yet another round of interviews aboutthat FA Cup goal against Nottingham 
Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/fa-cup-third-round-field-notes>
 26 years ago which quite possibly saved Sir Alex Ferguson’s job at Manchester 
United.

Laird’s favourite Cup memory involves embarrassing Alan Pardew, Joey Barton 
and company in that 3-1 defeat of Newcastle, with the shine only slightly 
tarnished by an incident after the final whistle involving a drunken home 
supporter spilling on to the pitch, punching him in the face and subsequently 
being sent to prison. “It was upsetting,” he acknowledges. “But it was still a 
great game.”

Now the challenge is to reprise Bradford’s achievement at Stamford Bridge last 
year when theyshocked a certain Portuguese by winning 4-2. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/24/chelsea-bradford-city-fa-cup-fourth-round>
 “It’s a bit disappointing not to be playing a José Mourinho side,” concedes 
Laird. “Guus Hiddink’s not done too badly though, has he? Chelsea have 
world-class players but, like Bradford last year, we’re going there to win. 
Dreamsdo come true sometimes.”

Should he score he can expect to be presented with a one pound coin by his 
grandmother. “It’s something she did to encourage me as a kid and it’s a 
tradition that’s most definitely going to continue,” says Laird. “As a 
professional I’ve earned £40 but, in total, I’d have around £100 now – if only 
I hadn’t spent most of it on packets of sweets.”
 