
Take a look on the average British high street now, and chances are you will 
be faced with an impressive choice of places to get a hair cut, manicure or wet 
shave.

According to the Royal Mail’s Address Management Unit 
<http://www.royalmailgroup.com/media/press-releases/beards-and-brow-remain-big-business-high-street>
, more beauty and grooming salons opened on UK high streets last year than any 
other type of independent business, with a net increase of 626 salons, the 
equivalent of 10%.

Part of everyday life

Susan Routledge has run her salon in County Durham since 1988 and now works as 
a consultant for salons and spas. She thinks the beauty and grooming sectors 
are booming because it has become mainstream. “It’s no longer a luxury, it’s 
just part of everyday living,” she says. “We’ve had clients before who’ve 
actually factored in their beauty treatment as part of their divorce 
settlement. That’s how mainstream it is becoming.”

It seems we’re more ready to part with cash for a bit of grooming than we used 
to be. Industry supplier Salon Services’ annualBeautiful Britain report 
<http://www.salon-services.com/beautiful-britain-2016/>, which surveys 2,000 
hair and beauty salons across the UK, found the average annual spend on hair 
and beauty treatments grew 19% for female clients to £876 in 2015, and 23% for 
male clients to £711.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fbeauty-boom-or-bust-uk-too-many-salons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4adcfcf42d874c8b41f3c7b119735bb1607210af%2F0_366_3710_2226%2F3710.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beauty%20boom%20or%20bust%3A%20does%20the%20UK%20have%20too%20many%20salons%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fbeauty-boom-or-bust-uk-too-many-salons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beauty%20boom%20or%20bust%3A%20does%20the%20UK%20have%20too%20many%20salons%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fbeauty-boom-or-bust-uk-too-many-salons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4adcfcf42d874c8b41f3c7b119735bb1607210af%2F0_366_3710_2226%2F3710.jpg>
 Mark Jones opened E Street Barbers in Leeds three years ago with co-founder 
Gavin Colwill. 
The increase in men’s grooming 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/fashion/features/mens-grooming-is-now-a-multi-billion-pound-worldwide-industry-a6813196.html>
 has been cited as the one of biggest drivers behind the growth of the whole 
beauty industry in recent years. “I would say a much higher percentage of men 
are more conscious of their hair now than 10 years ago,” says Mark Jones, who 
openedE Street Barbers <http://www.estreetbarberco.com/> in Leeds three years 
ago with business partner Gavin Colwill.

In November 2015, they launched the Native 
<http://www.thegroomingclinic.com/male-grooming-brands/native-products.html> 
male grooming haircare product range, which now has more than 100 stockists in 
the UK and internationally, and in August this year opened up a second E Street 
Barbers in Hackney, east London.

“There have always been guys that are conscious about their hair, but they 
were going to [high-end salons], where you’re talking £80 a hair cut,” Jones 
says. “Now you get these guys that are really fashion conscious, but they don’t 
want to go to a women’s salon. All the barbers in the industry have had to up 
their game, and they’re knocking out really stylish cuts but at more affordable 
prices.”

Saturated market?

But for all the positive signs of the sector’s growth, is there enough 
business to go around? While Kantar Worldpanel found that the professional nail 
industry is now worth £153m (up from £143m in 2015), it also revealed the 
industry as a whole could in fact be in decline. The total beauty treatments 
market was worth £1.92bn in the 52 weeks to 25 September 2016, down from 
£1.94bn in the previous year.

New salons popping up are having an impact on established beauty businesses. 
“Five years ago when we opened up, there wasn’t anything around this area,” 
says Tima Reshad, owner of nail salonCoco Nails <http://www.coconailbar.com/> 
on Portobello Road. “I’ve found that in the last few years we’ve had quite a 
few nail salons open up.”

Reshad says her first two years of trading were her best, but then two other 
nail bars opened up just a couple of minutes’ walk from Coco “in the space of 
two weeks”.

“They’re not high-end salons like we are; they’re catering to the low end of 
the market and that has affected us,” she says. “I guess there’s enough 
business for everybody, but it has affected us because we also used to get that 
part of the market but now we don’t.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fbeauty-boom-or-bust-uk-too-many-salons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce7571d10e2c78e47921275a72eb82d3c002edc8%2F0_263_4136_2481%2F4136.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beauty%20boom%20or%20bust%3A%20does%20the%20UK%20have%20too%20many%20salons%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fbeauty-boom-or-bust-uk-too-many-salons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beauty%20boom%20or%20bust%3A%20does%20the%20UK%20have%20too%20many%20salons%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fbeauty-boom-or-bust-uk-too-many-salons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce7571d10e2c78e47921275a72eb82d3c002edc8%2F0_263_4136_2481%2F4136.jpg>
 Two other nail bars opened nearby Coco Nails on Portobello Road, which has 
affected business. Photograph: Ali Zabihollah 
How to withstand the competition from new faces on the block is one of the 
biggest challenges for salon owners such as Reshad, especially when the 
competition are undercutting on price. Routledge says that getting into a price 
war with competitors is one of the most dangerous things salons owners can do. 
“I always liken it to buying handbags: there’s a market for a £5 handbag and a 
market for a £5,000 handbag. But you’ve got to know your market,” she says.

“The [businesses] I work with that are struggling are the ones that are just 
trying to compete against everyone. There’s a real diversity in this industry 
at the moment. The salons that are doing really well are the ones who have got 
their market right and know exactly what their point of difference is from the 
one down the road.”

Reshad admits that cutting prices to stay competitive did cross her mind. “But 
I just thought: ‘How are you going to pay the business rates, the rent, the 
wages?” she says. “We can’t compete on price so what we’ve tried to do is add 
value to what we provide.”

Not everyone in this industry sees competition as a bad thing. Colina Currell 
runs a small chain of four hair salons in Dorset, calledSynergy 
<http://www.synergyhairdressing.com/Home.aspx>. Competition is fierce, she 
says, but it’s very good for the industry as it keeps business owners on their 
toes. “It’s all about customer care,” she says. “You have to make sure your 
staff are highly trained.” She believes that while there are a lot of salons, 
many are mediocre.

Commenting on the Royal Mail’s findings, Trevor Studd from the British 
Barbers’ Association <http://britishbarbers.com/> warned that while the number 
of businesses will grow to meet the consumer demand, “skills and the level of 
service offered will determine how many of those shops will still be open in 
two years’ time”.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 