
Christian Benteke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/christian-benteke> 
struck the fastest goal in a competitive international and went on to complete 
his hat-trick asBelgium defeated Gibraltar 6-0 in a World Cup qualifier.

The Crystal Palace striker stole the ball in the home side’s half after two 
Gibraltar touches following the kick-off and weaved his way through their 
defenceto score from inside the area after only 8.1 sec 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cM9lKZoSyGs>.

Uefa said the goal was 0.2sec faster 
<http://www.uefa.com/european-qualifiers/news/newsid=2412481.html> than the 
previous record since detailed timing was kept,held by San Marino’s Davide 
Gualtieri against England <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rZS2aLl80wM> in a 
1993 World Cup qualifier.

Uefa said the fastest ever international goal is thought to be Lukas 
Podolski’s for Germany against Ecuador 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=li4n4kvj4vM> in a 2013 friendly, timed at six 
seconds.

“The most important thing was to score early,” said Benteke. He celebrated the 
record-breaking strike by holding up six fingers, thinking he had scored after 
six seconds. The win keptBelgium <https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> 
top of Group H, on goal difference, with nine points.

France’s Paul Pogba sinks Holland and Georginio Wijnaldum suffers injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/10/holland-france-world-cup-qualifier-match-report>
Axel Witsel scored from 25 metres after 19 minutes to double the advantage for 
Roberto Martínez’s side and Benteke scored his second shortly before half-time 
when he turned in Thomas Meunier’s cutback from six yards.

After Dries Martens scored the fourth with a dinked finish in the 51st minute 
Benteke completed his hat-trick five minutes later with a backheel from Eden 
Hazard’s pass. The Chelsea forward Hazard then added to his assist by 
completing the rout in the 78th minute.Greece also extended their 100% start in 
Group H by winning 2-0 inEstonia.

André Silva scored a first-half hat-trick to set Portugal on the way to a 6-0 
defeat of theFaroe Islands.

Cristiano Ronaldo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> was also on 
target in the Group B game as Portugal hit six goals for the second time in 
four days after their rout of Andorra on Friday.

Portugal went second in Group B with six points from three games, three behind 
Switzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland>. The Faroes are 
fourth after taking four points from their first two matches without conceding 
a goal, but they found the European champions a different proposition to 
Hungary and Latvia, who they beat 2-0 on Friday.

The hosts were never in contention after Silva took advantage of a sliced 
clearance to putPortugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> ahead 
with a clinical finish in the 12th minute.

What is the fastest that a football team has been reduced to nine players? | 
The Knowledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/05/what-is-the-fastest-that-a-football-team-has-been-reduced-to-nine-men>
The 20-year-old, who had scored once for his country before the game, doubled 
his tally 10 minutes later, heading in after Ricardo Quaresma’s cross caused 
havoc in the area. Silva completed his hat-trick eight minutes before halftime 
by knocking home another loose ball.

Ronaldo got on the scoresheet in the 65th minute, from 20 metres . The 
visitors added two more goals in stoppage time as João Moutinho curled a 
delightful effort into the top corner and João Cancelo slotted home from Gelson 
Martin’s pass.

Switzerland have their own prolific scorer in the defender Fabian Schär. The 
Hoffenheim centre-back took his goal record to seven in 27 internationals by 
scoring a 19th-minute penalty in Switzerland’s 2-1 victory inAndorra. Admir 
Mehmedi extended the lead in the 77th for the Swiss by connecting with a 
close-range header from Xherdan Shaqiri’s cross.

Andorra scored their first goal in World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualification since 
September 2009 in the 90th minute when Alex Martinez fired home from distance.

Hungary rose to third with their first win of the campaign, beating Latvia 
2-0. The winger Adam Gyurcso scored in the 10th and the forward Adam Szalai 
sealed the win in the 77th. Szalai also scored twice in a 3-2 home defeat 
against Switzerland on Friday.

Sweden swept to a 3-0 win against a brittle Bulgaria thanks to goals from Ola 
Toivonen, Oscar Hiljemark and Victor Lindeloef, a result that put them joint 
top of Group A with France. The two sides will meet in Paris on 11 November.
 