
Michy Batshuayi has written an open letter to Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> supporters, telling them his 
departure from the club will be confirmed on Sunday.

The 22-year-old Belgium striker, who is expected to join Chelsea for £33.2m 
after two successful years at the Stade Velodrome,wrote on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/mbatshuayi/status/749293942160683009?lang=en-gb>: “It will 
be made official tomorrow, I will be leaving Olympique Marseille this summer.”

Michy Batshuayi’s perfect audition paves way for £33m Chelsea move
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/29/michy-batshuayi-chelsea-belgium-euro-2016>
Batshuayi began his career at Standard Liège and joined Marseille in the 
summer of 2014, scoring 15 goals in his first season with the club. He took a 
step forward last season with 26 goals, including 17 in Ligue 1 even as 
Marseille struggled to 13th in the table – just nine points clear of the 
relegation zone.

His performances earned him a place in Belgium’s Euro 2016 squad and he 
immediately announced himself on his tournament debut, scoring within two 
minutes of his introduction as a substitute against Hungary in the last 16.

Batshuayi had been the subject of bids from West Ham and Juventus earlier this 
summer beforeCrystal Palace had a £31.6m offer accepted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/crystal-palace-michy-batshuayi-marseille-bid>
 by the Marseille president, Vincent Labrune. However, the player had 
reservations about moving to Selhurst Park and Chelsea’s late entry into the 
auction turned his head.

Batshuayi wrote: “Above all, I particularly want to thank all the supporters 
of OM: during my two years with the club I have loved since I was young, you 
have shown me your affection and support.

“It’s a big honour for me to have worn this jersey at the Velodrome, a stadium 
which you have made magnificent with an atmosphere which is unique in France. I 
thank the directors of Olympique de Marseille for having confidence in me and 
the coaching staff who have helped me progress.

“Developing for a season under coach [Marcelo] Bielsa was a privilege and I 
would love to achieve what he has wished for me in the remainder of my career. 
Thanks also to coach Franck Passi for having supported and advised me since my 
arrival at Marseille, and my team-mates for these two seasons.

“I hope I can keep making you proud with my new club, and will continue to 
follow closely the results of OM. I hope the club can recover the results they 
deserve.”

Marseille’s struggles last season came after the departure of a number of 
first-team players in the summer, and the pattern looks to be repeating this 
time around.

Captain and goalkeeper Steve Mandanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/crystal-palace-andros-townsend-alan-pardew>
 and key defender Nicolas Nkoulou have departed for Crystal Palace and Lyon 
respectively, while playmaker Lucas Ocampos has joined Genoa on an initial loan 
deal.
 