
Concerns have been raised within the Belgium squad that players may have been 
distracted before Friday’s eagerly anticipatedEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> quarter-final against Wales as 
they negotiate transfers to further their club careers.

Gareth Bale: we know Belgium, we might even be their bogey team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/29/gareth-bale-wales-belgium-bogey-team-euro-2016>
The club future of a number of key players in Marc Wilmots’s squad is up in 
the air.Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> were permitted 
to send a member of their medical staff to the team’s base in Bordeaux on 
Wednesday, just 48 hours before the last-eight clash in Lille, to conduct basic 
medical tests on the striker Michy Batshuayi, before his proposed €40m (£33.2m) 
move to Stamford Bridge.

The forward’s club, Marseille, are under pressure to balance their books and 
deliver on the budget presented to the French league’s financial watchdog, 
prompting them to request that the deal be concluded this week. Belgium’s 
management, in stark contrast to the Football Association, which had been 
privately unimpressed to discoverJamie Vardy agreed a new contract with 
Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/jamie-vardy-rejects-arsenal-leicester-city>
 during the team’s stay in France, duly agreed.

Yet the issue has been talked about by members of the squad concerned that 
focus may be blurred as players spend time discussing moves with their 
representatives. Another of Wilmots’s players, the right-back Thomas Meunier, 
was granted time away from the squad on Wednesday to conduct a full medical 
with Paris Saint-Germain. The Club Brugge defender will replace Gregory van der 
Wiel at the French champions and was due to return to the team hotel, Golf du 
Médoc, on Wednesday evening.

Another player in the squad, the Liverpool forward Christian Benteke, is 
drawing strong interest from Crystal Palace – whose bid for Batshuayi had been 
accepted by Marseille earlier in the week before Chelsea’s offer emerged – as 
he prepares to leave Anfield after only a year. Liverpool are aware that Palace 
can meet Benteke’s wage demands but will be seeking at least £30m for a player
who cost marginally more, at £32.5m, when joining from Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/19/liverpool-agree-deal-christian-benteke-aston-villa-transfer>
 last summer. It remains to be seen whether the London club will meet that 
asking price but Alan Pardew is keen to prioritise the addition of the forward 
having sanctioned Dwight Gayle’s departure to Newcastle United for an initial 
£8.5m. The north-east club are also closing in on the signing of Matt Ritchie 
from Bournemouth.

Michy Batshuayi’s perfect audition paves way for £33m Chelsea move
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/29/michy-batshuayi-chelsea-belgium-euro-2016>
Although Batshuayi was excused an appearance at a press conference on 
Wednesday evening, Wilmots has not prevented his players discussing club 
matters, or moves, over the tournament to date.

The midfielder Radja Nainggolan has been asked regularly about his potential 
transfer to Chelsea – discussions over that move have reached deadlock with 
Roma – and Romelu Lukaku has twice spoken about his future at Everton. The 
coach also granted his squad Tuesday afternoon off, allowing Batshuayi to 
liaise with his agent after the late emergence of Chelsea’s offer. The 
22-year-old will complete a fuller medical back at Cobham once Belgium’s 
involvement in the tournament has concluded and sign a five-year contract. 
Batshuayi scored 17 goals in Ligue 1 last season and will become the most 
expensive sale in Marseille’s history, eclipsing the fee they raised when 
selling Didier Drogba to Chelsea in 2004, though the player’s former club, 
Standard Liège, are due 35% of the fee through a previous clause. He departs 
the Stade Vélodrome having scored 33 goals in 78 appearances for the club.

He will become Antonio Conte’s first signing for Chelsea and, although his 
arrival eases the pressure to add further to the front-line following the 
departures of the loanees Radamel Falcao and Alexandre Pato, there remains the 
possibility the London club could maintain their pursuit of Spain’s Álvaro 
Morata, now back at Real Madrid, as they seek to bolster their options. Morata 
would cost in the region of £40m, but any interest in re-signing Lukaku appears 
to have petered out.
 