
The last time Bordeaux were top of Ligue 1, it was August 2002: at the time, 
Darius was No1 in the charts <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>, Liverpool had 
spent £5m on Salif Diao, and David Bellion was a teenager at Sunderland spoken 
of as a future France international. As Bellion, and indeedDarius 
<http://www.gwtwthemusical.co.uk/cast/darius_danesh.php> and Diao 
<http://www.thisisstaffordshire.co.uk/news/Stoke-City-Stars-flee-Senegal-riot/article-400410-detail/article.html>
 might now realise, you never quite know how things will work out - but this 
was the week that Bellion emerged to give notice that Bordeaux can push Lyon 
all the way for the title.

As Bordeaux played the night before everyone else, their time at the top may 
have lasted only 24 hours, and the team they beat 4-0, Le Havre, may have a 
one-way ticket back to Ligue 2, but it was animpressive performance 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WxCkAiAHe7w> and one that left opposition coach 
Jean-Marc Nobilo admitting: "From what I've seen, Bordeaux are the best side in 
France. They're stronger than Lyon or Marseille."

Not that Lyon coach Claude Puel seemed bothered. "I didn't even know we had 
lost our place as leaders, the table only makes sense when all the teams have 
played the same amount of games," he sniffed afterLyon beat bottom club Sochaux 
2-0 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NhxmACm0PuU> for their first win in four to 
restore a three-point lead. "The fact that we were top is important for our 
confidence and also for the way other teams will now look at us," responded 
Bellion, Bordeaux's man of the match with two goals. "It's a way of marking our 
territory."

Bellion was rested for last weekend's controversial 2-2 draw with his former 
club Nice <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4D22qZY5hiU>, and this was his first 
brace since last November. He had led the scoring charts with 10 goals in 
January, but only scored one more in the second half of the season. More than 
most French players, he deserves success, given what he's been through: after 
his first training session with Sunderland in 2001, when he was 18, he found 
out his unofficial stepfather, "the man who had brought me up for the last 15 
years", had hung himself; in his last training session before moving to 
Manchester United in January 2003, "an assistant coach crushed my foot - not on 
purpose - but I went to Old Trafford on crutches". Then, in May 2005, he broke 
his right leg playing for the reserves, and was loaned out to West Ham, where 
he also turned up on crutches.

After six months he moved to Nice <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice> 
and was happy there until outspoken coach Frédéric Antonetti criticised 
Bellion's religious beliefs live on TV. "I couldn't accept that. I'm a 
Christian and for me, religion is an intimate and family thing. I can be moody 
at times but I'm not a bad guy at heart. I forgave him but I don't forget," 
Bellion toldL'Equipe after he had been signed by his former United team-mate 
Laurent Blanc.

He could become a key player in Bordeaux's challenge, especially if Fernando 
Cavenaghi continues to miss as many chances as he did againstLe Havre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lehavre> (there were at least four in the 
first half). But even now his place is not secure: Blanc made six changes from 
the Nice game and will continue to rotate the squad. "There are 25 guys who all 
want to play but I can only pick 11. I know that because I called the league 
and asked to start games with 22 players and they said it wasn't possible," 
said Blanc. "So I have 13 guys who won't be happy every weekend but they may be 
the ones to get us through the difficult times so you must never forget them."

There was more rotation at Lyon, where Anthony Mounier, 21, and debutant 
Lamine Gassama, 19, started against Sochaux. Lyon needed over an hour until
Karim Benzema's cracker <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZhJXjx4fL9A> broke the 
deadlock, and were hanging on until Sochaux's Stephane Dalmat was dismissed. 
Sub Cesar Delgado doubled Lyon's lead and there was still time for Sochaux to 
have another player, Damien Perquis, sent off. "Dalmat tackled the man from the 
side, not behind, but the referee sent him off anyway," moaned Sochaux boss 
Francis Gillot, "while Perquis's red card came mainly from Jérémy Toulalan who 
was like a second referee on the field. He asked the ref to send him off, and 
that's what happened." You can see the Respect campaign has not reached France 
quite yet.

Hatem Ben Arfa won back a starting place for Marseille but was fairly quiet in 
their1-1 draw at Nantes <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X3EE6Hh2ciw>. L'OM 
goalkeeper Steve Mandanda had complained of a thigh injury but could do nothing 
to stop Rémi Maréval's 40-yard screamer to put Nantes ahead. It's probably a 
good thing he doesn't score too often: he had to have his wrist bandaged after 
an acrobatic goal celebration went wrong and he is due for a scan on Thursday. 
Bakary Koné levelled with 12 minutes left to leave L'OM four points behind Lyon.

PSG undid all their excellent work in the weekend win over Marseille 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1UnCsJfTrE> by playing terribly in a 1-0 home 
loss to Toulouse, withZoumana Camara's own goal 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IGb-ncoWvU0>, a header that somehow evaded 
three defenders on the line, separating the sides. "We made some terrible 
mistakes and after we let the goal in, we fell apart,"said coach Paul Le Guen 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KSOQ80fxpSA>. "It's going to be a difficult 
season but we'll get through it if we keep fighting."

Even that might not be enough to save Saint-Etienne boss Laurent Roussey, who 
was livid afterlosing 4-1 at home to Lorient 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3HmsrN7_lfY>. "We're going through a storm, and 
we've taken a big knock on the head," he said. "We now have to show real 
character." The Sainté fans booed their own players during their third straight 
loss and things could get worse as they travel to Marseille at the weekend. 
Roussey needs his players to converttheir Uefa Cup form 
<http://www.uefa.com/competitions/uefacup/fixturesresults/round=15285/match=> 
to domestic action.

Elsewhere, Monaco beat struggling Nancy 3-1 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uPBObKJX-xM> and injury-hit Auxerre won 2-0 at 
high-flying Le Mans <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SljA5hKqDDA>. Nice's Loïc 
Rémy scoredanother late penalty <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jf8FI2zLcDM> to 
earn a 1-1 draw at Caen.

Results: Bordeaux 4-0 Le Havre, Sochaux 0-2 Lyon, Nantes 1-1 Marseille, Le 
Mans 0-2 Auxerre, PSG 0-1 Toulouse, Grenoble 0-0 Lille,Valenciennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valenciennes> 0-0 Rennes, Caen 1-1 Nice, 
Monaco 3-1 Nancy, Saint-Etienne 1-4 Lorient

Latest Ligue 1 table 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=>
 