
Juninho lit up a town once labelled the ugliest in Britain with a little 
Brazilian magic asCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> cruised 
into the semi-finals yesterday.

Cumbernauld, home to Clyde <https://www.theguardian.com/football/clyde>, is 
not somewhere immediately associated with sambas or a carnival atmosphere. Yet 
Juninho and the visit of Celtic provided both.

The World Cup winner laid on three of the goals and served notice to Martin 
O'Neill that he might yet have something to offer, even though his likely 
reward for this performance will be to be relegated to the substitutes' bench 
again for the Premierleague match against Dundee on Wednesday.

Celtic joined Dundee United, Hibernian and Hearts in the last four thanks to 
two goals from Stanislav Varga, a penalty from Alan Thompson and further 
efforts from Stilian Petrov andCraig Bellamy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/craig-bellamy>, the Welshman's first 
since joining from Newcastle on loan.

Although it was fairly straightforward in the end, there was a hint of 
giant-killing in an interesting first half when Clyde matched their illustrious 
opponents and were left to rue a decision by the referee Craig Thomson that 
might have changed the game.

After half an hour the official watched Craig Bryson negotiate several 
desperate challenges, most notably from Petrov, before firing a fine shot past 
Rab Douglas only to stop the home celebrations in mid-flow to give Clyde a 
foul. The protests were long and entirely pointless, and to rub salt into their 
wounds Darren Sheridan's free-kick was touched round the post by Douglas.

That was perhaps the kick up the backside Celtic needed and after 40 minutes 
they went ahead when Varga headed home Juninho's corner. If it was an 
unconvincing first half there was a dramatic improvement from Celtic after the 
break. Three minutes in, Thompson scored from the penalty spot after the 
substitute Shaun Maloney, on for Chris Sutton, was brought down and further 
goals followed from Petrov on the hour, Varga again after 68 minutes and 
Bellamy four minutes later.

In the end it was entirely predictable but the First Division team will have 
enjoyed the experience - the referee's decision aside - and will reap the 
benefit from a sell-out 8,200 crowd together with television money.

"Yet we're disappointed," admitted their manager Billy Reid. "We didn't 
deserve 5-0 although we gave away cheap goals and you can't do that.

"But I was pleased with other aspects. I felt we were the better team in the 
first half and although I have no problem over the one we had disallowed I 
didn't think we got much from the referee in the rest of the match."

O'Neill, meanwhile, admitted his side were "stodgy" in the first half and is 
now concerned about injuries to Sutton, St√©phane Henchoz and Maloney.

On the plus side, however, he insisted: "I was very pleased with Maloney's 
contribution because he's been out for a year through injury, and it was good 
to see Bellamy get his first goal."

 Man of the Match: Juninho (Celtic)
 