
Few screen debuts have equalled the searing malevolence of Ben Gazzara's 
Iago-inspired Jocko De Paris in The Strange One (1957). The role, which he had 
created on stage, became forever associated with this intense graduate of New 
York's method school of acting.

Gazzara, who has died aged 81 of pancreatic cancer, continued his stage career 
in modern classics including Epitaph for George Dillon and as the humiliated 
and vengeful George in Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? He also achieved popular 
acclaim through television series – notably Run for Your Life (1965-68) – and 
in movies for his friend John Cassavetes and other directors including Otto 
Preminger, Peter Bogdanovich, David Mamet, Todd Solondz and the Coen brothers.

Gazzara was born to Sicilian immigrants and grew up on Manhattan's lower east 
side. He began acting at the Madison Square Boys Club and made a teenage debut 
in a TV dramatisation of a short play by Tennessee Williams. After gaining a 
scholarship to Erwin Piscator's drama workshop, he eventually moved to the 
equally legendary Actors Studio headed by Lee Strasberg.

His stage debut came in Pennsylvania and then on tour, in Jezebel's Husband, 
but his career took off when – aged 23 – he created Jocko in Calder 
Willingham's adaptation of his own novel End As a Man. When a revised version 
of the play transferred to the Vanderbilt theatre in 1953, giving Gazzara his 
Broadway debut, he received the New York critics' award as most promising young 
actor.

Its director, Jack Garfein, an assistant to Elia Kazan, took four years to get 
the movie version financed, and in the interim Gazzara gained more Broadway 
experience as the original Brick in Williams's Cat on a Hot Tin Roof and as the 
drug-addicted Johnny in A Hatful of Rain, where his darkly handsome features 
and forceful acting were distinct assets.

Although The Strange One looked overly theatrical, Gazzara's pared-down 
performance survived the lumpen direction, revealing a natural screen presence. 
The sombre work about a duplicitous cadet leader, who manipulates an army camp 
in the deep south, was not a popular success and Gazzara returned to the stage 
until cast as the equally venal, though more enigmatic, soldier Lieutenant 
Manion in Preminger's courtroom masterpiece Anatomy of a Murder (1959).

These movies were hard acts to follow and Gazzara, who spoke Italian before he 
learned English, returned to his roots to star opposite Anna Magnani in The 
Passionate Thief (1960). It was the start of a lifetime affair with Italy, 
where he was to work and live for many months each year and where he eventually 
bought a villa in Umbria.

The following year Gazzara married Janice Rule – having divorced his first 
wife, Louise Erickson, in 1957 – and took the role of the idealistic 
pathologist in The Young Doctors. He then co-starred opposite David Niven in 
The Captive City, a lacklustre war movie set in Athens. A challenging role as 
the convicted murderer turned painter John Resko better reflected Gazzara's 
ambitions, but Convicts Four was not a hit and he moved into television, first 
as the detective in Arrest and Trial and then as the dying Paul Bryan in Run 
for Your Life.

Filming in Czechoslovakia of the second world war story of The Bridge at 
Remagen was overtaken by the real-life Soviet invasion of August 1968. An 
escaping waitress hid behind the legs of Gazzara and Robert Vaughn as she 
crouched on the floor of their car when it crossed the border.

Gazzara was one of several stars coaxed into a cameo role in If It's Tuesday, 
This Must Be Belgium (1969). Fortuitously, another was Cassavetes and, after 
working on the liberal documentary King: A Filmed Record ... Montgomery to 
Memphis, Gazzara joinedPeter Falk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/jun/25/peter-falk-obituary> and 
Cassavetes as the eponymous Husbands (also 1970) in the latter's improvised 
study of marital discord.

Gazzara played the murderous stripclub owner Cosmo Vitelli in Cassavetes's 
edgy thriller The Killing of a Chinese Bookie (1976), and a year later Manny 
Victor in the director's masterpiece, Opening Night. After Cassavetes's 
untimely death in 1989, Gazzara appeared in several documentaries about his 
friend, notably Anything for John (1993), which reflected the admiration felt 
by his peers for that maverick film-maker.

Gazzara had established a willingness to work outside the commercial 
mainstream, specialising in anti-social characters including a plumply brutish 
Al Capone in Capone (1975), but his career wavered between quality and dross, 
film and television, and work in the US, Italy and a few other countries, 
notching up more than 80 movies in the years following his initial 
collaboration with Cassavetes.

These included the free-spirited Saint Jack (1979) in Peter Bogdanovich's 
elegant rendition of Paul Theroux's novel and – two years later, also for 
Bogdanovich – a co-starring role opposite Audrey Hepburn in They All Laughed, 
an underrated but commercially disastrous variation on love's roundabout.

Following a second divorce, Gazzara worked for a decade in Italy, returning to 
the US only for lucrative TV movies, including A Question of Honour (1982), A 
Letter to Three Wives and the Aids drama An Early Frost (both 1985), as well as 
the film Road House (1989).

In Europe he portrayed the disillusioned poet Charles Bukowski in Tales of 
Ordinary Madness (1981), was a professor in Il Camorrista (1985) and a less 
amiable don in Don Bosco (1988). Although he had directed episodes of Columbo 
for Falk, he graduated to the big screen only in 1990 with the little-seen 
Beyond the Ocean, shot in Bali.

Soon after that Italian-financed movie he again concentrated on work in 
America, averaging five films or TV movies each year, while dividing his time 
between homes in Umbria, New York City and Sag Harbor, New York state. 
Highlights of this busy period included Mamet's The Spanish Prisoner (1997), 
where he played the mysterious Mr Klein; cult success Buffalo 66; the black 
comedy The Big Lebowski; and the controversial Happiness (all 1998). He was 
well cast as a gang leader in Spike Lee's Summer of Sam and moved to the other 
side of the fence as a smooth lawyer in the glossy The Thomas Crown Affair 
(both 1999).

Dozens of other films were routine and he freely admitted that "these days I 
turn nothing down in order to maintain a comfortable and happy life with my 
third and last wife". He had married the German-born Elke Krivat in 1982.

Despite debilitating treatment for throat cancer, in 1999 he published an 
autobiography and worked steadily for the next decade, notching up more than 30 
credits, from television series to leading roles in features, many made in 
Europe, often in his beloved Italy. There he worked in TV, was on location in 
Calabria for Secret Heart (2003), in Umbria for a brilliant cameo in 
Christopher Roth (2010) and moved to Spain for Schubert (2005) and to Belgium 
for Chez Gino (2011). In 2008 he took the name role in Looking for Palladin, 
about a former Hollywood star who hides from fame in Guatemala.

He enjoyed his role as the Vatican's banker in Holy Money (2009), but most 
rewarding of the many films were a short, Eve (2008), cleverly directed by 
Natalie Portman, with Lauren Bacall, and the two films with Gena Rowlands, 
echoing their Cassavetes days. He took a supporting cameo to her lead in the 
superior television movie Hysterical Blindness (2002), and four years later 
they played a two-hander as part of the portmanteau film Paris, Je t'aime, in a 
bittersweet episode where, as in later works, a recent stroke had affected his 
speech, though never his courage or professionalism.

Gazzara is survived by Elke; his daughter, Elizabeth, from his second 
marriage; and his brother, Anthony.

• Ben Gazzara (Biagio Anthony Gazzara), actor, born 28 August 1930; died 3 
February 2012
 