
Inside the glass-fronted office that is home to Pearl Street Films in Santa 
Monica, visitors are greeted by its owners, if not always in person then by 
their screen alter egos. In one corner stands a life-size mannequin wearing 
Matt Damon’s spacesuit fromThe Martian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-martian>. There, glowering nearby, is 
another in Ben Affleck’s bat suit, complete with mask, pointy ears and a 
flowing cape. “What’s the good of doing a movie with great souvenirs if you 
don’t get to keep them?” deadpans Affleck.

Damon and Affleck, Boston boys, best friends since childhood, have done good. 
Their production company also has an impressive track record. Pearl Street 
co-produced Damon’s last Jason Bourne movie and Affleck’s latest, the gangster 
epicLive by Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/09/live-by-night-trailer-ben-affleck-directs-1920s-gangster-drama-video>
. It is behind the Oscar-tipped dramaManchester by the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/manchester-by-the-sea-review-kenneth-lonergans-morose-echo-of-margaret>
, starring Affleck’s younger brother, Casey. Damon, inan interview with this 
magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/27/matt-damon-i-think-you-are-a-better-actor-the-less-people-know-about-you>
last year, joked that Affleck, now an Academy Award-winning director, always 
keeps the best roles for himself. “That’s true,” Affleck laughs. “But I’d love 
to get a great two-handed script and do a movie with Matt. But, for whatever 
reason, those scripts are rare.”

He’s sprawled on the sofa dressed in blue jeans, trainers and grey sweatshirt. 
He sports dark stubble that blurs the chiselled jaw that matches his sportman’s 
physique. Though instantly recognisable, he still rises from the sofa and 
offers a firm handshake and an unnecessary but polite, “Hi, I’m Ben.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fben-affleck-my-dreams-have-true-come-at-a-price%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68047b2bb77d576efc6d84ae92656e569dda0a1f%2F0_22_2946_1768%2F2946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Affleck%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20wildest%20dreams%20have%20come%20true%2C%20but%20at%20a%20price%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fben-affleck-my-dreams-have-true-come-at-a-price%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Affleck%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20wildest%20dreams%20have%20come%20true%2C%20but%20at%20a%20price%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fben-affleck-my-dreams-have-true-come-at-a-price%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68047b2bb77d576efc6d84ae92656e569dda0a1f%2F0_22_2946_1768%2F2946.jpg>
 Two of a kind: with best buddy Matt Damon in Good Will Hunting. Photograph: 
Miramax/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
While his blockbuster films – such as Gone Girl  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/22/gone-girl-review-film-ben-affleck-rosamund-pike-david-fincher>
andArgo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/08/argo-review> (which he 
also directed) – have been watched by millions, his American TV appearances are 
also worth searching out. He sounds off on the HBO sports showAny Given 
Wednesday, effing and blinding like a bricklayer who’s just dropped a bag of 
cement on his toe. He’s equally at home slugging it out round for round with 
intellectuals and politicos on the current affairs programmeReal Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/06/ben-affleck-bill-maher-sam-harris-islam-racist>
. He’s as passionate about the injustice meted out to one of his favourite 
football players as he is about comments that veer close to Islamophobia.

“I love a good debate and I get very energised by it,” he says. “On Real Time, 
I think people could tell I had a genuine emotional response because I strongly 
believe that no one should be stereotyped on the basis of their race or 
religion. It’s one of the most fundamental tenets of liberal thought.”

Affleck grew up in a tough Boston neighbourhood and if someone picks a fight, 
he’s not about to back down. You can’t help thinking he’d have a head start if 
he ever thought of going into the pugilistic world of American politics. “But I 
really wouldn’t want to,” he says. “It’s not because I think being a public 
servant wouldn’t be satisfying, but it’s become a pure money-raising exercise 
from beginning to end. It’s small talk with people who you want to squeeze 
money out of. It’s sleazy. You have to have a certain tolerance to that kind of 
schmooze that I don’t have.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fben-affleck-my-dreams-have-true-come-at-a-price%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86526038254a96cd5bc77788d38815c1d09daeaa%2F0_182_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Affleck%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20wildest%20dreams%20have%20come%20true%2C%20but%20at%20a%20price%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fben-affleck-my-dreams-have-true-come-at-a-price%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Affleck%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20wildest%20dreams%20have%20come%20true%2C%20but%20at%20a%20price%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fben-affleck-my-dreams-have-true-come-at-a-price%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86526038254a96cd5bc77788d38815c1d09daeaa%2F0_182_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Making a stand: in the psychological thriller, Gone Girl. Photograph: 
Allstar/New Regency Pictures 
Talking of world-class schmoozing, it’s just weeks before Trump’s inauguration 
and Affleck is still trying to come to terms with his victory. He saw the signs 
in the US and the UK of populism on the rise. “I spent five months in London 
[last year] and I have to say the Brexit vote smacked of the same kinds of 
things I heard here. People whose overarching political agenda is that 
immigrants are ruining things for us or immigrants are getting one over on us 
somehow, taking advantage. In London, it’s Polish people and here it’s Mexican 
Americans. I still believe in the basic goodness of people, but that doesn’t 
mean we aren’t going through a spell where we’re in thrall to some ugly ideas 
and ugly notions.”

It’s unlikely that an invite to the Trump White House will be landing on to 
his doormat anytime soon. “I met him once at a Fashion Week event in Milan. You 
knew you were at a cheesy party if Donald Trump was there. He would kind of 
trawl around them. He was famous for only granting permission for films to 
shoot on his real estate locations if they put him in as a cameo. The director
Marty Brest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/24/midnight-run-review-comedy-thriller-minor-classic-robert-de-niro-martin-brest>
 told me he’d had to create a whole hand-shaking scene inScent of a Woman  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/12/scent-of-a-woman-review>where 
Trump comes out of the door and goes, ‘Hey! Donald Trump, nice to meet you,’ as 
he bumps into Al Pacino. The ego was there a long time ago.”

Affleck’s own ego is more than satisfied with acting and directing. With Live 
by Night,based on a Dennis Lehane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jan/24/dennis-lehane> novel, he does 
both. He plays Joe Coughlin, a corrupt policeman’s son who runs with the bad 
boys in 1920s Prohibition Boston and falls for the girlfriend of his ruthless 
boss. When the boss finds out about their affair, Coughlin is lucky to escape 
with his life. He moves up the ranks with a rival mob, overseeing a rum-running 
operation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fben-affleck-my-dreams-have-true-come-at-a-price%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab6cdeeeb47784a5728d9b064ae8b2d213030ea1%2F0_0_2035_3280%2F2035.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Affleck%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20wildest%20dreams%20have%20come%20true%2C%20but%20at%20a%20price%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fben-affleck-my-dreams-have-true-come-at-a-price%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Affleck%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20wildest%20dreams%20have%20come%20true%2C%20but%20at%20a%20price%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fben-affleck-my-dreams-have-true-come-at-a-price%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab6cdeeeb47784a5728d9b064ae8b2d213030ea1%2F0_0_2035_3280%2F2035.jpg>
 ‘I always tried to treat other people well’: with his estranged wife, Jennifer 
Garner. The couple have three children. Photograph: Broadimage/Rex 
Affleck describes the movie as a love letter to the gangster flicks of the 
1930s and 40s, and with a reported budget of $65m it’s his biggest movie to 
date. The era of fedora hats, braces and brogues fits Affleck’s classic matinee 
idol good looks, too. The first act is, once again, set in Boston just like two 
of his earlier films as a director,Gone Baby Gone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jun/06/drama.thriller> and The Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/23/the-town-review>. “I think you 
recognise what’s closest to home,” he says. “Wherever you were raised and 
formed your primary attachments and learned about life, that’s the world that’s 
most accessible to you. Dennis really gets Boston. He infuses his story with a 
love for the place, even if parts of it aren’t that lovable.”

Although Affleck was born in California, his family moved to Cambridge on the 
outskirts of Boston when he was two. His father, Timothy, went from one job to 
the next – bartender, mechanic, janitor and, later, after battling alcoholism, 
an addiction counsellor. His mother, Chris, was a teacher. They separated when 
he was 12. “I guess contemporary helicopter parents would be aghast at our 
level of supervision, but it wasn’t bad. There were scary kids and people that 
you’d want to stay away from, but I tried to make people laugh and make 
friends.”

His best friend, then and now, was Damon, two years older, who lived a few 
blocks away. They began acting at high school and as teenagers would go to 
auditions together. Damon went to Harvard and Affleck to the University of 
Vermont, but both dropped out and headed to Los Angeles to “live the dream”. 
“It was me, Matt, my brother Casey and a bunch of friends from Boston – all of 
them were trying to make it in some capacity or other. It was a time to 
experiment, to go to auditions and try stuff. And part of what we revelled in 
was the absurd level of frustration that we went through and the ridiculous 
hoops we had to jump through. Those years were wonderful – they were great, 
formative, blissful, fun, free years.”

It was during those struggling years that he made his low-budget directorial 
debut in the insanely titledI Killed My Lesbian Wife, Hung Her on a Meathook, 
and Now I Have a Three Picture Deal at Disney. “Yeah, the title is the best 
thing about it,” he says. “It’s about how we sometimes forgive the lunatic 
behaviour of artists and call it “eccentricity”. I was trying to make it as an 
actor and hearing stories of how ‘so and so was doing this’ or ‘that guy has 
this outrageous technique’. And I remember thinking, “What bullshit.” Just 
because this guy’s on some crazy diet doesn’t make him talented. The work 
itself is what matters.” Sound advice that he, perhaps, should have remembered.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fben-affleck-my-dreams-have-true-come-at-a-price%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67d0eadeb4cdce6d2ddacdf4faa8f3c3b630a811%2F0_38_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Affleck%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20wildest%20dreams%20have%20come%20true%2C%20but%20at%20a%20price%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fben-affleck-my-dreams-have-true-come-at-a-price%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Affleck%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20wildest%20dreams%20have%20come%20true%2C%20but%20at%20a%20price%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fben-affleck-my-dreams-have-true-come-at-a-price%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67d0eadeb4cdce6d2ddacdf4faa8f3c3b630a811%2F0_38_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 We can be heroes: as Batman, opposite Henry Cavill in a scene from Batman v 
Superman: Dawn of Justice. Photograph: Clay Enos/AP 
In the early 2000s he made a series of disastrous film choices including 
Michael Bay’s overblownPearl Harbor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/sep/17/benaffleck.pearlharbor> and the 
dreadful weepieJersey Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2004/jun/20/features.review27>. At the 
same time, he becameengaged to Jennifer Lopez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/sep/14/popandrock> and there were 
reports of drinking, gambling and a spell in rehab. “I’d always had a strong 
idea about my values and the direction I wanted to be headed in, then I ran 
into getting famous and it totally spun me around and I flailed around for a 
few years. When you’re a young man in your 20s, part of that is making mistakes 
and learning from them. I just made those in front of everybody, rather than 
privately. There’s stuff I look back on and kind of cringe at but I always 
tried to treat other people well. My parents imbued that in me and the mistakes 
I made were mostly just of the embarrassing kind.”

The upswing in his professional fortunes coincided with the start of his 
relationship with the actressJennifer Garner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-garner>, the mother of his three 
children, Violet, 11, Seraphina, 7, and Sam, 4. “I think becoming a father 
makes you see the world differently and it’s good.” In 2015, he and Garner, his 
wife of 10 years,announced they were separating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/30/ben-affleck-jennifer-garner-divorce>
, although both insist they remain on good terms, despite the tabloid headlines 
claiming the split involved the couple’s nanny.

The poster for Live by Night has the tag line “the American dream comes at a 
price”. He agrees it’s pertinent to his own life. “Absolutely. I’ve been lucky. 
I’ve had my wildest dreams come true, but the price is the Faustian exchange 
you make where your identity is not your own. You become a public figure and it 
changes all the rules,. The press can become invasive and dishonest, and you 
have to put up with inconvenient stuff like that. I’m at peace with paying my 
own price, what I’m not at peace with is when it invades on my kids’ space and 
time. They didn’t make any bargains. I try to shelter them as best I can. 
That’s my only real gripe.”

Essentially, he insists, he’s the person he was before he won his Oscar for the
Good Will Huntingscript back in 1998. He credits Robin Williams with getting 
the film into production. “Most people can’t point to the moment that changed 
their life in such a dramatic way, but I can. It was the moment that Robin 
decided to take a flyer on that movie. I’ll always feel a huge debt to him 
although now I’ll never get to repay it.” Williams, who had dementia,took his 
own life in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/11/robin-williams-found-dead-suicide>
. “It’s one of these incredibly horrible diseases that destroys the mind and 
that was especially cruel to a guy like Robin who was always so brilliant and 
quick witted. And on a totally selfish level, he’s the reason why I got 
successful in this business. If Robin hadn’t doneGood Will Hunting, Matt and I 
would still be sitting there today talking about how we could update that 
script.”

Instead, they’re sitting in their office, talking about other people’s scripts 
and their own film projects. Though the batman costume in the foyer is from 
Affleck’s caped crusader in Zack Snyder’s messyBatman v Superman: Dawn of 
Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/27/batman-v-superman-dawn-of-justice-observer-review>
, word is that he will get to direct his own superhero movie, tentatively titled
The Batman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/nov/07/ben-affleck-batman-dc-warner-bros>
. “That’s the idea. But it’s not a set thing and there’s no script. If it 
doesn’t come together in a way I think is really great I’m not going to do it.”

Ask him why he took the Batman role and he replies with characteristic honesty 
that he did it for his son. “Sam thinks his dad isBatman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/batman>,” he laughs. “That’s an incredible 
feeling.” Everyone wants to be a superhero to their son, although it strikes me 
that one of the best things about Affleck is that he remains endearingly human.

Live By Night is released on 13 January
 