
The pantomime season <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/pantoseason> needs a 
villain and on Sunday night Hatem Ben Arfa obliged on his first return to Lyon 
after his controversial transfer to Marseille last summer. Did he wind up the 
league leaders by claiming they were "not a big club" because they made 
mistakes with payments to players? Oh yes, he did! Did he ever get on with 
Karim Benzema when they played together at Lyon? Oh no, he didn't! Did he get 
booed every time he touched the ball, and eventually get booked for dissent? Oh 
yes, he did!

It was just as well that Ben Arfa was around 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/oct/28/ligue-1-paris-st-germain-marseille>
, because this top-of-the-table fixture had just three shots on target andended 
goalless for the first time in its 39-game history 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=400ecIJ4Myw>. It left Lyon winless in four 
games and now only three points ahead of Marseille, Bordeaux and Paris St 
Germain.

Ben Arfa dominated the build-up, his face alongside Benzema on the cover of 
France Football with the headline The History of A Rivalry. Much of it was, as 
the French say,rechauffé, old news, and both players trotted out the same line: 
"I respect him as a player but we are not friends." A youth-team match when Ben 
Arfa moaned at a misplaced Benzema pass by cussing his team-mate's family, who 
happened to be watching, apparently marked the start of the frosty relationship.

Ben Arfa hardly improved his standing with others at his former club when he 
toldLe Progress that Lyon were not classy about paying their players and often 
forgot to include bonuses in their pay-slips. Lyon's financial director, Marino 
Faccioli, responded by revealing that amidst all the kit that remained in Ben 
Arfa's training-ground locker after his departure, he hadcarelessly left behind 
a cheque for €90,000 
<http://www.ouest-france.fr/actu/actuDet_-Ben-Arfa-avait-oublie-un-cheque-de-90-000-%E2%82%AC-dans-le-vestiaire-de-l-OL_39382-771736_actu.Htm>
. "To accuse us of being financially disorganised is a bit much coming from 
him," said Faccioli, who sent the money to Ben Arfa's agent.

"I saw Ben Arfa play five years ago and today he's the same player," said RMC 
pundit Jean-Michel Larqué. "For me, he's not a good footballer, nor even a good 
player in the making. He's just not intelligent with his choice of passes." If 
Ben Arfa was the panto villain, the unlikely Cinderella figure was theMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> centre-back Ronald Zubar, 
booed so mercilessly by his own fans three weeks ago thatL'Equipe wondered if 
he would ever be picked again but who, after keeping Sergio Agüero quiet in 
midweek, barely gave Benzema a sniff of goal. "Lyon proved that they are the 
best team in France when they ran Bayern Munich ragged last week [coming back 
from 3-0 down to lose 3-2, in a game they could have won], so we were pleased 
to get something from the game," said L'OM coach Eric Gerets.

Lyon have picked up two points from a possible 12 and have beaten only one of 
the four teams behind them (and even in that game, againstBordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux>, they were out-played). There 
are four more teams three points behind the chasing pack and with Lyon the only 
French side left in the Champions League, the title race looks like it's on 
again.

Bordeaux won their first away match in five, beating Le Mans 3-1 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7KSgOxPkqbw>, with Fernando Cavenaghi opening 
the scoring. The Argentinian is Ligue 1's most prolific scorer in 2008, with 25 
goals (Benzema is next on 17), yet has never started a Champions League match. 
"I worked really hard to help Bordeaux qualify and was very disappointed not to 
have played in the campaign," he said. "The coach told me it was a tactical 
decision." Cavegol, also known as El Torito, The Little Bull,is now joint 
top-scorer with Guillaume Hoarau and Pierre-Andre Gignac 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?CTID=23&CPID=61&pStr=Comp_Scorer&t=2>
, and dreaming of a place in Diego Maradona's Argentina squad. "I often think 
that the French league is the most difficult one for forwards, it's perhaps the 
toughest place to score goals," he said,hoping to catch Diego's attention 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2008/20081215_083845_cavenaghi-ma-plus-belle.html>
.

PSG were also able to take advantage of the top-of-the-table stalemate, 
deservedly beating Auxerre 2-1 thanks totwo Stéphane Sessegnon goals 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FXqecAxWEvw>. Despite having already lost six 
games, the same amount as Grenoble (14th) and one fewer than Sochaux (19th), no 
team has won more than PSG's 10 games, and Paul Le Guen is reaping the benefits 
of being able to pick an unchanged side for six games running.

Lorient's nautical winger turned playmaker Marama Vahirua scored a fantastic 
goal <http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x6wyaw_jour-de-foot-sur-groupama-2_sport>
 and celebrated with his traditional Tahitian kayaking impression (you had to 
be there) inthe 3-1 win at bottom club Le Havre 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x7qk8s_rsumer-havre-ac-1-3-fc-lorient-but_sport>
, whose coach Jean-Marc Nobilo is set to move upstairs with one of Frédéric 
Hantz, Patrick Remy, Albert Rust or René Girard taking on the impossible job of 
trying to keep them up.

Sochaux coach Francis Gillot was the Fairy Godmother of the week, after 
handing Guyanese teenager Sloan Privat a professional contract on Tuesday, and 
throwing him into action with 20 minutes left and his side 2-0 down to Caen. He 
pulled one goal back six minutes later and, on 89 minutes, equalisedwith a 
brilliant bicycle-kick <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yvk01Y84oMU>. "I don't 
know why we played so well at the end, I just don't know," said Privat after 
the game. "All I know is it's been magic, a fantastic week for me. I'm on a 
cloud!" It was Sochaux's fourth straight draw, their 10th of the season. Gillot 
needs his magic wand to turn these draws into wins (they have won only one 
league game all season) to move out of the relegation zone.

The other draw specialists, Rennes, played out a 0-0 with Nantes to extend 
their unbeaten run to 16 games. They face Lorient in next week's Britanny 
derby, while PSG take onValenciennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valenciennes>, Marseille host Nancy and 
Bordeaux go to Monaco. Caen welcome Lyon and, with one week to go before the 
winter break, the chorus from the chasing clubs is all too clear: "We're behind 
you!"

Results: Le Mans 1-3 Bordeaux; Auxerre 1-2 PSG; Toulouse 3-1 St Etienne; 
Valenciennes 3-1 Monaco; Sochaux 2-2 Caen; Nancy 2-0 Grenoble; Rennes 0-0 
Nantes; Nice 0-1 Lille;Le Havre <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lehavre> 
1-3 Lorient; Lyon 0-0 Marseille

Latest Ligue 1 table 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=23>
 