
Nicolás Gaitán and Talisca scored in the last five minutes to give Benfica a 
dramatic 2-1 win atZenit St Petersburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/zenitstpetersburg> which sent them into 
the Champions League quarter-finals.

Zenit St Petersburg 1-2 Benfica (1-3 agg): Champions League last 16 – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/mar/09/zenit-st-petersburg-v-benfica-champions-league-last-16-live>
Benfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica>, leading 1-0 from the 
first leg of the last-16 tie and fielding a makeshift defence, fell behind in 
the 69th minute to a Zenit goal scored by the Brazilian striker Hulk.

With Zenit pressing for a second, however, Benfica snatched an 85th-minute 
equaliser when Gaitán was first to react after Raúl Jiménez’s long-range drive 
hit the bar and he headed in from the rebound.

The substitute Talisca scored with the last kick of the game to leave Zenit 
waiting for their first ever quarter-final place. Benfica, twice European 
champions, reached the last eight for the first time since 2012.

The first hour was a cagey affair with few chances, although Benfica nearly 
snatched an away goal in the fourth minute when Jonas’s curling free-kick was 
tipped over the bar by Yuri Lodygin.

Zenit came to life after a double substitution by André Villas-Boas just 
before the hour and immediately created chances. They went ahead in the 69th 
minute after Yuri Zhirkov, who appeared to foul Nelson Semedo, broke down the 
left and crossed into the middle where Hulk, who up to that point had had a 
dismal game, headed in.

Lodygin saved Zenit when he brilliantly turned away Victor Lindelhof’s header 
but Benfica were on the ropes and Zenit nearly grabbed a second when goal when 
Artem Dzyuba ran through the middle of the Benfica defence but his shot was 
blocked by Ederson.

Gaitán’s goal would have been enough for Benfica to advance but the visitors 
completed a 3-1 aggregate win six minutes into added time when Gaitán burst 
forward and a lucky bounce presented Talisca with a chance which the Brazilian 
crashed home in style.
 