
The incoming polar air mass and clear night sky produces this yearâ€™s heaviest 
frost. Water crystallises into bristly masses on every surface. The blazing 
morning sun rapidly scorches most of it away, but in the deepest still hollows 
ofKetton quarry <http://www.lrwt.org.uk/nature-reserves/ketton-quarry/> the 
thick, white, dusting endures into the afternoon.

Birds and berries: A fertile feast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2008/sep/08/wildlife.conservation>
Most of the big trees have shed their leaves, but the prolonged autumn 
kaleidoscope continues with golden yellow birches and guelder rose bushes 
bedecked with angular coral-pink leaves and drooping bunches of 
semi-translucent scarlet berries.

The hazel is still clothed in green and, given that the arctic is now at an 
unprecedented 20C above its November average, will there be sufficient bite and 
force in the air to strip the leaves, or, like last year, will we see hazel 
moving straight from autumn to spring?

Buff limestone has been quarried from Ketton, in Rutland, for hundreds of 
years and was used to build many of the older Cambridge University colleges. 
Active quarries supply building stone and raw materials for the Portland cement 
which is made in the jumble of cream-coloured industrial buildings and chimneys 
that are separated fromKetton quarry nature reserve 
<http://www.lrwt.org.uk/nature-reserves/ketton-quarry/> by two vast fields of 
panels, a solar farm that was opened by Amber Rudd, in 2015, when she was 
energy and climate change secretary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fberries-festoon-the-quarry-reserve%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4726ec3f34d35d4861af360b21acfc3b5a481860%2F0_0_4752_3168%2F4752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Berries%20festoon%20the%20quarry%20reserve&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fberries-festoon-the-quarry-reserve%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Berries%20festoon%20the%20quarry%20reserve&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fberries-festoon-the-quarry-reserve%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4726ec3f34d35d4861af360b21acfc3b5a481860%2F0_0_4752_3168%2F4752.jpg>
 Buckthorn berries. Photograph: Matt Shardlow 
Haws light way for the worm hunters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/14/country-diary-wenlock-evans-worm-hunters-buzzards-rooks-gulls-haws-badgers>
The nature reserve is a mixture of convoluted calcareous grassland on the 
oldest quarry areas and planted beech woodland. Lime-loving species abound; 
hefty and spiky fronds of woolly thistle and papery husks ofcarline thistle 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/carline-thistle> are easy to find. 

Most remarkable however is the cornucopia of berries. Withered stems of white 
bryony lash together clumps of little red globes hanging in garlands from 
bushes and fences; hedges and wood edges blush with haws; here little black 
privet berries; there rose hips.

More tree than bush, a huge female buckthorn is festooned with pea sized black 
fruit. A few lime coloured leaves hang on, oval, fine saw edges and curved 
veins that converge towards the pointed tip. In spring the more notorious
brimstone butterflies <http://butterfly-conservation.org/50-1310/brimstone.html>
 will emerge, seek out this buckthorn and lay eggs on its new foliage.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>








 