
Five women wearing T-shirts blaming Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> for the Beslan school 
massacre have been detained during a ceremony commemorating victims of the 
siege.

Two journalists were also arrested while trying to film the brief protest at 
the memorialmarking the 2004 hostage crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/sep/06/schoolsworldwide.chechnya> that 
left 334 people dead, including 186 children.

As a bell rang near the redbrick ruins of School Number One in the town in the 
North Ossetia republic ofRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, the 
women took off their jackets to reveal T-shirts reading “Putin is the 
executioner of Beslan”.

Four of the women lost children in the siege and one also lost her husband. 
The fifth woman’s daughter survived the ordeal, in which hostages were held in 
the sweltering school for nearly 60 hours.

Armed Islamic militants, mostly from the neighbouring Chechnya and Ingushetia 
republics, stormed into the school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/sep/05/russia.chechnya> on 1 September 
12 years ago, the first day of classes, taking about 1,200 children, parents 
and teachers hostage.

Many of the victims were killed by explosions or gunfire during Russian 
special forces’ assault on the school, on the third day of the crisis. Some 
victims’ relatives, and others in North Ossetia and across Russia, blame the 
authorities for the deaths.

Russian police accused the women of violating a law against unauthorised 
protests, legislation that denies Russians their constitutional right to free 
assembly, according to critics.

Ten years after Beslan school siege, survivors struggle to make a new life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/01/beslan-school-massacre-ten-years>
They face up to 15 days in custody and potential fines. Two journalists 
covering the event, the Novaya Gazeta reporter Elena Kostyuchenko and Diana 
Khachatrian, a correspondent for online news site Takie Dela, were also 
detained and held in custody for two hours.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4IIQANfWQkc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4IIQANfWQkc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4IIQANfWQkc&media=>
The journalists said police prevented them from filming the protesters, 
blocking the camera’s view and then forcibly taking them into custody. They 
said police initially told them that their identification documents were 
suspicious.

The Beslan siege followed the bombings of two Russian airliners 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/3607886.stm> and a Moscow train station
 <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/8592190.stm>, which killed a total of 
131 people and were blamed on militants from the North Caucasus region, 
precipitating what Kremlin critics described as steps to curtail political 
freedoms.

The Beslan commemoration ceremonies, which began on Thursday, will last for 
three days.

A version of this article first appeared 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/beslan-mothers-putin-blamed-tragedy/27959692.html>
 on RFE/RL.
 