
I sometimes feel sorry for directors of this enchanting comedy: it's revived 
so often that they have to strive for originality. It's a play that's also been 
adapted for every medium: there's the Britten opera, the Ashton ballet and 
several film versions, including one by Max Reinhardt (1935) withMickey Rooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mickey-rooney> as Puck.

But, for all its frequency, the play gives constant pleasure. I've had 
countless magical evenings seeing it at the Open Air Regent's Park, where Ian 
Talbot's Bottom was a legend. And I recall memorable productions by Peter Hall 
(1962), John Barton (1977) and Greg Doran (2005), as well as many fine visiting 
ones. Much the funniest was A Midsummer Night's Dream (As You Like It), which 
played Stratford and Edinburgh in 2012. Performed in Russian, the production 
included acrobats, dancers, puppets and a scurrying Jack Russell terrier.

But two productions stand out. For my generation, Peter Brook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/peter-brook>'s 1970 version was the real 
game-changer. It's been much copied since, but the white cube setting, the 
sight of Oberon and Puck on trapezes and the evocation of the forest through 
coils of steel wire were a revelation. The cast, headed by Alan Howard and Sara 
Kestelman as Oberon/Theseus and Titania/Hippolyta, also spoke the verse 
superbly.

For me, the best production since was a 1999 offering from Michael Boyd that 
had a sensuality even Brook might have envied: the show became a joyous hymn to 
fertility, with Nicholas Jones as Oberon and Josette Simon as Titania leading a 
phenomenal, stage-pounding dance that was fiercely erotic.

• What are your favourite versions of A Midsummer Night's Dream? Let us know 
in the comments thread below.

• Shakespeare's plays – as you like them: read the series so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/shakespeare-plays-as-you-like-them>

• Share your best bits of Shakespeare's wit and wisdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/11/shakespeare-quotes-to-live-your-life-by-share-your-favourites>
 