
Charles I famously wrote "Bennedike and Betrice" under the title of the play 
in his copy of the Second Folio; and it is thetwo warring characters 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/william-shakespeare/10307341/The-top-ten-Beatrice-and-Benedicks.html>
, technically the subplot, that are always the big draw. Over the years I've 
seen countless memorable duos. Michael Redgrave andGoogie Withers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/16/googie-withers-obituary> (1957), 
Robert Stephens and Maggie Smith <http://www.screenonline.org.uk/tv/id/565168/> 
(Old Vic, 1965), Derek Jacobi and Sinéad Cusack (1982). I also have fond 
memories of Simon Russell Beale and Zoë Wanamaker (at the National in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/dec/19/theatre.shakespeare>) as a 
Benedick and Beatrice likely to go on merrily arguing into eternity.

Passing over the recent debacle at the Old Vic with James Earl Jones and 
Vanessa Redgrave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/sep/20/much-ado-about-nothing-review-rylance>
, we've lately had a multiplicity of Much Ados.Two even opened within the space 
of five days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/jun/05/much-ado-about-nothing-review> 
in the summer of 2011. At Shakespeare's Globe, Charles Edwards (excellent) and 
Eve Best were the sparring partners, while David Tennant and Catherine Tate 
locked horns in a noisy West End revival by Josie Rourke.

But I'd finally plump for two other versions. In 1993, Kenneth Branagh made a 
first-rate film that began, unforgettably, with the sight of the returning 
soldiery galloping apace over an Italian plain:Branagh and his then wife, Emma 
Thompson <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zl0lBHti99A>, invested the raillery 
with real wit. But, although I've been accused of favouring Stratford in the 
1970s, I've never seen anything to match a John Barton production in 1976, set 
during the days of the British Raj, withDonald Sinden and Judi Dench 
<http://shakespeare.berkeley.edu/index.php?option=com_g2bridge&view=gallery&Itemid=256&g2_itemId=15926>
. Sinden exploited his great gift for raking the auditorium with faintly 
disapproving eyes, while Dench movingly suggested Beatrice's sparkling facade 
concealed a bruised heart. They made a peerless pair.

• What are your favourite versions of Much Ado About Nothing? Let us know in 
the comments below
• Shakespeare's plays – as you like them: read the series so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/shakespeare-plays-as-you-like-them>
• Shakespeare quotes to live your life by – share your favourites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/11/shakespeare-quotes-to-live-your-life-by-share-your-favourites>
 