
I once rashly suggested that this "barbaric, disgusting play" be permanently 
shelved. I soon recanted but my impulsive edict is a measure of the problems 
the play poses. Different directors seek different solutions. One answer, as in
Toby Frow's revival at Shakespeare's Globe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jul/05/taming-of-the-shrew-review> 
(2012), is to suggest that the whole play is the fantasy of a drunken tinker. 
Another popular one is to imply that Petruchio and Kate fall in love at first 
sight and simply play out a mock-violent charade. A third solution is to 
transpose the action to a new setting as in the teen movie10 Things I Hate 
About You <https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/jul/09/3> (1999).

But, in my experience, the three productions that have grappled best with the 
play's problems have all come out of Stratford. Oddly,it was Michael Bogdanov's 
1978 version 
<http://www.rsc.org.uk/explore/shakespeare/plays/the-taming-of-the-shrew/1978.aspx>
, which began with Jonathan Pryce's Sly erupting on to the stage and tearing 
down the set, that prompted my call for a ban: on a second viewing, I realised 
that Bogdanov was offering a vivid re-creation of a cruel, male-dominated 
mercantile society. I also admired Jonathan Miller's 1987 production in which 
Brian Cox's Elizabethan Petruchio used Biblical texts as a warrant for his 
treatment of Fiona Shaw's disturbed, scissor-wielding Kate. But it wasGreg 
Doran's 2003 production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/apr/11/theatre.artsfeatures2> that for 
me unlocked the play. Jasper Britton's Petruchio was a mad drunk, obsessed by 
his father's recent death, who was effectively "cured" by Alexandra Gilbreath's 
sympathetic Kate who glimpsed a figure worthy of redemption. It was an 
eye-opening reading which totally changed my perception of the play.

â€¢ What are your favourite versions of The Taming of the Shrew? Let us know in 
the comments thread below
 