
I have a confession to make. I used to think this Shakespeare's masterpiece. 
Now, as I get older, I find the weight of suffering it contains almost too much 
to bear. Don't get me wrong: I've had some memorable evenings at Lear. But the 
thing we were taught to admire at school – the way the subplot echoes the main 
story – now makes the play seem top-heavy with grief. And I increasingly find 
the disguised Edgar's refusal to reveal himself to his father faintly sadistic.

That said, I've seen some excellent productions and performances, including 
the currentSam Mendes one at the National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/24/king-lear-olivier-theatre-review>
 withSimon Russell Beale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/24/simon-russell-beale-webchat-ask-the-actor>
 and an extraordinary one by Helena Kaut-Howson at Leicester Haymarket in the 
1980s withKathryn Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jan/27/kathryn-hunter-theatre-interview>
's Lear the occupant of a geriatric ward. But, rather than list all the Lears 
I've seen, I've picked out three productions that for me redefined the play.

The first was a landmark Peter Brook production at Stratford in 1962 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/nov/07/archive-lear-brook-ballet-nuryev-fonteyn>
. Brook's staging had a Beckettian clarity, he approached the text with a moral 
neutrality so that you saw Goneril and Regan's point about Lear's band of 
unruly knights and Paul Scofield played Lear asa testy, military autocrat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/24/kenneth-tynan-paul-scofield-peter-brook-king-lear>
. These ideas have been absorbed into numerous modern stagings; but it was 
Brook who got there first.

John Wood, one of my favourite modern actors, was also a brilliant Lear in a 
1990 Nicholas Hytner RSC production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/aug/10/john-wood-obituary>: when Wood, 
having cursed Goneril with sterility, rushed to embrace her, I got a startling 
vision of the senseless contradictions that inform both Lear's character and 
the play itself.

And, even if Michael Grandage's 2010 Donmar Warehouse production was less 
radical,Derek Jacobi's Lear pierced all my emotional defences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/dec/08/review-king-lear-derek-jacobi> 
with his final retreat into a bewildered innocence that suggested second 
childhood. I can't choose between these three productions. Suffice to say that 
they made what Tynan called this "flawed pyramid of a play" a joy to watch.

• What are your favourite versions of King Lear? Let us know in the comments 
below

• "Shame the devil": Shakespeare quotes to live your life by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/23/shakespeare-quotes-to-live-your-life-by>

• Beat the Bard! Shakespeare's characters fight it out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ng-interactive/2014/apr/23/beat-the-bard-shakespeares-characters-fight-it-out-in-our-interactive-game>

• Simon Russell Beale answers your questions on playing Lear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/24/simon-russell-beale-webchat-ask-the-actor>
 