
Kenneth Tynan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/kenneth-tynan-at-the-observer> called 
these plays "the twin summits of Shakespeare's genius" and I see no reason to 
disagree. They embrace court and tavern, town and country, exuberant life and 
omnipresent death and are the first, and finest, state-of-the-nation plays in 
our history. They've given me limitless pleasure since I first saw them in a 
Bernard Hepton revival at Birmingham Rep in 1960, and I view the prospect of a
brand-new Greg Doran production 
<http://www.rsc.org.uk/about-us/press/releases/henry-iv-tour.aspx> with eager 
anticipation.

Raking over my memories, I recall especially a feast of Falstaffs 
<http://www.rscshakespeare.co.uk/Henry4th_part1.html>: Hugh Griffith, Brewster 
Mason, Joss Ackland, Desmond Barrit and David Warner, as well as John Woodvine 
for the English Shakespeare Company, and Orson Welles in his peerless 
conflation of the plays in the movieChimes at Midnight 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xf6fxz1mI6g>.

But two performances stand out. Roger Allam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jul/18/henry-iv-theatre-review-shakespeare>
, whom I've only seen in the video version of the Shakespeare Globe production, 
had the right air of corrupted vanity. It was Robert Stephens, however, who 
changed my perception of Falstaff in Adrian Noble's 1991 RSC production. 
Stephens was certainly a sack-swilling life-enhancer; but he also highlighted 
Falstaff's merciless indifference to his ragged recruits ("food for powder") as 
well as his essential solitude when his voice suddenly broke on the line "If I 
had a thousand sons… "

In that same production, Julian Glover's superb Henry reminded us that, while 
the plays chart Hal's education in kingship, they are also a study of paternal 
grief. Given so many great productions, it's a tough call but for me Noble's 
version takes the crown.

• What are your favourite versions of Henry IV: Parts I and II? Let us know in 
the comments below.

• Shakespeare's plays – as you like them: read the series so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/shakespeare-plays-as-you-like-them>

• Shakespeare quotes to live your life by – share your favourites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/11/shakespeare-quotes-to-live-your-life-by-share-your-favourites>
 