
I've always had a soft spot for this play. Long patronised by academics, it's 
Shakespeare's only purely English comedy, pins down middle-class mores to 
perfection and almost always works in the theatre. It also yielded one of
Verdi's greatest operas 
<http://www.metoperafamily.org/opera/falstaff-verdi-tickets.aspx>.

Two productions I remember chiefly for portrayals of the manically jealous 
Ford. In Terry Hands's 1968 production,Ian Richardson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/feb/10/guardianobituaries.broadcasting> 
looked, as one critic said, "as if he were being bounced on a trampoline". In a 
1979 version byTrevor Nunn and John Caird 
<http://www.johncaird.com/theatre/merry_wives_of_windsor_rsc.html>, Ben 
Kingsley was like some permanently erupting Thames Valley Othello. But the 
production that did most to change our perspective was the 1985 production by 
Bill Alexander, which set the action in a recognisable 1950s world, with 
Lindsay Duncan and Janet Dale as the witty wives seen plotting under the 
hairdryer.Peter Jeffrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/dec/28/guardianobituaries2> was a 
raffish, and faintly RAF-ish, Falstaff.

That set the tone for a series of updated versions, of which my favourite was, 
easily, the most recent. In 2012, Phillip Breen came up witha joyous Stratford 
production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/nov/02/the-merry-wives-of-windsor-review>
 set in a sharply defined modern Windsor-on-Avon. Desmond Barrit was a 
magnificent Falstaff, seen disco-dancing at one point to the strains of Marvin 
Gaye's Let's Get It On. Alexandra Gilbreath as, in Libby Purves's choice 
phrase, "a yummy-mummy Mistress Ford in tight jeans" and Sylvestra le Touzel as 
a sensible, green-wellied Meg Page were both spot on. John Ramm's Ford, 
venomously hissing into an empty buck-basket 
<http://www.malfordplayers.co.uk/buck_basket.html>, was a model of middle-class 
delusion. Why, I wonder, was this glorious production never seen again?

• What are your favourite versions of The Merry Wives of Windsor? Let us know 
in the comments below

• Shakespeare's plays – as you like them: read the series so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/shakespeare-plays-as-you-like-them>

• Shakespeare quotes to live your life by – share your favourites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/11/shakespeare-quotes-to-live-your-life-by-share-your-favourites>
 