
Twelfth Night is Shakespeare's most perfect comedy. It's also devilishly hard 
to bring off. It requires a blend of dream and reality, a balance between 
laughter and pain and a strong, all-round ensemble. Almost every production 
yields something to remember; in the recentLiverpool Everyman revival 
<http://www.theartsdesk.com/theatre/twelfth-night-liverpool-everyman-0> it was 
Nicholas Woodeson's Malvolio.

From the last quarter-century, I'd pick out three fine productions. Tim 
Carroll's Shakespeare's Globe version,which I saw at the Apollo in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/nov/18/twelfth-night-richard-iii-review>
, had Mark Rylance as a stylised, kabuki-like Olivia and Paul Chahidi as a 
plumply roguish Maria. I also loved Sam Mendes's2002 Donmar production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/oct/23/theatre.artsfeatures2>, with 
Emily Watson's Viola stepping through a looking-glass into a strange world and
Simon Russell Beale 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/10536014/Simon-Russell-Beale-interview-Why-I-shaved-my-head-for-Lear.html>
 as a Malvolio whom we saw alone in his cubicle clearly pleasuring himself over 
fantasies of Olivia. Further back, in 1987, Kenneth Branagh dida wintry revival 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6i3J17Jp0ag> for the Renaissance Theatre 
Company with Richard Briers as an unforgettably mean-spirited Malvolio.

But, if I'm honest, I have to go a long way back in time for my two favourite 
productions.Peter Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/nov/01/sir-peter-hall-at-80> has, by my 
reckoning, done the play four times, but never better than at Stratford in 1960 
in aLila de Nobili 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/mar/02/guardianobituaries> set described 
by the critic Robert Speaight as "a rich symphony in russet" and with Dorothy 
Tutin as an exquisitely mischievous Viola.

Later, in 1969, John Barton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/feb/07/theatre.rsc> directed an 
astonishing RSC production in which the sadness and merriment were pushed to 
Chekhovian extremes; Judi Dench's Viola was all lyrical ardour while Donald 
Sinden's Malvolio was a vindictive Puritan, gazing at the audience in mock 
outrage during the letter-reading scene, driven to possible suicide. For me, 
Hall and Barton share the honours for the best Twelfth Night.

• What are your favourite versions of Twelfth Night? Let us know in the 
comments below

• Shakespeare's plays – as you like them: read the series so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/shakespeare-plays-as-you-like-them>

• Shakespeare quotes to live your life by – share your favourites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/11/shakespeare-quotes-to-live-your-life-by-share-your-favourites>

• Twelfth Night: a dozen productions of Shakespeare's romantic comedy - in 
pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2014/mar/14/twelfth-night-shakespeare-romantic-comedy-in-pictures>
 