
I've loved this play ever since I was a revolting Roman citizen in a 
production, directed by Anthony Page, in my second term at Oxford. Soon after I 
sawOlivier play Coriolanus 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/arts/yourpaintings/paintings/sir-laurence-olivier-19071989-as-coriolanus-stratford-54979>
 in a Stratford production directed by Peter Hall. No one who saw Olivier will 
ever forget the way he caught the character's emotional immaturity, dark irony 
and physical danger: the final image of him dangling from a 12ft high platform 
is branded on my memory.

Since then I've seen countless productions which reflect the play's political 
and psychological complexity. For Brecht'sBerliner Ensemble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/09/bertolt-brecht-berliner-ensemble-eviction>
, who brought the play to London in the mid-1960s, it became an attack on the 
idea of the indispensable hero. British productions tend to focus more on the 
intricacies of the hero's relationship with Volumnia and Aufidius. Tyrone 
Guthrie opened the Nottingham Playhouse in 1963 with a dazzling production 
which ended withIan McKellen's Aufidius 
<http://www.mckellen.com/stage/00023.htm> diving on to the body of John Neville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/21/john-neville>'s Coriolanus with 
a cry of despair.McKellen himself played Coriolanus 
<http://www.mckellen.com/stage/coriolanus/> in a 1984 National Theatre version 
which again highlighted the homoerotic nature of the hero's combat with 
Aufidius (Greg Hicks 
<http://www.rsc.org.uk/about-us/ensemble/ensemble-biog-greg-hicks.aspx>).

But Coriolanus is also the ultimate militaristic mummy's boy and this has 
emerged in many of the best productions: in Terry Hands's for the RSC in 1977, 
with Alan Howard; in Tim Supple's for Chichester in 1992 where Kenneth 
Branagh's hero was matched by Judi Dench's lion-hearted Volumnia; and by Josie 
Rourke's 2013 Donmar Warehouse version, where Tom Hiddleston's Coriolanus was 
viewed with a mix of idolatry and exasperation by Deborah Findlay as his 
mother. One of the best pairings I've seen, however, was in the viscerally 
excitingRalph Fiennes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ralphfiennes> movie. 
Fiennes's battle-fatigued hero was superbly matched by Vanessa Redgrave as the 
archetypal, straight-backed mother devoted to the sanctity of the state.

Olivier on stage and Fiennes on film remain my favourite versions of this 
magnificent play.

â€¢ What are your favourite versions of Coriolanus? Let us know in the comments 
below
 