
Blood-boltered balderdash or neo-Senecan study of grief? I've heard Titus 
Andronicus described as both. But what is staggering is the way I've seen the 
play become an established part of the Shakespearean rep in my lifetime. I was 
extremely lucky to be present, as a schoolboy I hasten to add, at the Stratford 
first night in August 1955 ofthe production that reclaimed the play for the 
modern theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/jun/25/theatre.samanthaellis>. Directed 
by Peter Brook and starring Laurence Olivier, it was a dazzling affair. Brook 
stylised much of the violence with Vivien Leigh's mutilated Lavinia entering 
with red ribbons trailing from her mouth and hands, and Olivier's Titus 
exploring the extremities of grief.

Since then I've seen a number of fine productions including those by Trevor 
Nunn (1972) and Greg Doran (1994). But two, in particular, stand out. Deborah 
Warner did a superb production in 1987 that confirmed the point made by 
Shakespearean scholar Jonathan Bate that Titus is a play that blurs the 
distinctions between tragedy and comedy:Brian Cox's Titus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/01/brian-cox-first-rsc-performance> 
set about his revenge on the queen of the Goths with a dangerous jocularity.
Lucy Bailey <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/jun/01/theatre2> took a 
similar line in her excellent 2006 production –to be revived this month 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/theatre/whats-on/globe-theatre/titus-andronicus-2014>
 – at Shakespeare's Globe. Bill Dudley's design transformed the Globe into a 
darkened cavern andDouglas Hodge's Titus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/jun/04/theatre> served up a pie made of 
human flesh with the relish of a manic Gordon Ramsay.

Bailey and Warner both did a great job but, having sadly missed the Julie 
Taymor film version, I have to give the palm to Brook for his pioneering 
rediscovery of a remarkable play.

• What's your favourite version of Titus Andronicus? Let us know in the 
comments thread below.
 