
Where to start? The modern theatre loves The Winter's Tale, most recently seen 
asa highly acclaimed Christopher Wheeldon ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/audioslideshow/2014/may/01/the-winters-tale-edward-watson-lauren-cuthbertson-royal-ballet-audio-slideshow>
. If we come back to this beautiful play time and again, I suspect it is partly 
for spiritual reasons. It provides, of course, a searing study of jealousy: a 
more plausible one, in fact, thanOthello 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/29/best-shakespeare-productions-othello>
. But the play also shows that human life and the earth itself are capable of 
renewal, rebirth and resurrection.

My first Winter's Tale was at Stratford in 1960 
<http://www.rscshakespeare.co.uk/wintersTale.html> when Eric Porter was Leontes 
and Peggy Ashcroft was Paulina: I can still hear Porter's incredulity when, at 
the trial of Hermione, he cried "Your actions are my dreams?" Since then, I've 
seen a clutch of fine performances. As Leontes, I rememberIan McKellen 
<http://www.mckellen.com/stage/winter/>, Antony Sher and Greg Hicks – all for 
the RSC, Simon Russell Beale for the Sam Mendes Bridge Project, and Tim 
Pigott-Smith andAlex Jennings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2001/may/25/theatre.artsfeatures> for the 
National. But other performances also leap to mind: Eileen Atkins as a 
forbidding Paulina in Peter Hall's 1988 production; a genuinely pregnant 
Samantha Bond as Hermione in Adrian Noble's 1992 revival; and Alexandra 
Gilbreath, in the same role in Greg Doran's 1999 production, as a pale figure 
extending a compassionate hand to her tyrant husband.

But, if Porter remains my favourite Leontes, one particular production stands 
out: one by Declan Donnellan forSt Petersburg's Maly theatre 
<http://variety.com/1999/legit/reviews/the-winter-s-tale-5-1200458184/> in the 
late 1990s. It caught both the frenzy of Sicilia and the fun of Bohemia and 
contained one breathtaking moment when an old woman who swept the stage between 
scenes turned into the symbolic figure of Time and threw back her cloak to 
reveal herself as young and beautiful. That was as potent as the always-moving 
image of Hermione's statue coming to life and reminded us this is a play about 
transformative magic.

• What are your favourite versions of The Winter's Tale? Let us know in the 
comments below

• Audio slideshow: Edward Watson and Lauren Cuthbertson on The Winter's Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/audioslideshow/2014/may/01/the-winters-tale-edward-watson-lauren-cuthbertson-royal-ballet-audio-slideshow>
 