
I really need your help on this one. I reckon I've seen this play less often 
than the supposedly rareTitus Andronicus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/01/best-shakespeare-productions-favourite-titus-andronicus-laurence-olivier>
 and few productions have branded themselves on my memory. I recall Peter Hall 
opening his first season at Stratford in 1960with a decorative production 
<http://archive.thetablet.co.uk/article/24th-september-1960/7/comedy-at-stratford>
 distinguished by only two things:Eric Porter 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituaryeric-porter-1619844.html> as 
a bustling Duke and Patrick Wymark as Launce looking askance at his dog, Crab, 
and saying "When didst thou see me heave up my leg and make water against a 
woman's farthingale?" In fact, in any production, it's the dog that nearly 
always runs off with the show.

In theory, this is a fascinating early play about male rivalry and female 
ardour, with Julia disguising herself as a boy in order to get her man. But 
directors are often tempted to do gussied-up productions. I missed a Robin 
Phillips revival (1970) set around a campus swimming-pool and wasn't crazy 
about a David Thacker production (1992) that filled out the show with Cole 
Porter tunes. I do have pleasant memories of an Open Air theatre, Regent's Park 
version, in which the foosteps of Bernard Bresslaw's Launce were notably 
dogged, and of an RSC touring production by Fiona Buffini (2004) which I saw in 
an Ebbw Vale community centre. But perhaps the best version I've seen was one 
directed by Jack Shepherdwhich launched Shakespeare's Globe in 1996 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/education/discovery-space/previous-productions/the-two-gentlemen-of-verona-1>
. In that new space, on a warm moonlit night, this early comedy suddenly took 
off. But have I somewhere missed a truly great production?

â€¢ What are your favourite versions of The Two Gentlemen of Verona? Let us know 
in the comments thread below
 