
What do we look for in musicals? Mostly uplift, escape, transcendence. Just 
occasionally, a show comes along that rattles our consciences and leaves us 
shaken and stirred. Such was the case with Kander and Ebb'sThe Scottsboro Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/30/the-scottsboro-boys-review>, 
which had a triumphant run at the Young Vic; and it says a lot about Broadway 
that it wasbeaten in virtually every category at the Tonys by the far-inferior 
Book of Mormon <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OKkLV1zE8M0>.

The great thing about The Scottsboro Boys was that it exposed the shocking 
injustice that prevailed in 1931 Alabama when nine black youths were falsely 
accused of rape. And, while many commented on the ironic use of a minstrel-show 
format, I'm not sure we fully grasped the skill with which it was deployed in 
Susan Stroman's production. At the start, we were confronted by a 
straightforward reversal: black actors appropriated the minstrel method to 
offer us parodically stereotyped whites. But, as the show proceeded, sincerity 
replaced irony. Julian Glover as a white Uncle Sam MC lost his power. A key 
number,Southern Days 
<http://www.stlyrics.com/lyrics/scottsboroboysthe/southerndays.htm>, upended 
all those Deep South cliches about mint juleps and strumming banjos. Protest at 
racial injustice became a baton passed on tothe resilient figure of Rosa Parks 
<http://www.thehenryford.org/exhibits/rosaparks/story.asp>, who in 1955 refused 
to budge from her seat on an Alabama bus and thereby ignited the civil rights 
movement.

I'd like to have heard more about the contribution of the American Communist 
party to the campaign on behalf of the Scottsboro Boys, and a few key facts 
were glossed over. That said, this was a fine show that suggested the US had 
moved on since 1930s – but not sufficiently far. It also used music not as 
melodic diversion, but as an integral part of the experience. And it boasted a 
towering performance from Kyle Scatliffe as the militant Haywood Patterson, who 
refused to sacrifice his conscience in order to gain parole.

Not many musicals cover so much ground with such panache; and, in case anyone 
thinks it was a show that simply allowed white liberals to scoff at American 
rednecks, I was reminded of howThe Black and White Minstrel Show 
<http://dangerousminds.net/comments/honky_tv_britains_racist_black_and_white_minstrel_show>
 remained a grisly staple of British TV and theatre until well into the 1960s.

• Read Michael Billington's four-star review of The Scottsboro Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/30/the-scottsboro-boys-review>
• Read more from the Best theatre of 2013 series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/best-theatre-of-2013>
 