
I once angered Peggy Ashcroft, herself a famous Juliet 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw16529/John-Gielgud-Dame-Peggy-Ashcroft-as-Romeo-and-Juliet-in-Romeo-and-Juliet>
, by saying I thought this was a defective tragedy: that a tumultuous first 
half was followed by a contrived ending depending on the faulty postal service. 
But I still thinkWest Side Story <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qy6wo2wpT2k> 
is better plotted: the crucial message there fails to get through because Anita 
(the Nurse figure) is almost gang-raped by the Jets. In the theatre, I've had 
mixed responses to countless revivals of Shakespeare's play. I remember a 
vivacious one byMichael Bogdanov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/nov/22/theatre.stage> (1986) set in a 
world of high finance and fast cars that I dubbed "the Alfa Romeo and Juliet". 
There was also a prodigiously athletic version fromIceland's Vesturport company 
<http://vesturport.com/theater/romeo-juliet/> at the Young Vic in 2003, in 
which Romeo made love to Juliet while suspended from a chandelier. On the 
screen, I unfashionably preferredZeffirelli's 1968 movie 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jmzeHFubp7c> to Baz Luhrmann's trendy 1996 one.

But mention of Zeffirelli reminds me of a great production he did at the Old 
Vic in 1960: all seething crowds and Veronese colour. John Stride and Joanna 
Dunham (replacing Judi Dench) were the lovers when I saw it, but my abiding 
memory is of Alec McCowen's brilliant Mercutio: he died unforgettably by 
maintaining, until the last second, the mocking tone of the sardonic jester. 
Easily the best version since then wasRupert Goold's sensational 2010 RSC 
production <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/mar/19/theatre>. By putting 
Mariah Gale's Juliet and Sam Troughton's Romeo in modern dress while everyone 
else wore Renaissance costume, he emphasised the lovers' isolation. Add in 
Jonjo O'Neill's manic Mercutio and eruptions of scalding heat, and you had a 
production that caught the play's intemperate wildness and disguised its 
narrative defects.

• What are your favourite versions of Romeo and Juliet? Let us know in the 
comments thread below.

• Shakespeare's plays – as you like them: read the series so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/shakespeare-plays-as-you-like-them>

• Share your best bits of Shakespeare's wit and wisdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/11/shakespeare-quotes-to-live-your-life-by-share-your-favourites>
 