
I've experienced a deluge of Tempests in my time. My first was a memorable 
Peter Brook production in Stratford in 1957 with John Gielgud as Prospero. Here 
there many hints of the later Brook's love of simplicity: a large bowsprit 
swung in a huge pendulum-like arc evoked the opening storm; Richard Johnson's 
Ferdinand dragged a pile of logs across the vast expanse of an empty stage; and 
Gielgud, clad in a rough, hempen costume, was no heavily cloaked magician but a 
half-naked hermit.

Since then, I've seen a number of impressive productions. Jonathan Miller's 
1970 version 
<http://www.rsc.org.uk/explore/shakespeare/plays/the-tempest/stage-history.aspx>
, at London's Mermaid theatre, was the first in Britain to highlight the play's 
colonial aspect, with Graham Crowden's Prospero holding imperialist sway over a 
black Caliban and Ariel. In Sam Mendes's1993 Royal Shakespeare Company's 
production 
<http://www.rsc.org.uk/explore/shakespeare/plays/the-tempest/tempest-sam-mendes-1993.aspx>
,Simon Russell Beale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/24/simon-russell-beale-webchat-ask-the-actor>
's newly enfranchised Ariel spat vehemently in the face of Alec McCowen's 
Prospero. And from this century, three productions stand out. Rupert Goold,in 
his main-house Stratford debut in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/aug/10/theatre.rsc>, relocated the play 
to an Arctic island, with Patrick Stewart as a Faustian Prospero and Mariah 
Gale as a faintly autistic Miranda.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F5q4KReYS3mQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F5q4KReYS3mQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F5q4KReYS3mQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to view a video of Strehler's 1977 staging of La 
Tempesta <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5q4KReYS3mQ>

David Farr also did a fine version in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/apr/26/comedy-errors-twelfth-night-tempest-review>
, in which Jonathan Slinger as a Prospero was deeply moved by Ariel's 
instinctive charity. In 2013, at Shakespeare's Globe, Roger Allam gave usa 
profoundly paternalistic Prospero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/may/03/the-tempest-globe-review> who 
struggled to let his beloved daughter go.

But I have to go back in time for my favourite production. In 1983, I caught 
thegreat Giorgio Strehler 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1997/12/27/arts/giorgio-strehler-76-dies-director-of-italian-theater.html>
's Italian production, La Tempesta, in Paris. It showed Strehler's mastery of 
theatrical effect, with a topsail descending on the heads of the mariners in 
the opening storm. By playing Caliban as a black slave resentful of Prospero's 
land grab, it explored the play's anti-colonialist politics. It was also 
inexpressibly moving when Gulia Lazzarini's Ariel finally fled through the 
centre aisle radiant with the joy of freedom. A truly great island fling.

• What are your favourite versions of The Tempest? Let us know in the comments 
below
• Shakespeare's The Tempest: to be read or watched? That is the question 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/apr/08/shakespeare-the-tempest-april-reading-group>
 