
Stanley Wells dubs this "Shakespeare's masterpiece, if we use that word to 
mean the first work in which mastery of craft is displayed". I'm with the 
esteemed professor on that. It strikes me as a perfectly plotted play that 
doubles the fun of its source, Plautus'sMenaechmi 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Menaechmi>, by offering us not one but two sets 
of twins. It almost always provides a great night out and my only reservation 
comes when one actor plays each set of twins.Kathryn Hunter 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/education/discovery-space/previous-productions/the-comedy-of-errors>
 made that idea work in her Shakespeare's Globe production (1999) largely 
because of the exuberant Marcello Magni as the two Dromios. I was less keen on
Ian Judge <http://www.ianjudge.com/>'s 1990 RSC production where, even with 
Desmond Barrit as the two Antipholuses, we were often as confused as the 
characters: the whole joke rests on the audience being ahead of the game.

But I've seen some lovely productions with some memorable pairings. Clifford 
Williams did the play twice at Stratford – once with Ian Richardson and Alec 
McCowen as the twin masters, the next time with John Wood andCorin Redgrave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/apr/06/corin-redgrave-obituary>. 
Dominic Cooke also did alively, if slightly strenuous, production at the 
National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/30/comedy-of-errors-theatre-review> 
(2011), starring Lenny Henry and turning the play into an urban nightmare.

But – somewhat to my surprise because I'm a bit of a Shakespearean purist – 
the production I recall with most pleasure is aTrevor Nunn revival 
<http://www.rsc.org.uk/explore/shakespeare/plays/the-comedy-of-errors/trevor-nunn-1976.aspx>
 (1976) that came equipped with a full-blown score by Guy Woolfenden as well as 
a sublime cast including Judi Dench, Francesca Annis andRichard Griffiths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/mar/29/richard-griffiths>. The moment 
I remember best is that of Michael Williams and Nickolas Grace as the twin 
Dromios singing "let's go hand in hand" as they made their harmonious joint 
exit. Pure magic.

• What are your favourite versions of The Comedy of Errors? Let us know in the 
comments thread below
 