
Obviously, The Merchant of Venice 
<http://www.rscshakespeare.co.uk/merchantofVenice.html> poses a problem in the 
modern world. But I'm struck by how successful it's been on the postwar stage 
for two basic reasons: directors increasingly give it a strong social context 
and realise it's as much a play about money as race or religion. Best, perhaps, 
to pick out a defining performance and production from each of the recent 
decades.

Peter O'Toole in 1960 was one of the first Shylocks I saw: a handsome, heroic 
figure who looked, said one critic, like an émigré conductor. Laurence Olivier 
was also a dazzling Shylock, opposite Joan Plowright's Portia,in Jonathan 
Miller's eye-opening 1970 National Theatre production 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0EGBKuapkX4>: set in the 1880s, it was the 
first of many modern versions to highlight the play's capitalist themes by 
presenting Shylock as a frock-coated financier convinced that Venetian trade 
and justice were inextricably linked.

The more detailed the background, the richer the play becomes. From 1987 I 
recall Antony Sher, in Bill Alexander's RSC production,as a Jewish outsider 
stoned by passersby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/08/playing-shylock-patrick-stewart-sher>
 in the Venetian alleys and literally spat upon by John Carlisle's Antonio. But 
the best production of recent times was Trevor Nunn's at the National in 1999 
which set the action in the fascist 1930s and showedHenry Goodman's Shylock 
<http://vimeo.com/16613031> seeking to maintain his Jewish identity in a 
barbarically hostile world.

Since then we've had a memorable 2011 Rupert Goold production located in Las 
Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/20/merchant-of-venice-review-rsc> 
with Patrick Stewart as an uneasily assimilated Shylock and Susannah Fielding 
as a stunning Portia finally seen in her mansion dejectedly listening to 
Elvis's Are You Lonesome Tonight. Nunn comes out tops but all these versions 
have proved The Merchant is a viable proposition in today's world.

• What are your favourite versions of The Merchant of Venice? Let us know in 
the comments thread below.

• Shakespeare's plays – as you like them: read the series so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/shakespeare-plays-as-you-like-them>

• Shakespeare quotes to live your life by – share your favourites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/11/shakespeare-quotes-to-live-your-life-by-share-your-favourites>
 