
There are two ways of looking at this play. Seen in isolation, it offers scope 
for a standalone virtuosic display. Play it in the context of the preceding 
histories and Richard embodies the fulfilment of the curse on the house of 
Lancaster. I've seen some dazzling, individual Richards: the superbly menacing 
Georgian actorRamaz Chkhikvadze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/02/ramaz-chkhikvadze-obituary> in a 
Rustaveli production (Edinburgh, 1979), Ian McKellen as a 1930s fascist 
dictator (1990 on stage <http://www.mckellen.com/stage/index11.htm>, 1996 on 
film <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DsGGjXZw1eQ>), Kenneth Branagh as a 
plausibly smiling villainat the Sheffield Crucible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/mar/20/artsfeatures7> (2002) and 
Kevin Spacey as a self-loathing monster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/29/richard-iii-review-kevin-spacey> 
(2011). But equally I've seen some fine Richards who seemed part of the grand 
mechanism of history: Ian Holm in The Wars of the Roses (1963), Andrew Jarvis 
in the English Shakespeare Company cycle (1986) and Jonathan Slinger in Michael 
Boyd's RSC Histories (2007).

But two performances tower above all others. Olivier in his 1955 film 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pdj6LH-hvsQ>, which I sat through twice in one 
day, established the idea of Richard as Satanic joker and demonic ironist: all 
later performances became a reaction to the Olivier prototype. No one went 
further thanAntony Sher 
<http://uncgbls.wordpress.com/2012/09/21/spiders-and-toads/> (RSC, 1984) who, 
propelling himself forward on two giant crutches, reinvented Richard as a 
figure of active, ferociously energetic evil. Both performances haunt me still.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fpdj6LH-hvsQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fpdj6LH-hvsQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fpdj6LH-hvsQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

â€¢ What's your favourite version of Richard III? Let us know in the comments 
thread below.
 