
King John <http://shakespeare.mit.edu/john/full.html> is an unloved play. Yet 
I have to admit to a grudging affection for it. I studied it as an A-level 
set-text in 1957 and that summer saw a very fine Stratford production by the 
now-forgottenDouglas Seale 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/obituary-douglas-seale-1101646.html>
 six or seven times.

Seeing it so often not only helped get me through the exam: it also bred an 
admiration for certain actors including the trumpet-tonguedAlec Clunes 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alec_Clunes> (father of Martin) as the Bastard and
Ron Haddrick 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/noises-off-ron-haddrick-is-ageing-like-a-good-wine-20140217-32vzt.html>
, who had intriguingly played cricket for South Australia, as the rough-hewn 
Hubert who is deputed to blind the boy Arthur.

The productions I've seen since then fall roughly into two camps. There are 
those that take this story of the wavering king more or less seriously: on that 
list I'd include versions by Deborah Warner (1988),Greg Doran (2001) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2001/dec/17/theatre.artsfeatures> and Josie 
Rourke (2006) <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/aug/04/theatre.rsc>. 
There are others that offer a radical rewrite or treat the play as a cynical 
study of high-level corruption: these would include productions by Buzz 
Goodbody (1970), John Barton (1974) and an extraordinary one byMaria Aberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/apr/20/king-john-review> (2012) that 
was all party hats and pop music and that starred the exquisitely feminine 
Pippa Nixon as the Bastard. But if I had to choose a favourite production it 
would be one by Barbara Gaines I saw at the Chicago Shakespeare Theatre in 
2004. Gaines's version was true to the text, brought out the play's modern 
parallels (at one point Greg Vinkler's power-hungry king literally wrapped 
himself in the flag) and played to packed houses for ten weeks.

At least in Chicago they loved King John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/jun/23/theatre1>.

• What are your favourite versions of King John? Let us know in the comments 
thread below

• Shakespeare's plays – as you like them: read the series so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/shakespeare-plays-as-you-like-them>
 