
Kenneth Tynan once referred to "an embarrassment of Richards". And so many 
fine actors have played the lead role, it's difficult to pick out a personal 
favourite. I'd start, however, with a game-changing production.John Barton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/feb/07/theatre.rsc> in 1973 had the 
brilliant idea of gettingIan Richardson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/feb/10/guardianobituaries.broadcasting> 
and Richard Pasco to alternate as Richard and Bolingbroke: in place of the 
usual conflict between a winsome dandy and a burly pragmatist, one suddenly got 
a study of parallel misfortune.

Steven Pimlott capitalised on that idea in a fine Brechtian production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/apr/15/books.guardianreview1> at 
Stratford's The Other Place (2000) where Samuel West's king and David 
Troughton's Bolingbroke both reminded us that kingship is a form of solitary 
confinement. And even if Greg Doran's recent production (2013) relied on a more 
familiar temperamental opposition,David Tennant's Richard seemed haunted from 
the start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/17/richard-ii-review-royal-shakespeare-theatre-david-tennant>
 by his implication in the Duke of Gloucester's death.

But I'd also recommend three TV Richards. You can now buy a boxset of the 1960 
BBC TV seriesAn Age of Kings <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/An_Age_of_Kings>, in 
which David William is a memorably lyrical Richard: you get the added benefit 
of Sean Connery as a young Harry Percy.Derek Jacobi also hits the right note 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0077806/> in the 1978 TV Richard II. But best of 
all isRupert Goold's stunning 2012 version with Ben Whishaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/jul/01/hollow-crown-richard-ii-shakespeare>
 as a Richard who is a mix of Jesus Christ and Michael Jackson, unforgettably 
making his imprint on the shifting English sands. For me, it's Barton's stage 
version and Goold's TV film that come out tops.

• What are your favourite versions of Richard II? Let us know in the comments 
thread below.

• Shakespeare's plays – as you like them: read the series so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/shakespeare-plays-as-you-like-them>
 