
There was a time when this play was considered too indecent for modern 
audiences. In 1935, the Leicester Mercury gravely warned that "the play insults 
the respectability of Melton Mowbray people". I also recall, from my childhood, 
a brouhaha over whether a legendaryPeter Brook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/peter-brook> production was too dirty a dish 
to set before King George VI.

But today we are totally at home with a play about corruption in high places, 
the abuse of power and unfettered sexual licence. Virtually every production 
now updates the play, sometimes to startling effect.

Nicholas Hytner <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/nicholas-hytner> did a fine 
one at Stratford in1988, set in a growingly fascist Austria with Roger Allam as 
a suavely trilbied Duke.Declan Donnellan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/declan-donnellan>'s 1994 Cheek by Jowl 
version pushed the modern parallels still further, with Angelo as a 
hypocritical politician. AndSimon McBurney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/simon-mcburney>'s 2004 Complicite production 
at the National took us into a sinister modern state with TV monitors 
eavesdropping on political prisoners clad in Guantanamo-Bay-orange uniforms.

But the two productions I remember best were both set in an early 20th century 
Freudian Vienna.Jonathan Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jan/10/jonathan-miller-interview>'s 
1974 National Theatre mobile production unforgettably showed Julian Curry's 
repressed Angelo placing a tentative finger on the knee ofGillian Barge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/nov/24/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
's Isabella as he cried, "now do I give my sensual race the rein". And, in
Trevor Nunn <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/trevor-nunn>'s 1991 revival at 
Stratford's the Other Place,David Haig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/oct/08/theatre>'s Angelo was a casebook 
study of sexual disorder prompted to downright violence byClaire Skinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/claire-skinner>'s naively tactile 
Isabella. For me, it's a tie between those two productions.

But since directors have now explored virtually every aspect of the play's 
modernity, wouldn't it be fascinating to see it played as a deeply Christian 
parable about justice and mercy?

• What are your favourite versions of Measure for Measure? Let us know in the 
comments below 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/25/shakespeares-plays-as-you-like-them-alls-well-that-ends-well>

• "Shame the devil": Shakespeare quotes to live your life by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/23/shakespeare-quotes-to-live-your-life-by>

• Beat the Bard! Shakespeare's characters fight it out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ng-interactive/2014/apr/23/beat-the-bard-shakespeares-characters-fight-it-out-in-our-interactive-game>
 