
Not a play for rationalists. Dr Johnson wrote of its "unresisting imbecility 
<http://unspeak.net/unresisting-imbecility/>" and Shaw dubbed it "stagey trash 
of the lowest melodramatic order". But, although the play is an odd mish-mash 
of an ancient Britain, classical Rome and Renaissance Italy, it often works in 
the theatre: partly because of its language (how often at funeral services do 
we hear "Fear no more the heat of the sun") and partly because of the character 
of Imogen whom one critic called "the soul of beauty, honour and faith".

At Stratford I've seen a succession of fine Imogens including Peggy Ashcroft 
(1957), Vanessa Redgrave (1962), Susan Fleetwood (1974), Harriet Walter (1988), 
Joanne Pearce (1997) andEmma Fielding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/aug/08/theatre> (2003). But two non-RSC 
productions stick most in my mind.

Peter Hall, who directed the highly pictorial Stratford production with 
Ashcroft, reimagined the play in a more austere Jacobean versionat the National 
in 1988 
<http://www.ahds.rhul.ac.uk/ahdscollections/docroot/shakespeare/performancedetails.do?performanceId=11173>
 withGeraldine James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/nov/20/room-own-geraldine-james-actor>
 as an impassioned Imogen. Along with a group of colleagues, I followed the 
production to Tbilisi in Georgia where the set and costumes failed to arrive 
and the actors were forced to do it in rehearsal-room gear: it was one of the 
most gripping Shakespeare events I recall.

In 2001 Mike Alfred also staged a visually simplified Cymbeline at 
Shakespeare's Globe 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/education/discovery-space/previous-productions/cymbeline>
 with a cast of six all dressed in white andMark Rylance playing three roles 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/education/discovery-space/adopt-an-actor/archive/posthumus-cloten-cornelius-played-by-mark-rylance>
 including the heroic Posthumus. This probably remains my all-time favourite 
Cymbeline in that it lent coherence and clarity to the play's convoluted 
narrative. As an experiment, it would now be fascinating to see the play staged 
in the intimate candle-lit Sam Wanamaker Playhouse: the kind of space for which 
it was originally intended.

• What are your favourite versions of Cymbeline? Let us know in the comments 
below

• Shakespeare's plays – as you like them: read the series so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/shakespeare-plays-as-you-like-them>

• "Shame the devil": Shakespeare quotes to live your life by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/23/shakespeare-quotes-to-live-your-life-by>
 