
I heard Mark Ravenhill on the radio this week 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0419n4c> pointing out that this play belies 
Shakespeare's reputation as a generous-hearted humanist. He's right in that 
this cynic's Iliad is a scorching satire that debunks heroic ideals. 
Unfortunately, the revival that Ravenhill co-directed with the Wooster Group's
Elizabeth LeCompte <http://thewoostergroup.org/blog/tag/elizabeth-lecompte/>, 
in 2012, wasan unholy mess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/aug/09/troilus-and-cressida-review>. 
But this is a play that, largely ignored until the 20th century, has come into 
its own in modern war-weary times, and has yielded many fine revivals.

The first I saw, directed by Peter Hall and John Barton at Stratford in 1960, 
was set in a sandpit and boasted a magnificent Ulysses inEric Porter 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituaryeric-porter-1619844.html>, 
who had the ability to make manifest thought. (I once heard him get a round of 
applause for his delivery of an especially complex speech.) Subsequent 
productions by John Barton, in 1968 and 1976, highlighted the homoerotic 
aspects of the Trojan war. Later, the focus switched to Cressida, who was seen 
less as an archetype of infidelity than as the victim of a patriarchal society. 
That was the approach taken by Juliet Stevenson in Howard Davies's 1985 revival 
and by Sophie Okonedo in a very good Trevor Nunn productionat the National 
Theatre in 1999 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/20/national-theatre-50-sophie-okonedo>
.

If I had to choose a single outstanding modern production, it would be one by 
Sam Mendes <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sam-mendes> at Stratford's Swan 
theatre in 1990. Mendes mixed Anglepoise lamps and khaki tunics, clearly 
distinguished between the clean-limbed Trojans and the grungy Greeks, and had 
an outstanding cast: Ralph Fiennes was Troilus, Amanda Root was Cressida, 
Ciarán Hinds was Achilles and Simon Russell Beale was an unforgettable 
Thersites inveighing against "wars and lechery" with a savagery that seemed to 
encapsulate the play's cynicism.

• What are your favourite versions of Troilus and Cressida? Let us know in the 
comments below

• "Shame the devil": Shakespeare quotes to live your life by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/23/shakespeare-quotes-to-live-your-life-by>
 