
Timon, wrote Quentin Letts in the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2176204/Timon-Of-Athens-Greedy-Greeks-huge-debts--Timon-times.html>
, "tends to be dismissed as one of Shakespeare's clunkers". He's right except 
that in the last 50 years, like so many of Shakespeare's unfashionable plays, 
it's enjoyed a bit of a theatrical renaissance. I suspect it's largely because 
we find its savagely satirical portrait of a wealth-worshipping society based 
on naked self-interest ever more topical.

I first saw the play at Stratford in 1965 with Paul Scofield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/24/janet-suzman-paul-scofield-genius-rehearsal-shakespeare?view=classic>
, whose voice one critic compared to "thunder buffeting from crag to crag", as 
a magnificent Timon.

But it was Peter Brook's 1974 Paris production at the Bouffes du Nord that 
really changed my thinking not just about the play but about the act of theatre 
itself. Brook's magic was evident in scenes like that of Timon's first-act 
party where the tipsily swaying guests were all encased in golden twine. I 
remember coming back to London believing that theatre, at its best, consists of 
direct, uncomplicated communication with 500 or 600 people at a time.

Since then, I've seen a number of first-rate performances and productions. 
Richard Pasco (1983) andMichael Pennington 
<http://shakespearestaging.berkeley.edu/index.php?option=com_g2bridge&view=gallery&Itemid=256&g2_itemId=17295>
 (1999) were excellent RSC Timons.

Trevor Nunn at the Young Vic and Cardboard Citizens, in a production at 
Stratford Town Hall, highlighted the play's modernity. But it wasNicholas 
Hytner's 2012 revival at the Olivier 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/timon-of-athens>, rather undermining 
my argument about the virtues of small auditoria, that I admired most. With its 
vivid updating, showing the protagonist hosting a swanky sponsors' party in the 
Timon Room of a smart gallery, it brought out the toxic nature of the fat-cat 
culture. AndSimon Russell Beale was at his best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jul/18/timon-of-athens-review-olivier> 
in suggesting that Timon's philanthropy was a way of compensating for his 
inadequate human relationships. One of Shakespeare's least loved plays became a 
bitter fable about the precariousness of a credit culture and the insulating 
effect of wealth.

â€¢ What are your favourite versions of Timon of Athens? Let us know in the 
comments below
 