
Over the summer (what summer?) the next generation of Guardian website changes 
has been being 'rolled out'. It is a massive operation, designed to link and 
unify all of the group's online operating systems in Europe, North America and 
Australia, as the Guardian consolidates itself as a leading 24-hour-a-day 
English-language global news operation. The crosswords are now starting to be 
included by stages in this process. There have been a few teething problems and 
some complaints of the 'if-it-ain't-broke-why-fix-it' variety.

One single statistic encapsulates why all this change is necessary and urgent. 
The way in which Guardian journalism (including its crosswords) is 'consumed' 
is shifting at an incredible rate. Now, each day, well over half (ranging from 
55 to 70%) of our readers come to the Guardian via a mobile browser or a 
dedicated app. This trend towards the small screen is accelerating. So it is 
essential for the future of the paper that everything it produces should look 
as good as and work as well as possible on these smaller devices, while not 
sacrificing clear and user-friendly presentation on desktop-size screens.

The changes are being 'beta tested' live alongside the current publication 
formats â€“you can try the beta crossword site here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/optin>. If a new format that is being 
tested comes up on your desktop screen,you can still click on a link that will 
take you back to the old format <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/optout>
. And, if you want to comment on the new formats (positively or negatively), 
you can do so directly by email to the developers at
crosswords.beta@theguardian.com <mailto:crosswords.beta@theguardian.com>. 
Please copy such comments for good measure to me at 
crossword.editor@theguardian.com. Solving the problems thrown up for the 
software by our popular alphabetic jigsaw puzzles, jumbo 21 x 21 grids, twin 15 
x 15 grids and the monthly Genius puzzle is still 'work in progress'. I can 
only ask for your patience, when 'temporary' expedients seem to continuing for 
longer than is comfortable.
_____

Those of you whose daily Quick fix comes via the website, rather than the 
paper itself, and who glance at the comments posted beneath each puzzle will be 
aware of a virtual institution, self-titled the Quick Crossword Caff (or QCC). 
I am not sure how the QCC came in to (virtual) existance and am in no way 
involved in the 'moderation' of the comments that are sent in to it. With all 
the other Guardian online comment spaces the moderators are, for obvious 
reasons, pretty strict in excluding postings that are not directly connected 
with the topic involved. (They would otherwise rapidly be taken over by 
axe-grinders and nuts.)

However, in the case of the QCC the moderators recognised early on that a 
genuine online community had created itself, which from time to time would not 
only discuss the Quick crossword but would also chat about crosswords in 
general, or arrangements for actual (rather than virtual) meetings of Guardian 
quick crossword fans, or the prospects for rain during a test match against 
Australia, or other even more 'off topic' subjects.

I know (for they have told me) that some solvers are put off posting comments, 
because they just want to make and/or read comments about quick crosswords and 
feel inhibited about joining in what is clearly social banter between a (small) 
club whose members feel that they have come to know each other personally, even 
if they have never met.

To such solvers I would say four things. First, don't be shy about posting 
comments. My impression over the years is that the regulars are kind at heart, 
even if from time to time acerbic in their choice of words. Second, don't be 
shy about limiting your comments solely to crossword issues. (That is the 
reason why the slot in there in the first place.) Third, it does not take long 
to scroll past the comments that are more to do with the QCC than with actual 
crosswords. And, finally, you may be interested to glance at a well-designed 
websitehttp://qcckaff.weebly.com <http://qcckaff.weebly.com/>, set up by a QCC 
regular, 'spanishscot', which summarises the caff's past and present 
extracurricular activities and interests.
_____

Congratulations to Ceridwen Jones in Cambridge, who is the winner of the 
August Genius competition.
_____

If you have any technical problems with our crossword service, please email 
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>. If you have any 
comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>. For 
Observer crosswords pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>
 