
Everyone knows what happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video>
 when the US vice-president elect, Mike Pence, attended a performance ofthe 
hip-hop musical Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/20/lin-manuel-miranda-musicals-hamilton-broadway-disney-hiphop>
 recently. He was booed by sections of the audience and was the target of a 
curtain speech stressing the importance of diversity. This ledan angry Donald 
Trump to tweet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-booed-at-hamilton-performance-then-hears-diversity-plea>
 that “the theater must always a be a safe and special place”. Special, 
possibly. Safe, no. So I would suggest a list of five works from the American 
theatrical canon that might be revived to provide instruction, or even 
enlightenment, for Messrs Trump and Pence before they take office.

1. Of Thee I Sing (1931)

This show <http://gershwin.com/publications/of-thee-i-sing/>, by George and 
Ira Gershwin and George S Kaufman, became the first musical to win the Pulitzer 
prize and hilariously lampoons American politics. The chosen presidential 
candidate, John P Wintergreen, has no coherent policies and reluctantly agrees 
to marry the winner of a beauty pageant. Since she turns out to be a descendant 
of Napoleon, his ditching of her prompts the prospect of war with France and 
threats of his impeachment. The funniest character, however, is the 
vice-president, Alexander Throttlebottom, whose name and face no one can ever 
remember but who succeeds to the top job. Given that one New York columnist,
David Brooks 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/opinion/the-view-from-trump-tower.html?_r=0>
, has already suggested Trump will either resign or be impeached within a year, 
this could be a must-see for the hapless Pence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhamilton-broadway-shows-mike-pence-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd9ff10f2879c57206d4e6cf8bbc83f4ec31816b%2F115_264_2285_1369%2F2285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Hamilton%3A%20five%20shows%20Pence%20and%20Trump%20should%20see%20together&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhamilton-broadway-shows-mike-pence-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Hamilton%3A%20five%20shows%20Pence%20and%20Trump%20should%20see%20together&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhamilton-broadway-shows-mike-pence-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd9ff10f2879c57206d4e6cf8bbc83f4ec31816b%2F115_264_2285_1369%2F2285.jpg>
 Sophie Okonedo and Denzel Washington in A Raisin in the Sun on Broadway in 
2014. Photograph: Brigitte Lacombe/AP 
2. A Raisin in the Sun (1959)

Donald Trump can dish it out but he can’t take it | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/donald-trump-can-dish-it-out-but-he-cant-take-it>
Trump’s election campaign has been described as “a festival of racism and 
misogyny 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2016/11/leader-trump-and-liberal-order>
”. It might be doubly fitting, therefore, to expose him to this work byLorraine 
Hansberry <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/apr/23/artsfeatures.stage>, 
which made her the first black woman ever to have a play on Broadway and has 
become a modern classic: it even spawned a spin-off inBruce Norris’s Clybourne 
Park <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/sep/03/clybourne-park-review> 
(2010), which proved that issues of race and property remain permanently 
intertwined. The play shows a divided black family living on Chicago’s South 
Side being bribed to stay out of a close-knit white neighbourhood. Although 
Hansberry offers a totally unsentimental portrait of the family’s deluded 
patriarch, she also vividly demonstrates defiance overcoming oppression and 
family pride triumphing over bullying white prejudice.

3. The Best Man (1960)

For proof of the timeless dirtiness of American machine politics, there could 
be no better example than Gore Vidal’s poisonous satire: although its leading 
figures are clearly based on Adlai Stevenson, Joe McCarthy and Harry Truman, 
the play’s pertinence was proved by popularBroadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> revivals in 2001 and 2012. At its 
heart is the creepy figure of Senator Joseph Cantwell, a bigot and a charlatan 
who releases a damaging psychiatric analysis of his presidential opponent in 
order to ruin his campaign. At one point Cantwell is told by an ex-president, 
“It’s not that I mind your being a bastard: it’s your being such a stupid 
bastard I object to.” Initially attacked as melodrama, Vidal’s play now seems 
more relevant than ever.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhamilton-broadway-shows-mike-pence-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72e74ced2c51132cdbfbcf50012c1dc83397fa44%2F0_0_1600_2400%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Hamilton%3A%20five%20shows%20Pence%20and%20Trump%20should%20see%20together&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhamilton-broadway-shows-mike-pence-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Hamilton%3A%20five%20shows%20Pence%20and%20Trump%20should%20see%20together&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fhamilton-broadway-shows-mike-pence-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72e74ced2c51132cdbfbcf50012c1dc83397fa44%2F0_0_1600_2400%2F1600.jpg>
 Kirsty Bushell and Mark Emerson in Angels in America at the Lyric Hammersmith 
in 2007. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
4. Angels in America (1991-92)

The shadow of McCarthy also hangs over Tony Kushner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/aug/31/tony-kushner-tiny-kushner>’s 
astonishing two-part fantasia in that one of its principal figures is Roy Cohn, 
McCarthy’s red-baiting sidekick who, even when told he has contracted Aids, 
refuses to admit he is gay. But that is only one strand in a multi-dimensional 
play that deals with the emergence of the new right in America, the prevailing 
uncertainty facing the next millennium and the equivocal consolation of 
religious faith in the modern world. In its belief in tolerance, openness and a 
just and diverse society, it stands for everything Trump questions and might be 
a provocative dish to set before the president-elect.

5. The Scottsboro Boys (2010)

As a reminder of American society at its worst – and American theatre at its 
best –you couldn’t have a finer example 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/30/the-scottsboro-boys-review> than 
this musical by John Kander and Fred Ebb. It is based on the infamous case of 
nine black teenagers who were falsely accused of rape in the segregated Alabama 
of the 1930s. Its brilliance lies inresurrecting the datedly offensive form of 
a minstrel show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/29/scottsboro-boys-minstrel-show-accused-rape-new-york>
 to expose the racist bigotry that pervaded the case. It is a supreme example 
of the potency of theatrical irony in that the jauntiness of the songs is in 
stark contrast to the injustice at the story’s heart. Donald Trump fondly 
imagines theatre to be a “safe” place. This powerful work proves just how 
subversive it can be.


But those are just my choices of American plays and shows to set before Trump 
and Pence. What, I wonder, are yours?

 