
Pumpkins carved into the gurning visage 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/10/13/trumpkins-are-here-and-they-are-the-most-terrifying-halloween-trend-ever-6189875/>
 of Donald Trump. Giant pumpkinsstrapped up and hoisted onto trucks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/07/giant-pumpkin-chelmsford> 
to be transported to compete against similarly gargantuan squash. Pumpkins used 
as plant pots; halloween lanterns, evenboats 
<http://www.atlasobscura.com/articles/watch-people-carve-and-compete-in-these-epic-pumpkin-boat-races>
.Animals in zoos 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Lifestyle/animals-oregon-zoo-play-devour-smash-pumpkins/story?id=43071334>
 chomping on whole pumpkins. Not to mention a whole raft of food and drink 
products jumping on the pumpkin bandwagon (what is pumpkin spice, anyway?); 
only some of which actually contain any actual pumpkin.


Halloween is nearly here, and we are reaching peak pumpkin.


In Asda in the UK, pumpkins are selling for £1 each 
<http://www.mysupermarket.co.uk/asda-compare-prices/Vegetables/ASDA_Carving_Pumpkin.html?TrackingCode=332.kxTXjOtARU2iP3tOks1KBw>
 right now. Anyone who has ever tried to grow a pumpkin may feel disheartened 
that they could have just bought one for less than the price of a beer. But the 
beauty of growing your own is that you can raise varieties you never see in the 
shops, many with specific uses in mind; you know where and how they have been 
produced, and what’s gone into growing them.

Whether homegrown or shop-bought, it makes my heart sink to think of all the 
pumpkins displayed on doorsteps and in windows that will end up in landfill 
rather than on a dinner plate, or even the compost heap. According to the 
food-sharing appOlio <https://olioex.com/pumpkin-halloween-recipes>, more than 
18,000 tonnes of pumpkin waste ends up in UK bins every year.

But enough of this pumpkin-related pessimism. it doesn’t have to be this way. 
Horticulturist Sara Vennblogged 
<http://thephysicblog.blogspot.co.uk/2016/10/please-don-play-with-your-food.html>
 about the issue of pumpkin waste recently, offering a raft of recipes for 
turning flesh from carved pumpkins into jam, scones, brownies, soup and more. 
There are alsopumpkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/oct/25/pumpkin-recipes-curry-pie-waffles-risotto-salad-pickle-pecan-tart-10-best>
recipes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/31/pumpkin-squash-recipes-stuffed-soup-roast-yotam-ottolenghi>
galore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/sep/21/ten-best-recipes-butternut-squash>
 right here at the Guardian. If you can, buy a locally-grown pumpkin this year:
bigbarn.co.uk <https://www.bigbarn.co.uk> is a good way to find a supplier. And 
now’s the time to start researching the best varieties to invest in seed for 
your homegrown squash harvest next year. See below for a roundup of some of my 
favourite pumpkin varieties...

Pumpkin picks

Lesson one in pumpkin growing is this: don’t limit yourself. There are many 
forms of squash, and the pumpkins bred for lanterns are often less tasty. The 
difference? Not all squash are pumpkins, but all pumpkins are squash (as is 
generally true in life, it’s actually more complicated than that - for a more 
detailed explanation,read this 
<http://www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/gardens-gardening/your-garden/help-for-the-home-gardener/advice-tips-resources/gardening-help-faqs.aspx?questionid=274&afmid=4462>
). Here are a few of my favourites.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fbeyond-the-pumpkin-the-best-winter-squashes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd3a134804043dc4193bd714bbaf0f83c943432%2F0_243_5315_3189%2F5315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20the%20pumpkin%3A%20the%20best%20winter%20squashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fbeyond-the-pumpkin-the-best-winter-squashes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20the%20pumpkin%3A%20the%20best%20winter%20squashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fbeyond-the-pumpkin-the-best-winter-squashes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bd3a134804043dc4193bd714bbaf0f83c943432%2F0_243_5315_3189%2F5315.jpg>
 ‘Pink Banana’ squash is a South American native. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
I first came across ‘Pink Banana’ squash via the Heritage Seed Library 
<https://www.gardenorganic.org.uk/hsl>, and grew it on my allotment with great 
success. It’s a zeppelin-shaped squash that originated in South America, with 
very tasty, dense flesh, similar to a butternut squash. It’s adaptable, being 
suitable for use in the summer as a summer squash, or saved for use in autumn 
or winter as a winter squash. I haven’t tried it yet, but the seed geeks at the 
Real Seed Catalogue rate its sister variety‘Blue Banana’ 
<http://www.realseeds.co.uk/wintersquash.html> even more highly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fbeyond-the-pumpkin-the-best-winter-squashes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F909f3ac35c88e415705c75f017059379e197a8e7%2F0_7_3062_1837%2F3062.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20the%20pumpkin%3A%20the%20best%20winter%20squashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fbeyond-the-pumpkin-the-best-winter-squashes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20the%20pumpkin%3A%20the%20best%20winter%20squashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fbeyond-the-pumpkin-the-best-winter-squashes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F909f3ac35c88e415705c75f017059379e197a8e7%2F0_7_3062_1837%2F3062.jpg>
 Heirloom pumpkin ‘Rouge Vif D’etampes’. Photograph: work by Lisa Kling/Getty 
Images 
I have a soft spot for ‘Rouge Vif D’Etampes’ because it was the first pumpkin 
I ever grew. This is the variety that is always referred to as the inspiration 
for the fiary godmother’s magical transformation of pumpkin into coach in the 
Cinderella story, and it’s even marketed as “the Cinderella pumpkin” in some 
seed catalogues. Its deep orange-red skin (rouge vif meaning bright red) and 
flattened shape make it a good pumpkin for carving, and it’s reasonably tasty 
too. Each fruit usually weighs between 4kg and 10kg, and you can expect two to 
five per plant.

If you don’t want to end up with too much in the way of pumpkin flesh 
leftovers, mini pumpkin ‘Jack Be Little’ is perfect. Franchi Seeds sells a 
white version called‘Small Baby Boo’ 
<http://www.seedsofitaly.com/SMALL_BABY_BOO_PUMPKIN/p1834925_8313908.aspx>, too.

Uchiki Kuri is well suited to climbing, with smallish, onion-shaped fruits and 
small leaves, so you can grow it up frames or trellises if space is short. This 
type of squash is the kabocha or Japanese pumpkin: it stores extremely well and 
is also one of Guardian columnist Alys Fowler’sfavourites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/may/15/alys-fowler-winter-squash-slug-fight>
.

If pumpkin seeds are your thing, you need to grow ‘Lady Godiva’. This pumpkin, 
if picked at the right time, has “naked” or hull-less seed that you can eat 
either raw or roasted, avoiding the tedious processing usually required to grow 
your own edible pumpkin seed. The only UK seller of the seeds I am aware of is
The Organic Gardening Catalogue 
<http://www.organiccatalogue.com/p1925/SQUASH-Lady-Godiva/product_info.html>.

If you want a good pumpkin for carving into jack-o’-lanterns, try ‘Jack of All 
Trades’ from Thomson & Morgan 
<http://www.thompson-morgan.com/vegetables/vegetable-seeds/pumpkin-squash-and-courgette-seeds/pumpkin-jack-of-all-trades/630TM>
 or ‘Winter Luxury’ from Real Seeds 
<http://www.realseeds.co.uk/wintersquash.html>.

Finally, if you love butternut squash but find it hard to get them to ripen 
before the first frosts hit, try the improved, early butternut‘Waltham’: Real 
Seeds <http://www.realseeds.co.uk/wintersquash.html> stock this one. Another 
plus is that it has a smaller seed cavity so there’s less waste.
 