
Inverness remain three points clear at the top of the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> after a comfortable 
2-0 victory over ten-manHearts. Two first-half goals from the in-form striker 
Billy McKay, who later missed an opportunity to claim his hat-trick when he 
missed from the penalty spot, were enough to overcome a young Hearts side 
missing their captain Danny Wilson, and who finished with 10 men when Jamie 
Hamill was sent off when his deliberate handball conceded the penalty.

Partick Thistle applied more pressure on the St Mirren manager, Danny Lennon, 
by winning 2-1 and consigning Thistle to their fourth defeat from five games 
this season.St Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> were set 
to earn their first three points of the season after Kenny McLean had put them 
into an early second-half lead, but Kallum Higginbotham and Ross Forbes both 
struck in the final 10 minutes to ensure Lennon was on the receiving end of 
boos from the furious home supporters at the final whistle.

Hibernian remained winless against Ross County after playing out a frustrating 
goalless draw at Easter Road. Hibs have now played County six times over four 
years and have yet to record a victory.

Both sides struck the post in the first half, James Collins with a header from 
ten yards for the hosts and Mihael Kovacevic for the visitors. Derek Adams's 
County will be disappointed they could not collect three points as they also 
passed up goalscoring chances through Rocco Quinn and Graham Carey. The home 
side again left the field to jeers from their supporters after another poor 
showing at Easter Road.

Aberdeen had the better openings but could not break the deadlock against a 
resilientSt Johnstone team at Pittodrie. Niall McGinn struck the crossbar and 
also had a shot saved expertly by the Saints goalkeeper Steve Banks. The result 
meansSt Johnstone <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> remain a 
point above Aberdeen in the early league standings. John Sutton scored a second 
successive winner asMotherwell came from behind against Kilmarnock to move into 
third place in the Scottish Premiership. Sutton followed his strike against 
Partick Thistle when he netted from close range with the last kick of the first 
half after a mistake by Killie centre-back Jackson Irvine. A headed own goal by 
Stephen McManus had given the visitors a 17th-minute lead, but the unmarked 
Henri Anier equalised three minutes later.

Motherwell <https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> were never 
entirely comfortable after the break and Kris Boyd came close several times 
before Killie were boosted by the sending-off of Simon Ramsden in the 87th 
minute. However, Lee Hollis made two excellent late saves to deny the Ayrshire 
side their third point of the season.

In Scottish League One, Rangers beat East Fife 5-0 at Ibrox with their 
captain, Lee McCulloch, scoring the first hatâ€‘trick of his career. The former 
Queen of the South striker Nicky Clark scored a debut goal for the home side 
within a minute of the kick-off. Goalkeeper Cammy Bell also made his 
competitive debut, with both players appearing as the club's two permitted 
triallists.Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> will be able 
to register their eight new signings when the transfer embargo imposed upon the 
club ends at midnight on Sunday.
 