
I’m due to meet Bill Browder at Mari Vanna, a favourite hangout for rich 
Russians in Knightsbridge. But when we get there the restaurant, with its rustic
dacha-style Russian decor, leaves us both feeling slightly spooked. So we 
wander across the road to an anonymous sushi bar. Browder’s reluctance to avoid 
bumping into anyone with Kremlin connections is understandable. As he explains, 
matter-of-factly: “They [the Kremlin] threatened to kill me. It’s pretty 
straightforward.”

American-born Browder is one of Vladimir Putin’s most prominent critics. For 
over a decade he lived in Moscow and ran the most successful investment fund in
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. Initially, he was a fan of 
Putin’s. But in 2005 he was deported from the country. A corrupt group of 
officials expropriated his fund, Hermitage Capital, and used it to make a 
fraudulent tax claim. They stole $230m (£153m).

Stuck in London, Browder hired a team to fight his case. The same Russian 
officials arrested his lawyer, Sergei Magnitsky, after Magnitsky uncovered the 
money trail and made a complaint. They put Magnitsky in jail and refused him 
medical treatment. (Magnitsky suffered from pancreatitis and gall stones.) 
After he had spent almost a year behind bars, guards beat him to death. He was 
37 and married with two small boys.

The incident had a transforming effect on Browder. “If Magnitsky had not been 
my lawyer he would still be alive,” he says. He describes Magnitsky’s death as 
“absolutely heartbreaking”. “If he hadn’t taken on my case he’d still be 
enjoying his life, being a father, looking after his wife. A young man whom I 
was responsible for died in the most horrific way because he worked for me.”

Browder’s memoir, published next week, recounts how Magnitsky’s death changed 
him from entrepreneur to global human rights crusader. Its title is Red Notice: 
How I Became Putin’s No.1 Enemy; and it reads like a non-fiction version of a 
Mario Puzo thriller. There’s a ruthless crime syndicate, a mafia boss – for 
Michael Corleone read Putin – and a growing tally of bodies.

Ever since Magnitsky’s murder in 2009 Browder has waged an extraordinary 
campaign to bring the officials to justice. Not in a court of law – there’s no 
prospect of a trial inside Russia – but in the wider court of international 
public opinion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422029055525%2F128a5147-af1e-4563-907c-268dad5191f3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bill%20Browder%3A%20the%20Kremlin%20threatened%20to%20kill%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bill%20Browder%3A%20the%20Kremlin%20threatened%20to%20kill%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422029055525%2F128a5147-af1e-4563-907c-268dad5191f3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Putin in the summer after talks with the Ukrainian president. Photograph: 
Alexander Zemlianichenko/AP 
After footslogging round Washington, Browder succeeded in persuading US 
Congress to pass a groundbreaking Sergei Magnitsky law. The 2012 legislation 
imposed visa bans on the bureaucrats implicated in Magnistky’s murder. It 
denied them access to US banks. Putin was furious. In 2013 a Russian judge 
sentenced Browder in absentia to nine years in jail, and, bizarrely, 
“convicted” the already-dead Magnitsky. The Kremlin sent a Red Notice warrant 
to Interpol demanding Browder’s extradition. Interpol refused, but Moscow is 
currently putting together a third extradition bid.

Aged 50, and dressed in an inconspicuous suit and tie, Browder still resembles 
the investment banker he once was. He concedes that there are several Russians 
who have annoyed Putin more but says “among foreigners” he’s probably the 
President’s biggest foe. There have been death threats, including one sent by 
text days before Magnitsky died. (A quote from The Godfather Part II, sent to a 
colleague’s mobile, read chillingly: “History has taught us that anybody can be 
killed.”) Browder casually mentions that the US Department of Justice warned 
last summer of a plot to kidnap him and render him back to Moscow.

This may seem a little fantastical, but the Kremlin has a track record of 
silencing those it dislikes. Our Japanese lunch venue is a short stroll away 
from Mayfair and the Millennium hotel. It was there in 2006 a KGB squad 
allegedly poisoned the former Russian intelligence officer Alexander 
Litvinenko. A public inquiry into Litivineko’s radioactive murder opens this 
week.

Given the threats against him, I wonder why Browder is dining without 
bodyguards? “Bodyguards offer fake security. The real security comes from 
having your enemies know nothing about you,” he replies.

According to Browder, the west is embroiled in a new cold war with Russia. The 
most visible manifestation of this is the worsening conflict inUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>. But unlike in communist times, he 
says, the west isn’t dealing with a hostile ideology. His thesis – which I 
share – is that Putin and his law enforcement and spy agencies are in effect 
running Russia as a “criminal enterprise” for their own financial gain. Anyone 
who stands up to them – such as Magnitsky – faces being shot, arrested or 
penalised.

For those who don’t know Russia, this might sound a bit gloomy. Is it also 
Russophobic, the charge made by pro-Kremlin online commentators against anybody 
who dares to criticise Putin? Browder says his problem isn’t with Russia as 
such but with the powerful clique of ex-KGB spies who have grabbed the state. 
“I think Russia is an occupied country. There are 140 million good people and a 
million bad people,” he says. He points out that he is married to a Russian, 
Elena, (they met and fell in love in Moscow) and they have two children 
together. His “longest serving and most trusted” colleagues are Russian, he 
says, and adds: “Among the 140 million are some of the most loyal, generous and 
intelligent people you can find in the world.”

Browder’s own backstory is fascinating. His grandfather was the head of the 
American communist party in the US. As a teenager, outshone by his prodigy 
brother, Browder decided he would rebel by becoming a capitalist. He found 
himself initially drawn to London, where he worked briefly for Robert Maxwell, 
and later became a British citizen. He says he feels little loyalty to the US, 
which persecuted his leftwing family. (Senator McCarthy dragged his grandfather 
before the House Committee on Un-American Activities.) Browder harboured a 
“romantic notion” the UK was synonymous with the rule of law and freedom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422030729279%2F3473448a-26a4-43e9-879b-6dc156963b06-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bill%20Browder%3A%20the%20Kremlin%20threatened%20to%20kill%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bill%20Browder%3A%20the%20Kremlin%20threatened%20to%20kill%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422030729279%2F3473448a-26a4-43e9-879b-6dc156963b06-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alexander Litvinenko after being poisoned. Photograph: Natasja Weitsz/Getty 
Images 
After Magnitsky’s death, Browder says the policy of western governments 
disillusioned him. The Obama administration was deeply relectant to impose 
sanctions on corrupt Russian officials for fear of annoying Putin – a stance 
Browder calls “appeasement”. The Foreign Office treated Browder politely. But 
Downing Street stubbornly refused to enact its own version of the Magnitsky 
Law, despite strong cross-party support and worsening relations following 
Putin’s Crimea putsch.

The bad guys in Browder’s book are vividly painted. One of them is a senior 
interior ministry official called Major Pavel Karpov. Karpov sued Browder for 
libel in the high court and lost – the judge ruled that he had no standing in 
Britain. Karpov has since failed to pay £250,000 in costs. Browder says he’s 
dismayed at the way corrupt Russians can abuse the British legal system.

Much of Red Notice reads like a detective novel, with Browder and his lawyers 
trying to figure out what happened to the stolen cash. Gradually, they put 
together the clues. They discovered that Karpov was part of a wider group of 
dodgy bureaucrats. It included another interior ministry official, Lt Col Artem 
Kutznetsov. And the head of a Moscow tax office, Olga Stepanova.
 Alexander Perepilichny, who collapsed and died suddenly. Photograph: Public 
domain 
Between them the gang splashed millions of dollars on cars, Moscow real estate 
and flats in Dubai. Browder’s investigation got a “huge breakthrough” when a 
Russian holed up in Surrey, Alexander Perepilichny, gave them printouts from 
Stepanova’s Swiss bank account. (Perepilichny did business with Stepanova, and 
fled to the UK when they fell out.)

In 2013, Perepilichnyy suddenly collapsed and died jogging outside his Surrey 
mansion. He was 44 and in good shape. Browder immediately wrote to Surrey 
police and told them Perepilichny had been receiving death threats. Detectives 
failed to reply. The police carried out a toxicology analysis on his corpse 22 
days later – by which time they were unable to find a cause of death. Browder 
is convinced that a Moscow assassin bumped off Perepilichny, just like 
Litvinenko. “I’m certain he was murdered. The police kicked it into the long 
grass. This is a travesty of justice,” he says.

It’s hard to disagree with Browder’s gloomy analysis of the current Russian 
regime but I point out that between 2000-2005 he was an ardent Putin supporter. 
He tells me: “I got it wrong. Putin is a totally inscrutable guy. He gives 
nothing away. People interpreted what they wanted to see in him.” He thinks 
Putin’s rule will last another “one, two, five years” before he is driven out, 
possibly by a coup. Western sanctions and the collapse of the rouble – it’s 
lost 50% of its value since last year – make Putin’s ruling system unviable, 
Browder thinks. “It’s based on 90% bribery and 10% repression. He has now run 
out of money for bribery, so he has to flip it over to 90% repression. I don’t 
think he [Putin] has got the infrastructure to be a proper repressive dictator.”

Interestingly, Browder says he opposes western sanctions on ordinary Russians, 
regarding them as an imprecise tool that punishes the wrong people. Rather, he 
would like to see the top 1,000 Russian government officials banned fromEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the US. Of London, he says: 
“Every Russian wants to come here. It’s their bolthole, their escape valve.” He 
adds: “We have lots of leverage.”

Browder says writing the book – his first – was the “hardest thing I ever 
did”. It took him 18 months, with the manuscript penned in a succession of 
planes and trains. He had a collaborator and sent early drafts to his wife and 
18-year-old son, David. “My son would say it’s boring,” he jokes. He hopes his 
memoir will reach a new audience. “Everything is about the story,” he says.

We finish our fried squid and marinaded sea bass. Browder says he has to 
leave. He’s off to Davos. There he will, once again, tell the “biblical” story 
of Sergei Magnitsky – a decent man who fell among thieves – to opinion formers 
and heads of state. His book, he admits in the final chapter of Red Notice, is 
a kind of macabre insurance policy. He writes: “If I’m killed, you will know 
who did it. When my enemies read this book, they will know that you know.”

Red Notice: How I Became Putin’s No.1 Enemy is published on 5 February by 
Transworld

Out in the cold: Vladimir Putin’s biggest enemies

1 Barack Obama Putin’s enmity towards Obama is ideological rather than 
personal. Putin’s KGB worldview is predicated on anti-Americanism: he views 
Moscow as a rival “superpower” to Washington, in terms of global reach and 
influence. Since Putin’s “return” as president in 2012 hostile rhetoric about 
America has hit record levels.

2 Mikhail Khodorkovsky <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mikhail-khodorkovsky>
 Putin arrested Khodorkovsky – at the time Russia’s wealthiest man – in 2003 
and packed him off to jail in Siberia. After a decade behind bars, he was 
unexpectedly freed by Russia’s president. In the event that Putin steps down 
from power, Khordorkovsky could play a major role in Russian politics. At 
least, this is the fantasy among Russia’s liberals.

3 Alexei Navalny <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny> The Moscow 
opposition leader is currently under house arrest. A court recently jailed 
Navalny’s brother on charges widely seen as fictitious: a sure sign that 
Navalny’s campaign against corruption and Putin’s leadership has got the 
Kremlin rattled. Navalny is a tall, charismatic lawyer with nationalist views 
and a popular blog: plenty of reasons for the authorities to shut him up.

4 Bill Browder Browder’s lobbying campaign following the murder of his lawyer 
Sergei Magnitsky has been extraordinarily successful, with the US and others 
banning the officials involved. Corrupt Russian bureaucrats have assets (and 
very often families) in the west. Without visas they can no longer enjoy them.

5 Petro Poroshenko <https://www.theguardian.com/world/petro-poroshenko> The 
pro-western president of Ukraine is in effect at war with Putin, who last year 
seized a large chunk of Ukraine – Crimea – and fomented a separatist rebellion 
in eastern Ukraine. Poroshenko says Russia has waged a covert invasion of his 
country, with troops, tanks and heavy weapons. Putin denies this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422030605666%2F2652584b-0035-40e7-9c6f-9d5db42674ba-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bill%20Browder%3A%20the%20Kremlin%20threatened%20to%20kill%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bill%20Browder%3A%20the%20Kremlin%20threatened%20to%20kill%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422030605666%2F2652584b-0035-40e7-9c6f-9d5db42674ba-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Boris Berezovsky. Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
And two dead ones ...

Boris Berezovsky <https://www.theguardian.com/world/boris-berezovsky> Once 
Putin’s close friend – they went on holiday together in the south of France – 
Berezovsky became the president’s biggest enemy when the two fell out in 2000. 
Berezovsky decamped to Britain where he led a noisy campaign against Putin, 
accusing him of numerous misdeeds. Berezovsky was found hanged in his Surrey 
mansion in 2013.

Alexander Litvinenko <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-litvinenko> 
An FSB officer, Litvinenko fled to London and worked for both Berezovsky and 
MI6. In 2006, two Russians – Dmitry Kovtun and Andrei Lugovoi – allegedly 
poisoned him with radioactive polonium in a Mayfair hotel. Afterwards, Putin 
said Litvinenko was too insignificant to be worth murdering. But the British 
government believes the Russian state killed Litvinenko in a carefully crafted 
plot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422030505897%2Ff8c7cc98-697b-4574-96b0-a1b04a072ca7-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bill%20Browder%3A%20the%20Kremlin%20threatened%20to%20kill%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bill%20Browder%3A%20the%20Kremlin%20threatened%20to%20kill%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422030505897%2Ff8c7cc98-697b-4574-96b0-a1b04a072ca7-680x1020.jpeg>
 Alexei Navalny. Photograph: Pochuyev Mikhail  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422030562683%2Fd81f4b28-d4da-4715-a152-0a0eb2e4855a-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bill%20Browder%3A%20the%20Kremlin%20threatened%20to%20kill%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bill%20Browder%3A%20the%20Kremlin%20threatened%20to%20kill%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2F-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422030562683%2Fd81f4b28-d4da-4715-a152-0a0eb2e4855a-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko AFP/Getty Images Photograph: MYKOLA 
LAZARENKO/AFP/Getty Images  