
Life was tough in Fleetwood 
<http://www.lancashire.gov.uk/acs/sites/museums/venues/fleetwood/?siteid=4049&pageid=16512&e=e>
 in the late '70s and '80s: the cod wars  
<http://www.britains-smallwars.com/RRGP/CodWar.htm>with Iceland had brought the 
virtual collapse of the fishing industry and nearly all visitors to theFylde 
coast <http://www.fyldecoast.co.uk/>preferred to spend their money in the 
port's bigger and brasher neighbour, Blackpool, nine miles to the south. After 
hundreds of Fleetwood homes were damaged in the floods of 1977 
<http://www.fleetwoodtoday.co.uk/news/local/cleveleys/anniversary_of_fleetwood_floods_marked_1_1559999>
, ugly grey sea defences known as the Berlin Wall were built along much of the 
town's seafront – hardly a recipe for enticing holidaymakers.

In such harsh times the kids at my school in Fleetwood couldn't be blamed for 
supporting one of the Manchester or Liverpool teams instead ofBlackpool FC 
<http://www.blackpoolfc.co.uk>. After the Seasiders' glory years in the 1950s, 
they spent 1978 to 1992 flitting between the third and fourth divisions, and 
the Bloomfield Road ground's proximity to the Irish Sea meant it was pretty 
chilly in the stands watching Blackpool getting beaten.
 Tangerine dreams: Blackpool warms to Fleetwood's challenge; but only up to a 
point. Photograph: Michael Regan/Getty Images 
Two decades later, times have changed. Blackpool had a glorious season 
<http://gordonmarsden.co.uk/index.php?rt=articles/blackpool_basks_in_promotion_glory!>
 in the Premier League last year when they were almost universally praised 
(Preston and Burnley fans excepted) for their exciting, attacking football and 
my kids went to see their team (Blackpool) get thrashed by the nearest club to 
our house (Arsenal) yet still came home smiling. Blackpool are back in the 
Championship now but may yet sneak into the playoffs for another year.

Up the coast, meanwhile, Fleetwood Town FC <http://www.fleetwoodtownfc.com/> 
are riding high in the Blue Square Premier and there are hopes of promotion 
into the Football League this season. When Blackpool are playing away, fans 
often go up to Fleetwood to watch their neighbours play.

But now life has got a bit complicated, albeit in a nice way, for 
Fleetwood-based Blackpool fans. For the first time since 1980, Fleetwood have 
beendrawn against Blackpool 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2011/dec/31/fleetwood-town-blackpool-fa-cup-fylde?newsfeed=true>
 in the FA Cup, on Saturday 7 January, this time in the third round and at
Fleetwood's ground, Highbury 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Highbury_Stadium,_Fleetwood>. Who should get 
their support, the home town team or the tangerine neighbours who for years 
have themselves been the underdogs?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8jY0jBYPABQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8jY0jBYPABQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8jY0jBYPABQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
In the Highbury sports and social club, overlooking Fleetwood's ground, it's a 
foregone conclusion. The Fleetwood fans say their town will triumph, "2-0 or 
2-1" and believe that despite what they see as a sometimes patronising attitude 
of Blackpool fans to Fleetwood, the bigger team needs the win most – both for 
its pride and as a moneyspinner. For Fleetwood, getting promoted is more 
important … but beatingBlackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> would be a bonus.

Mick Beeston, a steward at a former incarnation of Fleetwood Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fleetwood-town>, reckons the success of 
the team is good for the whole town:

I was here when only 50 people turned up for a match but now everyone is 
getting involved with something a bit special and they want it to last.

For Tim Bowman, a Fleetwood man now living in Ipswich:

It's put the town on the map. Everyone knows about Fleetwood now.

If Blackpool fans are worried, they're not showing it. Up the Fylde coast in 
St Annes, Derek Parkinson is planning to watch the match on the big screen at 
Bloomfield Road as tickets for the 5,500-capacity ground in Fleetwood were all 
snapped up. His ideal scenario is a draw at Fleetwood, then for Blackpool to 
win the replay:

It's fantastic what they're doing there [in Fleetwood]. I think Blackpool fans 
wish them all the best.

The strongest feelings – and insults - come from Blackpool fans living in 
Fleetwood who have no intention of jumping ship to their town team. One, who 
did not wish to be named, said the Fleetwood club was:

...getting too big for its boots and needs a good spanking. I hope 
[Blackpool's manager, Ian Holloway] fields a strong side because if Fleetwood 
win, the bragging rights are going to last forever – it would be deadly.
 