
“A disgusting feast of filth” was the Daily Mail’s infamous headline about 
Sarah Kane <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/oct/28/theatre.stage>’s 
debut play, Blasted, when it opened at the Royal Court 20 years ago. Like 
Edward Bond’sSaved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/09/edward-bond-saved-original-cast> 
at the Royal Court 30 years previously, Blasted became notorious overnight. 
Young, female and attempting to write a play that wasn’t just adventurous in 
content but in form too, Kane found herself isolated in the face of largely 
critical incomprehension from what the Royal Court’sCarl Miller 
<http://www.theweek.co.uk/theatre/56459/emil-and-detectives-national-theatre-reviews>
, pre-echoing the“dead white males” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2007/may/14/arewomendirectorssuffering>
 debate raised by Nicholas Hytner more than 10 years later, described as “a 
group of men in comfortable shoes”.


Gender and age may very well have played a part in the response, but as Aleks 
Sierz <http://www.inyerfacetheatre.com/> and others have pointed out, not all 
the reviews were hostile – some alluded toKane’s promise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/1999/feb/28/featuresreview.review9>. 
What’s notable about the reviews, as Kane herself said in arare interview with 
Dan Rebellato <http://www.danrebellato.co.uk/sarah-kane-interview/>, is how 
many of them either just told readers what happened during the play or 
catalogued the more grisly moments (often not entirely incorrectly).

But then that’s what tends to happen when critics faced with new work 
–particularly new work trying to do something different and find new forms – 
are writing in the heat of the moment and with an imminent deadline. It’s 
perhaps not surprising that in the past many of the most famous examples of 
critics championing new work in the face of their colleagues’ critical 
perplexity, including Tynan’sadvocacy for Look Back in Anger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/may/21/theatre.samanthaellis> and 
Harold Hobson’s support of Pinter’s The Birthday Party, came from those writing 
on Sunday papers. They had had time to digest, reflect and, possibly even read, 
some of their colleagues’ reviews. After all critical writing is not an exam in 
which there is a right or wrong answer and no peeping is allowed. As we all 
know from some of the best bloggers writing today, writing not just in response 
to the show itself but towhat others have already penned 
<http://postcardsgods.blogspot.co.uk/2014/06/mr-burns-almeida.html> can lead to 
acute and insightful writing and spawn fascinating dialogues around the work.

Increasingly theatres have been recognising this, although in fact it has been 
the West End rather than new writing theatres that have led the way in allowing 
critics to see showsover a series of evenings with an embargo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2012/nov/01/theatre-press-nights>
. It offers the best of both worlds: time for those writing to reflect more 
deeply, and yet still the excitement of a flurry of reviews that create a bit 
of a buzz around a show and make it news-worthy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsarah-kane-blasted-was-dismissed-by-critics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420812230521%2Ff3616237-8c59-40d3-a549-b0bc3d002daf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blasted%20was%20dismissed%20by%20a%20handful%20of%20critics%20but%20the%20conversation%20has%20changed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsarah-kane-blasted-was-dismissed-by-critics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blasted%20was%20dismissed%20by%20a%20handful%20of%20critics%20but%20the%20conversation%20has%20changed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsarah-kane-blasted-was-dismissed-by-critics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420812230521%2Ff3616237-8c59-40d3-a549-b0bc3d002daf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Danny Webb (Ian) and Lydia Wilson (Cate) in Blasted at the Lyric Hammersmith 
in 2010. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
But the entire critical climate is very different from what it was 20 years 
ago and that can only be a good thing. Yes, the Mail’s Quentin Letts stilldubs 
shows a disgrace 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/reviews/article-2824525/A-National-DISGRACE-Sleazy-Amoral-paid-QUENTIN-LETTS-horrified-National-Theatre-s-latest-offering.html>
, demanding that that no more public money should be spent on the theatre 
concerned, and all critics – whether online or in print – will misjudge 
particular pieces of work, myself included. But what has changed is the sheer 
number of people who now have a platform towrite about theatre in many 
different ways 
<http://statesofdeliquescence.blogspot.co.uk/2014/11/got-life-got-music-got-theatre.html>
, often with passion, love, eloquence and insight.

Back in 1995 what a small group of 20 or so people wrote about Blasted was – 
very largely – the conversation. Alternative points of view, such as the urgent 
response by the director James Macdonald published in the Observer, were few 
and far between. That’s because those who didn’t think Blasted was “a feast of 
filth” but a crucial and important new play weren’t invited on to a platform to 
express another view, or couldn’t find one willing to host them. There wasn’t 
an arena like Twitter where other playwrights and directors could respond 
directly and very publicly to the play and so creating a different dialogue and 
narrative around it, encouraging another audience to take a look.

Nobody has to wait to be invited now. And while that means that along with the 
best and most acute observations there is often a lot of noise, not all of it 
useful with some merely replicating what the mainstream press is doing anyway, 
it does mean that the views of print critics such as myself are not the final 
word. They are instead part of a much wider conversation and a continuous 
ongoing dialogue between critics (of all kinds, and whatever their platform), 
playwrights and theatre-makers.

As responses to recent work including Three Kingdoms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2012/may/16/three-kingdoms-shape-british-theatre-or-flop>
, Mr Burns andPomona 
<http://www.danrebellato.co.uk/spilledink/2014/11/22/pomona> have proved, it is 
often not the first critical dispatches from the front line that have proved 
most interesting but those that have followed in response. It means that the 
kind of overheated response and whipped up frenzy that the young Sarah Kane 
encountered 20 years ago is less likely to happen now, and that can only be 
welcome for individual playwrights, theatres and companies doing difficult, 
risky work. And for critics too.

Kate Ashfield on Blasted: ‘the whole run was charged with energy’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/12/kate-ashfield-sarah-kane-blasted>

A blast at our smug theatre: Edward Bond on Sarah Kane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/12/edward-bond-sarah-kane-blasted>

Sarah Kane: Why can’t theatre be as gripping as footie? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/12/sarah-kane-theatre-football-blasted>

 * Blasted is revived next month at the Other Room in Cardiff 
<http://www.otherroomtheatre.com/en/> and as part of Sheffield Theatres’ Sarah 
Kane season <http://www.sheffieldtheatres.co.uk/event/blasted-15/>
 