
Early next month the mayor of London will announce the winner of the 
competition to find the designers of the Illuminated River, a £20m project to 
create a permanent “world-class lighting scheme” over 17 bridges in central
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. The Kinks’ “dirty old river”, 
TS Eliot’s “sweet Thames”, the waterway rhapsodised by Wordsworth and given a 
Venetian sparkle by Canaletto, old Father Thames himself will, depending on the 
choice of winner, be arrayed with patterns like a Hawaiian shirt, or disco hues 
of orange and purple, or lights that switch on and off in response to its tidal 
pulse, as if he were wearing the world’s biggest Fitbit.

To the casual observer, the Thames looks quite all right already – to be 
precise, absolutely stonkingly wonderful

Described as a “public realm commission on an unprecedented scale”, the 
Illuminated River aims to fix a problem you might not have known existed, which 
is that the Thames is “a ribbon of darkness… at odds with the ambition to make 
London a 24-hour city”. It is promised that the cost will be almost entirely 
borne by private benefactors, with £5m pledged from the Rothschild Foundation 
and £5m from the Arcadia Fund, which was set up by the philanthropist Lisbet 
Rausing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcda2efb90c3195c98f3eef10bac7175da7c2d0b5%2F0_446_4000_2612%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bling!%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bling%21%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcda2efb90c3195c98f3eef10bac7175da7c2d0b5%2F0_446_4000_2612%2F4000.jpg>
 Diller Scofidio + Renfro’s proposal for Chelsea bridge, a water screen with 
projected text. 
A quite dazzling array of creative and eminent people are involved – artists 
such asJames Turrell <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/james-turrell> 
andMichael Craig-Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-craig-martin>, the former 
Serpentine gallery directorJulia Peyton-Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/oct/30/serpentine-co-drector-julia-peyton-jones-to-step-down-25-years>
, architectsDavid Adjaye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/aug/02/david-adjaye-interview-not-always-looking-at-usual-references>
 andDiller Scofidio + Renfro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/dec/30/diller-scofidio-renfro-high-line>
, who were co-creators of theHigh Line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2010/jul/13/return-high-line-new-york>
 in New York. The project has come about because the banker and philanthropist 
Lord Rothschild, through conversations with Turrell going back years, felt that 
the current lighting of the river is a bit of a mess. Turrell says that “the 
river that once united London came to divide the city” and that the lighting 
project offers the “possibility of uniting the city again”. He speaks of the 
magic of life at night, “when we finish our day job, get dressed up and have a 
different life”. Illumination, he says, can make a city that is “a peasant by 
day” into a “princess by night”. .

London super-sewer is waste of £4bn, says assessor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/14/london-super-sewer-is-waste-of-4bn-says-assessor>
And so the Illuminated River <http://illuminatedriver.london/> will join the 
garden bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/22/thames-garden-bridge-huge-expensive-folly>
, a “diamond jubilee bridge 
<http://www.wandsworthguardian.co.uk/news/10475073.Diamond_Jubilee_bridge_from_Battersea_to_Fulham_given_thumbs_up/>
”,an alternative garden bridge 
<http://www.alliesandmorrison.com/news/could-blackfriars-bridge-be-londons-bridge-garden/>
, a proposedfloating parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/commentisfree/2016/apr/10/parliament-london-bristol>
, and yet another garden bridge that reuses a former railway crossing, in the 
ever-growing number of entrepreneurial proposals dreamed up by private 
individuals, with varying prospects of success and of support by public 
authorities. Which in turn follow a long line of islands and lagoons, of 
floating lidos, “living bridges” and pontoon walkways, the London Eye, the 
formerly wobbly bridge and other fantasies mostly failed but sometimes 
achieved. No other urban space in the country has the same power of attraction 
to visionaries, dreamers and self-publicists. Yet to the casual observer, 
especially one watching from the banks of the Mersey, Clyde, Tyne or Humber, 
the Thames looks quite all right already – to be precise, absolutely stonkingly 
wonderful – and not greatly in need of improvement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdda8f6cda880a46f4564f36262eab41d02cfe6dd%2F196_0_2612_1386%2F2612.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bling!%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bling%21%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdda8f6cda880a46f4564f36262eab41d02cfe6dd%2F196_0_2612_1386%2F2612.jpg>
 Gensler’s proposal for a bubble-like pontoon to house parliament while 
Westminster Palace is refurbished. 
At the same time, huge construction projects are radically and sometimes 
brutally altering the river with considerably less poetic ambition, input from 
grandees and celebratory PR. Construction has started on theThames Tideway 
Tunnel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/14/london-super-sewer-is-waste-of-4bn-says-assessor>
, also known as thesupersewer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/14/london-super-sewer-is-waste-of-4bn-says-assessor>
, a £4.2bn, 16-mile-long concrete pipe under the river’s bed, whose seven years 
of construction will disrupt the lives of those living near its work sites and 
whose infrastructure of access, maintenance, ventilation and servicing will 
require 24 highly prominent structures to be built in and alongside the river. 
On the river’s banks, meanwhile, clusters of towers are going up, such asOne 
Blackfriars 
<https://www.berkeleygroup.co.uk/new-homes/london/southwark/one-blackfriars>, 
aka the Boomerang, of a scale and number the Thames has never seen before.

Objectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/27/londoners-back-skyscraper-limit-skyline>
 to both the sewer and the towers argue that they show insufficient sense of a 
big picture, that they narrowly pursue their aims of evacuating waste and 
making profit without a coherent overview of what might be best for what 
everyone agrees is a great urban asset. So there are flurries of good 
intentions on the one hand and blunt construction facts on the other, with 
little connection between them. There are many visions but no vision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bb3de173728524f63a481978a320783102b431b%2F121_0_1799_933%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bling!%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bling%21%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bb3de173728524f63a481978a320783102b431b%2F121_0_1799_933%2F1799.jpg>
 ‘The Boomerang’: an artist’s impression of One Blackfriars, currently under 
construction. 
Somewhere in between are effective but less glamorous initiatives such as the 
decades-long programme of opening up of riverside paths. There are practical 
proposals, such as thecrossings 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/mayor-commits-to-east-london-crossings>
 that mayor Sadiq Khan wants to build in east London, which would significantly 
improve the functioning of the capital, but which get less attention and 
support from the media than more fanciful ideas. There is theproposed bridge 
for pedestrians and cyclists at Nine Elms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/25/public-fury-as-new-bridge-across-the-thames-announced-at-nine-elms>
, near Battersea power station, overblown in its design and feared by residents 
on the more prosperous north bank, but nonetheless beneficial in its intent.

A clear strategy on tall buildings can cut developers down to size | Rowan 
Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/27/skyscrapers-poll-planners-developers-strategy>
Critical to visions for the future of the Thames is an idea of what it is. 
UntilJoseph Bazalgette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/mar/26/comment.design> embanked 
it in the mid-19th century it was a huge sewer, while also sustaining intricate 
webs of commercial activity at its edges. Until quite recently it was dominated 
by industry. For at least 30 years, sinceRichard Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/richard-rogers> presented ambitious 
proposals for new bridges and pedestrianised embankments, it has been called 
“London’s most undervalued asset”, the “heart” of the city, what the architect
Graham Morrison <http://www.alliesandmorrison.com/people/graham-morrison/>now 
calls “London’s largest public space”. Architects like Rogers have proposed 
ways in which its banks can be more readily enjoyed by the public, such that is 
might be more like the Seine or the Grand Canal in Paris.

There is a further view, which is that its value is in its wildness. “It is 
crucial,” says the leading London bloggerthe Gentle Author 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/the-gentle-author>, “because it is our 
connection to the greater natural world beyond the urban environment. It is 
uplifting that it is alive with something so much greater than human force.” 
Michael Ball, of the campaign groupThames Central Open Spaces 
<http://www.tcos.org.uk/>, calls it “an incredible breathing space all across 
London”. ProfessorTony Travers <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tonytravers>
 of the London School of Economics, a man often seen on TV news giving sober 
analyses of electoral politics, waxes lyrical on the subject: “It is properly 
wild, mythic, its movements are governed by the moon. When you look down it is 
like looking at the sea.” It is dangerous, with tides that fluctuate by 6-7m. 
The country’s two busiest lifeboat stations are in central London. “All 
interventions have to be seen against this background,” says Travers. “It’s 
about intruding on the wild.” In these respects the Thames is nothing like 
“nice rivers like the Spree or the Seine”, which are narrow, tame, not tidal – 
“canals, really”.

At its worst the Illuminated River could be a vanity project by a metropolitan 
elite… high-end light pollution

Travers also says that the river is a “bit like the family dog”, familiar, 
loved but a bit neglected. It suffers from administrative neglect at odds with 
the protestations of admiration from its would-be boosters. No single body 
takes responsibility for it. As Travers likes to point out, it forms a boundary 
of the many London boroughs along its edge, which means it suffers from the 
fact that all local authorities “are more attentive for good political reasons 
to their centres”, which is where more of their voters will notice what is 
happening. “If you want to build one library you put it in the middle,” he 
says, “if one waste transfer plant you put it on the edge.”

For Morrison, the Thames’s problem is that “nobody has custodianship of it, so 
no one’s looking at it as a space”. Both the mayor and the boroughs have so far 
proved unwilling or unable to take on this responsibility. He believes 
development on its edges should be guided by a “proper spatial conservation 
plan, a complete architectural strategy”, without which “developments line up 
along the river like pigs feeding at a trough”, each one grabbing its portion 
of value-enhancing view. He has argued that the river and its embankments be 
designated as a single listed building, so that it would be treated with the 
respect it deserves. Travers suggests that a single entity be created with 
responsibility for the wellbeing of the Thames, as has happened with a smaller 
London river, the Lea <https://www.visitleevalley.org.uk/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b33d79a98075d3e6bb69346c98eb874080ed6cc%2F0_0_4977_2846%2F4977.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bling!%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bling%21%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b33d79a98075d3e6bb69346c98eb874080ed6cc%2F0_0_4977_2846%2F4977.jpg>
 Tideway Tunnel project: the design for one of the 24 new structures, at 
Chelsea Embankment. Photograph: Tideway London 
By contrast with governmental impotence over the river, the privatised 
monopoly Thames Water has been able to push through its colossal supersewer 
project and fund it through a compulsory increase in the water rates paid by 
Londoners. The purpose of the sewer seems reasonable enough, which is to 
augment the 19th-century systems for disposing of rainwater and sewage, which 
are no longer able to cope with a city that is both growing and more profligate 
in its use of water. The sewer’s opponents, however, argue that it is an 
“outdated and expensive folly” and “an extravagant way to deal with the 
occasional flushes of storm water” that they will be built to address.

George Osborne under attack over Garden Bridge cash pledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/17/george-osborne-london-garden-bridge-cash>
Professor Chris Binnie, an engineer who chaired the steering group that 
approved the project in 2005 has since announced that his approval was based on 
information that “turns out not to have been factually correct” and that the 
money being spent is largely a“waste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/14/london-super-sewer-is-waste-of-4bn-says-assessor>
”. Other objectors say that there are cheaper, less disruptive, more 
environmentally friendly ways of dealing with rainwater, which involve slowing 
down the rate at which it reaches the drains through such things asporous 
pavements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/25/why-concrete-rain-flash-floods-weatherwatch>
,swales 
<http://permaculturenews.org/2012/05/16/swales-the-permaculture-element-that-really-holds-water/>
, holding ponds and rainwater tanks. But such measures require a city-wide 
approach, which is more the province of mayors than private companies. Thames 
Water finds it easier to commission heavy engineering, collect payment from its 
users and make a profit for its investors.

The sewer will also generate those 24 structures on the Thames foreshore, 
which will be as impactful as they are under-publicised. As Thames Water 
rightly says, these could be an opportunity to “reconnect Londoners to the 
Thames”, which in turn suggests that a level of attention should be paid to 
their design at least equal to that spent on the illuminations. Indeed, some 
respected architectural practices are on the job –Muf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/jun/21/younger-generation-architects>
,Hawkins\Brown <http://www.hawkinsbrown.com/>, Weston Williamson 
<http://www.westonwilliamson.com/projects/> – and they may reveal admirable 
designs next year, but they are employed as sub-contractors to the three huge 
engineering firms constructing different sections of the sewer, a situation 
that often squeezes the life out of architects’ good intentions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe991f675b1de2d61312b79dc8ab751ee6335da91%2F477_24_4163_1998%2F4163.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bling!%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bling%21%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe991f675b1de2d61312b79dc8ab751ee6335da91%2F477_24_4163_1998%2F4163.jpg>
 One-world design’s proposal for converting a disused railway bridge into a 
pedestrian garden bridge between Barnes and Chiswick. Photograph: Andrew Wilson 
/ one-world design architects 
Meanwhile other players, of varying degrees of opportunism and seriousness, 
keep jumping into the anarchic void left by the lack of oversight of the 
Thames’s wellbeing. The garden bridge project,dreamed up by Joanna Lumley  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/24/joanna-lumley-role-boris-johnson-thames-garden-bridge-london-thomas-heatherwick>
and now staggering under accusations ofpoor procurement procedure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/17/selection-of-london-garden-bridge-designer-thames-unfair-boris-johnson>
,poor value for money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/11/london-garden-bridge-report-national-audit-office-public-money>
,false claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/14/garden-bridge-half-truths-deceptions-evasions-thames-london-rowan-moore>
 and ill-conceived design, is another. Graham Morrison’s practice, Allies and 
Morrison, have suggested a cheaper, saner alternative 
<http://www.alliesandmorrison.com/news/could-blackfriars-bridge-be-londons-bridge-garden/>
, by reusing the abandoned pillars of an ex-railway bridge at Blackfriars. The 
architects Gensler, who once proposed afloating corporate fun-fest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/nov/13/london-river-park-floating-public-space>
 next to the City of London, now want to put parliament into a big bubble-like 
pontoon while the Palace of Westminster is refurbished. Chris Medland, leader 
of the architectural practiceone-world design 
<http://www.one-worlddesign.co.uk/about-us/> is punting two ideas, a “Diamond 
Jubilee Bridge 
<http://www.one-worlddesign.co.uk/portfolio-view/diamond-jubilee-bridge/>” for 
pedestrians and cyclists andthe conversion of a disused railway bridge 
<http://www.one-worlddesign.co.uk/portfolio-view/thames-promenade/> into a 
tree-planted “haven for wildlife”.

And then there is the Illuminated River  <http://illuminatedriver.london/>
project, which tries hard to avoid the garden bridge’s missteps by going about 
the procurement of its designers in an impeccable way. Its promises to cost the 
public sector very little are more plausible than the bridge’s. It has already 
lined up an impressive array of support, from Khan to Duncan Wilson, the head 
of Historic England, to the leadership of the City of London.

The official blurbs, however, ring alarms. They say the project will 
“contribute to the international profile for London as a world city, a centre 
for creative industries”, as if the role of this magnificent work of nature and 
humanity is to be a PR bauble. The assumption that the Thames’s relative 
darkness is a problem, rather than a blessed relief from the sparkling buzzing 
hubbub of the rest of the “24-hour” city, is untested and undebated, as is the 
belief that a single artistic conception is the best way to counter the lack of 
structured thought about the river. The blurbs also say that the river 
requires, as they put it, a “creative” response, which suggests that it and its 
bridges are blank canvases for artistic expression, whereas most of them are 
beautiful and fascinating structures in no need of further adornment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dd584dba1f02988d604001bffe615b57180ea6e%2F0_322_3200_2078%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bling!%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bling%21%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dd584dba1f02988d604001bffe615b57180ea6e%2F0_322_3200_2078%2F3200.jpg>
 Low tide… Amanda Levete’s proposal illuminates the edges of the river, so 
changing with the tides. 
If you ask silly questions you get silly answers, and all six shortlisted 
teams combine good ideas with intrusive proposals and superfluous gestures. 
They have a tendency to duplicate and over-announce beauties that are good at 
announcing themselves – the rhythm of the tides, the arrival of sunset. One 
wants to make Westminster Bridge into a giant clock, on the basis that Big Ben, 
already quite an effective timepiece, is nearby. The best of the proposals, 
such as those by Diller Scofidio + Renfro andAmanda Levete 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/08/illuminated-river-london-thames>
, appreciate that the main aim should be to bring the best out of what is 
already there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05788222966a5c2dc9a7d3104026f80ba412688d%2F0_388_3200_2012%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bling!%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bling%21%20goes%20London%3A%20the%20Illuminated%20River%20project%20and%20other%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbling-goes-the-capital-the-illuminated-river-thames-project-supersewer-boomerang%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05788222966a5c2dc9a7d3104026f80ba412688d%2F0_388_3200_2012%2F3200.jpg>
 …and high tide. Photograph: MRC and AL A 
The project’s recently appointed director, Sarah Gaventa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sarah-gaventa>, however, makes it sound 
very much better than its bumf and its brief. The idea, she says, is not to 
create “Christmas lights 24/7” or abolish darkness. In some cases intrusive 
lighting that is already there will be taken away. She promises subtlety and 
responsiveness and that the competition will select, rather than a rigid 
concept, a team that will listen to the views of the many people affected. They 
“want to do something for London but not impose it” – “the last thing we’re 
going to do is destroy someone’s love of a bridge”. She talks about the 
experience of being on bridges rather than looking at them and about making 
them more enjoyable.

Turrell also says that the intention is not to obliterate the dark. He argues 
that the Illuminated River could reverse the “Las Vegas-isation” that the banks 
of the Thames are currently suffering, whereby commercial blocks of offices and 
flats strive for attention with ever more lurid lighting. “If you just add all 
the time, add more and more light, it loses its meaning,” he says. This aim 
would require political leverage over adjoining landowners and is beyond the 
project’s current brief, but it is vitally important. It doesn’t make sense to 
conceive delicate schemes for the bridges if they are out-glared by 
neighbouring buildings. At its worst the Illuminated River could be a vanity 
project by a metropolitan elite that, like the Bourbon monarchy, would have 
learned nothing from this year’s expressions of popular discontent. It would 
reinforce the perception that central London is a glittering self-inflating 
bubble disconnected from the rest of the country and its own hinterland. It 
would be high-end light pollution. It would gild the lilies that are the Thames 
bridges and polish the turd that is politicians’ failure to take care of the 
river.

At its best the project could indeed enhance the experience of the Thames, to 
bring out the best of one of the great urban spaces of the world. It could also 
be the prompt for what is really desperately needed, which is a public body 
with the power and talents to protect its best interests and to ensure that new 
development adds to it rather than damages it. As Graham Morrison says, in 
another generation the river’s greatest qualities could be gone.

The six shortlisted Illuminated River projects are on display in the Royal 
Festival Hall 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/illuminated-river-1002081>, London 
SE1 until Tuesday. The winner will be announced on 8 December
 