
With my questions last month I seem unwittingly to have stumbled on a problem 
with dictionary definitions that had never occurred to me before. Words, 
obviously, take on new meanings over time and, at some point, the new meaning 
gets into the dictionaries. "Gay", meaning homosexual, may have long been 
prison slang thirty-five years ago, but it was not included in the 1971 edition 
of the main OED. Today most dictionaries put it first. But last months case of 
the computer mainframe/central processing unit seems to be different.

Originally, "mainframe" meant one thing and then came to mean another. Yet 
most dictionaries have not only retained the old meaning, but persist in 
listing it first - while the 2002 two-volume Shorter Oxford Dictionary does not 
include it at all in its "more than half a million definitions".

Brian Boutel in Wellington, New Zealand has unearthed some history, which I 
pass on to dictionary editors. "In the early 1960s," he says, "computers were 
physically large and housed in several cabinets, typically connected together 
by fat cables snaking under a false floor. The 'mainframe' was the cabinet 
containing the central processing unit (CPU). Other cabinets held memory, the 
various controllers and peripheral devices."

So, once upon a time our Quick clue "Computer's central processing unit (9)" 
did equal "mainframe". However, Brian continued, "Later, when smaller 'mini' 
computers appeared, the CPU was typically located in the same cabinet as the 
other components and there was no separate 'mainframe'. It was then that larger 
machines became knows as 'mainframes', simply because they had one and the 
'minis' did not."

Lexicographers may also be interested in John Underwood's remarks. He says 
that inside the modern PC the CPU is just one chip on what used to be called 
the motherboard (MB), but which in this post-feminist world is now called a 
mainboard (MB). Nevertheless, he has even heard computer experts use "central 
processing unit" for the metal box of a PC into which everything (like the 
keyboard, screen, mouse and printer) is plugged.

My own conclusion is that dictionaries should be quicker than they have been 
in their new editions to mark obsolete science and technology definitions as 
such. On the other hand, Rahul Siddharthan from Chennai, India, has a much more 
radical view. His advice is never to trust dictionaries for scientific, 
technical or computer definitions.
____________

Mr Siddharthan might have added medical definitions to that list. Arachne and 
I discussed at length a clue in her Quiptic No 327 before it was uploaded last 
month. It was one for ADENOIDS: "Doctor Addison, first to examine tissue in the 
throat (8)" [ADDISON + E(xamine) (anag)]. The original clue had "glands" in the 
definition, which was where the problem started.

My Chambers 21st Century Dictionary has adenoids as "a pair of glands". That 
looked good, but for "adenoids" Collins has "a mass of lymphoid tissue". Even a 
lay person knows that the function of glands is to secrete things into the 
body, which tissue (even lymphoid) surely does not do. My older Chambers has 
for adenoids "glandular tissue at the back of the nose", but also has "adenoid" 
(singular and as an adjective) as "gland-like, glandular". Glandular, of 
course, can mean "relating to a gland", but it can also mean "like a gland". 
The plot, adenoid-like, was thickening.

So I turned to all true hypochondriacs' regular bedside reading, the British 
Medical Association's Complete Family Health Encyclopedia. For adenoids it has: 
"Midline swelling at the back of the nose ... made up of lymph nodes." No sign 
of a secreting gland there! A quick check of medical school websites revealed 
that some spoke of "adenoids" and some of "adenoid glands". But adenoid, as an 
adjective, means "gland-like". When we realised that we were dealing with 
"gland-like glands", we ran for cover, thankful that being a good doctor has 
little or nothing to do with being good at semantics.________

Returning to the theme of words that have changed their meaning, my Wellington 
computer expert also tells me that "pavlova" originally was not a 
meringue-based dessert at all (see my column last month). His source is the 
1997 Oxford Dictionary of New Zealand English, edited by the late Harry Orsman. 
It has a 1927 recipe for Pavlova, which was for a moulded jelly, like a 
multi-coloured tutu. The dictionary also has a 1929 recipe for a meringue 
version, called Pavlova Cake, to distinguish it from the original Pavlova 
jelly. The first New Zealand reference to just "pavlova" as the meringue 
confection is not until 1953. It seems that, by then, the jelly was history. 
But this does rather knock on the head any claim that the pavlova cake was 
invented by a chef in Western Australia in 1935.

Â· Hugh Stevenson is the Guardian's crossword editor
 