
Have you heard the good news? The blockchain is here – and it’s going to save 
everything.

If you aren’t tied to the tech community, you might not have picked up on this 
salvation rhetoric. But you probably have heard of bitcoin,which burst into the 
public consciousness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/nov/25/is-bitcoin-about-to-change-the-world-peer-to-peer-cryptocurrency-virtual-wallet>
 beforeimploding dramatically 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/17/why-bitcoin-is-the-worst-investment-2014>
 in 2014.



But now, bitcoin is starting to look less important than the engine that 
drives it – the blockchain. It was created to solve a problem that had been 
puzzling digital activists for decades: how to createdigital property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/drm> without a central authority 
keeping track of who owns what.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbitcoin-made-simple-video-animation&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F29%2F1398765903214%2FBItcoin640360.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bitcoin%20made%20simple%20%E2%80%93%20video%20animation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbitcoin-made-simple-video-animation>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bitcoin%20made%20simple%20%E2%80%93%20video%20animation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F30%2Fbitcoin-made-simple-video-animation&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F29%2F1398765903214%2FBItcoin640360.png>
Bitcoin made simple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2014/apr/30/bitcoin-made-simple-video-animation>
The answer to that question, first proposed by bitcoin’s pseudonymous creator, 
Satoshi Nakamoto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/02/bitcoin-craig-wright-satoshi-nakamoto-inventor-scepticism>
, was to create a decentralised digital ledger, keeping track of every 
transaction made, and with its accuracy guaranteed through the combined honesty 
of the entire network.

The core of the idea is to get computers burning energy in order to prove that 
they are trustworthy, and stamping that trust on the “blocks” of recorded 
transactions. You could still lie to the network – but you’d need to burn more 
energy doing so than every honest participant, combined.

Bitcoin <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/bitcoin> was the first 
technology to use the blockchain, but the currency is now starting to look a 
bit like the steam pumping engines invented in the 17th century. Yes, it’s 
ingenious, but the real revolution comes when the underlying technology is used 
for something altogether new.

And now for something completely different: some positive news
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/01/and-now-for-something-completely-different-some-positive-news>
And so the technology world has fallen over itself to find out what that 
invention could be. A permissionless, distributed, trust-free network has the 
power to revolutionise not just financial technology, stock markets and 
banking, but also the music industry, digital access in some of the world’s 
poorest nations, and could even ensure yourItalian extra-virgin olive oil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jan/04/olive-oil-real-thing> 
really is from Italy.


And yet sceptics warn that the waste at the heart of the blockchain is not 
worth the marginal improvements. Anyway, what harm is there in a little bit of 
centralisation?

Chain reaction

For its first five years of existence, Bitcoin overshadowed its engine in 
technological circles, as the price of one coin fluctuated from nothing, to 
$31, to $2, to $266, to $100, to $1,250, to $200 (it currently stands at $700, 
following a post-Brexit boom).

The blockchain, intended to document bitcoin transactions, can also be used as 
a distributed ledger for … well, anything. If it can be recorded digitally, it 
can be written on a blockchain and kept beyond the reach of controlling states, 
malicious attackers and those who would rewrite history.

Initially, this took the form of what became known as “coloured coins”. The 
idea was that a particular sliver of bitcoin could be permanently marked with 
some other property: say, ownership of a stock, or a plot of land. It can be 
thought of as taking a marker and writing on a £5 note: “Whoever holds this 
also owns one common share of Apple stock” – except that thanks to modern 
cryptography, the signature cannot be forged, the £5 cannot be falsified, and 
everyone can see when it changes hands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fblockchain-answer-life-universe-everything-bitcoin-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff029b1186be7751ad692d33792944d81ff8affd%2F0_15_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blockchain%3A%20the%20answer%20to%20life%2C%20the%20universe%20and%20everything%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fblockchain-answer-life-universe-everything-bitcoin-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blockchain%3A%20the%20answer%20to%20life%2C%20the%20universe%20and%20everything%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fblockchain-answer-life-universe-everything-bitcoin-technology%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff029b1186be7751ad692d33792944d81ff8affd%2F0_15_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 Bitcoin has experienced a post-Brexit boom. Photograph: Benoit Tessier/Reuters 
For a long time, the ability to use the blockchain in this way was treated as 
an interesting side-effect of bitcoin’s role as a currency, but the tenfold 
collapse in the currency during 2014 prompted many who had invested in the 
bitcoin ecosystem – whether financially or intellectually – to seek other uses 
for the underlying technology.

London’s Provenance <https://www.provenance.org/>, for instance, aims to use 
the same technology to provide a transparent trustworthy platform for 
presenting the history and, well, provenance of a business’s products. The 
company has gone through some changes since it waslaunched in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/apr/25/jessi-baker-clothes-slaves-fashion-provenance-website-revolution-consumer>
, and the blockchain now forms a core part of its offering.The idea 
<https://www.provenance.org/whitepaper> is that a Chilean vineyard can, for 
instance, publicly share a bottle’s origin in its fields, and track it 
throughout the chain of production, all the while recording its statements 
publicly for posterity. At the end of the chain, a shopper can check a tag on 
the bottle and find out precisely what happened in its journey.

Others aim to preserve the financial core of the blockchain concept, while 
returning some establishment credibility to the project. In May last year,New 
York’s Nasdaq announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/13/nasdaq-bitcoin-blockchain> 
it was exploring the potential of using coloured coins to track stocks.

Nasdaq’s head, Bob Greifeld, was optimistic, saying: “Utilising the blockchain 
is a natural digital evolution for managing physical securities. Once you cut 
the apron strings of need for the physical, the opportunities we can envision 
blockchain providing stand to benefit not only our clients, but the broader 
global capital markets.”

It is also becoming clear that it will no longer be accurate to talk about 
“the” blockchain. Instead, there are many blockchains, as companies are born 
with different needs from a distributed ledger than those of Bitcoin. Perhaps 
the most innovative of them is Russian-Swiss company Ethereum, formed around 
the idea of using the same sort of network to do much more than record 
information.

The true fascination of bitcoin is not its mystery inventor | Dominic Frisby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/03/bitcoin-craig-wright-satoshi-nakamoto-blockchain-technology>
Created by Vitalik Buterin in 2013, the Ethereum network allows users to 
create “smart contracts” that can be automatically executed by any computer 
running the Ethereum software in exchange for the network’s own currency, 
“ether”, creating one gigantic distributed computer for hire. Advocates insist 
the idea could change the world of computing, allowing for digitalsmart locks 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/ethereum-based-slock-reveals-first-ever-lock-opened-money-1527014>
 that open when a fee is paid, orletting musicians release songs for 
collaborators to rebuild in real time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2015/oct/02/live-stream-imogen-heap-releases-tiny-human-using-blockchain-technology>
.

Ethereum gained its biggest public exposure following the creation of a smart 
contract, called the decentralised autonomous organisation (DAO), intended to 
be a sort of crowdsourced hedge fund. Investors could buy into it, and vote on 
where the pool of cash it controlled was invested, before splitting their share 
of the pool and cashing out. But there was a major flaw in the code behind it: 
it was possible to write an infinite loop of cash-out instructions, taking your 
share of the DAO out over and over again. One user noticed this in early June, 
and managed to steal $50m worth of ether before the flow was stemmed.

More generally, the undeniable potential of the blockchain has led to it 
becoming one of tech’s newest buzzwords; companies with little good reason to 
use a distributed ledger throw it in their business plan anyway, in the hope of 
getting an extra $25m fromventure capitalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/us-money-blog/2016/apr/17/venture-capital-funding-decreases-startups-tech-industry>
 eager to cash in on the trend.

Even for those uses where it can be transformative, blockchain technology 
still comes with its downsides. The mining process that underpins the whole 
technology is a colossal waste of energy, for one thing.

More fundamentally, sometimes centralisation can be a good thing: a fraudulent 
credit card transaction can be reversed by the card company, but stolen 
bitcoins are gone forever.


This article is part of the Guardian’s Half Full series. If you would like to 
suggest technologies or innovations that are changing the world for the better 
or making a difference to people’s lives, get in touch via the form below
 