
The sudden availability of James Allison, one of the brightest engineering 
minds inFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>, is likely 
to prompt a flurry of interest in the paddock.

F1 Hungarian Grand Prix: five things we learned from the Hungaroring | Giles 
Richards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/25/f1-hungarian-grand-prix-five-things>
However, Allison, who split from Ferrari on Wednesday, is unlikely to commit 
to a hectic schedule of global travel. Even before the death of his wife, 
Rebecca, through bacterial meningitis after the Australian Grand Prix in March, 
Allison had altered his role as the technical director atFerrari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> to spend more time with his family; 
it is now thought he wants to be in Britain as much as possible so he can be 
close to his children.

McLaren are known to be long-term admirers and were anxious to sign him three 
years ago. There could be a return to his old team Renault, who have already 
employed him on three occasions. Williams, who have stalled after two years of 
heroic overachievement, would also be a good fit, especially as the team are in 
urgent need of fresh input with their aerodynamics.

Allison’s departure from Ferrari was agreed mutually but his position had been 
the centre of speculation for a number of weeks. It was even rumoured he would 
take full control of the team. He has been replaced by Mattia Binotto.

It has been a difficult season for the Scuderia, who were tipped to give 
Mercedes a stronger run for their money. The German team are romping at the 
head of the field again while Ferrari keep a nervous watch for Red Bull in 
their mirrors.

There have been poor strategy calls that arguably cost Sebastian Vettel victory
in Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/nico-rosberg-edges-out-teammate-lewis-hamilton-to-take-melbourne-grand-prix>
 andMontreal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-canadian-grand-prix-close-gap-nico-rosberg>
 but also tyre and technical issues. Allison brought order and organisation but 
the team’s innate conservatism has persevered.

Allison had a long association with the most famous team in Formula One. He 
was heads of aero when Michael Schumacher ruled the world in the early years of 
this century. He then returned to Renault before rejoining Ferrari three years 
ago.

The Ferrari team principal, Maurizio Arrivabene, said: “The team would like to 
thank James for his commitment and sacrifice during the time spent together and 
wishes him success and serenity for his future endeavours.”

Allison said: “During the years I spent at Ferrari, at two different stages 
and covering different roles, I could get to know and appreciate the value of 
the team and of the people, women and men, which are part of it.

“I want to thank them all for the great professional and human experience we 
shared. I wish everybody a happy future with lots of success.”

Binotto will take on the role of chief technical officer after moving across 
from the engine department. He joined Ferrari in 1995 and became the chief 
operating officer of the power unit at the end of 2014 after a five-year spell 
as the head of engine and Kers.
 