
I’ve just read a delightful book about the media’s relationship with football, 
From the back page to the front room: football’s journey through the English 
media <http://www.amazon.co.uk/From-Back-Page-Front-Room/dp/095714105X> by 
Roger Domeneghetti.*

It was published towards the end of last year but it didn’t get the publicity 
it warranted, or enough reviews for that matter. That was a pity because it is 
chock full of fascinating facts and penetrating insights.

The book considers every possible aspect of the links between the game and the 
various forms of media, beginning with newspapers back in the Victorian era and 
on to television’s developing influence over the past 75 years. And the author 
doesn’t overlook radio and film either.

He deals with the fanzines, cigarette cards, Roy of the Rovers, hooliganism, 
the tragedies - such as Munich, Bradford and Hillsborough - and the often 
bizarre decision-making by football’s administrators.
 Roger Domeneghetti’s book Photograph: Ockley Books 
Moreover, he manages to do all this by relating the coverage to the historical 
context and the changing social class landscape. It’s a politically astute 
piece of work by Domeneghetti, the Morning Star’s north east football 
correspondent with a 20-year background in sports reporting and media academia.

I found myself nodding a great deal because he skewers many myths. For 
example, those who bellyache about Sky messing up the football schedule by 
demanding games on Sundays and Mondays ought to know that the uniform 3pm 
Saturday kick-off of yesteryear was dictated by newspapers.

He conveys the newspaper era I recall from my earliest days as a journalist 
when football writers had a higher profile than the players.

I recall turning up at West Ham games to see large banners displayed around 
Upton Park with aDaily Express <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> 
logo announcing “Desmond Hackett is here”. And the hacks in the 1960s earned 
more than most players too.

Domeneghetti recalls that when another Express writer, Henry Rose, died in the 
Munich air disaster in 1958, more people turned out for his funeral in 
Manchester than for any one of the eight United players who died.

Among the more colourful anecdotes is one about a reporter I knew well, Ted 
Oliver. In 1996, he claimed that the Wimbledon player Vinnie Jones bit him on 
the nose.

“You have to admire Oliver’s professionalism,” writes Domeneghetti. “When a 
shocked bystander shouted, ‘Get him a doctor’, Oliver replied, ‘No, get me a 
photographer.’”


Just occasionally, the myth-puncturing author may have been guilty of peddling 
myths. He tells how in 1927, before an Arsenal-Sheffield United match, the 
Radio Times published a diagram of the pitch divided into numbered squares.


Listeners could then consult their visual aid when commentators relayed which 
square the ball was in. “It was this practice”, writes Domeneghetti, “which 
gave rise to the phrase ‘back to square one.’” I quoted that for days until a 
friend pointed out that the claim has been widely debunked (as explained here 
<http://www.phrases.org.uk/meanings/back-to-square-one.html>).

That cavil aside, Domeneghetti’s entertaining and thoughtful book proves his 
central thesis: “The media dominates our lives. Sport dominates the media. 
Football dominates the sports media... The history of football media is the 
history of the media.”

That mutual dependence is clear from almost every page. It really is a 
terrific piece of work.

*Published by Ockley Books <http://ockleybooks.co.uk/>

 