
If literature is not the cure for all ills, it is at least a balm for some 
anxieties, an elixir for a few worries. When we were looking for a theme for 
our annual summer series on the books desk, every idea was overtly tied to 
current events. Books about Europe, elections, politics. It was both 
unavoidable, and something we wanted to avoid. To briefly strap on my pith 
helmet and take a rare step into the wild, alien world of political commentary: 
I think we now all agree 2016 has been a year of relentlessly bad news.

So when we finally we settled on the theme “books to give you hope”, we had 
some worries that the pitch was potentially too broad, and too ambitious (“
Don’t fret everyone, we have books!”).But when we put the idea to you in our 
Reading group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/02/reading-group-help-choose-a-book-to-give-us-hope-in-august>
, you put us at ease. The sheer range of books you proposed to give someone 
hope – PG Wodehouse, Lord of the Rings, nonfiction by Laurie Lee or Amy 
Liptrot, Catch-22 (the eventual top choice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/09/reading-group-catch-22-by-joseph-heller>
) – showed us that the breadth of the theme was interesting in itself, as it 
lent itself equally to all genres and moods.

So what we are hoping for this time around is not to indulge in some 
prescriptive posturing, a sort of vague bibliotherapy that doesn’t account for 
your individual concerns – rather, these are books that gave us hope at 
different times, titles that variously taught us something new about the world, 
or ourselves.

Guardian Books podcast: Marilynne Robinson talks about Gilead to book club
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/belief/audio/2012/may/18/marilynne-robinson-gilead-books-podcast>
Now, for mine. The first time I read Gilead by Marilynne Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/apr/16/fiction.alismith>, some years 
ago, was on my first day of holidays after some particularly rigorous 
university exams. It was a transcendental experience. I remember wandering 
around in a kind of fugue state, dazedly responding when spoken to and mashing 
some food into my face during breaks, as I finished it in one sitting. This 
isn’t hyperbole – Gilead is a serene, almost meditative book, and Robinson 
writes with an unnameable, enviable quality that forces you to read slowly, 
with intention.

This is not to imply her writing is soporific or dull; on the contrary, the 
frequent bursts of pleasure that come from reading such sweet clarity are 
invigorating. Robinson’s novels are rare things, and all the better for it: 
four in 33 years and all four are fantastic. “I would rather be tastefully 
silent,”she has previously said 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/authorinterviews/11158670/Marilynne-Robinson-the-Pulitzer-Prize-winning-author-on-her-new-book.html>
, than write a bad book. It shows.

Gilead is told through a letter by John Ames, a terminally ill pastor in the 
crumbling prairie town of Gilead, who is writing a letter to his seven-year-old 
son. The letter is full of advice and religion, but is also confessional, with 
revelatory truths about Ames’s family history – all delivered among small 
moments of self-interruption as he observes his son play, talk, eat in real 
time. Treasured moments to a father who knows he will not see his son reach 
adulthood.

Ames finds new, heartbreaking beauty in everything around him: Sundays 
(“Sometimes I have loved the peacefulness of an ordinary Sunday. It is like 
standing in a newly planted garden after a warm rain”), nature (“a line of oak 
trees can still astonish me”), even his heart, which now flutters with a new 
irregularity. Everything is more beautiful for being ephemeral. As death comes 
closer, Ames’s musings become increasingly metaphysical: “I feel as if I am 
being left out, as though I’m some straggler and people can’t quite remember to 
stay back for me.” He laments what he can offer his son: “What have I to leave 
you but the ruins of old courage, and the lore of old gallantry and hope?”

Marilynne Robinson: ‘We don’t know anything about the future, as everything is 
in flux’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/15/marilynne-robinson-interview-givenness-of-everything>
It all sounds very worthy – except it isn’t. To label Gilead worthy would be 
to imply that it is very deliberately trying to improve you. But the worth 
found in Gilead is something much stranger, at least for me; as a young person 
imagining a grand, dramatic future for myself, it taught me that an ordinary 
life could be also be good and even more meaningful. When you’re young and 
invincible, with a head full of vague plans for as-yet-unperformed great deeds, 
it is a useful lesson to learn that quietness does not equate with 
insignificance. Ames’s life – an existence of small impact, but a graceful one 
– has enviable value. Years on, Gilead still makes me hopeful by reminding me 
of the possibilities in my future, as ordinary and small as it may turn out to 
be. As Ames concludes, to his son and himself: “There are a thousand thousand 
reasons to live this life, every one of them sufficient.”
 