
Marseille missed their chance when they had it. So did Auxerre, and Monaco 
too. All three clubs turned down the opportunity to give Laurent Blanc his 
first job as a coach, and all three will regret it now, afterBlanc led Bordeaux 
to a wholly deserved Ligue 1 title 
<http://www.sudouest.com/accueil/sports/espace-girondins/article/606949/mil/4601560.html>
, their first for 10 years, in only his second season as a coach. Bordeaux beat 
Caen 1–0 to stay three points clear of Marseille, whose 4–0 hammering of Rennes 
carried a note of defiance but ultimately was in vain.

"Indisputable!" was the L'Equipe headline while Sud-Ouest announced: "They 
were magnificent, the true kings of the season." "We've had a revolution here," 
said the defender Mathieu Chalmé.Bordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> were down in fifth after Week 
27, but they won their last 11 matches, a French record, with their final 
victory sending Caen into Ligue 2. "We worked so hard on our fitness back in 
January to be fit for this part of the season," said Blanc, "and that's what 
made the difference in the end."

It was not the only difference: this season, Bordeaux were unbeaten at home 
(their last defeat at Stade Chaban-Delmas was in October 2007), and earned 12 
more points at home than the runners-up, Marseille; they showed huge mental 
strength, not least in thenine-man 1–0 win over Grenoble in Week 6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/sep/23/bordeaux.lille>, the 
comeback from 3–0 down to beat Monaco away 4–3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/dec/23/lyon-bordeaux-monaco-blanc-ricardo-govou-fred-chimbonda-faubert-aulas-beck>
 in Week 19 and, in Week 33,the 3–2 win at Rennes after having a player 
dismissed in the first half-hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/may/05/marseille-bordeaux-ligue-1>
. Their youth policy is working, as evidenced by the emergence of young local 
talents such as Benoît Trémoulinas andGrégory Sertic 
<http://www.rmc.fr/edito/sport/77463/sertic-fan-de-bordeaux/> and their 
recruitment has been spot on, as the yo-yo pairing of two Yoanns – Gourcuff and 
Gouffran – proved on Saturday night.

It was Gourcuff's free-kick that set up the only goal of the game at Caen: 
Trémoulinas crossed and Gouffran headed home 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BcZJ9J-RvQ8>. "It was appropriate that he 
scored the winner: a rookie who began the season slowly, before ending it, like 
his team, unstoppable," wrote Sud-Ouest. For the player, who signed from Caen 
last summer, emotions were mixed: "These are all my friends lying on the pitch 
and crying, I'm just so sorry for them," he said.

That the winning goal was a header was not surprising. Among the many stats 
France Football recently published to explain Bordeaux's success were the 
following: no team has scored more goals from headers (22), from set pieces 
(25, nine from corners), from substitutes (10), or by coming from behind (23 
points). The physical and mental strength of this team is whySo Foot's 
comparisons to Aimé Jacquet's bruising 1987 title winners 
<http://www.sofoot.com/bordeaux-champion-22-ans-apres-113091-article.html> seem 
more appropriate than the 1999 comparison. The 1999 side did beat Marseille to 
the title on the last day of the season but, with a front four of Johan Micoud, 
Ali Benarbia, Lilian Laslandes and Sylvain Wiltord, it was a lot more attacking.

Blanc's side is somewhere between the two: amid the brawn of Souleymane 
Diawara, Alou Diarra and Marouane Chamakh, thegenius of Gourcuff 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MjfSQRMLqYU> has shone through. One of the 
season's longest soap operas ended on Thursday whenFrance's player of the year 
completed his move from Milan and signed a four-year deal at Bordeaux 
<http://www.lefigaro.fr/football/2009/05/28/02003-20090528ARTSPO00529-gourcuff-fidele-a-bordeaux.php>
 . "My decision had nothing to do with money," Gourcuff said, although a delay 
in signing the deal might have. Bordeaux's original offer of a monthly €300,000 
(£260,000) with a €25m buyout clause was a long way from what he wanted, but 
tying the contract up before the final day gave the club a huge boost.

Blanc, typically, has already started playing down expectations for next 
season. "No French team will be able to repeat the dominance of Lyon," he 
warned. But with Gourcuff staying andChamakh changing his tune and claiming he 
now wants to stay 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090531_132050_chamakh-reste-a-bordeaux.html>
, Blanc's next ambition, to match Lyon's quarter-final place in the Champions 
League, might just be achievable.

It seems incredible to think that had Bordeaux's president, Jean-Louis Triaud, 
not appointed Blanc two years ago,a coach now tipped as a possible successor to 
Sir Alex Ferguson at Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/may/31/laurent-blanc-bordeaux-manchester-united-profile>
 might never have returned to the game. "If Bordeaux had the same attitude as 
some, I might never have made it to the bench," he said. "Just when I thought I 
might never get a job, Bordeaux came along and I'm very grateful to them." This 
week, the feeling is most definitely mutual.

Round 38 talking points

• Although Marseille reached their pre-season target of a top-two finish, 
there was huge disappointment at the Vélodrome. "That's inevitable, really, but 
this season has not been a failure," said their president, Pape Diouf, after
second-half goals from Bakary Koné, Mamadou Niang (two) and a Nicolas Douchez 
own goal blitzed Rennes <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GuGBtx6M1zw>. Diouf 
must take some responsibility for the breakdown in the relationship between the 
owner, Robert Louis-Dreyfus, and coach, Eric Gerets, who was on the verge of 
tears after his final game. "The club got what they wanted, but I wanted more," 
he said, adding as his voice broke: "Tonight was very special, but all a bit 
much for me, thank you."

• A few weeks ago, Paris St Germain were challenging Lyon for a Champions 
League place, but they ended the campaign with a 0–0 draw atMonaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> and so missed out, on goal 
difference, on even a Europa League spot. The coach, Paul le Guen, is now 
leaving, and others, such as the goalkeeper Mickaël Landreau and winger Jérôme 
Rothen, are set to follow.

Rothen was among many of the PSG players whistled and jeered at the Parc des 
Princes during Sunday's testimonial for Pedro Pauleta. "Alain Roche [PSG head 
of recruitment] has broken me, he criticised me to the coach, to the board, and 
even to my fellow players, while [president Sébastien] Bazin barely 
acknowledges me now," said Rothen. "I turned down Lyon to stay here,I wanted to 
finish my career here, but with these guys in charge, I have to leave 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/FF/breves2009/20090601_084406_rothen-mon-depart-est-ineluctable.html>
."

"For a season that should have been about consolidation, the club was rocked 
by crisis,"lamented Le Parisien 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/psg-foot-paris-saint-germain/comment-paris-s-est-saborde-en-un-mois-01-06-2009-533158.php>
. "Three years after Colony Capital took over, there has been no progress. In 
Paris, nothing changes, least of all this phenomenal ability to create a mess."

• The other big winners on the final day of the season were Lille and 
Toulouse, who both qualified for Europe afterbeating Nancy 3–2 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g6_GzjtLftc> and drawing 0–0 with Lyon, 
respectively. Both clubs expect to lose their best players, Michel Bastos and 
André-Pierre Gignac, before next season.

Mention must also go to Alain Perrin, whose St Etienne side smashed 
Valenciennes 4–0 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fC_snVeLVqs> to leapfrog Caen 
to safety.Their hero was Ilan 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/FF/breves2009/20090531_231812_ilan-le-maillon-fort.html>
, who responded to getting the captaincy by scoring five goals in their last 
seven games to keepLes Verts in Ligue 1. "We were relieved to survive, but we 
could have clinched it before now," said Perrin, who may yet get the chop from 
the sports director, Damien Comolli, before the summer is out.

Results, Week 38: Caen 0–1 Bordeaux, Grenoble 0–1 Sochaux, Lille 3–2 Nancy, 
Lorient 1–1 Le Mans, Marseille 4–0 Rennes, Nantes 2–1 Auxerre, Nice 0–0 Le 
Havre, PSG 0–0 Monaco, Saint-Etienne 4–0Valenciennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valenciennes>, Toulouse 0–0 Lyon

Final Ligue 1 table 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=23>

Watch video highlights of the last day of the Ligue 1 season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/interactive/2009/jan/08/ligue-1-football-highlights-goals>
 