
Bordeaux's game against Lyon on Sunday night was never going to decide who 
wins the French title this year, but it may just have told us who won't win it.
Bordeaux's 1–0 win <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H70x0dIES4Q>, courtesy of a 
close-range shot from the ex-Lyon midfielder Alou Diarra, has left the reigning 
champions down in third place, four points behind the leaders, Marseille, and 
two behind Bordeaux.

"It won't be dramatic if we don't win the title this year," the Lyon striker 
Sidney Govou told Fabulous Sport 
<http://darren.blog.canal-plus.com/archive/2009/04/17/fabulous-sport-sydney-govou-vous-repond.html>
 before the game, "as the most important thing is to qualify for the Champions 
League." Aside from the obvious shift in ambition his comment reveals, even 
that might now be tricky for Lyon given that they still have to play PSG (who 
are one point back), Marseille and Toulouse. "Lyon could now implode completely 
and might not even make the top three," warned pundit Christophe Dugarry.

Lyon were unlucky not to be awarded a penalty when Mathieu Chalmé's 
sixth-minute trip on Ederson went unnoticed, but aside from that, the visitors 
had few chances.Bordeaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> were 
on top when, just before half-time, Diarra reacted quickest after Wendel's shot 
hit the post and he stabbed in the rebound.

Bordeaux controlled the second half, Diarra and Fernando were brilliant in 
holding midfield while Karim Benzema was kept isolated and had only one 
half-chance in the second period. The expected surge ofLyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> pressure in the final ten minutes 
never came and it was Bordeaux who could have doubled their lead, Hugo Lloris 
saving from Yoann Gourcuff and Marouane Chamakh, who also headed against the 
crossbar.

"Is this the end of the reign?" ran the L'Equipe headline on Vincent Duluc's 
article: "Lyon are slipping inexorably towards a mediocrity which should lead 
to the loss of their title. They have gone from fighting for the title to 
fighting for a place in the Champions League."

Lyon's president, Jean-Michel Aulas, complained about the penalty decision 
after the game, though the fact that he said anything at all was highly 
significant. In among the reasons for Lyon's troubled season – rotten luck with 
injuries (Cris, Govou, Grosso, Réveillère and Clerc have all been out 
long-term), a coach trying to adapt a new system to his players (rather than 
the other way round), squad disharmony, overreliance on Benzema and individual 
mistakes at the back – the role of Aulas this term has come under scrutiny.

His decision to offload Fred in January left Benzema having to carry the 
attack on his own without a partner, while the pressure he put on the team to 
reach the Champions League semi-finals, when Lyon clearly didn't have the squad 
for it, undoubtedly affected their league focus.

On a day-to-day level, Aulas has shied away from the spotlight, and has been 
conspicuous by his absence. This is almost certainly at the request of Claude 
Puel, who unlike his predecessors, was not prepared to play second fiddle to 
his boss. "This is the first time I have seen Aulas leave the coach alone like 
this," said Lyon's mayor, Gérard Collomb. "Puel asked forcarte blanche and he 
got it."

Aulas's energies have been focused on the project to build Lyon's new stadium 
at Décines <http://www.l-equipe.fr/Football/20061022_195953_01.html>, while he 
is also trying to bring in new revenue and look for sponsors to replace Accor, 
who are unlikely to renew their contract. According toLe Journal du Dimanche 
<http://www.lejdd.fr/cmc/sport/200916/aulas-prend-du-recul-lyon-aussi_202990.html>
, it would appear that Aulas's decision to take a step back from the club has 
had an effect on the team as well. "He watches as much as he used to, but he 
speaks to us less often and doesn't come into the dressing room as much," 
admitted Cris.

There is no such fear factor in play at Bordeaux, where Laurent Blanc's team 
have remained united all season. They are solid at the back and have now won 
five games in a row without ever playing brilliantly. "We feel good physically 
and psychologically," said Diarra, whose time at Lyon ended after one season 
following a row with Gérard Houllier. "Beating the champions is an important 
sign and it sets up an exciting end to the season."

Not that you would hear them talk up their title chances: how the top two 
clubs have approached this title race perfectly reflects their personalities as 
cities. Bordeaux have been reserved, modest and spent most of the season 
pretending they are not in the race (and when they did say they were, in 
February, they went five games without a win). "Can you now say that you are 
heading for the title?" Blanc was asked after the game. "Ask me in two weeks," 
he replied.

Over at Marseille, they have not been shy to admit they are going for the 
title and OM's coach, Eric Gerets, knew that his patched-up side, with Charles 
Kaboré and Bolo Zenden as stand-in full-backs, had pulled off a great result in 
coming from behindto beat Lorient 2–1 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k2GvqFdzko8>. Once again, Gerets's 
substitutions were decisive: Sylvain Wiltord, after replacing Hatem Ben Arfa, 
set up Renato Civelli for the equaliser, while another sub, Karim Ziani, 
crossed for Brandao's winner, his fourth goal in as many games.

Brandao also had an effort ruled out in the first half and his battering style 
forced Lorient to replace their injured goalkeeper Fabien Audard and 
centre-back Benjamin Genton. "After what he did to us, you have to say Brandao 
was their man of the match," grumbled theLorient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lorient> manager, Christian Gourcuff.

On-loan Wiltord, who also saw a shot hit both posts after running through from 
the halfway line, had a major impact. He is expected to leave Marseille this 
summer, but his presence and experience has definitely boosted morale at the 
club. There was still time for the captain, Lorik Cana, to get a late red card 
for acomical scuffle with his friend Arnaud Le Lan 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rzJitzwpG8w>. "We watched the end of the game 
together in the changing room and if there had been a bar there, we would have 
shared a beer," said Le Lan.

There was also drama at the bottom of the table, where Nantes jumped out of 
the drop zone thanks totheir 2–0 win over Nice 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CcfesfGTgqM> and Nancy beat Caen 2–1 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sVujionx0Hc>. "I don't know whether to laugh or 
cry," said the Caen coach, Franck Dumas. "My boys showed so much heart, but 
they let in two bloody stupid goals."

Saint-Etienne are still in the bottom three, but only on goal difference after 
they ended a difficult week bybeating Lille 2–1 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4OIXuAM5Jsk>. The coach, Alain Perrin, admitted 
his players were tense after Ilan and Yohan Benalouane had to be separated 
during atraining-ground punch-up 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090415_121003_ilan-benalouane-l-altercation.html>
, while the sporting director, Damien Comolli, admitted next season's 
recruitment policy was being drawn up with an eye on playing in L2.

"When you fall into the sea, if you panic, you're certain to drown, so we have 
to keep cool," said the co-president Bernard Caïazzo. "We can still get out of 
this."

Elsewhere, Valenciennes are not out of the woods after losing 2–0 at home to 
Le Mans <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MPKH3oHbZxw>, while Monaco continued 
their good form witha 3–1 win over Rennes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gFTGWrWl5D8>, whose coach, Guy Lacombe, looks 
to beon his way out 
<http://www.lavoixdunord.fr/actualite/L_info_en_continu/Metropole_Lilloise/2009/04/13/article_lens-guy-lacombe-pour-succ-eacute-der-ag.shtml>
 this summer. L2 leaders Lens are favourites to snap him up, while Rennes's 
owner François-Henri Pinault, has Frédéric Antonetti (Nice) and Antoine 
Kombouaré (Valenciennes) top of his list.

Jérôme Rothen was the star man as PSG eased past Le Havre 3–0 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z-peRvHqZqM> to stay in fourth and close in on 
Lyon for that third and final Champions League qualifying place. The ex-Lyon 
contingent at Paris, headed by Paul Le Guen and featuring Jérémy Clément, Ludo 
Giuly, and Peguy Luyindula, will need little motivation for their next game, on 
Friday night at Stade Gerland, where Lyon have won only eight of 16 games and 
have dropped 17 points.

"You can't expect Lyon to win the title for 100 years in a row," said their 
midfielder Kim Kallstrom. It now looks like eight will be beyond them.

Results: Grenoble 1–0 Toulouse, Monaco 3–1 Rennes, Nantes 2–0 Nice, Sochaux 
0–1 Auxerre, Valenciennes 0–2 Le Mans, Caen 1–2 Nancy, Saint-Etienne 2–1 Lille, 
Lorient 1–2 Marseille, PSG 3–0 Le Havre, Bordeaux 1–0 LyonCurrent Ligue 1 table 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=23>
 