
Another two coaching changes, the biggest cup shock in 50 years, more 
whingeing at Lyon, a new reffing conspiracy and a title race inching closer to 
the wire after joint-leadersMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> and, thrillingly, Bordeaux 
came through tricky away matches: a midweek round of Ligue 1 action was never 
meant to be this exciting.

The drama began at the weekend, when second-division Guingamp, a village whose 
stadium holds more people (11,000) than it has inhabitants (8,000), came from 
behind tobeat Rennes 2–1 in the French Cup final 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Shm64FEXA-c>, the first time a second-division 
side has lifted the cup since Le Havre in 1959. Eduardo, their Brazilian 
striker who scored two excellent late goals, is already fielding offers from 
Sochaux, Nancy and Lens, whose president shrieked, "I saw him first!"

It continued with Marseille cementing their place at the top after a 2–0 win 
at neighbours Nice 
<http://fourfourtwo.free.fr/index.php/ligue-1/nice-0-2-marseille-la-video-des-buts-de-niang-et-brandao-2345>
, goals from Mamadou Niang and Brandao continuing their brilliant away form, 
which now reads: 11 wins, six draws, one defeat. "It was easier than I 
expected," said the coach, Eric Gerets, who like Zinedine Zidane, and most OM 
fans, has backed last week's appointment of Didier Deschamps as his 
replacement. "For the last six weeks, I have felt that we will be champions, as 
I think Bordeaux will drop points," said OM's unlikely defensive hero, Renato 
Civelli, before the game. "This team is mentally tough."

He might not have thought Bordeaux would struggle quite so soon: and yet 
that's how it looked after they were outplayed in the first half and went 
behind to an early Gaël Danic penalty at Valenciennes, who went into the game 
having beaten Lyon 2–0. But just as in the incredible game at Rennes a 
fortnight ago, Bordeaux came from behind and headers from Fernando, from a 
nicely worked free-kick, and Yoann Gourcuff, France's player of the year (in 
waiting) with yet another late winner – this one on his 100th L1 appearance – 
edged them to a2–1 win 
<http://www.videodesport.com/video-valenciennes-bordeaux-buts-resume/>.

Bordeaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> must now be title 
favourites given their more comfortable run-in (Le Mans, Monaco, Caen, compared 
to OM's Lyon, Nancy, Rennes) though as usual, you won't hear them say so. 
"Nothing has happened, except we are closer to a Champions League place," 
deadpanned the coach, Laurent Blanc, who gave his team a half-time rocket. "The 
Marseille result put us under pressure, but it's good for everyone that we won."

The result was a little harsh on the volatile Valenciennes coach, Antoine 
Kombouaré, who, along with his players Siake Tiéné and Luigi Pieroni, wassent 
off by the ref Tony Chapron 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090514_074808_m-chapron-se-defend.html>
. "It's dangerous to moan about the official when Bordeaux were better than 
us," conceded Kombouaré, though his president, Francis Decourriere, was not so 
restrained, claiming that Chapron had insulted his players. "You are a disgrace 
to humanity, the leftover shit in a bidet!" he shouted at the official. Perhaps 
Kombouaré was on best behaviour because he is expected to leave VA and replace 
his former team-mate Paul Le Guen as coach at Paris Saint-Germain.

The PSG board refused to extend Le Guen's contract last week after he fell out 
with the chairman, Sébastien Bazin, who wanted to extend the control of the 
recruitment head, Alain Roche, appoint a new assistant to replace Yves Colleu, 
and promote the communications director, Bruno Skropeta, a man Le Guen 
distrusts due to his close relationship with ex-president Charles Villeneuve. 
According to Le Parisien, there were also complaints thatLe Guen's training 
sessions were boring 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/psg-foot-paris-saint-germain/le-guen-avait-senti-le-coup-venir-08-05-2009-505635.php>
. "We had stability for over two years with Paul and we had no problems," said 
Jérôme Rothen. "I'm beginning to get tired of it all. These constant changes 
are not fun for anyone."

Bazin has at least persuaded the influential Claude Makelele to stay on for 
one more year, though he is unlikely to choose the midfielder's preferred 
candidate, Raynald Denoueix, as new boss. InsteadKombouaré 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/psg-foot-paris-saint-germain/psg-kombouare-favori-pour-succeder-a-le-guen-06-05-2009-503385.php>
, part of the successful PSG side of the 1990s that won one league title, two 
French Cups, one League Cup and reached five straight European semi-finals, is 
in pole position.

As a player, Kombouaré scored PSG's most famous goal, a dramatic late 
aggregate winner in the 4–1 win over Real Madrid 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vCsmg7IQMT8> in the 1993 Uefa Cup 
quarter-final. His reaction, to harangue the PSG president, Michel Denisot, 
after the game for not getting enough starts, sums him up. "When I scored that 
header, I was telling [coach] Artur Jorge to stick it where the sun don't 
shine."

Previous PSG coaches Vahid Halilhodzic and Luis Fernandez both offered 
Kombouaré an assistant coaching job, but were turned down flat. "No way, for me 
it's number one or nothing," he toldSo Foot <http://www.sofoot.com/>. "If I had 
accepted, and then I disagreed with the coach, he would get a smack in the 
face." It will be interesting to see how Kombouaré works with another of his 
old team-mates, Roche, in Paris. "I fell out with him, and many others, when I 
was a player, but once we had it out there was no bitterness and we are all 
mates now."

As a coach, his belligerent attitude endears him to his players, if not 
referees. "At the end of every season, I want the players to say not that I'm a 
good coach but that I'm a fair and honest man, that's all." His secret, 
apparently, is humility, or as he so eloquently put it, "I don't fart higher 
than my arsehole." It should be fun in Paris next season.

Pity Le Guen, though: he is now being linked with Atlético Madrid and 
Fenerbahce. Last night, he watched his side stay fourth and keep the pressure 
on Lyon afterwinning 1–0 at Le Mans 
<http://fourfourtwo.free.fr/index.php/ligue-1/le-mans-0-1-paris-sg-but-de-kezman-en-video-2348>
, who made a bizarre change of their own this week: the coach, Daniel 
Jeandupeux, returned to his position as sports director while the 33-year-old 
Arnaud Cormier, who began the season as assistant coach,is now in charge 
<http://www.rmc.fr/edito/sport/78115/cormier-remplace-jeandupeux/>, with Yves 
Bertucci, coach at the season's start, as his number two.

Elsewhere, Le Havre's relegation was confirmed after losing 4–2 at home to 
Saint-Etienne <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sMYPpdlo6Sw>, who move out of the 
bottom three for the first time since Week 27. Sochaux are also clear after 
beating Monaco 3–0, while Caen, 1–0 losers at Rennes, slip back into the drop 
zone.

Nantes are three points adrift after their 3–0 loss at Lyon 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gIj1sf1NyFU>. "This team is good enough to 
finish 13th but a lot has gone against us this season," said depressed 
goalkeeper Jérôme Alonzo. Fans hurled abuse at Nantes' owner, Waldemar Kita, 
but that made no difference: he has vowed to stay on if Nantes, the last team 
to win Ligue 1 before Lyon's dominance, do go down.

The win has barely papered over the cracks at Lyon, whose coach, Claude Puel, 
blamed this season's problems on the psychological effect of Barcelona's 5–2 
Champions League win. Former striker Fred stuck his oar in, claiming: "The way 
that Puel spoke to mepissed me off 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090508_162554_fred-se-paie-puel-et-aulas.html>
, while [president Jean-Michel] Aulas only pays you attention if you're doing 
well." Captain Juninho, ending a season trophy-less for the first time since 
1996, can't decide whether to jet off for a final payday in Qatar.

L'Equipe claimed that up to nine other players 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/FF/breves2009/20090511_082651_la-grande-lessive-lyonnaise.html>
, among themFabio Santos 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/FF/breves2009/20090513_182903_f-santos-contrat-resilie.html>
, Fabio Grosso, Mathieu Bodmer, Kim Källström and Anthony Mounier, could be 
following Juninho out of the club this summer. If some of them are playing for 
their futures, they had better get on with it: next up for Lyon is Marseille 
away, and if the outgoing champions cannot win the title, they will certainly 
have a say in who does.

Results: Lyon 3–0 Nantes, Nice 0–2 Marseille, Le Mans 0–1 PSG, Toulouse 0–0 
Lille, Rennes 1–0 Caen, Auxerre 2–0 Grenoble, Sochaux 3–0 Monaco, Nancy 2–2 
Lorient, Le Havre 2–4 Saint Etienne,Valenciennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valenciennes> 1–2 Bordeaux

Latest Ligue 1 table 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=23>
 