
Borussia Dortmund <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> are 
in talks with Arsenal over a deal for Gedion Zelalem. The Germany-born 
19-year-old, who has declared for the United States at international level, was 
considered to be a future first-team star at Arsenal.

When Arsène Wenger saw Zelalem play for the first time when the midfielder was 
14, he told the boy’s father that he would one day play forArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>. That has been proved correct, 
with Zelalem making his debut for the club two days before his 17th birthday in 
January 2014.

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in Europe's top five leagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
But he has not made the progress that was hoped for. Zelalem played once for 
Wenger’s team in the 2014-15 season while he has appeared on two further 
occasions this time out in the EFL Cup. He spent the whole of last season on 
loan at Glasgow Rangers.

Dortmund are hopeful that they can tempt him back to Germany, where he lived 
until the age of nine, before he emigrated with his family to the United 
States. They are aware that Zelalem is now at the stage of his career where he 
needs to be playing regular football; he turns 20 later this month. His 
situation at Arsenal is a source of frustration but it also illustrates how 
difficult it is for a young player to make the step from academy prospect to 
first-team fixture.

The negotiations with Dortmund are not thought to be advanced and, if a deal 
cannot be struck in January, the Bundesliga club would be open to trying again 
in the summer. Zelalem has two-and-a-half years to run on his contract at the 
Emirates Stadium.

Arsenal are not expected to be active during the January transfer window but 
they have confirmed the signing of the 20-year-old left-back Cohen Bramall from 
Hednesford Town in the Northern League Premier Division. Bramall impressed on a 
recent trial and he will join up with Steve Gatting’s under-23 squad.
 