
At the end of last month we had another of those instances where an expert in 
their field complains that a word was being incorrectly used by a setter, who 
should have known better. In this case [Letters, Wednesday 1 June], Keith Kirby 
of Monmouthshire took exception to a Brendan clue (Cryptic No 26,898 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/lookup?crossword_type=cryptic&id=26898> 
for 31 May, 5 across). It was ‘Bottle, or something a Dutchman can get from 
one’, with the solution COURAGE. The objection was that in cockney rhyming 
slang ‘bottle’ does not mean ‘courage’. If you did not see the Kirby letter, 
his case is worth repeating. His assertion was that true cockneys, not wishing 
to be vulgar, call an ‘arse’ an ‘aris’. (Chambers and Collins give support for 
this view.) You then move by stages from ‘aris’ to ‘Aristotle’, which rhymes 
with ‘bottle’, which gives you ‘bottle and glass’, which rhymes with ‘arse’ or 
‘ass’ (depending on how you pronounce ‘glass’). Thus, in this version, to ‘lose 
one’s bottle’ means something like to shit yourself, rather than to lose one’s 
courage.

Brendan did not need me to spring to his defence, because Mervin Chester from 
Northampton did so in his letter, published the following day. It pointed out 
that nowhere in the clue was cockney rhyming slang even hinted at and that the 
Oxford English Dictionary (no less) defines ‘bottle’ as ‘courage, spirit, 
guts’, especially in the phrase ‘to lose one’s bottle’, which dates back at 
least to 1958 and probable derived from the much older term ‘no bottle’, 
meaning ‘no good’ or ‘useless’, which was current from 1846 at least. So I hope 
that Mr Kirby will understand that I am not with him on this one, firmly taking 
the view that what’s good enough for the OED must surely also be good enough 
for the Guardian.

_____

As those of you who do the crosswords online will already know, some of them 
have not been appearing on your screens on the due day, including the Quick, 
the Quiptic and the Observer’s Speedy. We think/hope that the problem has now 
been solved. To the limited extent that I understand these things, the puzzles 
were all present and correct on time in the paper’s database but the ‘tool’ 
that is designed to take stuff from there and use it to update the crossword 
home page [https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords>] was for some reason prevented from 
doing so. My apologies for all this and my fingers remain firmly crossed. 
However, if for any reason it (or anything similar) should happen again, there 
is another route to the puzzles in the database. It is via the option offered 
at the top left-hand side of the home page to ‘Search archive’. You need to 
know (or to work out) the serial number of the puzzle you are after. Click 
there and you will be offered ‘Lookup’. Choose the type of puzzle you want and 
enter its serial number (without any comma) in the ID box and Bob should be 
your uncle.

_____ 


Our ever-thoughtful crossword blogger Alan Connor has teamed up with Boatman 
and some of his mates to prepare a little extra offering for you for Thursday 
23 June, in case you find time hanging heavy on your hands on Referendum Day. I 
have been shown something of what is scheduled to appear on the website that 
day and it should excellently serve to keep you safely occupied until after the 
polls have closed.

_____

Despite severe problems in getting May’s Genius No 155 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2016/may/02/genius-no-155> by Puck up 
and running properly, there were 28 entries on the first day and 274 by the 
deadline. Inevitably, the first correct entries were late in arriving but Hook 
T (a new name in the winners’ enclosure, I think) and Ian with Ocelot were 
involved in a dead heat at 10:41, with Nigel at goldhill and Geoff M both less 
than 50 minutes behind them. The first overseas entry was from PS in Australia 
at 12:00.

Congratulations to John Fowler in Japan, who won the May Genius prize.

If you have any technical problems with our crossword service, please email 
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>. If you have any 
comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>. For 
Observer crosswords please emailcrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 