
“When I’m watching a film or play,” says Matthew Bourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/matthewbourne>, “there’s always a part of me 
that’s wondering: ‘Could this be a show?’ When I’m browsing through a bookshop, 
I’m always looking for titles. But I have to really love something if I’m going 
to make it into a dance. I have to know that I can take a work that people love 
– and make them love it in a different way.”

Making audiences fall in love with the unexpected has become Bourne’s calling 
card. Over the years, he’s refashioned ballet classics and popular movies in 
his own imaginative and irreverent image. With such works as his funny and 
homoeroticSwan Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/14/how-we-made-matthew-bourne-swan-lake>
, he’s attracted a whole new audience to contemporary dance and made himself a 
household name. But despite his past successes, Bourne knows that he’s taken on 
a monumental challenge with his latest project: an adaptation of the Powell and 
Pressburger filmThe Red Shoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/10/the-red-shoes-film-review>.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmatthew-bourne-the-red-shoes-interview-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd514cb0f3fee76de38c8e1d3905f6332d62b43cb%2F0_128_1200_1500%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bourne's%20supremacy%3A%20the%20blockbuster%20choreographer%20puts%20on%20The%20Red%20Shoes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmatthew-bourne-the-red-shoes-interview-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bourne%27s%20supremacy%3A%20the%20blockbuster%20choreographer%20puts%20on%20The%20Red%20Shoes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmatthew-bourne-the-red-shoes-interview-sadlers-wells%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd514cb0f3fee76de38c8e1d3905f6332d62b43cb%2F0_128_1200_1500%2F1200.jpg>
 The 1948 film: Grischa Ljubov (Leonide Massine) helps Moira Shearer (Vicky 
Page) on with the red shoes. Photograph: Publicity image 
Not only does this 1948 masterpiece rank as the greatest dance film ever, it’s 
widely considered a cinematic gem. It brings an almost Faustian grandeur to the 
story of aspiring ballerina Vicky Page, as she’s forced to make her impossible 
choice between love and art. The cast, including Moira Shearer and Robert 
Helpmann, have become the stuff of legend, while the cinematography is regarded 
as a benchmark of skill and invention as the film weaves its brilliant, 
disconcerting path between fantasy and realism.


The obvious question for Bourne, when I meet him during a rare break from his 
rehearsal schedule, is what he can possibly add. He’s grabbing a late Sunday 
breakfast, and he smiles thoughtfully as he considers his reply. “The film does 
have that quality of being a monument, but I think you change something 
straight away when you take it from screen to stage. And, even though I’ve 
followed the film quite closely, I’ve been able to see lots of ways of 
expanding on it through dance. There will be quite a few surprises along the 
way.”


One area where Bourne has let his imagination run riot is in choreographing 
the life of the ballet company Page belongs to. In the film, the company is run 
by Boris Lermontov, a steely aesthete and ruthless boss who has shades of the 
great Russian impresarioSergei Diaghilev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/sep/12/sergei-diaghilev-and-the-ballets-russes>
. But while Bourne has retained the character of Lermontov, he’s given the 
company a new identity, one that bears a distinct resemblance to the Royal 
Ballet back in 1948, when it was still known as Sadler’s Wells Ballet. The 
company had just emerged from the war years, when it went slogging around 
Britain entertaining the public and the troops. For Bourne, it seemed to have 
something of the improvised, mongrel quality of his own troupe,New Adventures 
<http://new-adventures.net/>. 

“It was a company I felt we could relate to, even though we’re not a ballet 
company ourselves. When we were building up the background and the characters 
in the story, I had my dancers research the lives of English dancers likeBeryl 
Grey <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beryl_Grey>. Vicky, of course, is a little 
bitMargot Fonteyn <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/margot-fonteyn> and, 
although the audience doesn’t have to know about those connections, they make 
the work a bit richer.”


I have to be careful what I say – or tweet … It’s like I’ve become an 
authority, the voice of dance

Bourne has also aimed for historical authenticity in the works he’s created 
for Page and the Lermontov company, referencing the kind of mid-20th century 
repertory that Sadler’s WellsBallet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> 
would have danced. There’s a pastiche of Frederick Ashton’s Dante Sonata, as 
well as “a beach ballet and a more waltzy old-fashioned kind of ballet”. Bourne 
relished the stylistic challenges of creating this work, including the fact 
that some of it has to be danced on pointes.

“I’ve always resisted that, but I realised I had to have it here.” He 
particularly had to have pointe shoes in the Red Shoes, the ballet that turns 
Page into a star but also precipitates her tragedy. As in the film, it’s based 
on the strange and sinister fairytale by Hans Christian Andersen, but Bourne 
says he had “a lot of fun” inventing a brand new choreographic language for it. 
“I wanted this ballet to look as if it was something a little bit futuristic 
for those times. The whole set changes, we go into a different world.”

But the most satisfying challenge has been portraying the intense triangular 
relationship between Lermontov, Page and Julian Craster, the composer Page 
falls in love with. “The more I’ve watched the film, the more I’ve realised how 
messy that relationship is. Vicky and Julian fall in love while they’re working 
together on the Red Shoes ballet and, really, they’re only happy together 
inside that burst of creativity. Afterwards, it doesn’t work so well and I’ve 
actually found myself sympathising with Lermontov’s position: that love and art 
don’t always go together.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmatthew-bourne-the-red-shoes-interview-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd37c66fff4c6df7c795b7b5df51a4b79d28de68%2F307_1464_4292_2576%2F4292.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bourne's%20supremacy%3A%20the%20blockbuster%20choreographer%20puts%20on%20The%20Red%20Shoes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmatthew-bourne-the-red-shoes-interview-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bourne%27s%20supremacy%3A%20the%20blockbuster%20choreographer%20puts%20on%20The%20Red%20Shoes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmatthew-bourne-the-red-shoes-interview-sadlers-wells%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd37c66fff4c6df7c795b7b5df51a4b79d28de68%2F307_1464_4292_2576%2F4292.jpg>
 ‘Love and art don’t always go together’ … Matthew Bourne. Photograph: Richard 
Saker for the Observer 
Bourne also recognised that there were layers to Page’s individual character 
that needed to be explored. “She’s actually quite calculating and forthright – 
much tougher than the Natalie Portman character in Black Swan. I’ve tried to 
show that side of her. There are two small scenes in the film between her and 
Julian that I’ve expanded into longer duets. It’s been quite new for me to get 
to grips with all that complexity, all those different motivations.”

If Bourne regards this production as a significant new phase in his 
dance-making, he says he’s been inspired by his music, which he thinks will be 
one of the “biggest revelations of the show”. The film’s original score was not 
adequate to his needs, so he and his regular collaboratorTerry Davies 
<http://new-adventures.net/company/meet-our-team/terry-davies> investigated the 
works ofBernard Herrmann 
<http://www.bernardherrmann.org/articles/blog-herrmann100/>. “There is so much 
of his music that hasn’t been used in the theatre, concert pieces and film 
scores. It has a bittersweet quality, full of feeling. We’ve used some of the 
music from Citizen Kane, would you believe, and Fahrenheit 451. Terry has 
arranged it into a full-length score. I’m very excited about it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmatthew-bourne-the-red-shoes-interview-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf2f4e83cc1652f37f264956a8daa9ef887c7ec6%2F267_1116_2281_2851%2F2281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bourne's%20supremacy%3A%20the%20blockbuster%20choreographer%20puts%20on%20The%20Red%20Shoes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmatthew-bourne-the-red-shoes-interview-sadlers-wells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bourne%27s%20supremacy%3A%20the%20blockbuster%20choreographer%20puts%20on%20The%20Red%20Shoes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fmatthew-bourne-the-red-shoes-interview-sadlers-wells%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf2f4e83cc1652f37f264956a8daa9ef887c7ec6%2F267_1116_2281_2851%2F2281.jpg>
 Ashley Shaw as Vicky Page in Matthew Bourne’s The Red Shoes. Photograph: Hugo 
Glendinning 
The work of Bourne’s other long-term collaborator, the designer Lez Brotherston
 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/oct/14/lez-brotherston-matthew-bourne>
, has been equally important: creating sets that shift the location from London 
to Monte Carlo to the fantasy land of the Red Shoes, producing a vast wardrobe 
of costumes for the 24 dancers. “It’s crazy, we’ve got more costumes for this 
show than any other. Lez is brilliant but we’ve had to work hard to keep him 
inside the budget.”

Calculating the cost of a production like The Red Shoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-red-shoes>, as well as creating its story 
and choreography, is a massive undertaking and Bourne does sometimes wonder if 
he can bear to put himself through it all. “You’re always fighting with 
yourself, worried about repeating yourself, wondering if you can get away with 
a trick that you’ve used before.” At 56, he has an impressive body of work – 
not only for New Adventures but also in musical theatre – but he feels suddenly 
aware of being one of the oldest choreographers working in Britain.

He gives a rueful grin when he admits that being awarded a knighthood this 
year has made him feel his age. “I’m just beginning to get used to it but it 
seems to have brought a lot of responsibility. I find I have to be careful what 
I say – or tweet – because people are much more likely to report on it. It’s 
like I’ve become an authority, the voice of dance.”


But these worries seem to fade away when he launches into a list of his future 
plans. He wants to mount a brand new Swan Lake (“some of it will look very 
different”) and he’s in discussions withSadler’s Wells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sadlers-wells> for a small experimental work 
to be shown in its new 500-seat theatre. Despite feeling the strain of creating 
The Red Shoes, Bourne acknowledges that these large-scale productions are where 
his heart lies. “New Adventures has grown so much over the last 20 years, but 
it still feels like family to me. It still has that freshness of spirit. And 
the truth is I like making big shows for big audiences. I always have.”


 * The Red Shoes is at Plymouth Theatre Royal 
<http://www.theatreroyal.com/whats-on/2016/matthew-bournes-production-of-the-red-shoes/>
, 21-26 November, then atSadler’s Wells 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/matthew-bournes-production-of-the-red-shoes/>
, London, 6 December to 29 January.
 