
Boxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> has been a life long 
fascination for me. I grew up in Belfast, a city transfixed with its prize 
fighters and I in turn idolised those brave gloved men. My friends and family 
found it largely barbaric, but I always argued that it was a sweet science. The 
brutal knockouts weren’t the sport’s only satisfying objective, a fighter’s 
nous and artistry were valued just as much by the fans.

This morning, in Sydney, far from home, I watched a brave English fighter 
called Nick Blackwell fall to the ground at the end of a brutal British title 
defence against Chris Eubank Jnr. Blackwell’s formerly handsome face resembled 
a swollen mess with his left eye fully closed shut. A doctor examined the 
stricken fighter carefully before the refereedecided to call an end to the fight
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jnr-hospital>
 in the 10th round. The crowd booed loudly during the examination. They were 
delirious at what they had paid to see, two fighters standing toe to toe, 
neither taking a backwards step. They didn’t want the fervour of the fight 
spoiled by a staid medical practitioner.

Boxer Nick Blackwell in coma after title fight defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/nick-blackwell-in-coma-title-fight-defeat-chris-eubank-jr>
Blackwell had been waiting for this fight patiently for a year, it would 
represent the pinnacle of a career that already had three losses on it. 
Fighting Chris Eubank Jnr would give the young man from Wiltshire a rare chance 
to fight in the spotlight, with millions watching on free-to-air television. He 
started the fight gamely as expected, even winning some early rounds. Yet, as 
the fight progressed, Eubank Jnr was using his head as speed ball, unattached 
to a sturdy bracket. The head snapped back sporadically after Eubank Jnr’s 
vicious upper cuts found a way through Blackwell’s high gloved guard.

Late in the fight, Chris Eubank Snr, climbed into the ring between rounds and 
looked his son directly in the eye. “If the referee doesn’t stop it, I don’t 
know what to tell you, but I will tell you this, if he doesn’t stop it, and you 
keep beating him like this, one, he’s getting hurt, two, if it goes to a 
decision, why hasn’t he stopped the fight? I don’t get why, so maybe you 
shouldn’t leave it to the referee. Now you’re not going to take him out to the 
face, you’re going to take him out to the body.” Was this a rare act of 
compassion in an often physically brutal sport? Was this a horrible reminder to 
Eubank Snr of the horrific injuries he witnessed as a fighter againsthis 
opponent Michael Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/may/04/boxing.features> Or perhaps, it 
was just a genuine tactical initiative, to knock the wind out of his opponent 
who was refusing to be be counted out with blows to the face, regardless of 
their ferocity.


Eventually in the 10th round, the fight was stopped and Eubank Jnr’s hand was 
raised. Shortly after, both fighters had hugged and shared a few quiet words 
before Blackwell fell to the ring’s floor unexpectedly. He was rushed to 
hospital, where it is reported thathe has a small bleed on his brain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/nick-blackwell-in-coma-title-fight-defeat-chris-eubank-jr>
. His family and friends face nervous hours waiting to see what will happen to 
a man they love, who was ultimately too brave for his own good.

Nick Blackwell taken to hospital after Chris Eubank Jr wins British title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jnr-hospital>
Can a fighter’s corner be blamed? Stop the fight too early, and you are 
potentially depriving a man of his livelihood and his dreams. Refuse to stop 
it, and the consequences can be fatal in seconds. Should the referee be 
admonished? He is making a judgement, trying not to bow to the pressure of a 
crowd, a corner and ultimately the bloodied fighter who will want to continue 
no matter of the consequences in the heat of the battle.

Or, are people like me to blame? The armchair purists. People who have climbed 
between the ropes and fought at a humble amateur level, and feel foolishly that 
they know what it is to feel scathing blows, having never stepped into a 
professional ring. People like me who will lose themselves in a close and 
brutal fight, and urge their man to stop it with one brutal punch. Watching my 
favourite fighters, I have rarely if ever stopped to think about the opponent, 
a man who has a family and friends. I have argued that boxing is a sweet 
science, and it is. At its best, this fight game has given a lot to so many 
people, the fighters I have known are always the most cordial men in sport.

I sit tonight wondering about the sport I love. No man should have taken the 
beating that Nick Blackwell took in a professional ring, regardless of the fame 
and fortune on offer. Blackwell remains in hospital, with the world’s boxing 
family thinking of his welfare and hoping he makes a full recovery. There are 
risks involved in every gruelling physical sport, and professional fighters 
know this better than anyone. But if a fighter or his corner make the wrong 
decision during a fight, the consequences are unthinkable. A boxer has only his 
two fists and a determination to win regardless of the pain he encounters; the 
responsibility of bringing him home safely to his loved ones lies squarely with 
his cornermen and the referee.

We long for bloody battles in the ring, yet we fear the harsh aftermath. 
Herein lies the guilt of a boxing fan, captivated by a sport that can change 
from beautiful to brutal in a split second.

• This article is from Behind the Lines <https://jdrennan13.wordpress.com/>
• Follow Jonathan Drennan <https://twitter.com/jwdrennan> on Twitter
 