
BP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> has finally officially withdrawn 
its application to drill for oil in the pristine Great Australian Bight, ending 
months of uncertainty after it announced it was not pursuing the project but 
then did not withdraw its application.

The Wilderness Society, which has been fighting plans from BP, Chevron, 
Santos, MurphyOil <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/oil> and others to 
create a massive new oil field in the remote waters, described the announcement 
as an “early Christmas present” for Australians.

“BP’s decision to finally withdraw its risky plans for the bight has given 
Australians something to really celebrate this Christmas,” said the Wilderness 
Society’sSouth Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> director, Peter 
Owen.

The National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority 
(Nopsema) announced on Wednesday night that it had been notified of BP’s 
withdrawal on Tuesday.

Resources minister 'bitterly disappointed' BP won't drill for oil in Great 
Australian Bight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/resources-minister-bitterly-disappointed-bp-wont-drill-for-oil-in-great-australian-bight>
BP’s applications had failed to meet Nopsema’s regulatory requirements several 
times and, in a statement, Nopseama said BP had failed to provide it with more 
information it needed on several issues including oil spill response plans, 
environmental monitoring, risks to commonwealth marine reserves and impacts of 
“planned emissions and discharges”.

The Wilderness Society called for other companies to follow suit.

“If BP with all its experience could not produce an acceptable drilling plan 
for the regulator, Nopsema, the remaining companies exploring in the bight will 
be wasting their shareholders’ money trying to pursue this folly,” Owen said.

At a Senate inquiry hearing in November, Nopsema’s chief executive said BP’s 
application was “still in play” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/bps-applications-to-drill-for-oil-in-great-australian-bight-still-in-play-says-regulator>
 and said if it pursued its application, and received approval, it would be 
possible for BP to transfer or sell their rights to drill to another company.

Nopsema’s announcement ends that speculation but leaves several other 
applications to drill for oil in the Great Australian Bight progressing as 
usual.

The Great Australian Bight’s pristine waters are home to dozens of species of 
whales and dolphins, many of which are protected under Australian law. It is 
often described as the world’s most important nursery for the endangered 
southern right whales.

Oil spill modelling, a summary of which was released by BP, showed that, in a 
very bad spill, oil could reach as far as New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/bp-modelling-great-australian-bight-oil-spill-new-south-wales>
.

The offshore oil industry in the US has been plagued by safety concerns about 
the bolts used to secure underwater equipment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/12/call-to-halt-great-australian-bight-oil-drilling-amid-faulty-equipment-fears>
. The US regulator has said the issue is ongoing, with no known solution, and 
that it is was only a matter of time until a faulty bolt caused a catastrophic 
spill.

Disaster experts from the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/16/oil-disaster-investigator-alarmed-by-bp-great-australian-bight-response>
 andAustralia have been highly critical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/23/bps-planned-response-to-any-great-australian-bight-oil-spill-too-slow-says-expert>
 of Australia’s response to those safety concerns.
 