
Plans to build a huge hydroelectric dam in the Amazon have been put on hold 
afterBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>’s environmental agency, 
Ibama, suspended the licensing process over concerns about its impact on the 
indigenous community in the region.


As one of the central elements of the government’s project to expand 
hydroelectric power generation across the Amazon, the 8,000-megawatt São Luiz 
do Tapajós dam is slated to be Brazil’s second largest, after the controversial 
Belo Monte power plant, which finally began operating this week.


But in a letter sent this week to the heads of Eletrobrás, the state energy 
company, and Funai, Brazil’s agency on indigenous affairs, the Ibama president, 
Marilene Ramos, stressed the “unviability of the project given the indigenous 
component”.


Amazonian tribes unite to demand Brazil stop hydroelectric dams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/30/amazonian-tribes-demand-brazil-stop-hydroelectric-dams>
Around 10,000 Munduruku people live around the river Tapajós. The dam would 
flood a vast area, requiring the forced removal of at least some indigenous 
communities, an act that is strictly prohibited by the Brazilian constitution 
except in cases of disease epidemics or war.


The Munduruku’s attempts to preserve their land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/dec/22/amazon-munduruku-indians-brazil-tapajos>
 have been hamstrung by the government’s decade-long refusal to recognise their 
territory, prompting the community to carry out its own demarcation process. 
But in another success for the Munduruku this week, Funai has published an 
initial report that defines about 170,000 hectares as Sawré Muybu indigenous 
land.


“The publication of this report is highly significant,“ Brent Millikan, the 
Amazon programme director from the NGO InternationalRivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/rivers>, said. “This throws a monkey 
wrench into the licensing process. It shows that there is a constitutional 
right that needs to be respected.”


According to Ramos, the future of the licence now depends on the “final 
report” produced by Funai. But if the indigenous affairs agency confirms the 
status of the land, campaigners believe it will be difficult for the government 
to circumvent the constitution.


“Brazil’s constitution is quite progressive in recognising indigenous peoples 
and their rights,” Millikan said. “Only in very unusual circumstances could 
their land be exploited and only after approval by congress.”

At present, however, the greatest obstacle to further development of the 
Amazon basin is economic. After the years of lawsuits that doggedthe Belo Monte 
dam 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=6&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiFmOLPw6LMAhWJaz4KHUSSCW0QFghHMAU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2014%2Fdec%2F16%2Fbelo-monte-brazil-tribes-living-in-shadow-megadam&usg=AFQjCNG5b-mdH5sFmL92hASC4mBfZZxb5g&sig2=ggpQO8C_Mh7Q0Ie1AcUbAw&bvm=bv.119745492,d.cWw>
, energy and construction companies may be reluctant to risk large amounts of 
money on impact assessment studies for a project that may never be realised, 
particularly in the middle of an economic crisis.

“These dams were planned when the government expected a rise in energy demand 
based on growth of 4% a year,” Márcio Santilli, a founding partner of the 
not-for-profit Instituto Socioambiental (ISA). “But in 2015 GDP shrank by 3.8% 
and the projections for 2016 indicate a similar drop.”

But while the recession may have forced a pause in the development of the 
region, Brazil’s political crisis, which looks set to see PresidentDilma 
Rousseff <https://www.theguardian.com/world/dilma-rousseff> removed from office 
next month, could change that dynamic.


“We are living in a moment of great instability,” Santilli said. “Potentially, 
a new Ibama president could reverse the decision.”

Earlier this week, Eduardo Braga, Brazil’s minister for mines and energy, left 
the government. He may not be replaced until after the senate votes on whether 
to impeach President Rousseff in mid-May

Added to this uncertainty, a strategic development law, known as PLS 654/2015, 
currently being debated in the senate, could significantly accelerate the 
licensing process, by reducing the environmental protections enshrined in 
Brazilian law, and eliminating the requirement for public consultation.
 