
The president of the British Racing Drivers’ Club, Derek Warwick, has acted to 
allay fears over the future of theBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> by revealing the body, 
which owns Silverstone, is in talks with the government to safeguard the race’s 
future.

Related: Lewis Hamilton left with a clear path to greatness at Mercedes | 
Giles Richards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/12/lewis-hamilton-paddy-lowe-mercedes-leadership>

The BRDC warned last week of the financially “potentially ruinous risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/future-f1-british-grand-prix-silverstone-in-doubt-hosting-costs>
” of continuing to host Formula One at the track and that it may activate a 
break clause to opt out of its contract in 2019.

With few other viable venues available it threw the existence of the British 
Grand Prix, a meeting that has been on the world championship calendar since it 
began in 1950, into doubt. However, Warwick is now positive a solution will be 
reached.

Silverstone has staged the race since 1987 but despite attendances of more 
than 139,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/10/lewis-hamilton-rock-star-british-grand-prix-silverstone>
 at the past two meetings it has continued to lose money hosting the event, 
with the BRDC chairman, John Grant, warning that high race fees were 
unsustainable even with such crowds.

Warwick is optimistic a way round the problem will be found. “We are talking 
to the government to see if there is any help there,” he said at the Autosport 
International Show in Birmingham on Friday. “I feel there is light at the end 
of the tunnel and I think we will have a grand prix past 2019.” He added: “We 
are feeling very positive at the minute.”

He is confident the sport’s new owners, the Liberty Media group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/f1-liberty-media-8bn-takeover-deal-agreed-bernie-ecclestone>
, and Bernie Ecclestone will be part of reaching a solution. “We have had 
meetings with Liberty and Chase Carey [the Formula One Group chairman]. He 
understands our dilemma. Even Bernie is calling us and saying: ‘Let’s set up a 
meeting and talk about it.’”

Unlike many of the newly added circuits, which are publicly supported for 
promotional purposes,Silverstone <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone>
 receives no government backing. However, given the current economic situation 
the concept of direct public funding of an event that makes considerable sums 
for the sport and its owners seems highly unlikely, and any assistance may take 
more indirect forms.

More realistically, a renegotiation of the current contract, set to run until 
2026, would be feasible. Liberty has made clear their support for keeping 
classic venues on the calendar and for lowering costs. Equally for a media 
company, which wants to promote the sport, it is in its interest to maintain an 
event that boasts big crowds, as opposed to the areas of empty grandstands 
noticeable at some modern venues. Ecclestone has previously been dismissive of 
Silverstone’s complaints but there remainno other tracks currently suitable to 
host F1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/silverstone-alternatives-f1-british-grand-prix-ecclestone>
 in the UK.
 