
The first major opera based on a film by Lars von Trier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lars-von-trier> is set to debut this week, 
but don’t look for the famously provocative Danish director – and noted opera 
lover – to have a hand in the work itself.

With Breaking the Waves 
<http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/breaking-the-waves-1996>, composer Missy 
Mazzoli <http://www.missymazzoli.com/>and librettist Royce Vavrek 
<http://www.laopera.org/Artists/Creative/Royce-Vavrek/> have adapted von 
Trier’s bleak 1996 fable set in an insular Calvinist community on the coast of 
Scotland. The work that introduced the director to the world at large, and a 
modernarthouse classic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/20/breaking-waves-trier-arthouse>, 
it establishes themes that became constants in his later films – religious 
piety and obsessive love endured by a suffering heroine.

The work opens at Opera Philadelphia 
<https://www.operaphila.org/whats-on/on-stage-2016-2017/breaking-the-waves/> on 
Thursday. “One of the things I love about this film is that each of the 
characters is infinitely deep and incredibly complicated,” said Mazzoli, 
speaking at a recent preview for the opera at New York’s Guggenheim museum. 
“That’s a very attractive quality for opera.”

Von Trier has periodically used opera’s heightened emotions in his films, 
notably in the soundtrack to 2011’sMelancholia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/29/melancholia-film-review> 
(featuring Wagner’s Prelude to Tristan und Isolde) and 2009’sAntichrist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/24/antichrist-lars-von-trier-review> 
(Handel’s aria Lascia Ch’io Pianga). He was even scheduled to direct a 
production of Wagner’s four-opera Ring Cycle at the 2006 Bayreuth festival, but
withdrew <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2004/jun/09/film.arts> early on, 
saying he was unprepared for its technical and political complications.

In a Skype interview, von Trier said he agreed to Mazzoli and Vavrek’s 
proposed concept without conditions. “I believe that if you’re an artist, you 
have to follow your own ideas,” he said. “It was important for me not to know 
anything about it because then I would start giving ideas. My work was finished 
when the film was finished.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fbreaking-the-waves-opera-lars-von-trier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F720e323425cf824b1cc598d05ed84e94e1244fd0%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20the%20Waves%3A%20Lars%20von%20Trier's%20'true%20love%20story'%20becomes%20an%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fbreaking-the-waves-opera-lars-von-trier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20the%20Waves%3A%20Lars%20von%20Trier%27s%20%27true%20love%20story%27%20becomes%20an%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fbreaking-the-waves-opera-lars-von-trier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F720e323425cf824b1cc598d05ed84e94e1244fd0%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 Baritone John Moore as paralysed husband Jan Nyman. Photograph: Nicholas 
Korkos/Opera Philadelphia 
Breaking the Waves has been a tough nut to crack for many audiences and 
critics, unsure if it’s a bold feminist statement or a chauvinistic 
provocation. At the film’s center is Bess (Emily Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/08/this-much-know-emily-watson>), a 
shy and troubled young woman who, defying the scowls of local church elders, 
marries Jan, a raffish Scandinavian oil worker (Stellan Skarsgård). After Jan 
is paralyzed in an accident and left in despair, he encourages Bess to sleep 
with other men and tell him about her experiences. Bess increasingly views 
promiscuity as the route to a miracle cure for Jan.

Is Jan perversely testing Bess, as some critics have suggested 
<http://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9E06EED9153FF937A35753C1A960958260>, 
or liberating her from a bad situation? “I don’t think Jan is testing Bess’s 
devotion,” said Mazzoli. “I don’t think he’s reveling in her pain and 
suffering. That, to me, is the beauty of the piece: everyone is doing what they 
think is the most good and still, terrible things happen. We’re very careful in 
the staging not to portray Jan in that way.”

Von Trier agrees with this essential reading, though expresses some regrets. 
“I have tried not to have bad guys in the rest of my films, but here I have 
chosen a relatively innocent Calvinistic group of people and turned them into 
bad guys, which I don’t think is really fair,” he says. “But it was good for 
the story. So I’ve done my best later on not to have bad guys like that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fbreaking-the-waves-opera-lars-von-trier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c68ca4ea56d1134b3325e3affa9de470c51edd6%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20the%20Waves%3A%20Lars%20von%20Trier's%20'true%20love%20story'%20becomes%20an%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fbreaking-the-waves-opera-lars-von-trier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20the%20Waves%3A%20Lars%20von%20Trier%27s%20%27true%20love%20story%27%20becomes%20an%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fbreaking-the-waves-opera-lars-von-trier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c68ca4ea56d1134b3325e3affa9de470c51edd6%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 The Opera Philadelphia Chorus play the elders of Bess’s strict Calvinist 
church. Photograph: Nicholas Korkos/Opera Philadelphia 
The idea for the opera began with Vavrek, who first encountered Breaking the 
Waves as a precocious 14-year-old in his native Alberta, Canada. “I saw it at 
the 1997 Golden Globe Awards when they showed a scene where Jan asks Bess to 
take up other lovers,” said Vavrek. “It just blew my mind.” Vavrek rushed out 
to rent the video. “I foundLars von Trier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lars-von-trier> to be this master 
storyteller. I just loved his audacity. Breaking the Waves is something I’ve 
been carrying with me for 20 years.”

Mazzoli was at first leery of adapting such a prominent film, but she found 
“it was an idea that wouldn’t leave me alone”. She and Vavrek, who both live in 
Brooklyn, previously worked together on Song From the Uproar 
<http://www.laopera.org/season/1516-Season-at-a-Glance/Song-from-the-Uproar/>, 
a chamber opera about the Swiss explorer Isabelle Eberhardt. But while Vavrek’s 
libretti have powered a string of gritty operas, the Yale-trained Mazzoli is 
most identified with downtown chamber music, having written works for Kronos 
Quartet, Eighth Blackbird and other groups.

Yet Mazzoli was in the midst of a three-year residency at Opera Philadelphia, 
which, together withBeth Morrison Projects 
<http://www.bethmorrisonprojects.org/>, offered her a commission. Once funding 
and rights were secured, she and Vavrek traveled to the film’sScottish locations
 <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0115751/locations>, where they spent a week 
studying the local accents and taking in the craggy mountainous landscapes. In 
her score, Mazzoli aims to evoke Gaelic Psalms, a rough-hewn style of church 
singing on the Isle of Skye, and the droning texture of bagpipes. “The sound of 
bagpipes weirdly corresponds to the Scottish landscape in such an interesting 
way,” she said. “It’s a very loud landscape.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fbreaking-the-waves-opera-lars-von-trier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5791eee42c74d8f5deab5c6280f9e564c00f280%2F0_24_2376_1426%2F2376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20the%20Waves%3A%20Lars%20von%20Trier's%20'true%20love%20story'%20becomes%20an%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fbreaking-the-waves-opera-lars-von-trier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20the%20Waves%3A%20Lars%20von%20Trier%27s%20%27true%20love%20story%27%20becomes%20an%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fbreaking-the-waves-opera-lars-von-trier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5791eee42c74d8f5deab5c6280f9e564c00f280%2F0_24_2376_1426%2F2376.jpg>
 Emily Watson and Stellan Skarsgard in von Trier’s 1996 film: ‘I’m very 
curious,’ the director said of the opera. Photograph: Everett/REX/Shutterstock 
Finding a theatrical parallel to von Trier’s raw, shaky-cam documentary style 
fell to James Darrah, a Los Angeles-based director. He says he largely resisted 
a Scottish postcard approach, instead emphasizing stylized video projections of 
oil and water. “It’s a very slippery slope where you become very dependent on 
period, naturalism and all those things,” he said. “We’re trying to use 
choreography and visuals that are completely abstracted, in some instances, and 
completely nightmarish in others.” The cast, led by soprano Kiera Duffy and 
baritone Jon Moore, will be outfitted in early 1970s-style costumes.

Von Trier, who has a fear of flying, says he won’t attend the premiere, but 
admits: “I’m very curious and I would definitely like to see a video if they 
make one.”

Where the opera’s creators didn’t wish to dilute their source material is in 
the film’s tough mixture of sex and violence, entailing an advisory for adult 
content (Opera Philadelphia general director and president David Devan insists 
that “we’re doing it responsibly”). Yet ultimately, Mazzoli believes that 
opera’s reflective capacities can reveal new depths in the drama. At the 
Guggenheim preview, Moore delivered Jan’s poignant love song, which serves as 
an epilogue.

“It’s interesting in watching this film, how at first, you really don’t trust 
him,” said Mazzoli, referring to Jan. “He accidentally leads her into this 
place of suffering because she misconstrues what he’s telling her to do. But it 
is a true, true love story.”
 