
Brendan Rodgers does not need the Scottish League Cup as endorsement of his 
early work at Celtic.Champions League qualification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/27/celtic-comeback-to-draw-1-1-with-fc-astana-in-champions-league-third-qualifying-round-first-leg-tie>
 afforded Rodgers instant acclaim, to the point whereeven finishing bottom of 
Group C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/celtic-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
 will be accepted by the masses.

Rodgers smiles when contemplating what might have been, in the event of 
falling at the Champions League’s playoff hurdle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/celtic-astana-champions-league-third-qualifying-round-match-report>
. “You start behind the eight ball,” he says. “You are tight behind it. If we 
don’t qualify and then go on to win a league and cup what is said is ‘You 
didn’t make the Champions League.’”

Nonetheless, tangible reward always helps. Rodgers may insist that trophies 
will not define him but the claiming of one for the first time in his 
managerial career in the immediate aftermath of Celtic’s joust withAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> at Hampden Park on Sunday will 
further enhance a sense that the 43-year-old has returned to an upward curve.

Rodgers is clearly relishing the power he was given when succeeding Ronny Deila
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/20/celtic-appoint-brendan-rodgers-manager>
. That level of autonomy goes beyond new managerial office space and the desire 
to introduce world class analytics. Come January, Rodgers will have the chance 
to flex his muscles further by purchasing the level of player he believes will 
be needed for next season’s European test. “I was asked when I came in here to 
be the architect of the club,” he says. “And that was very appealing.”

The comparison here is an obvious one. The transfer committee as utilised by 
Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/18/liverpool-jurgen-klopp-transfer-committee>
 when Rodgers was in charge contrasts markedly to the scenario in Glasgow. “I 
don’t really think it’s a conversation,” says Rodgers when asked if he prefers 
the Celtic scene. “That’s how it was set up at Liverpool when I went in there.

“The manager has to be a big part of the process but with players, it always 
boils down to availability and affordability. It’s about having the right 
people assessing the right type of profile for you.

“It is very different, yes. I’m not against that [committee]; the modern 
manager, especially if he is a coaching manager, then he can’t see every 
player. If you are out doing double sessions, preparing sessions and have other 
commitments then it is hard to then go and see players at the same time. What 
is vitally important is that everything is in tune with what your idea of 
football is, what your philosophy is.”

Rodgers swats aside the sense of legacy. “The biggest thing for me is having a 
team of substance, one supporters enjoy watching,” he says. “That’s the 
ultimate aim as a coach and a manager.

“I’m not worried so much about the periphery stuff as long as the job I do is 
respected by the people at the club, the supporters and that the players enjoy 
their work.

“If we get a wee bit of luck along the way we can win trophies and make our 
mark.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fceltic-brendan-rodgers-revolution-league-cup-scottish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F454214d7b0d921d78ccc5435241ff6b135de44bd%2F0_43_6020_3613%2F6020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brendan%20Rodgers%E2%80%99%20Celtic%20revolution%20chases%20first%20trophy%20against%20Aberdeen%20%7C%20Ewan%20Murray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fceltic-brendan-rodgers-revolution-league-cup-scottish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brendan%20Rodgers%E2%80%99%20Celtic%20revolution%20chases%20first%20trophy%20against%20Aberdeen%20%7C%20Ewan%20Murray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fceltic-brendan-rodgers-revolution-league-cup-scottish%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F454214d7b0d921d78ccc5435241ff6b135de44bd%2F0_43_6020_3613%2F6020.jpg>
 Celtic’s Tom Rogic celebrates scoring against Aberdeen at Pittodrie in 
October. Photograph: Jeff Holmes/PA 
It has not taken Rodgers long to assess the wider Scottish picture. Owing to 
financial constraints and a meagre talent pool, Celtic’s prominence is not 
reflective of what is going on elsewhere. Rodgers believes a switch towards a 
summer season worthy of consideration. “I’ve only been here a few months, but 
it’s getting colder. And in terms of coaching it’s tough,” he says.

“We’re blessed in terms of what we have here compared to other teams but take 
a developing kid for example. The best months of the year he’s off. The season 
has finished and the posts get taken down and the grass doesn’t get cut.

“Now – in season – it’s just about keeping kids warm. You can’t coach them. At 
Liverpool, we turned things around because of this. If you are outside it’s 
tough. It was minus eight here this morning.

“Having been here now and experienced it I would say that there is an argument 
to say a season which starts in February to November would work up here and 
there would be benefits for clubs. There would be financial benefits and 
benefits for coaching in the warmer months. Then, when you are midway through 
your season, you get the qualifiers. Astana had played 22 games by the time we 
faced them and that’s remarkable because we had played once.”

So to the task in hand. Aberdeen have been Celtic’s closest challengers since 
the demise of Rangers in 2012 but the team from the north east remain miles 
adrift of this Rodgers revolution. Which is not to suggest the cup final will 
be a formality; Ross County, Kilmarnock, St Mirren, Inverness and a then 
second-tier Rangers have inflicted bloody noses onCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> at Scotland’s national stadium in 
recent times.

Brendan Rodgers, the beauty of 3-4-2-1 and its potency as a tactical weapon | 
Jonathan Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/15/brendan-rodgers-3-4-2-1-chelsea-manchester-city-basel-liverpool>
Rodgers has a long-time knowledge of, and affinity for, the Aberdeen manager, 
Derek McInnes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/16/aberdeen-derek-mcinnes-celtic-scottish-premiership>
. “It is a cup final, it will be tough,” says Rodgers. “I spoke to Derek when 
he was at Bristol City. It was a tough job there at the time, a difficult 
moment for the club.

“But, in my conversations with him, he struck me as someone who was wanting to 
go down the right path always.

“I was delighted he came to Aberdeen, a big club, and when I was at Liverpool 
we spoke more. I like him, he’s conscientious with his work, his communication 
is open, he sets his teams up very well. They work hard, fight for a result and 
mix the game up well. He’s done a very good job.”
 