
Brentford will assist any FA or Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> investigation into an 
altercation between Crawley Town's Paul Connolly and a Brentford supporter 
during the League One game at Griffin Park on Tuesday.

Video footage appears to show Connolly raising his right hand to a supporter 
after the ball was thrown at the defender from the Braemar Road stand. A 
plastic bottle was also thrown on to the pitch during the match thatBrentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> won 1-0 to strengthen their 
grip on automatic promotion.

The Brentford chief executive, Mark Devlin, said: "It does look as though the 
ball went into the crowd, and from what I could see it was thrown towards the 
player. The player didn't like it and there appeared to be an exchange, whether 
it was a slap or a punch or whatever.

"The referee has moved in and a plastic bottle has come on to the pitch, so no 
doubt we'll hear from the Football League about that one as well. The club will 
wait to see what the police say and then take it up with Crawley. If the 
Football League asks us for our input we will investigate it and let them know 
from our point of view what's gone on."
Al's... JFT96, YNWA. (@alhugLFC66) 
Brentford v Crawley player altercation with a fan... https://t.co/INsrzhejA6 
<https://t.co/INsrzhejA6>
 <https://twitter.com/alhugLFC66/statuses/453638467365249025> April 8, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/alhugLFC66/statuses/453638467365249025> 
Connolly attempted to play down the incident by tweeting: "A total blown up 
incident at the game last night! Handbags! We move on."

The Crawley manager, John Gregory added: "I was a long way from the incident. 
That was the only exciting part of the night I would think, so people dwell on 
that as opposed to the match."
 