
Inverness offers a more sedate setting to Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> following a hectic week for the 
Parkhead club but Brendan Rodgers’ attitude will not differ.

The Champions League group stage is back and already as predictable as ever | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/14/champions-league-group-stage-predictable-barcelona-bayern>
The Northern Irishman celebrated his first Old Firm game Celtic manager last 
weekend with athumping 5-1 win over Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/celtic-rangers-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 at a packed and frenzied Parkhead. Celtic’s opening Champions League Group C 
clash against Barcelona at the Camp Nou last Tuesday in front of 73,290 fans 
ended very differently, however, with the Glasgow club departing Catalonia on 
the wrong end ofa 7-0 defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/barcelona-celtic-champions-league-match-report>
, the biggest European loss in the club’s history.

Rodgers’ men return to Premiership duty on Sunday with a trip north to the 
Tulloch Caledonian Stadium but the former Liverpool manager will “handle it the 
same way” as he looks to make it five league wins out of five against a team 
who have drawn against Aberdeen and beaten St Johnstone in their last two 
matches, after starting the campaign with three league defeats.

Joey Barton apologises ‘unreservedly’ after being sent home by Rangers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/joey-barton-rangers-fallout-after-celtic-defeat>
“We are very committed and very focused to winning games,” Rodgers said. “We 
are going for a fifth straight win in the league, which is very important for 
us.

“We wanted to make a good start and the opening 10 games will be a reflection 
on that. We respect that Inverness had a difficult start but in the last couple 
of games against St Johnstone and Aberdeen they have showed much better. So I 
am sure it will be a tough game for us, like all the trips there before.

“No team will lie down and make it easy for you. It is up to us to play with 
our dominance and be as aggressive as we have been.”

Despite the rigours of the past two matches, Rodgers will make any changes 
with caution. He said: “I don’t like to make too many but I have to respect the 
level and intensity of the game, which is very challenging for us, and we have 
a squad for a purpose.

“The core of the team will mostly stay the same and I will look at one or two 
[changes] to ensure we retain the intensity of the team.”

Leigh Griffiths will again miss out because of a calf injury, although the 
striker could be back next weekend. 
 