
The recurring criticism levelled against Brendan Rodgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brendan-rodgers> will surely vanish 
within one season of managing Celtic. After all, should the 43-year-old’s 
attempt to win major silverware run into a second season in Scotland then 
serious questions must be asked regarding his capabilities.

Manchester City draw Steaua Bucharest in Champions League play-offs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/05/manchester-city-pep-guardiola-champions-league>
Celtic are the overwhelming favourites to return a sixth Scottish top-flight 
title in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/08/celtic-seal-scottish-premiership-title-3-2-win-aberdeen>
 and, barring something disastrous, will justify that status. A more intriguing 
area for analysis may be Europe, where Rodgers has already made progress by 
guiding his team – when an obvious work in progress –to the Champions League’s 
play-off round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/celtic-astana-champions-league-third-qualifying-round-match-report>
. He hardly needed it from a support apparently captivated by his arrival but 
Rodgers has bought time rather than finding himself engulfed by early crisis.

Precisely where Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> will play 
their continental football this side of Christmas can wait. On Sunday a trip to 
Tynecastle opens their league campaign.

Rodgers inherited the strongest squad in Scotland. His desire to add a winger 
and defensive obduracy is obvious, just as shedding midfield deadwood makes 
perfect sense. In Leigh Griffiths Celtic have the league’s most potent striker.
Patrick Roberts, a Manchester City loanee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/13/patrick-roberts-theo-walcott-celtic-manchester-city-arsenal>
, has the platform to showcase himself as its finest player.

The key to Rodgers’s enhancement of Celtic’s personnel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/21/celtic-brendan-rodgers-right-man-revival>
 is that he will have relatively lavish resources. The former Liverpool manager 
has impressed all of those within the club, raising the bar with his attention 
to detail, planning and game knowledge. Rodgers makes those around him want to 
work; he has publicly heaped praise upon players who are in no doubt as to what 
switch may be flicked if they fall below newly implemented standards. 
Alterations to the style of play will be constant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbrendan-rodgers-celtic-premiership-rangers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F739e43137e3597e66ff333eb45c716cc24bcd6d5%2F0_78_4073_2493%2F4073.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brendan%20Rodgers%20poised%20to%20reap%20benefit%20from%20Celtic%E2%80%99s%20Premiership%20primacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbrendan-rodgers-celtic-premiership-rangers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brendan%20Rodgers%20poised%20to%20reap%20benefit%20from%20Celtic%E2%80%99s%20Premiership%20primacy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fbrendan-rodgers-celtic-premiership-rangers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F739e43137e3597e66ff333eb45c716cc24bcd6d5%2F0_78_4073_2493%2F4073.jpg>
 Clint Hill, left, and Joey Barton, right, are among the signings made by 
Rangers for their return to the top division. Photograph: Mark Runnacles/Getty 
Images 
The phoney war between the Celtic squad and their counterparts at Rangers has 
been ongoing since before the end of last season whenthe Ibrox club’s return to 
the top flight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/05/rangers-promotion-scottish-premiership-dumbarton>
 was confirmed. This is so depressingly formulaic; Player X claiming their team 
is superior to Team Y. What else would or should they say?

The scale of such coverage does nothing to suggest Scottish football has used 
the four years of Rangers’ absence from the front line to accentuate 
alternative, positive themes.

Even the game’s administrators have an unhealthy obsession with the Old Firm 
narrative, which even seeps into the negotiation of television deals and, as a 
consequence, the league set-up. There are occasionally grim snapshots as to 
Scottish football’s general standing, such as the coaxing of the Premiership’s 
second-highest scorer of last season, Kane Hemmings, by Oxford United of League 
One.

Celtic advance in Champions League thanks to Moussa Dembélé’s penalty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/celtic-astana-champions-league-third-qualifying-round-match-report>
In Mark Warburton Rangers have a blue‑chip manager of their own. The arrivals 
of Joey Barton, Niko Kranjcar, Clint Hill and Matt Gilks illustrate Warburton 
has quickly grasped the Glaswegian value of short-term success. Warburton’s own 
aspirations, after all, are linked to what barriersRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> can place in front of Celtic.

Rangers’ problem is straightforward; a questionable defence. There is also the 
curious dynamic of supporter expectation. Any other club earning promotion from 
the Championship would be afforded time and grace to find their feet; that does 
not apply at a club the size of Rangers. Warburton should benefit from a
favourable opening set of fixtures <http://spfl.co.uk/premiership/fixtures/>, 
beginning when Hamilton visit on Saturday, and still the financial incentive to 
players which dwarves clubs such as Aberdeen and Hearts. The league to which 
Rangers have been promoted is also essentially weak. At home especially Rangers 
will win far more than they lose, rendering them likely runners-up. There could 
be a fair gulf to first, however.

Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> and Hearts are 
expected to compete in the upper echelons of the league. The Edinburgh side are 
in need of a morale boost after the wounding Europa League exit to Maltese 
opposition. The key to Derek McInnes’s rejuvenation in the north-east has been 
an ability to retain Aberdeen’s key performers. So it proved again in this 
close season.

Hamilton have assumed the tag of favourites for demotion. They have, 
nonetheless, made a recent habit of defying odds. Intriguing in this context is 
Kilmarnock, where Lee Clark has made an admirable attempt at breaking season 
upon season of relegation battles by overhauling his playing staff. Should 
Clark have underestimated Scottish football, or tried too much too soon, 
Kilmarnock will struggle again.
 