
For many comedians, the Edinburgh festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/edinburghfestival> is the pinnacle of the 
year – a 30-day marathon of gigs in cramped, dark venues in which to test their 
comic mettle in front of audiences from all over the world. Material is 
written, scrapped, rewritten and rehearsed months in advance.

Edinburgh festival fringe 2016 turns spotlight on modern-day crises
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/08/edinburgh-festival-fringe-2016-revenge-porn-eu-referendum>
But this year, on 24 June, a Brexit-shaped problem presented itself to 
comedians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
. Performers from Al Murray and Mark Steel toBridget Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/29/bridget-christie-what-makes-me-laugh>
 and Simon Evans all had material that presumed the UK’s future in the EU was 
safe, or ignored the referendum altogether. And so, with just a month to go 
until the festival, they had to start from scratch.

Christie scrapped all her material and penned a new Brexit-themed Edinburgh 
set in the past week. “I’m later with this set than ever before but I couldn’t 
not change it,” she said. “After the referendum everything seemed irrelevant 
and different and like the whole world had changed. I looked at what I was 
doing in my show and realised it just didn’t seem that interesting to me any 
more.”

Christie’s previous sets have never shied away from addressing politically and 
socially fractious issues, and she said it would just be “odd not to talk about 
Brexit”. However, she said that with feelings still running raw around the 
referendum result, and the short amount of time she had to write and learn the 
new material, it was “obviously a risk”.

When she tried out some of the material on audiences over the past week, its 
reception was not seamless. “More so than other issues, you run the risk of 
really splitting audiences on this,” she said. “I thought feminism was divisive 
but this? Well ... ”

'Booed off in 17 seconds' – comedians recall their first gigs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/01/comedians-first-gigs-paul-merton-susan-calman-shappi-khorsandi-isy-suttie-omid-djalili>
Christie’s show will now be based around the premise that she wants to talk 
about anything other than Brexit – be that gardening or vibrators – but that 
she keeps getting distracted as she remembers the result.

The outspoken comedian has a lot she wants to say on the subject, and admitted 
some of it might raise the hackles of her audience. “I totally reject this 
notion, which is coming from a lot of people on the left, that we mustn’t 
criticise leave voters,” said Christie. “Everybody has to admit that there were 
a lot of people who voted leave for not noble and legitimate reasons. Just look 
at the 500% increase in race hate crimes after Brexit.”

She continued: “And people saying that the middle classes and the educated 
elite are demonising the working classes as racists. Well, I’m working class 
and I don’t accept that at all. Racists are being demonised; it doesn’t matter 
what their socio-economic background is. We have to talk about it – in the 
media and in comedy.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fnish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nish%20Kumar%3A%20What%20can%20a%20satirist%20do%20with%20our%20post-truth%20politics%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fnish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nish%20Kumar%3A%20What%20can%20a%20satirist%20do%20with%20our%20post-truth%20politics%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fnish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video&media=>
Nish Kumar: What can a satirist do with our post-truth politics? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/jul/15/nish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video>
Last-minute Brexit panic is gripping other performers too. Murray, who will 
once again perform at Edinburgh as his popular character, the xenophobic, 
ultranationalist pub landlord, said he had written material under the 
assumption that the remain camp would win and found himself having to do an 
“180-degree turn”.

Murray said the vote to leave the EU had given a new lease of life to his 
character, who could be found in a jubilant mood and “breathing the sweet air 
of freedom”.

“When it comes to writing jokes, this referendum outcome is a better one,” he 
said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fbrexit-and-the-edinburgh-fringe-selfishly-it-was-a-bit-of-a-godsend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b4c5434bf1e226f423ad25f5f80e9dca6f8e14d%2F1455_0_2545_1527%2F2545.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20and%20the%20Edinburgh%20fringe%3A%20'Selfishly%2C%20it%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20godsend'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fbrexit-and-the-edinburgh-fringe-selfishly-it-was-a-bit-of-a-godsend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20and%20the%20Edinburgh%20fringe%3A%20%27Selfishly%2C%20it%20was%20a%20bit%20of%20a%20godsend%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fbrexit-and-the-edinburgh-fringe-selfishly-it-was-a-bit-of-a-godsend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b4c5434bf1e226f423ad25f5f80e9dca6f8e14d%2F1455_0_2545_1527%2F2545.jpg>
 Al Murray stands alongside Nigel Farage to hear the Thanet South result in the 
2015 general election. Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Murray said his pub landlord character had been born out of the anti-immigrant 
rhetoric and feeling that had been simmering for years and was brought to the 
surface by the leave campaign. “I’ve always thought this whole crisis has been 
brewing for 25 years,” he said. “I used to have people say that my act was 
really out of date, banging on about Europe – and I would always think: 
‘Really, you fucking wait.’

“I used to have the landlord doing these barking-mad conspiracy theories about 
the EU, and watching that simply glide into the mainstream has been very 
interesting.”

It was a view echoed by the Australian comic Nazeem Hussain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/26/nazeem-hussain-soho-theatre-fear-of-a-brown-planet-comedy-review>
, whose show deals with issues of racism and Islamophobia. He said the Brexit 
result – and subsequent rise in racist attacks – had simply validated the 
material he had already written.

Matt Forde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/06/comedy-and-politics-need-a-bulletproof-persona>
, who was once a Labour party adviser, lamented how he had initially written 
his whole Edinburgh show on the premise that in politics you have close shaves 
but “in the end sense prevails and thank God we stayed in the EU”.


But after the referendum result came in, “obviously I had no other option than 
to write an entirely new show from scratch. Politics suddenly became a firework 
display, really, where everything’s in flames,” he said.

Edinburgh festival 2016: comedy shows that should deliver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/10/edinburgh-festival-2016-comedy-shows>
Once Forde got over having to tear up mountains of material, including jokes 
about David Cameron and George Osborne, things got “really exciting”.

He said it had been very easy to find comedy in the referendum campaign and 
fallout. “Selfishly, Brexit is a bit of a godsend as a comedian who writes 
about politics. So even though this is a completely new show, if anything there 
has been too much material to work with,” he said.

“I’ve been doing political shows at the fringe for a few years now, and every 
year you get a sense that people are becoming more politicised, but the 
reaction to Brexit is like nothing else in my lifetime. So making comedy out of 
it is cathartic.

“People who would never have dreamed of going to see a political comedy show 
are far more inclined to now.”
 