
A penalty in each half from Glenn Murray and the substitute Tomer Hemed sent 
Brighton & Hove Albion to the top of the Championship with a comfortable 2-0 
home victory overLeeds United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited>
.

Brighton, unbeaten in 14 games and winners of six of their last eight matches, 
are now eight points clear of third-placed Reading. Leeds were forced to battle 
for 66 minutes with 10 men after the sending-off of Kalvin Phillips in the 
incident that led to Murray giving Albion the lead.

The visitors rarely threatened before a crowd of 28,206, which included nearly 
3,000 from Yorkshire, and the home goalkeeper, David Stockdale, had very little 
to do.

Brighton went into the match having won their previous five fixtures against 
Leeds and the manager, Chris Hughton, made three changes, with the left-back 
Sebastien Pocognoli replacing the suspended Gaetan Bong. Anthony Knockaert was 
recalled for Jiri Skalak and Oliver Norwood came in for Steve Sidwell.

Football League your thoughts: Brighton and Reading slip up in Newcastle chase
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/dec/03/football-league-your-thoughts-brighton-and-reading-slip-up-in-newcastle-chase>
Their record signing Shane Duffy should have hit the target for the home side 
in only the 12th minute when he failed to get on the end of a teasing free-kick 
from Norwood.

Brighton went in front on 24 minutes when Murray took his tally for the season 
to 12 with a coolly taken penalty, awarded when the Leeds midfielder Phillips 
saw red for handling an attempt from Lewis Dunk on the goalline following a 
corner by Knockaert.

Murray might have done better shortly after when he headed a Knockaert corner 
into the side netting at the back post.

Leeds rarely threatened in the first half but their striker, Chris Wood, did 
fluff a snap-shot opportunity when well placed after a scuffed shot from Hadi 
Sacko.

The former England goalkeeper Rob Green came to Leedsâ€™s rescue in stoppage 
time by tipping a Murray shot over after good work from Pocognoli.

Green produced an important save shortly after the interval to block a shot 
from Jamie Murphy after good work from Knockaert.

Hughton made his first change when Solly March was introduced for the injured 
Murphy for the final 24 minutes.

Duffy was in an offside position when he had the ball in the net for Brighton 
on 70 minutes after Dunk headed down a Knockaert cross and the effort was 
disallowed.

But Brighton continued to look the more threatening and doubled their lead 
seven minutes from time when the Leeds captain, Kyle Bartley, held Dunk back in 
the area and Hemed calmly sent Green the wrong way from the penalty spot.
 