
Brighton went top of a fledgling Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> table on goal difference 
thanks to a convincing 3-0 win overRotherham at the Amex Stadium.

Having narrowly missed out on promotion last season after finishing level on 
points with automatically-promoted Middlesbrough, Brighton have started with 
two wins and a draw. Anthony Knockaert and Glenn Murray struck in a four-minute 
spell midway through the first half and Tomer Hemed added a third from the spot 
just before the hour.

Rafael Benítez unmoved by Newcastle’s struggles | Louise Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/16/rafael-benitez-newcastle-early-season-struggle>
Norwich, like Brighton a team tipped to go up, sit second after a 1-0 home win 
overBristol City at Carrow Road. Jonny Howson found the top left corner from 
the centre of the box in the 38th minute. Norwich were unlucky not to add to 
that goal.

Huddersfield are third thanks to a 1-1 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/16/aston-villa-huddersfield-match-report>
 withAston Villa.

Fulham are fourth after being held 1-1 at Leeds, who struck late on to avoid a 
third straight defeat. The visitors went ahead through Tom Cairney’s fine 
curling effort that found the bottom left corner in the 77th minute. However 
Chris Wood levelled in the 90th minute to ease the pressure on the manager 
Garry Monk.

Burton, promoted last season, stunned the expected promotion contenders 
Sheffield Wednesday 3-1 at the Pirelli Stadium. Kyle McFadzean gave them a 
seventh-minute lead but Gary Hooper equalised from the spot five minutes later.

On the stroke of half-time Jackson Irvine restored the advantage with a header 
into the bottom corner, before Lloyd Dyer made sure of three points 13 minutes 
from the end.

Huddersfield’s Michael Hefele earns late point against Aston Villa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/16/aston-villa-huddersfield-match-report>
Derby picked up their first league win of the season, with Craig Forsyth’s 
late header seeing offPreston at Deepdale.

Brentford beat Nottingham Forest 1-0 thanks to Scott Hogan’s first-half finish 
from close range. To compound matters for Forest, Damien Perquis was sent off 
late-on.

Newly-promoted Wigan rescued a late point against Birmingham at the DW 
Stadium. Adam Bogdan saved Clayton Donaldson’s 44th-minute penalty but David 
Davis was quick to tuck in the rebound – however, Craig Davies finished from 
very close range to deny Birmingham in the 90th minute.

Jón Dadi Bödvarsson’s 24th-minute penalty miss proved costly to Wolves, who 
were held to a goalless draw byIpswich at Molineux. Bartosz Bialkowski 
impressively saved a right-foot effort that was heading for the bottom-left 
corner.
 