
Jonathan Kodjia has joined Aston Villa from Bristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> in an £11m deal which could 
rise to £15m. The striker has signed a four-year contract at Villa, who were 
relegated from the Premier League last season.

Transfer news live: Arsenal sign Lucas Pérez, Hart to Torino, Barcelona seal 
Alcácer and more!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/aug/30/transfer-window-live-wilshere-hart-chambers-berahino-and-more>
The 26-year-old scored 19 goals in the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> last season for the Robins 
from 45 appearances.

Villa’s manager, Roberto Di Matteo, said on avfc.co.uk: “We are really pleased 
to have secured the services of Jonathan. He is a proven goalscorer and 
hopefully he’ll play an important part in what we hope will be a successful 
season for the club.”

Kodjia is an Ivory Coast international who joined City for around £2m from 
Angers last summer.
Dr. Tony Xia (@Dr_TonyXia) 
Kodjia almost closed a sign with other clubs including perims be4we turned 
into him.We're delighted he chose playing 4Villa! Welcome Kodjia!
 <https://twitter.com/Dr_TonyXia/status/770621153962438656> August 30, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Dr_TonyXia/status/770621153962438656> 
The Robins said they had turned down offers from Premier League and 
Championship clubs but reluctantly accepted Villa’s offer after Kodjia stated 
his wish to move on.

The club’s chief operating officer, Mark Ashton, said: “We’ve continually told 
Jonathan that we don’t want him to go but recently he’s made it clear that he’s 
aware of the interest of other clubs and that he wanted to leave.

“Due to the high-profile nature and speculation surrounding the deal we have 
chosen to disclose the fee. We will receive a total of £11m guaranteed, which 
has the potential to rise to £15m. In addition, we have retained a sell-on 
clause for a percentage of any future profit.”

City’s previous record sale was £3.5m when Ade Akinbiyi joined Wolves in 
September 1999.
 