
The last coal power station in Britain will be forced to close in 2025, the 
government said as it laid out its plan to phase-out the polluting fossil fuel.

Ministers promised last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/18/energy-policy-shift-climate-change-amber-rudd-backburner>
 that the UK would close coal power within a decade and replace it with gas and 
other sources to meet its climate change commitments.

But in a delayed consultation on the phase-out, published on Wednesday 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/coal-generation-in-great-britain-the-pathway-to-a-low-carbon-future>
, officials admitted that the last coal power station was likely to shutter in 
2022 even without government intervention, prompting calls from campaigners to 
bring forward the cut-off year.

Greg Clark, the energy secretary, said the move sent a clear signal to the 
world that the UK was a good place to invest in clean energy. “Taking unabated 
coal power out of our energy mix and replacing it with cleaner technology, such 
as gas, will significantly reduce emissions from the UK’s energy use,” he said.

The government also confirmed renewable energy would receive £730m in support 
this parliament, and that bids for £290m of support annually would be opened 
from next April. Most of that is likely to be taken by offshore windfarm 
developers, which will receive at least £105 per megawatt hour of electricity 
generated if built in 2021, considerably lower than the £135 for ones deployed 
in 2018.

While admitting that recent history has shown coal power plants can close at 
short notice, the Department for Business,Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and Industrial Strategy said 
its analysis suggested taking action on coal posed no risks to electricity 
supplies.

The department is consulting on two options for effectively forcing the UK’s 
last eight coal power stations to close by 2025 at the very latest. Both 
involve changes to the Emissions Power Standard, which sets a limit on new coal 
power plants’ annual carbon emissions based on their capacity, and which the 
UK’s ageing fleet would be unable to meet.

Officials expect that because air pollution and climate change measures are 
making coal uneconomic, the most likely scenario is that all coal power plants 
will close by 2022. But they also said that if the price of coal was low it was 
conceivable they would not close until 2030. They said this uncertainty showed 
the need for intervention.

Ben Caldecott, associate fellow of the thinktank Bright Blue, called for the 
end date to be brought forward. “There are significant benefits of phasing coal 
out sooner, rather than later. We believe that the 2025 target should be 
brought forward by at least two years to give investors greater certainty to 
invest, which will improve security of supply.”
Coal generation in the UK 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-02T14:29:54/embed.html>
Most green groups and climate change commentators welcomed the move and 
commended the government. WWF said ministers should strongly resist any 
attempts to water down the phase-out. Friends of the Earth applauded the 
government and said it should now blocka proposed opencast coal mine in 
Northumberland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/09/opencast-coal-mine-application-called-in-over-climate-change-concerns>
, given the UK was no longer planning to burn the fuel.

Christiana Figueres, the former UN climate chief, said: “Congratulations to UK 
government for the consultation on coal phase-out. Coal needs to take its 
rightful place in history of yesterday.Coal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coal> workers need to be given a fresh 
chance at the jobs of tomorrow.”

The government acknowledges the potential human cost of coal power stations 
shuttering, saying plant closures could have a “significant impact on 
communities” as they employed around 100-500 people directly.

The only way the coal plants could stay open would be if they fitted 
technology to capture and store the carbon emissions, though officials said 
that was “considered unlikely”. The other option is that they convert to 
burning another fuel, such as biomass, a process which is complete at two of 
the six units at Drax, the UK’s biggest power station, and is nearly finished 
on a third.


“We recognise coal is a fuel of the past and using the latest technology we 
have already upgraded half the power station to run on sustainable biomass,” 
said a spokesman for Drax, which welcomed the consultation. “The majority of 
electricity we now produce is renewable, providing UK homes and businesses with 
low carbon, affordable and reliable power.”

Electricity generation from the UK’s coal plants has already declined steeply, 
and is expected to have fallen 66% by the year’s end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/uk-coal-powered-electricity-projected-to-fall-by-record-amount>
, compared to 2015. There are no coal plants left in Scotland afterthe last 
one, at Longannet, closed in the spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/24/longannet-power-station-closes-coal-power-scotland>
. Gas has taken up most of the slack this year, and is expected to replace most 
of the capacity provided as coal plants close in coming years.

Michael Grubb, professor of International Energy and Climate Change Policy at 
UCL, said: “Outlining how and when coal plants will cease to operate will pave 
the way for new investment, including gas. Coal is already struggling 
economically and removing coal clarifies the market space for gas during the 
2020s.”

ClientEarth, an environmental NGO that successfully won a legal case against 
the government on air pollution plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/high-court-rules-uk-government-plans-to-tackle-air-pollution-are-illegal>
, cautioned that while a coal phase-out was welcome, the UK should focus on 
clean energy to replace it, rather than gas.

“The UK government must make sure it isn’t problem-shifting. Putting a sell-by 
date on coal is logical, but the UK must be bolder and the deadline should be 
sooner,” said Susan Shaw, a lawyer at the organisation.

 