
1) Spectators are real winners

Silverstone is not only one of the biggest occasions in Formula One but also 
in sport. For much of the season grands prix are played out at empty, white 
elephant tracks in countries that know nothing about F1. On Saturday there was 
a crowd of 110,000 and on Sunday there wasa capacity 140,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/04/silverstone-britsh-grand-prix-formula-one-motor-racing>
. The gamble to cut prices and bring in more people paid off handsomely, not 
least for the spectators, who were treated tothe best race of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/05/lewis-hamilton-wins-british-f1-gp-nico-rosberg>
.

Williams thwarted by weather in British Grand Prix but future looks brighter | 
Giles Richards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/05/williams-silverstone-british-grand-prix-f1-felipe-massa>
2) Gimmicks not required

We have heard a lot of gimmicky ideas lately to brighten up the show, such as 
reverse grids or randomly wetting the track. AsSunday’s race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jul/05/f1-british-grand-prix-live-lewis-hamilton>
 showed all that is needed is a bit of real racing.Williams showed up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/05/williams-silverstone-british-grand-prix-f1-felipe-massa>
 at the weekend and that made all the difference.

With better tactics – they should have allowed Valtteri Bottas to attack 
Felipe Massa sooner – they would have been even stronger, although the rain 
finally did for them. Williams are terrible in the wet. Now it is up to Ferrari 
and Red Bull to come to the party.We can give up on McLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/05/british-grand-prix-mclaren-f1-fernando-alonso-jenson-button>
, for this season at least.

3) Manor start to find their way

Manor are on the way up and on this form might give McLaren a contest in the 
battle to avoid the wooden spoon. In October, Manor – then Marussia – became 
the second F1 teamto be placed in administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/27/marussia-administration-formula-one-us-grand-prix-caterham>
 within days, following Caterham. When they reappeared as Manor this year some 
people suggested they had only pitched up to collect last season’s prize money. 
At Silverstone they had their best weekend of the year to finish 12th and 13th. 
OK, that meant they were last and last but one. Their upgraded MR03B looked 
competitive and Will Stevens would have done better if his team had been ready 
for his pit stop when he went in to collect intermediate tyres – he was in 
there for 14 seconds.

4) Aston Martin could return to F1

Aston Martin could be on the way back to Formula One. It is thought they have 
had talks with Red Bull, Williams and Force India. Their chief executive, Andy 
Palmer, toldautosport.com <http://www.autosport.com/news/report.php/id/119869>: 
“The paddock is always full of rumours. We have to explore ways of getting 
Aston Martin’s name known around the world and we use the World Endurance 
Championship principally to do that. My job is to concentrate on turning Aston 
Martin around.”

Red Bull are fed up with receiving duff engines from Renault but any branding 
deal with Aston Martin would lead to a Mercedes engine – and Mercedes do not 
want to giveRed Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> one.

5) It’s the pits for Ricciardo
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Ffive-things-british-grand-prix-silverstone-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436190122914%2F99fdd098-a742-4b8b-975d-7d480678da88-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=British%20Grand%20Prix%3A%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20Silverstone%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Ffive-things-british-grand-prix-silverstone-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=British%20Grand%20Prix%3A%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20Silverstone%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Ffive-things-british-grand-prix-silverstone-williams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436190122914%2F99fdd098-a742-4b8b-975d-7d480678da88-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Daniel Ricciardo retires from the British Grand Prix. Photograph: Hoch 
Zwei/Corbis 
Life is becoming tough for the find of last season, Daniel Ricciardo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/daniel-ricciardo>, who won three races and 
proved to be a potential championship contender in 2014. It was bad enough for 
the Australian to find out this season that Red Bull would not be competitive. 
Now he is having hassle from his team-mate Daniil Kvyat, who looked the 
stronger man over the weekend and finished sixth; Ricciardo retired and is now 
only nine points ahead of Kvyat in the championship.
 