
There is little that stirs the heart of British motor racing fans quite like 
the cars Colin Chapman was making at Lotus during the 1960s. While they will be 
enjoyingLewis Hamilton’s resurgence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/20/lewis-hamilton-mercedes-deal-formula-one-monaco>
 as he attempts to win a third world championship, he is part of a racing 
industry in this country that owes so much to those heady days. And there were 
few that defined the era like the British Grand Prix of 1965, when the nation 
owned the event and Jim Clark, Graham Hill and John Surtees were the last 
British trio to complete a podium lock-out at the race.

Next Friday is the 50th anniversary of that race when Mike Spence and Jackie 
Stewart, in his debut season, made it a British top five. Such was the home 
dominance, Surtees’s Ferrari was the only non British-based car in the top 10. 
The success had been years in the making. Hill won his first world championship 
in a BRM in 1962, Clark secured his in the beautiful Lotus 25 in 1963 and, 
along with Surtees, the trio had shared the top three places at the previous 
two British GPs at Silverstone and Brands Hatch.

Surtees, still the only racer to have won world championships on bikes and in 
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>, had joined Ferrari 
in 1963, and was the only driver preventing Lotus, BRM, Cooper and Brabham from 
flying the flag. His world championship came the following year – giving the 
three drivers one apiece when they came to Silverstone in 1965. After Hill’s 
death in an aeroplane crash in 1975 and Clark’s at Hockenheim in 1968, Surtees 
is the only one of the three greats still alive.

At 81, fit, sprightly and with a cheerful glint in his eye, he takes pleasure 
in recalling the period. He was close to Clark from the moment he switched from 
two wheels to four. Chapman had invited him to Lotus in 1960 and after a second 
place at theBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> in his second race, 
asked him to join the team. “He said, ‘You are going to be No1 and you can 
choose your team-mate,’” says Surtees. “So I said: Jimmy.”

Clark was with Lotus but Surtees did not take up the offer, instead driving 
for another team before joining Ferrari. Unlike today, socialising between 
teams was part of the fabric of the sport. “I stayed friends with Jimmy,” says 
Surtees and in 1963 it was a friendship he had cause to cherish. “Jimmy was 
dancing with a girl at the hotel in Spa and the music was going and I wanted to 
get to bed, so I came out and had a right go at them,” he says. “But he ended 
up introducing me to my first wife – I married Pat, the girl he was dancing 
with, and had Jimmy as my best man.”

Relationships then were closer between drivers not least because of the very 
real dangers of the sport. Hill and Clark went on to become team-mates at Lotus 
but there was no acrimony to accompany their rivalry. “There was respect for 
one another,” says Hill’s son, Damon, who was a child at the time. “There was 
rivalry, competition but also an appreciation that the people you were racing 
with were doing it because they loved something. Even if you could get killed 
doing it, they would still want to do it, which is extraordinary.”

“It’s dangerous enough as it is without having someone who would like to see 
you dead racing against you. So that was not the way they went racing.”

Surtees also acknowledges Hill’s skill. “Graham was always going to give a 
good performance and keep the pressure on,” he says. “Perhaps not with the 
ultimate speed but certainly he would always be there and you couldn’t take any 
chances and expect him to ease off.”

It is hard not to imagine he is thinking of that race in 1965 in particular, 
when Hill’s tenacity saw it go to the wire. Surtees was struggling at Ferrari, 
with the team splitting resources in their mighty battle with Ford at Le Mans 
and the car he was racing, the new 1512 with its Flat-12 engine, needed 
development. His rivals were moving ahead and it was the British industry in 
the lead.

“F1 had been reborn in this country,” he says. “Before that you had the 
Germans and Italians dominating, then Coventry Climax came along with an engine 
and that was the basis on which Lotus and Cooper and Brabham all developed 
their championship contenders.”

“I was aware of the piggy-back situation that existed – each of these teams 
were out making little gains and piggy-backing on each other and becoming more 
and more competitive. It transformed British motorsport and grand prix racing 
and created the motorsport industry which is now a major one in this country.”

An industry that proved its might at Silverstone 50 years ago, when the 
drivers had to bring everything to bear to manhandle the cars. “You try and go 
along and become part of it,” says Surtees. “Through the seat of your pants and 
the way your hands are on the steering wheel, you get that essence of what the 
car is telling you and that is how you decide how close to the limit you can go 
and what the limit is.

“At times there are places where you can relax and other times where you have 
to tell it you are in charge and hold on to make certain outside forces don’t 
send you off. You have to bring the physical side.”

Hill’s BRM was quick but Clark was too strong. “Jimmy and the Lotus were the 
combination which was formidable, no doubt about it,” says Surtees. “Jimmy was 
someone who wouldn’t make many mistakes and was also quick. He was the most 
competitive person out there.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fbritish-grand-prix-1965-heady-era-home-drivers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435941791758%2F3184d9c3-1a09-4b31-b523-9baccc6e662b-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=British%20Grand%20Prix%201965%3A%20the%20race%20that%20defined%20heady%20era%20for%20home%20drivers%20%7C%20Giles%20Richards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fbritish-grand-prix-1965-heady-era-home-drivers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=British%20Grand%20Prix%201965%3A%20the%20race%20that%20defined%20heady%20era%20for%20home%20drivers%20%7C%20Giles%20Richards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fbritish-grand-prix-1965-heady-era-home-drivers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435941791758%2F3184d9c3-1a09-4b31-b523-9baccc6e662b-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Jim Clark celebrates after winning the 1965 British Grand Prix at Silverstone. 
Photograph: David Newell Smith for the Observer 
So it proved. Clark started from pole and quickly pulled away from the field 
but a misfire after 50 laps saw Hill haul him in. The latter had a brake issue, 
too, but could not resist the challenge and flew after Clark, breaking the lap 
record, but it was not quite enough. Clark took the flag by three seconds.

“I would have been prepared to risk blowing up rather than see Graham pass 
me,” Clark said afterwards, as far from the controlled measures currently 
foisted on modern F1 drivers as it is possible to imagine. He went on to be the 
first of the three to take a second title, winning six of the first seven races 
that season. And the seventh? Well that was Monaco – a race he missed because 
he was away winning the Indy 500. He remains the only driver to have won at the 
Brickyard and the F1 championship in the same season. Another feat unlikely to 
be repeated from that extraordinary group of drivers and from a time that, 
unsurprisingly, many remember as British motor racing’s golden age. “They were 
all drivers of the highest standard,” says Surtees with a smile. “They had 
different characteristics but were always people you would watch. But in those 
days it was largely down to performance. Today you need so much initial backing 
that a lot of talent is lost along the way.”

The Henry Surtees Foundation was established by John Surtees after the death 
of his son Henry during a Formula 2 race in 2009;henrysurteesfoundation.com 
<http://www.henrysurteesfoundation.com>
 