
In early January, just days after the Times Square ball had made its annual 
plunge, more Broadway corks were set to pop. Statistics compiled by the 
Broadway League, Broadway’s trade association, revealed that the Great White 
Way had bested its own astonishing records. In the last week of the year, it 
grossed $49.7m and played host to more than 359,000 people, more than the 
combined populations of Iceland and Greenland. This is all the more impressive 
as only 33 shows were playing, an arguably low number forBroadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> and significantly behind last 
winter’s 38 shows.

The best and worst of Broadway 2016: from innovation to ineptitude
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/12/the-best-and-worst-of-broadway-2016-from-innovation-to-ineptitude>
And even far from Broadway, bubbly must have flowed. In Washington DC the 
Wicked tour posted a $3.3m week, staggering numbers for a touring production, 
but not far above the $2.76m that the Lion King tour earned in a San Francisco 
stop. What accounts for the remarkable rise in revenue and attendance for 
Broadway and its touring productions that the last several years have 
witnessed? The answer probably relies on both the type of entertainment 
Broadway has been offering and the new strategies it has found to price and 
sell its wares.

Charlotte St Martin, the president of the Broadway League, credits the high 
numbers to the variety of Broadway shows now available and the diverse 
demographics they appeal to. When she first moved to the city 20 years ago, she 
says, “there was the big musical, the serious play and the comedic play and 
that was about it”. Now she sees offerings for “teeners, tweeners, 
twentysomethings, thirtysomethings, and the rest of us. You have something 
literally for everybody and you often have more than one thing.”

Certainly even a casual look at current offerings indicates the variety. 
Someone who would never set foot in Aladdin might be enticed by Dear Evan 
Hansen. A ticket buyer who wouldn’t go for A Bronx Tale could have a fine night 
at Jitney. And vice versa. Everyone lovesHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton>. Some people have even enjoyed 
Paramour. And while the spring lineup is light on original works, there’s still 
plenty to choose from among the likes of Come from Away and Groundhog Day, The 
Play That Goes Wrong and The Price, Oslo and Hello, Dolly!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbroadway-attendance-ticket-sales-record-high%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2216a448fbd085f9ee1bea69d6af3b30a2e10437%2F0_76_1140_684%2F1140.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Broadway%20blockbusters%3A%20why%20theater%20attendance%20is%20at%20an%20all-time%20high&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbroadway-attendance-ticket-sales-record-high%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Broadway%20blockbusters%3A%20why%20theater%20attendance%20is%20at%20an%20all-time%20high&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbroadway-attendance-ticket-sales-record-high%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2216a448fbd085f9ee1bea69d6af3b30a2e10437%2F0_76_1140_684%2F1140.jpg>
 Ben Platt in Dear Evan Hansen, the hit social media musical. Photograph: PR 
Another component is the large number of family-friendly shows available, a 
roster that includes Aladdin, the Lion King, Wicked, Cats, School of Rock, etc. 
Shows like this appeal both to tourists and locals looking to give their 
children a treat. A bring-the-whole-family ethos also encourages bulk ticket 
purchase. This trend looks set to continue with Anastasia and Charlie and the 
Chocolate Factory slated for the spring, and Frozen and Harry Potter due to 
arrive in 2018.

As Ken Davenport, a Broadway producer whose credits include Kinky Boots and 
the recent Spring Awakening revival, notes, this practice can have knock-on 
effects. “How you create audiences for the future is to introduce kids when 
they’re young,” he says. “These family musicals could have a significant effect 
on Broadway’s health – not only in the short term but the very long term.” Not 
everyone would like to see the theater district transform into a candied-up 
Disneyland north, however robust the box office numbers. But as Davenport noted 
in a post on his blog, The Producer’s Perspective, kid-friendly shows don’t 
necessarily mean aesthetic compromises, with the Lion King perhaps the most 
salient example, alongside recent offerings like Billy Elliot and Matilda.

These days, going to the theater has bragging rights for the fully grown set, 
too. Though these upward trends were set in motion years before the appearance 
of Hamilton, that show has helped to return theater to a more prominent place 
in the cultural conversation. Those who can’t score tickets to that show may 
still feel they ought to see something in New York (it’s during tourist-heavy 
holiday weeks that Broadway scores its best numbers) or catch a show when it 
comes around on tour. And the success of Hamilton may steer producers toward 
independent, idiosyncratic art with which theater frequently revives and 
reinvents itself.

What to see on Broadway in 2017: Bette Midler, Amélie and a chocolate factory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/28/broadway-2017-bette-midler-amelie-groundhog-day>
The pricing of Hamilton may be encouraging ticket buying in sometimes 
surprising ways. A top-tier price of $998 may seem outrageous, though not so 
outrageous that there aren’t people willing to pay it. While St Martin thinks 
that high ticket prices “are the last reason that audience attendance would be 
broken”, those ultra-expensive tickets may have the behavioral economics 
effects of making a $100 seat seem less like a luxury and more like a bargain. 
Davenport entertains this idea though he also acknowledges, “we may be pricing 
ourselves out for some people.”

Generally, he notes, pricing strategies have become much more savvy and can 
become savvier still, for Broadway and for tours. “Broadway just continues to 
get very good at inventory management,” he says. “We are slowly but surely 
catching up to other industries, most notably the airline industry and the 
hotel industry, in pricing when there’s demand and increasing that price.”

 And like in those industries, a number of sites and apps have sprung up to 
help consumers take advantage of what’s on offer. In addition to the TKTS 
booth, unsold seats can be moved via discount codes on a variety of sites or 
search for cheap tickets with an app like TodayTix or a site like nytix.com. 
Student lotteries and rushes can even make the very act of ticket buying 
exciting.

If these trends continue, and it seems likely they will, expect more backstage 
champagne toasts this time next year.
 