
I'm delighted to report that Hugh Stephenson is back in the saddle (if that's 
where he does his editing) and from February 3 any mistakes in the puzzles are 
his, not mine. Any credit, as usual, will belong to the setters. This, 
therefore, is my last dispatch from the editor's chair. But I will still be 
going to the Guardian from time to time. I have started browsing in the 
archives for the small volume I'm writing on the history of the Guardian 
crossword.

'History' is probably overstating it. Chambers gives this quaint definition 
(amongst others): 'a systematic account of the origin and progress of the 
world'. I fear my modest work will fall a litle short. It is more a 
'celebration' than a 'history' and researching it is fun. Many thanks to all 
those who wrote in with anecdotes and memories. What is clear from my research 
(again, probably the wrong word. It suggests more purpose and order than I 
bring to the project. 'Browsing' comes closer) is that from start the crossword 
has been the subject of much (animated) correspondence between the paper and 
its readers.

At first the paper was not at all convinced that the fad would last. An 
editorial in 1925 opined that crosswords were, "undoubtedly an absorbing escape 
from a disappointing world; but the world is not much more disappointing this 
year than two years ago or five or ten." What then could account for the 
popularity of the puzzles? The Guardian hoped that future scholars would 
explain - and even provided a putative title for some as yet unwritten 
dissertation: 'The Transverbitis Epidemic in the United States 1924-1925: Its 
Causes, Cure and Consequences'.

Despite its reservations the paper began to prepare its readers (or itself?) 
for a puzzle. In 1925 the 'Miscellany' column initiated a debate that still 
runs to this day: what makes a good crossword? The author posed two questions: 
would crossword puzzles 'stay the distance'? And if so, why?

To the first the Guardian's answer was "Wait and see." To the second the 
author wrote, "In this country at least it would appear that the permanence (or 
anything like it) depends on the ingenuity of the constructors. Everyone who 
has glanced through the puzzles that are set every day must be struck by the 
barrenness of invention shown. Certain words appear again and again day after 
day and the only alternative seems to be the ransacking of dictionaries for 
outlandish words or the giving of clues which are not clues ... The perfect 
crossword puzzle is that which the person of some reading and ingenuity can 
solve without reference to any book." Unless setters came up with something 
better than a puzzle "the solution of which depends on nothing more that the 
purchase of some 'solution book' and running a finger down a column of 
synonyms" then crosswords would surely have 'a short life'.

It was another four years before the first Guardian crossword appeared. It 
started with one a week in 1929 but by the end of the year demand for more was 
irresistible. "The 'Manchester Guardian' having hitherto printed two crosswords 
a week, has received evidence that this, for its readers, is not enough and 
from the New Year onwards it will print one every day including a stiff one 
every Wednesday for the real crossword 'fans'."

No doubt the 'real' fans were not the same people who so enthusiastically 
participated in a contest the paper organized. On January 28 1930, "the 
'Manchester Guardian' offers two prizes - one of two guineas and one of one 
guinea - for the best original story of not more than 200 words, making use as 
much as possible of the sort of words favoured by the crossword puzzle maker. 
The prizes will be awarded to the most humourous and best-constructed stories." 
The response was enormous and first prize went to Mr RH Edmondson of Windermere 
for this effort:

'Ena sat under the lee of a tor, singing an area in Erse. Her molars gleamed, 
her ebon tresses shaded the tan on her nose. Idly she drew tunes in the loam. 
An erne rose from the mere, and the evil cry of an otter rang o'er the lea.

Beside her sat a gallant tar, full of ale and �lan. "Fly with me," he cried, 
"my liner is at the quay and I have a store of taels and liras." And he talked 
on eden and of far manors of taro and copra where errant emus are, and beys and 
emirs dine on dates and all the denes teem with irate asps and boas.

But she must stay with her sire to ted the hay and ret the flax, tend the ewes 
and driver the bats out of the buttery. And what about her fianc�? A man of 
title, an Earl; he would slit her carotid with a snee if she eloped and she had 
no alibi. So she wended her way home, and the tar took his taels to some other 
damsel and the Earl jilted her. And she lived at home and did the crossword 
puzzles ever after.'

Ah, but was she happy? I think we should be told. There were many other 
entries of a similar ilk for which the authors had scoured their Chambers. And 
it demonstrated the problem with 'American-style puzzles'. Juicy words 
abounded, though coherent narratives were less in evidence. But it was around 
this time that the idea took hold that words were not so much 'units of 
meaning' as 'things to be played with'. Under the influence of Torquemada and 
others, setters began to play. And slowly, though not very surely, a particular 
style developed leaving us with what we have now, the Guardian crossword.

I had thought I would use this column to make a few remarks on 'what I 
learned' while in the editor's chair, but I see I have run out of space. 
Perhaps it is as well; it would expose either my ignorance or my erudition. It 
remains only to thank you for your many letters and to wish you many years of 
happy solving.
 