
The European commission <https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>
 is expected to deliver its verdict on Monday on whether Spain wrongfully 
handed out tens of millions of euros in state aid to some of the country’s top 
football clubs.

The investigation centres on aid received by seven clubs, including Barcelona 
and Real Madrid, whose £86m playerGareth Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-bale> is part of the first ever 
Welsh team to reach a semi-final in a major tournament atEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>.

The Brussels inquiry was launched two-and-a-half years ago  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/18/barcelona-real-madrid-ec-investigation-public-funding>
by the then competition commissioner, Joaquin Almunia. He said it would 
consider whether Spain had broken EU rules on public funding through tax 
breaks, property deals and loans.


The commission is expected to find against the Spanish state according to some 
reports. Its investigation will be seen as a clampdown on some of the excesses 
of the game inSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>, with regulators 
seeking to end the unlawful use of public money to fund some of the world’s 
richest clubs.


Real Madrid and Barcelona are the world’s two richest clubs by revenue 
according to theDeloitte Football Money League 2016 
<http://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/pages/sports-business-group/articles/deloitte-football-money-league.html>
.

It declined to comment before the decision was announced on Monday, but at the 
time the inquiry opened in December 2013, it said: “Professional football clubs 
should finance their running costs and investments with sound financial 
management rather than at the expense of the taxpayer.


“Member states and public authorities must comply with EU rules on state aid 
in this sector as in all economic sectors.”

The investigation focused on three elements, including possible corporate tax 
privileges enjoyed since 1990 by Real Madrid, Barcelona, Osasuna andAthletic 
Bilbao <https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao> – a team that 
counts Almunia among its supporters.

Brussels also investigated a complex land deal struck between Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> and the local authority in 
Madrid. It is thought the world’s richest football club might have to pay back 
more than €18m (£15m) if the commission does rule against the Spanish state.

The third element of the investigation focused on the legality of guarantees 
given by the publicly owned Valencia Institute of Finance for loans to 
Valencia, Hercules, and Elche football clubs while the clubs were “seemingly 
undergoing financial difficulties”.

“The commission has concerns that these measures provided significant 
advantages to the beneficiary clubs to the detriment of the clubs which have to 
operate without such support,” it said when opening the inquiry.

“In so far as the professional football clubs in question were facing 
financial difficulties at the time of the measures under scrutiny, they must be 
assessed on the basis of the EU guidelines that allow member states to grant 
aid for the rescue and restructuring of companies in difficulty if certain 
conditions are met.


“At this stage, the commission has doubts whether the measures comply with the 
guidelines, in particular because Spain has submitted no restructuring plan 
demonstrating how the clubs could become viable again while limiting the 
distortions of competition brought about by the state support.”

It is unclear how much the Spanish clubs involved in the inquiry would be 
expected to pay back should the commission rule that Spain broke EU rules.


Meanwhile, the Financial Times reported 
<https://next.ft.com/content/750e14a2-3f94-11e6-9f2c-36b487ebd80a> that 
Brussels is expected to close its investigation into the public finding of five 
Dutch football clubs after finding no evidence of illegal state aid.The inquiry 
opened in March 2013 <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-13-192_en.htm> 
and clubs involved included PSV Eindhoven and MVV Maastricht.
 