
Borussia Dortmund underlined their Bundesliga title credentials with their 
second 6-0 win of the week, thrashingDarmstadt to follow Wednesday’s 
dismantling of Legia Warsaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/champions-league-round-up> in 
the Champions League.

Bayern Munich and Rafinha hit back against Ingolstadt to stay 100%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/bayern-munich-ingolstadt-bundesliga-match-report>
The Dortmund coach, Thomas Tuchel, started with Mario Götze, Pierre-Emerick 
Aubameyang and Marc Bartra on the bench and his side led only 1-0 through 
Gonzalo Castro’s seventh minute goal at the break despite dominating.

Three minutes after half time, Adrián Ramos doubled the lead, and six minutes 
later Christian Pulisic swept the ball home for his firstBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> goal of the season, a 
day before he turns 18.

Dortmund’s task was made easier when Peter Niemeyer was sent off in the 57th 
minute for a second yellow card.

With 12 minutes remaining, Castro scored his second with his heel, before 
Sebastian Rode made it 5-0 with a backheeled effort of his own, and Emre Mor 
registered his first Bundesliga goal with two minutes remaining.

Tuchel said: “We controlled the game in every respect and gave our fans a 
great afternoon.”

Dortmund are now three points off the leaders, Bayern Munich, who came from 
behind to beatIngolstadt 3-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/bayern-munich-ingolstadt-bundesliga-match-report>
.

Borussia Mönchengladbach joined Dortmund on six points with a 4-1 win over 
Werder Bremen that piles the pressure on the visitors’ coach Viktor Skripnik. 
Thomas Hazard and Raffael each scored twice as the home side inflicted a fourth 
straight defeat of the season on the north German side, who pulled one back 
through Serge Gnabry, but ended the game with 10 men after Aron Johannsson was 
dismissed.

Bayer Leverkusen slumped to a second defeat from three league games after 
Javier Hernández struck a penalty against the post with two minutes remaining at
Eintracht Frankfurt.

Alexander Meier scored early in the second half for the home side before 
Hernández equalised on the hour to ensure Leverkusen scored for the 15th 
consecutive Bundesliga game, a Bundesliga record.

However, Marco Fabian then claimed what proved to be the winner for Frankfurt 
in the 79th minute, and the visitors were left to rue the cost of Hernández’s 
late penalty miss.

Elsewhere, promoted Leipzig impressed with four goals in the second half to 
defeatHamburg 4-0 away, and Hoffenheim held visiting Wolfsburg to a goalless 
draw.
 