
The Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> game 
between Cologne and Mainz due to be played on Saturday was called off 40 
minutes before kick-off after the match referee was found seriously injured in 
his hotel room, following what police called an "apparent suicide attempt".

The official, Babak Rafati, was discovered in the bath of his room on Saturday 
morning having "sustained injuries with no sign of any involvement by a third 
party," the police spokesman Andre Fassbender said. "It looks like a suicide 
attempt, yes."

The German FA president Theo Zwanziger, who cancelled other engagements to 
travel to Cologne, said Rafati was taken to the Eduardus hospital where he is 
in a "serious but stable condition".

"Rafati is out of danger," said Zwanziger, who described to reporters how 
events had unfolded. "When he did not show up for breakfast and then for the 
pre-game talk, the assistant referees first tried to reach him by telephone in 
his room.

"They went up and found the door locked. They knocked, no one opened, then 
they quickly opened the door with the help of hotel staff. They told me what 
they found. I would ask you to save me from giving out details. He was in the 
bath tub â€“ obviously there was a lot of blood. If he is out of danger, then the 
assistant referees are to thank for that."

He said it was unclear what had triggered Rafati's apparent attempt to take 
his own life. The referee and his assistants had been together on Friday 
evening at the hotel.

"Obviously he will be in intensive care in the coming days and will need 
intensive treatment," said Zwanziger, who confirmed that police had found notes 
in the room, which were being evaluated.

The incident brought back memories in Germany of the 2009 death of the then 
first-choice international goalkeeper Robert Enke, following his long battle 
with depression.

Zwanziger said: "I can only say that the pressure on the referees in 
professional sport is immense and we maybe fail to find the right balance."

The news spread as Bundesliga teams prepared for their matches on Saturday 
afternoon. The Wolfsburg coach Felix Magath said after his game: "I found out 
what had happened half an hour before our kick-off. I was stunned, especially 
because Babak Rafati is such a well-liked referee." Schalke's coach Huub 
Stevens said: "I cannot believe that something like this can happen. I have 
absolutely no words."

Cologne said the match was called off because they could not find another 
referee to deputise at such short notice. The club did not reveal the reasons 
for the postponement to the 20,000 fans already in the stadium.

Rafati, a banker of Iranian descent, has refereed 84 Bundesliga matches since 
making his debut in 2005 in the same match he was due to lead on Saturday, 
Cologne against Mainz. He has been a Fifa referee since 2008.
 