
Bayern Munich eased past Hertha Berlin 3-0 on Wednesday to open up a two-point 
lead at the top of theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> and inflict the first 
defeat for their opponents after three straight wins this season.

Bayern gave Hertha no chance, with Arjen Robben scoring on his league comeback 
from injury after goals from Franck Ribéry and Thiago Alcântara.

The two teams were the only ones with a perfect record but Bayern ran 
roughshod over Hertha from the start. The hosts could have scored twice in the 
opening three minutes with both Robert Lewandowski and Thomas Müller missing 
their point-blank chances. Ribéry, eager to secure a contract extension, did it 
much better when he weaved into the box, spectacularly shaking off two markers 
and firing in for the lead after 16 minutes with his second goal of the season.

Bundesliga round-up: Aubameyang at the double as Borussia Dortmund go top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/20/bundesliga-round-up-borussia-dortmund-wolfsburg>
The Bavarians, with Jérôme Boateng making his first start since his Euro 2016 
semi-final injury in July, had more than 70% possession during the one-sided 
first half. They took some of the pace out of their game after the break and 
Hertha carved out a decent chance on the break with Valentin Stocker but Manuel 
Neuer was on hand to save.

Thiago then settled any nerves, snatching the ball from Hertha’s Allan and 
firing in a low shot for a two-goal lead before substitute Robben curled in a 
trademark left-footed third to crown his comeback.

Bayern are on 12 points with Cologne, in second place on 10 after beating 
Schalke 3-1. Schalke are in 17th place after their fourth loss in four 
Bundesliga matches, with coach Markus Weinzierl under mounting pressure.

Borussia Dortmund are third on nine after Tuesday’s 5-1 demolition of VfL 
Wolfsburg.

Werder Bremen, who sacked coach Viktor Skripnik on Sunday after three straight 
losses, conceded two stoppage-time goals to lose 2-1 againstMainz on interim 
coach Alexander Nouri’s debut on the bench and remain bottom.

Bayer Leverkusen missed yet another penalty, settling for a goalless draw 
againstAugsburg to drop to 12th place on four points.
 