
Sam Vokes’s 81st-minute goal got Burnley back to winning ways in the 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> as they 
ensured Rotherham began life after Steve Evans with a 2-1 defeat.

Rotherham reject approach from Paolo Di Canio over manager’s job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/30/paolo-di-canio-reject-rotherham-united>
The Millers, managerless following Evans’ surprise exit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/28/rotherham-united-part-company-manager-steve-evans>
 on Monday, looked to have earned a deserved draw when Grant Ward’s stunning 
25-yard shot cancelled out Andre Gray’s opener for the Clarets.

But Vokes pounced with just under 10 minutes remaining to earn the three 
points and help Sean Dyche’s men, who were beaten by Reading last week, move up 
to third in the table before Saturday’s games.

For the home side, led by the caretaker manager Eric Black, a two-game winning 
run came to an end and they will feel unfortunate not to have earned a point. 
Any hopes of a rousing post-Evans start had been quickly extinguished when 
Dyche’s men took a ninth-minute lead. Danny Collins was caught ball-watching 
after a loose clearance from Richie Smallwood and Gray latched on and had no 
problem in slotting home from 12 yards for his second goal inBurnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> colours.

Rotherham’s response was spirited but they were undermined by a lack of 
quality in the final third and Burnley began to turn the screw, creating 
several chances to extend their lead.

The home goalkeeper Lee Camp had to be alert to turn away a deflected effort 
from Tendayi Darikwa and then again to parry David Jones’s effort. There was 
nothing the former Bournemouth man could do to keep out Vokes’ brilliant 
25-yard volley but the crossbar came to the Millers’ rescue.

Despite having Camp to thank for keeping them in it, Rotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham> could have gone into the break 
on level terms as Tom Heaton – named in Roy Hodgson’s England squad yesterday – 
had to be at his best to keep out a low Matt Derbyshire effort.

Rotherham offered plenty of bluster after the restart and had a chance to get 
level in the 53rd minute as Jonson Clarke-Harris robbed Darikwa, but his 
attempted lay-off to Tony Andreu was slightly behind his team-mate and the 
on-loan Norwich man could not make a proper contact with his shot.

They continued to control the game, though, and their reward came in the 75th 
minute as they levelled with a goal-of-the-season contender. Chris Maguire 
spread the ball out to the left, Joe Mattock laid off to Ward and he smashed an 
unstoppable effort from 25 yards into the top corner, which even Heaton could 
do nothing about.

Yet their joy was shortlived as Burnley hit back five minutes later when Vokes 
poked home from close range after Camp failed to hold Scott Arfield’s effort.

Rotherham could not find a repeat of Ward’s quality and Burnley saw the match 
out for a second away win of the league season.
 