
BuzzFeed’s decision to publish an intelligence report filled with salacious 
and unsubstantiated claims about Donald Trump’s purported behaviour in Russia 
has triggered a political storm and debate over media ethics.

The news website posted the unredacted documents 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/kenbensinger/these-reports-allege-trump-has-deep-ties-to-russia>
 on Tuesday, just 10 days before Trump’s inauguration, with a warning that the 
contents contained errors and were “unverified and potentially unverifiable”.

FBI chief given dossier by John McCain alleging secret Trump-Russia contacts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
The decision to put the claims in the public domain forced other media outlets 
to repeat the allegations or ignore a story that lit up the internet. Some 
critics rounded onBuzzFeed <https://www.theguardian.com/media/buzzfeed>, 
calling it irresponsible.

The documents, reportedly compiled by a British former intelligence agent, 
alleged that the Kremlin was “cultivating, supporting and assisting” Trump for 
at least five years.

They also alleged that Russian spies had exploited the president-elect’s 
“personal obsessions and sexual perversion” to gather compromising material.

The president-elect denied and denounced the claims in a series of tweets. 
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
FAKE NEWS - A TOTAL POLITICAL WITCH HUNT!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/818990655418617856> January 11, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/818990655418617856> 
The memos were compiled by the former intelligence officer on behalf of some 
of Trump’s Republican opponents in the primaries, and later for Democrats.

Other media outlets including the Guardian had obtained and reviewed the 
documents in recent weeks but declined to publish because there was no way to 
independently verify them.

The stakes rose on Tuesday when CNN reported 
<http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/10/politics/donald-trump-intelligence-report-russia/index.html>
 that America’s intelligence chiefs had given Trump and Barack Obama a two-page 
summary of the reports last week. CNN andthe Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
 also reported that Senator John McCain had delivered a copy to the FBI 
director, James Comey, last month, but withheld the documents’ most eye-opening 
details, citing lack of corroboration.

An hour after CNN’s initial story, BuzzFeed went ahead and published the 
documents. “Now BuzzFeed News is publishing the full document so that Americans 
can make up their own minds about allegations about the president-elect that 
have circulated at the highest levels of the US government,” the site said inan 
accompanying note 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/kenbensinger/these-reports-allege-trump-has-deep-ties-to-russia>
.

The news site noted the documents’ provenance and the fact that they contained 
“some clear errors”, such as misspelling the name of a Russian company.

Ben Smith, the editor-in-chief, followed up a few hours later with a statement 
that defended publication as an act of journalistic transparency in a 
hyper-partisan era.

“Publishing this document was not an easy or simple call, and people of good 
will may disagree with our choice. But publishing this dossier reflects how we 
see the job of reporters in 2017.” Smith amplified the warning in BuzzFeed’s 
original story by saying there was “serious reason to doubt the allegations”.
Ben Smith (@BuzzFeedBen) 
Here's the note I sent to @buzzfeednews <https://twitter.com/BuzzFeedNews> 
staff this eveningpic.twitter.com/OcAloWzVzb <https://t.co/OcAloWzVzb>
 <https://twitter.com/BuzzFeedBen/status/818978955965464580> January 11, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/BuzzFeedBen/status/818978955965464580> 
Some prominent journalists and media executives excoriated BuzzFeed. 

“Even Donald Trump deserves journalistic fairness,” tweeted David Corn, Mother 
Jones’s Washington bureau chief whoreported 
<http://m.motherjones.com/politics/2016/10/veteran-spy-gave-fbi-info-alleging-russian-operation-cultivate-donald-trump>
 in October on the existence – but not the contents – of memos from a “former 
western intelligence officer”.

“Rare that a story stinks from every possible angle: the source, the content, 
the consequence, the messenger, the target,” tweeted Wolfgang Blau, chief 
digital officer of Condé Nast International and a former Guardian executive.
Wolfgang Blau (@wblau) 
Rare that a story stinks from every possible angle: the source, the content, 
the consequence, the messenger, the target.
 <https://twitter.com/wblau/status/818966592822374400> January 10, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/wblau/status/818966592822374400> 
“Not how journalism works: Here’s a thing that might or might not be true, 
without supporting evidence; decide for yourself if it’s legit,” tweeted Brad 
Heath, an investigative reporter for USA Today.

Adam Goldman of the New York Times blamed CNN for opening the can of worms. 
“Sequence of events: @CNN finds way to talk about report and @buzzfeed uses 
that as reason to publish. Media critics are gonna be busy,” he tweeted.


On the other hand, Richard Tofel, the president of the investigative news 
organization ProPublica, applauded Buzzfeed, saying “citizens should have 
evidence to consider for themselves”.
Richard Tofel (@dicktofel) 
Kudos to @BuzzFeedBen <https://twitter.com/BuzzFeedBen> and his team for 
publishing the dossier. Once CNN story out, citizens should have evidence to 
consider for themselves
 <https://twitter.com/dicktofel/status/819031306361131008> January 11, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/dicktofel/status/819031306361131008> 
And the blog Lawfare 
<https://lawfareblog.com/about-explosive-trump-story-take-deep-breath> said the 
allegations, though unproven, needed to be taken seriously because intelligence 
chiefs appeared to be giving them some credibility. Trump, it noted, had 
consistently rejected intelligence reports that Russia had hacked the US 
election.

 “All of which is to say to everyone: slow down, and take a deep breath. We 
shouldn’t assume either that this is simply a ‘fake news’ episode directed at 
discrediting Trump or that the dam has now broken and the truth is coming out 
at last. We don’t know what the reality is here, and the better part of valor 
is not to get ahead of the facts – a matter on which, incidentally, the press 
deserves a lot of credit.”

In London, Jim Waterson, UK political editor of Buzzfeed, told an audience at 
a previously planned event about fake news: “The documents are unverified and 
yet this is a document which is being discussed across media circles and across 
security circles. If it is being briefed to the president-elect then it’s 
better to be able to see what he’s being briefed.”

Explainer: what is in the Trump-Russia dossier John McCain passed to the FBI?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-dossier-explainer-details>
Speaking at the same event, a panel on Fake News and the Fallout presented by 
the Edinburgh international TV festival and ITN, Brian Stelter, host of CNN’s 
Reliable Sources, said: “My gut reaction to this this morning was that if 
Buzzfeed hadn’t decided to publish the documents someone would have. I’m not 
saying whether it’s right or wrong but … this kind of raw material is always 
going to end up somewhere on the internet.”

BuzzFeed co-founder Jonah Peretti said in a statement: “We stand with Ben on 
his decision to publish this newsworthy document, which was reported on by 
multiple news outlets and seen by high level government officials including the 
president and president-elect.”

A survey of UK coverage on Wednesday morning by the UK Press Gazette 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/uk-newspapers-publish-sordid-details-of-unverified-trump-dossier-published-by-buzzfeed/>
 found the Mirror, Mail, Sun and Express had reported some of the lurid details 
in the dossier – accompanied by denials from Trump and the Kremlin – while the 
Independent and Guardian had reported some of the detail and the denials. The 
Daily Telegraph had a story based on denials with none of the detail, and the 
Times had not yet covered the story online.

Roy Greenslade, who teaches journalistic ethics at City University’s school of 
journalism and writes a column for the Guardian, said the publication of the 
documents was an error.

“I’m all for disclosure, but news outlets must act responsibly and should also 
beware of doing anything that undermines their credibility,” he said. “On both 
counts, Buzzfeed’s decision to publish the material was an error. It is 
disingenuous to publish the document on the grounds that ‘Americans can make up 
their own minds’. Adopting that criterion would allow for the publication of 
anything irrespective of its authenticity.”

The New York Times, which goes by the slogan “all the news that’s fit to 
print”, said it was “not in the business of publishing things we can’t stand 
by”. Dean Baquet, the executive editor, described the allegations as totally 
unsubstantiated.

“We, like others, investigated the allegations and haven’t corroborated them,” 
he said, explaining why the newspaper did not publish.
 