
A new bill in California’s legislature that aims to smooth the path for fully 
driverless vehicles on the state’s public roads is being proposed by an 
assembly member who has received thousands of dollars fromGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>.


It is one of two bills currently under discussion that would relax the rules 
on testing self-driving cars in the US’s largest state and the test bed for 
automated driving.

The bill being promoted by Mike Gatto, who represents several communities in 
and near Los Angeles, would allow Google and others to test vehicles on public 
streets without a steering wheel, brake pedal or human safety driver.

Gatto has received contributions from Google and Ford, which is also testing 
driverless car technology inCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, according to state campaign 
finance records. Alphabet, Google’s parent company, is considering spinning out 
its self-driving car project into a separate business.

The move comes after some members of Congress have expressed skepticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/15/self-driving-cars-danger-senate-general-motors-google>
 about the road-readiness of robot cars. Alphabet and others are under pressure 
to conform to universal testing standards and to be more open about their own 
testing processes.

“[I find] it a little bit ridiculous that the California department of motor 
vehicles (DMV) has passed a regulation that says driverless cars have to have a 
driver in them,” Gatto told the Guardian. “[It is] one of those regulations 
that veers into the absurd and runs the risk of making our state’s governance a 
laughing stock.”

California currently requires 
<https://www.dmv.ca.gov/portal/dmv/detail/vr/autonomous/bkgd> all experimental 
self-driving cars being tested on public roads to have manual controls and a 
human driver ready to take over at a moment’s notice should something go wrong. 
Other states, however, have laxer rules. Texas, where Google is also testing 
self-driving cars, has no special regulations for autonomous vehicles, while 
Arizona is planning to deploy completely driverless vehicles on state 
universities in partnership with Uber.

In a blog post 
<https://medium.com/@chris_urmson/the-view-from-the-front-seat-of-the-google-self-driving-car-chapter-3-476ea9deed9a#.jxkx99nf7>
 calling for California to relax the rules on driverless cars, Chris Urmson, 
director of Google’s self-driving car program, said that California’s 
insistence on human safety drivers “maintains the same old status quo and falls 
short on allowing this technology to reach its full potential”.

“We are competing with business-friendly states like Texas,” said assembly 
member Ling Ling Chang, who introduceda separate bill 
<http://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=201520160AB2682&firstNav=tracking>
 that would oblige California to consider autonomous vehicle recommendations 
from federal transport agencies. “We need to make sure we don’t lose another 
opportunity for keeping jobs in California – and potential federal funding,” 
she added in a press release promoting the bill.

Gatto’s bill, AB2866 
<http://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=201520160AB2866&firstNav=tracking>
, would permit the testing of vehicles without a steering wheel, brake pedal or 
accelerator, and even without a human inside at all. Google is currently the 
only company testing such a vehicle. Pilot projects could take place in three 
of California’s 58 counties starting in 2017, under the supervision of the DMV 
and the California highway patrol.

“Law enforcement would be involved for public safety,” says Gatto. “This is a 
very new technology and we’re obviously dealing with an item that kills more 
people annually in the US than anything else.” Google’s self-driving cars have 
been involved in 18 minor accidents on California’s roads since 2010, while
covering nearly 1.5m miles 
<https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/www.google.com/en/selfdrivingcar/files/reports/report-0216.pdf>
. Google and other car makers hope that autonomous vehicles might reduce 
America’s annual road deaths of over 35,000.

Gatto has received $6,000 in campaign finance from Google since 2012, 
including $2,000 for a 2016 senate campaign. He has also received a total of 
$10,000 fromFord <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford>, another car maker 
with a permit for autonomous vehicle testing in California.

Gatto says that he did not talk with autonomous car makers before introducing 
the bill. “But I’ve heard from them since and it’s been a productive 
conversation,” he said. “They would like a clear statement from the California 
legislature that we support this technology and would like to foster it in this 
state.”

A Google spokesperson said that the company was aware of but not involved with 
the bills.

Bryant Walker Smith, a law professor at the University of South Carolina, 
says, “A law that gives individual communities more flexibility in working with 
these developers could be a good thing.” But he also points out that Google 
shaped the original autonomous vehicle legislation in California, which 
disadvantaged systems that the company was not pursuing, such as automated 
lorries.

“This pattern will happen again,” he says. “A prominent company will announce 
an automated driving product or service and will then describe any specific 
legal changes necessary for its deployment. If the message (or messenger) is 
powerful, many states will likely accede.”
 