
Richard Money, the Cambridge United head coach, has defended the Abbey Stadium 
pitchafter it was criticised by Louis van Gaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/23/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-cambridge>
, the Manchester United manager, followingthe 0-0 FA Cup draw that earned the 
League Two side a lucrative replay at Old Trafford. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/23/cambridge-united-manchester-united-fa-cup-match-report>

It was a tough evening for the Premier League visitors, watched by a peak 
television audience of 7.1m on Friday night, who must face the lowest ranked 
team left in the competition again for a place in the fifth round. They will do 
so on their home turf, though, rather than on a surface of which Van Gaal was 
critical.

But Money stood firm when asked about his club’s facilities on Saturday 
morning. “We don’t have the money to spend on the pitch to make it as it is at 
Old Trafford or anywhere else,” he said. “The groundsman did a fantastic job to 
keep it in the condition it was. Yes it broke up a little bit, but it’s the 
same for both teams.”

Money said that he had no dealings with Van Gaal after the match. “I didn’t, 
the media commitments were ridiculous so I didn’t get a chance to chat to any 
of their staff afterwards,” he added. “I know Ryan Giggs came into the coaching 
room with one or two members of staff and was very complimentary, so that was 
nice.”

Van Gaal may have spent the night squirming in his seat, but the Cambridge 
winger Ryan Donaldson felt the hosts were comfortable in their goalless draw. 
“We were under the cosh for almost all the second half, [but] we’ve got a good 
resilience about us,” Donaldson said. “I didn’t feel we were in too much 
trouble. They had a couple of chances, but I thought we were reasonably 
comfortable. I thought we deserved a draw.”

One Cambridge player has had regular experience of Old Trafford. Luke 
Chadwick, who came off the bench for his hometown club, made 39 appearances for 
United and claimed a Premier League winners’ medal in 2001. The 34-year-old, 
who watched Cambridge twice reach theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> quarter-finals in the early 
1990s, told MUTV: “It will be great to go back to Old Trafford.

“Without a doubt the replay is going to help the club. But it’s also great for 
the players to go up there and experience a wonderful, wonderful stadium like 
Old Trafford. “It was fantastic to see the place [Abbey Stadium] like that, 
like the old days – it was an incredible atmosphere and an incredible result 
for the club.”

Van Gaal said before the game that a 4-4-2 formation gives him a “twitchy 
ass”, but nonetheless selected four at the back in the interests of greater 
creativity. He complained afterwards of “every aspect” of the match going 
against his team, but was relieved to still be in the competition.

“Cambridge are the weaker team – everybody knows that – and you have to solve 
that problem [of how to beat them],” the Dutchman said. “You cannot always 
solve that problem and I have seen that a lot of times. But fortunately we are 
still in the FA Cup. We have to play at home and we have to beat them.”

Asked if he thought Cambridge, promoted to League Two last season after nine 
years outside the Football League, can go to Old Trafford and win, Money said: 
“No. I don’t, but you never know. We’ve said in the dressing room: ‘You’re 
going to Old Trafford. Who cares what happens? Just go and enjoy it, soak it 
in. Whatever happens, happens.’

“This club has been in the doldrums for 10 years, out of the Football League, 
and suddenly here we are taking everybody back to Old Trafford. It’s 
incredible.”

Money said earlier in the week that his players would have to pay for a new 
shirt if they swapped with their opponents.

“Not one player asked me [if they could swap],” Money added.
Tom Champion (@TomChamps) 
What a day!! Unbelievable atmosphere! Dream come true to play at Old Trafford 
👦💭🏆#cufc <https://twitter.com/hashtag/cufc?src=hash> #facup 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/facup?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/8UvSEgLvLt 
<http://t.co/8UvSEgLvLt>
 <https://twitter.com/TomChamps/status/558774869131665408> January 23, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/TomChamps/status/558774869131665408> 
Tom Champion appeared to find a solution, though, the midfielder tweeting a 
picture of himself holding Michael Carrick’s shirt, while still wearing his own.

Louis van Gaal: everything was against Manchester United at Cambridge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/23/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-cambridge>
Cambridge United v Manchester United: FA Cup – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2015/jan/23/cambridge-united-v-manchester-united-fa-cup-in-pictures> 