
Southend United may soon be getting airs above their station, which is still 
below halfway in League One. On Saturday they were the top English match on 
television, give or takeRoy Hodgson’s lot in San Marino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/05/wayne-rooney-record-england-san-marino-euro-2016>
, who might have been playing on Fossetts Farm, the new ground approved for 
Southend in 2008. Having drawn 2-2 at Coventry on Monday, Southend beat 
Peterborough 2-1 at Roots Hall for their season’s first victory after five 
years in League Two.

Peterborough United sack manager Dave Robertson after four months
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/06/peterborough-united-sack-manager-dave-robertson>
Something had to give as, in two games each, Southend had not got a home point 
and Peterborough not an away one. The Posh had a poor record on screen, too, 
having won only two of their past 12 matches on TV, discounting penalty 
shootouts. Dave Robertson, their manager, warned them, “There will be no hiding 
place. We have to deliver a display that’s good enough for Peterborough 
United.” For his chairman, Darragh MacAnthony, away in the US, this display was 
clearly not. Robertson’s three-year contract, agreed in May,was ended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/06/peterborough-united-sack-manager-dave-robertson>
 on Sunday. TV had done for him.

In a long statement of commitment and self-justification the chairman 
included: “Our players must also shoulder responsibility for this awful start 
to the season [four points from six games], which has now led to a great person 
losing his job … The current squad in transfer fees alone has cost me over £4m, 
so to be accused of going down the cheap route doesn’t sit well with me … 
Talent only gets you so far; you need an incredible work ethic and desire with 
a never-give-up attitude.”

That, rightly, will not sit well with Robertson’s team, in their “cherry 
voltage” away shirts. After the match he said: “I obviously can’t accept coming 
here and losing but eventually our luck has to change. We’ve had two off the 
line and one off the crossbar.” One off the line was at 0-0, the other at 1-0 
when Jack Collison, late of West Ham and Wales, was denied by Ben Coker. 
Between times Michael Bostwick hit the bar. Marcus Maddison, pushed forward at 
half-time in support of the well-named striker Joe Gormley and never giving up, 
scored in the 90th minute andSouthend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> gasped for the final whistle 
after that.

Robertson’s time in the sun has been brief and not inglorious. He had a career 
in the Marines and was academy coach when promoted to caretaker in February. He 
won his first four games – Darren Ferguson had won four in 19 before that – but 
fans may never now sing, “There’s only one Dave Robertson.” In any case there 
are two.Soccerbase gives their now former man the other one’s long 
<http://www.soccerbase.com/managers/manager.sd?manager_id=1867>, 
undistinguished record at Elgin City.

Hartlepool’s August optimism dented by un-neighbourly Carlisle United | Jeremy 
Alexander
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2015/aug/30/hartlepool-united-carlisle-united-league-two>
If Robertson was trying to make a name, Phil Brown is restoring one in his 
third full season with Southend after a slump from takingHull City into the top 
flight <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/oct/18/premierleague> for the 
first time in 2008. “After getting this win,” he said, “I think we’ll get more 
respect from opposition.”Southend came up through the play-offs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/24/southend-wycombe-phil-brown-gareth-ainsworth-league-two-playoff>
 in May after finishing fifth for the second time running. Brown added: “It’s 
about these players, not just those we’ve brought in but those plying their 
trade in League Two last year, convincing them they can play at this level.” He 
had written beforehand of the door opening “if we keep on knocking”, then 
“hanging on to the shirt tails of the early leaders”.

Through the first half, a scruffy affair of ragged passes without England’s 
excuse (never mind obstructing the field; in San Marino the field was 
obstructing the game) the giant Posh centre-back, Ricardo Santos, was hanging 
on to much more of David Mooney’s shirt than its tails. By the end Mooney, 
helped by the running of his fellow Irishman and striker Noel Hunt, had escaped 
his marker’s clutches. If his neck had not been compressed, he might have 
headed a hat-trick. They and Anthony Wordsworth arrived in the summer and, with 
Coker’s overlaps from left-back, Southend presented a recurring threat.

On 32 minutes Adam Barrett, a centre-back mysteriously in the front line, shot 
home from this source and Hunt’s header to Coker’s free-kick doubled it in the 
70th. Robertson was entitled to be “disappointed” at that, more so at his 
dismissal. Brown, comfortable in front of cameras, could rejoice in TV’s 
£30,000. Fossetts Farm remains an £80m figment.
 