
It is a challenging time for allotments. The interest in grow-your-own is 
stronger than ever and many sites have long waiting lists, yet some allotments 
are battling against closure.

 A few weeks ago, gardeners at Farm Terrace allotments 
<http://savefarmterrace.wixsite.com/savefarmterrace> in Watford lost a case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/02/watford-allotment-campaigners-lose-high-court-battle-to-save-site>
 at the high court to defend their allotments from development. Plot holders at
Northfields allotments in Ealing 
<http://ealingdean.co.uk/savenorthfieldsallotments> and Craven Vale in Brighton 
<https://www.facebook.com/savecravenvaleallotments/> are still campaigning to 
save their sites. Afreedom of information request 
<https://homefarmer.co.uk/save-all-allotments/> revealed that from 2007 to 
2014, 194 out of 198 applications to close allotments were granted by the 
secretary of state.

Even while allotments close, demand for plots remains high. A survey 
<http://www.nsalg.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/ttwk_nsalg_survey_2013.pdf> 
in carried out in 2013 by the National Society of Allotment and Leisure 
Gardeners suggested that for every 100 allotment plots, 52 people were on 
waiting lists. This suggests there is still a need for increasing the provision 
of allotments.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcan-self-management-safeguard-future-allotments-plot-holders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8acd963bf73463b7be55df0cd65b2d139648bae%2F0_29_1370_1711%2F1370.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20self-management%20safeguard%20the%20future%20of%20allotments%3F%20%7C%20James%20Robbins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcan-self-management-safeguard-future-allotments-plot-holders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20self-management%20safeguard%20the%20future%20of%20allotments%3F%20%7C%20James%20Robbins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcan-self-management-safeguard-future-allotments-plot-holders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8acd963bf73463b7be55df0cd65b2d139648bae%2F0_29_1370_1711%2F1370.jpg>
 Demand for allotment plots remains high, yet sites across the country are 
closing. Photograph: Felicity Nook 
 For some sites, self-management can be a way to safeguard their future. In 
2011 my own allotment inFinchley 
<http://www.finchleyhorticulturalsociety.org.uk/>, north London came under 
threat when the council proposed to raise rents by an extraordinary 200%. In 
response our allotment association sprang into action. We were able to organise 
support, and by appealing to MP’s and local councillors, the decision was 
reversed.

 In 2013 we took a leap of faith and signed a 38-year lease to become 
self-managed. This gave us greater control over rent prices, the ability to 
deal with waiting lists more effectively, and ensured as many plots as possible 
were cultivated. This also meant we had a greater responsibility to raise funds 
for projects around the site. Through pooling our skills we built a dedicated 
team, and have started to see success; the site was judged the best in Barnet 
for the last two years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcan-self-management-safeguard-future-allotments-plot-holders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6dfb17c1841ef57301009b5059101bef8546edfb%2F0_114_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20self-management%20safeguard%20the%20future%20of%20allotments%3F%20%7C%20James%20Robbins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcan-self-management-safeguard-future-allotments-plot-holders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20self-management%20safeguard%20the%20future%20of%20allotments%3F%20%7C%20James%20Robbins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcan-self-management-safeguard-future-allotments-plot-holders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6dfb17c1841ef57301009b5059101bef8546edfb%2F0_114_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 ‘Through building and nurturing a strong community on the site, we have 
ensured it is recognised as a valuable asset and contributes to the local 
area.’ Photograph: Felicity Nook 
Our ever-popular spring plant sale provides a valuable source of income. It’s 
a great bonding experience for plot holders, bringing people together behind a 
common aim of raising plants, running stalls, and providing great plants for 
the local community.

 A grant from the Big Lottery Fund <https://www.biglotteryfund.org.uk/> 
enabled the construction of a composting toilet on site, reducing the cost and 
environmental impact of renting a portable toilet. We’ve been able to provide 
16 raised beds for disabled gardeners; the largest accessible gardening 
facility in the area. Recently we successfully applied for a grant from Tesco 
and Groundwork’sBags of Help 
<http://www.groundwork.org.uk/Sites/tescocommunityscheme> funding scheme. By 
using our email list and social media, we motivated supporters to vote for us 
in local stores, increasing the level of our grant. This will fund the 
construction of new paths to give better access for wheelchair users to the 
communal facilities. We are also hoping to refurbish one of the buildings to 
become an outside classroom for local schools.

 Through building and nurturing a strong community on the site, we have 
ensured it is recognised as a valuable asset and contributes to the local area. 
We have secured a stronger and safer future for our allotments, and we hope it 
serves as a model for how other allotments can weather the storm.

 * James Robbins is an allotment plot holder and he works as a professional 
gardener in Hertfordshire. He blogs atReflections on the Dew Pond 
<http://reflectionsonthedewpond.wordpress.com>.
 