
Toshiro Mifune turned down Obi-Wan Kenobi and Darth Vader roles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/04/toshiro-mifune-star-wars-turned-down-obi-wan-kenobi-and-darth-vader-roles>
What if… Star Wars had never been made?

There were many points during the inception of Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> when friends and studio execs said 
toGeorge Lucas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgelucas> words to the 
effect of, “Have you been smoking a lot of weed lately, George?” Had Lucas been 
deterred, or had he actually smoked more weed, the world – indeed the galaxy – 
would be a very different place.

First, let’s consider the immediate consequences of Star Wars’ non–existence: 
Lucas would have been reduced to making kids’ movies, and probably ended up 
runningDisney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/walt-disney-company>. Instead 
of Star Wars, the US’ highest-grossing film of 1977 would have been Smokey And 
The Bandit, followed byClose Encounters Of The Third Kind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/26/close-encounters-of-the-third-kind-review-a-must-watch-directors-cut>
. This would have prompted a wave of trucking movies that shifted skiploads of 
toy cars, and a Spielberg space franchise full of benign aliens with no Dark 
Side.

It would be nice to think we’d have no summer blockbusters, effects–driven 
franchises or cinematic universes without Star Wars, but it’s not really 
likely, is it? Superman and Jaws 2 were already in production before Lucas’s 
space opera was released, after all. But where would we be without all the 
cultural reference points Star Wars gave us?No Force, no Yoda, no “Jedi mind 
tricks”, no Jar Jar Binks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2015/dec/07/jar-jar-binks-banished-from-star-wars-the-force-awakens>
. The likes ofThe Simpsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-simpsons>, Spaced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2009/sep/24/spaced-pure-comedy-gold>
 andFamily Guy <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/family-guy> would be 
scrabbling for content, and king of the nerds Kevin Smith would probably still 
be working in a convenience store.

Furthermore, without Star Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars>, 
Ronald Reagan might not have invested in his “Star Wars” weaponry programme 
against what he called the “evil empire”. Instead, he might have reached out to 
the Soviet Union as if they were peaceful extraterrestrials, Close 
Encounters–style. Differences between capitalism and communism would have been 
harmoniously reconciled, creating a new, unified global order based on 
equality, cooperation and a five–tone jingle. And geeks around the world would 
have developed an alternative belief system based on... Smokey And The Bandit.
Steve Rose

What if… Alan McGee’s sister had bought a new watch?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facfe4a9d5e5f3bcc5d0ce65c3d368a2d76c16333%2F0_186_1496_898%2F1496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20imagine%20a%20world%20without%20Star%20Wars%2C%20Harry%20Potter%20or%20Oasis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20imagine%20a%20world%20without%20Star%20Wars%2C%20Harry%20Potter%20or%20Oasis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facfe4a9d5e5f3bcc5d0ce65c3d368a2d76c16333%2F0_186_1496_898%2F1496.jpg>
 Oasis. Photograph: PA 
Oasis snubbed Trainspotting soundtrack thinking film 'was about trainspotters'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/19/oasis-trainspotting-soundtrack-noel-gallagher-danny-boyle>
As the busy head of Creation Records, Alan McGee didn’t have a habit of 
turning up to gigs early 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/sep/21/alan-mcgee-creation-records>. 
Back in 1993, he was never supposed to see a bunch of lairy Mancs fourth on the 
bill to his label’s 18 Wheeler at Glasgow’s King Tut’s Wah Wah Hut; legend has 
it that his sister Susan’s faulty timepiece caused McGee to turn up a couple of 
hours earlier than intended; he stumbled upon Oasis and the rest is rock 
history.

Whether or not a band as rough–hewn as Oasis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/oasis> would have ended up being signed 
anyway is moot, but surely only under McGee’s exuberant guidance would their 
chaotic spirit have been fostered in order for them to dominate 90s culture as 
they did.

Apart from depriving us of one of the world’s greatest rock’n’roll groups, how 
else might this functioning Swatch have changed the music scene? It’s hard to 
imagine, say, a Cast stepping up to fill the gaping Knebworth–sized hole, while 
a whole load of Britpop also–rans – your Northern Uproars and Menswears – would 
probably never have bothered getting together in the first place.

The obvious thinking is that this would have sent Britpop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/britpop> in a more cerebral direction, in 
which the Blurs and Pulps flourished. But was it notDamon Albarn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/damon-albarn>’s competitive spirit that 
inspired countless Blur reinventions? Would Britpop even have had its true 
mainstream moment without the Gallaghers’ laddy yang to balance the Albarnites’ 
arty yin?

More likely Britpop would simply have had less impact and the culture gap 
would have been filled with raucous pop in theSpice Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/spicegirls> mould, a less patriotic outlook 
towards US R&B and hip–hop and increased attention on the 1990s’ other main 
musical story – the rise of superclub culture. It could have been Orbital 
headlining the era’s defining shows, while a generation of future bands from 
Arctic Monkeys to Kasabian would never have picked up guitars. In this world, 
Alex Turner becomes the UK’s foremost white rapper, while Tom Meighan wins 
series three of the X Factor. Let’s thank the gods above that Susan never got 
her watch fixed.Tim Jonze

What if… David Chase had made The Sopranos as a film? 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c6e772fd5cffa4863f1ffdee9009d8591348fb3%2F0_109_1636_982%2F1636.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20imagine%20a%20world%20without%20Star%20Wars%2C%20Harry%20Potter%20or%20Oasis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20imagine%20a%20world%20without%20Star%20Wars%2C%20Harry%20Potter%20or%20Oasis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c6e772fd5cffa4863f1ffdee9009d8591348fb3%2F0_109_1636_982%2F1636.jpg>
 Photograph: Channel 4 
David Chase finally explains The Sopranos ending – or does he?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/aug/28/david-chase-finally-explains-the-sopranos-ending-or-does-he>
At a TV festival earlier this year, David Chase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-chase> was asked about the 
origins ofThe Sopranos <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-sopranos>, 
his drama of mothers, sons, hits and mistresses. “I wanted to do it as a 
movie,” he said. “It never got anywhere.” But what if a butterfly had flapped 
its Bada Bings? What if this veteran TV writer – who had toiled for more than 
two decades on shows such as The Rockford Files and Northern Exposure – had 
been wooed by Hollywood rather than HBO in the mid–1990s?

Perhaps the autobiographical elements of Chase’s tale of a New Jersey gangster 
trying therapy to detoxify his relationship with an overbearing mother might 
have given this imagined Sopranos film enough edge to stand alongside Coppola 
and Scorsese’s mythic movie mobsters. More likely, it would have been a 
footnote, filed alongside Analyze This, the dumb comedy with a broadly similar 
wiseguy–on–the–couch premise.

Wipe The Sopranos from the telly timeline, though, and it would be like 
deleting the GPS of our current age of peak TV. Sure, you could point a finger 
at Tony for godfathering all the antiheroes that crowded our screens in his 
wake – for every Walter White, there have been a dozen Ray Donovans – but that 
would be to forget how The Sopranos changed the (mob) rules for ever: upending 
storytelling rhythms, atomising complex characters, burrowing deep into moral 
ambiguity.

Crucially, The Sopranos did all of this while delivering whopping ratings, 
doing more to cement HBO’s reputation as the home of deluxe, path–breaking TV 
than any other show before or since. So it’s not hard to imagine a parallel 
world in which a Sopranos–less HBO failed to dominate the 
entertainment–industrial complex, and stuck instead to pay–per–view sports. 
It’s a universe where Netflix was never emboldened to move into similarly 
highbrow programming and where you’d need to read an actual book to get your 
Game Of Thrones fix.Graeme Virtue

What if… JK Rowling never found a publisher for Harry Potter?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa51b033e425ac9d1ca6b76b0ac390fa807733314%2F0_237_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20imagine%20a%20world%20without%20Star%20Wars%2C%20Harry%20Potter%20or%20Oasis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20imagine%20a%20world%20without%20Star%20Wars%2C%20Harry%20Potter%20or%20Oasis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa51b033e425ac9d1ca6b76b0ac390fa807733314%2F0_237_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 Photograph: Allstar/Warner Bros 
JK Rowling unveils plans for five-part Fantastic Beasts franchise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/13/jk-rowling-fantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them-franchise>
A world without the boy wizard? It’s testament to JK Rowling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jkrowling>’s achievement in single–handedly 
taking over the entire world that this is so hard to envision. TheHarry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> books have sold a minimum of 
55m each. The films have grossed billions. The latest cinematic spinoff took 
$215m in its opening weekend. The current theatre incarnation? Booked up until 
2018.

It might never have happened if Christopher Little, a small Fulham–based 
agency, had never taken a punt on the unknown Rowling. The 1997 publication of 
The Philosopher’s Stone, alongside the first of Philip Pullman’s His Dark 
Materials books, heralded a new era of crossover fantasy that has endured among 
kids and adults alike. After all, it was Rowling’s popularity that saw 
“grownup” book covers for kids’ titles become de rigueur for self–conscious 
commuters seeking a great yarn. In formats and licensing, influence and 
audience, Potter changed the game in a way unlikely to be equalled: just check 
out the mega–sellingTwilight series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/twilight>, or the Hunger Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hunger-games> empire.

Indeed, if The Philosopher’s Stone had not been published, how would we have 
been able 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/mar/01/review-j-k-rowling-harry-potter-philosophers-stone>
, instantly, to distinguish the class status of kids in the late 1990s 
according to their pronunciation of Hermione (Her–mee–own: the hero of all comp 
school girls). Adults wouldn’t spend their weekends in public parks with 
broomsticks between their legs, playing Quidditch. One thing is for sure: a 
generation would have grown up less empathetic and less politically aware, not 
having been educated on the sly by a brilliant, accessible parable of our 
real-world complexities. We can all raise a toast of butterbeer to that.Hannah 
Jane Parkinson

What if… Seinfeld had been cancelled?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe7855327137f181264cf89772fcd9a0c1b2ea34%2F0_59_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20imagine%20a%20world%20without%20Star%20Wars%2C%20Harry%20Potter%20or%20Oasis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20imagine%20a%20world%20without%20Star%20Wars%2C%20Harry%20Potter%20or%20Oasis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe7855327137f181264cf89772fcd9a0c1b2ea34%2F0_59_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Seinfeld: the show that invented modern television is still 'shockingly 
relevant'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/03/seinfeld-modern-tv-seinfeldia-jennifer-keishin-armstrong>
By the end of its run, Seinfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/seinfeld> was a cultural monolith: 
76.3 million Americans – more than double the population of Canada – tuned in 
to watch its final episode. Yet, in its early yearsJerry Seinfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jerry-seinfeld> and Larry David 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/larry-david>’s sitcom struggled in 
the ratings, with NBC execs concerned that it was “too New York” and “too 
Jewish” to ever appeal to a mass audience. They nearly put the “show about 
nothing” out of its misery after a poorly received pilot, but gave it a 
reprieve. A shrewd decision as it turned out, but what if the suits had been 
more trigger–happy?

Certainly it’s tempting to suggest that the entire sweep of comedy would be 
irrevocably altered. Seinfeld established many of what are now considered 
sitcom norms. Antiheroic characters, observational comedy stylings, 
self–referential meta–ness, season–long story arcs: all of these traits, seen 
in everything fromArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> to It’s Always 
Sunny In Philadelphia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/may/14/its-always-sunny-in-philadelphia>
, were birthed on Seinfeld. (Thankfully one trend that didn’t catch on was the 
show’s hideous slap–bass theme tune.)

Yet, the argument that these tropes would simply be wiped out had Seinfeld 
been prematurely canned is less than watertight. The persistent urge in comedy 
to push boundaries would have surely meant such daring elements would have come 
to light eventually: David andSeinfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/seinfeld> were just either lucky or 
inspired enough to get there first.

Yet there is one show we can confidently erase from history. Had Seinfeld been 
considered a failure, NBC would never have risked commissioning another series 
about a group of New Yorkers who spend their days hanging out in cafes talking 
about relationships. Farewell, Friends.Gwilym Mumford

What if… Donald Trump had turned down The Apprentice?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aefd75b63026831ca1f54e46a27b26d41dc5868%2F0_105_4534_2721%2F4534.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20imagine%20a%20world%20without%20Star%20Wars%2C%20Harry%20Potter%20or%20Oasis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20imagine%20a%20world%20without%20Star%20Wars%2C%20Harry%20Potter%20or%20Oasis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcan-you-imagine-a-world-without-star-wars-harry-potter-oasis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aefd75b63026831ca1f54e46a27b26d41dc5868%2F0_105_4534_2721%2F4534.jpg>
 Photograph: Chris Pizzello/AP 
You’re hired: how The Apprentice led to President Trump | Stuart Heritage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/trump-the-apprentice-president-elect-reality-tv>
“Bottom–feeders!” barked Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> before he was pitched The 
Apprentice in 2002; that was his take on the nascent reality-contest genre. But 
producer Mark Burnett played on Trump’s love of easy wins, ego massages and 
publicity: by spending a few hours filming up in Trump Tower, he could have a 
show that plugged his businesses while casting him as a godlike ruler. The 
Donald signed up and was soon barking his catchphrase: “You’re fired.”

US TV already had Idol and Next Top Model, plus Burnett’s own Survivor, shows 
where bad humans fight over fool’s gold would have flourished anyway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/oct/08/mark-burnett-mipcom-reality>. 
But The Apprentice is uniquely Trump-shaped. The alternative tycoons mooted for 
the pilot, Mark Cuban and Richard Branson, have some capacity for reflection 
and shame: surely they couldn’t have fronted a world that rewarded people who 
were so transparently incompetent and unpleasant. Apprentice contestants 
pursued crap ideas with utter conviction, while viewers who ought to have known 
better couldn’t stop watching. This caused wider cultural abrasions: more than 
one ex–candidate has since got rich selling worthless opinions on which people 
can’t stop clicking.

A Trump–less US Apprentice would likely have been a three–season workhorse, 
culturally insignificant and not worth a UK remake, leaving the traits that 
made Alan Sugar the perfect Donald clone – rich yet cheap, dominant yet 
thin–skinned – untapped. He’d now be a frustrated 80s throwback, wondering why 
no one has bought his new two-in-one landline phone and fondue set.

Most importantly, if Trump says no to Burnett, there’s a chance the US doesn’t 
slide into disaster 13 years later. Trump trolled his way to the White House by 
learning from his screen proteges and harnessing the power of brazen bullshit. 
That TV world where no self–promotion is too tawdry, and morality is for wimps? 
We live in it.Jack Seale
 