
“You can’t out-Candice Candice,” said Jane Beedle halfway through the meringue 
round of the Great British Bake Off final, looking worriedly at her fellow 
contestant’s reliably opulent confection. It turned out she was quite right.

It was perfect pastry and a love of lavish decoration that saw Candice Brown, 
a PE teacher from Bedfordshire, win over Paul Hollywood and Mary Berry to be 
named the 7th winner of the UK baking programme on Wednesday night.

Brown, who has won star baker more than any other contestant during the show’s 
final series on theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, proved her 
winning credentials first with a three-tiered pavlova filled with 
prosecco-soaked strawberries, mango curd and topped with glittered pistachios. 
The sweet creation was such a hit that it even prompted a rare handshake from 
Hollywood.

However, it was Brown’s take on the 49-piece royal picnic – complete with 
chocolate-orange cake, sausage rolls shaped like pigs and rhubarb and custard 
tarts – that Berry called “an absolute humdinger of a showstopper” and secured 
her triumph over the other finalists Beedle and Andrew Smyth. Even during the 
sweat-inducing five hours of the showstopper challenge, her signature lipstick 
remained intact.

Brown, who began learning to bake at four with her grandmother, spent more 
than 12 hours a day practicing for the series final and admitted she was always 
her own worst critic.

 “I’ll always see the negatives, always see the bits I don’t like, always 
think everybody else’s is better,” she said before the final.

However, speaking after she was announced winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/oct/26/candice-brown-wins-the-great-british-bake-off-video>
, Brown said it meant “more to me than anyone will realise. I have low 
self-belief, even though my friends and family constantly build my confidence 
up. So it was a big moment in my life, probably the biggest so far. I felt that 
everything happens for a reason, and I did it, and that makes me smile so much. 
In fact, I can’t stop smiling.”

For Hollywood, it was Brown’s dedication to going the extra mile with her 
cooking that secured her victory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fcandice-brown-takes-great-british-bake-off-crown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d97ef018442614a1ff4ab2a833eb286480a7b44%2F0_0_1024_768%2Fmaster%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Candice%20Brown%20takes%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off%20crown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fcandice-brown-takes-great-british-bake-off-crown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Candice%20Brown%20takes%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off%20crown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fcandice-brown-takes-great-british-bake-off-crown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d97ef018442614a1ff4ab2a833eb286480a7b44%2F0_0_1024_768%2Fmaster%2F1024.jpg>
 Selasi Gbormittah posts picture on Twitter of the 2016 Great British Bake Off 
contestants in high spirits. Photograph: Selasi Gbormittah 
“Candice is very much all or nothing,” said the judge. “When you look back on 
some of her bakes they have been beautiful. When she nails it, she is one of 
the best.”

His words were echoed by Berry who praised Brown’s “determination and passion”.

There have been complaints that the standard of baking in this series has not 
reached that of previous ones, and the final was indeed not flawless. Despite 
Berry claiming it was “one of the most exciting showstoppers we’ve ever had”, 
there were mistakes in the three final contestants’ offerings and none rivalled 
in execution the bejewelled wedding cake presented by last series’ winner, 
Nadiya Hussain.

Smyth suffered the cardinal sin of a soggy bottom to his strawberry tarts, 
while Beedle’s sausage roll pastry was undercooked. Even in Brown’s scones, the 
cheese flavour was criticised for not being strong enough and the jam in her 
Victoria sponge was described by Berry as “not jam but jelly”.

As the episode kicked off, Berry described it as an open field as to who would 
win. The final was themed around the Queen’s 90th birthday, and the three 
contestants were asked to prove not just their ability to be imaginative in 
their baking but also prove their technical abilities with the perfect Victoria 
sponge and meringue.

As the whole episode was pre-recorded, none of the drama that has subsequently 
sprung up around the show’s controversial move to Channel 4 filtered into the 
bunting-clad Bake Off tent. Nonetheless, for the 14 million expected to watch 
on Wednesday night – including semi-finalist Selasi Gbormittah who hosted a 
finale-viewing party – the final proved poignant. It would be the last time 
Berry and Hollywood judged the show together, and the innuendo-loving duo Mel 
Giedroyc and Sue Perkins presented it. Only Hollywood has agreed to make the 
jump to the show’s new home.

Speaking on BBC Radio 2, Berry said she intended to work with Giedroyc and 
Perkins again on another BBC show but that it could possibly focus on gardening 
rather than baking. She said she had gone with her “gut feeling” in staying 
with the corporation.

Bake Off final will be overshadowed by loss of one of BBC's most-loved shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/great-british-bake-off-final-bbc-channel-4-mary-berry-paul-hollywood>
“I made it straight away for myself, having discussed it with my family and 
others. I’m very happy I’ve stayed with the BBC. Everything I’ve done has been 
with theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> and I wanted to stay with 
them,” she added.

For Brown, if previous years’ contestants are anything to go by, a lucrative 
future lies ahead in terms of cookery books and even cookery shows. Hussain won 
a reported £1m deal for her recipe book and has since been given a broad deal 
with the BBC to present future shows.

Brown, who returned to work as a PE teacher the day after she won, said Bake 
Off had presented her with a whole new set of aspirations.

“If I can get my little vintage shop selling tea and cakes with random 
antiques that would be my ultimate dream. Let’s wait and see what will come my 
way but I will be grabbing it with both hands and running with it, that’s for 
sure. It would be crazy not to, wouldn’t it?”
 