
The “all-age family entertainment” of panto is being “doused with 
ill-disguised ordure,”protested one correspondent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/25/lets-put-the-pure-back-into-pantomime>
 in the Guardian’s Letters page last week, in response toMichael Billington’s 
review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/15/cinderella-review-julian-clary-paul-o-grady-nigel-havers-amanda-holden-london-palladium>
 of the London Palladium’s smutty Cinderella. Whatever would she make of Liam 
Williams and Daran Johnson’sRicky Whittington and His Cat at the New Diorama 
<http://newdiorama.com/whats-on/ricky-whittington-his-cat>: an alt-panto with 
poo jokes, crude social satire and featuring “fuck London!” as its most 
spirited refrain? It’s not for the kids, mind you: this Dick Whittington 
retread is aimed squarely at millennials and comedy fans, and – after two and a 
half hours of spoof fairytale and gentrification gags delivered by a crack cast 
of hip young comics – few will leave disappointed.

It’s great fun, in short. The animating idea – that the Dick Whittington story 
offers a bitterly ironic frame through which to view modern London’s various 
malaises – proves extremely fruitful, as Williams and Johnson’s show mocks the 
idea that the capital’s streets might be paved (for the newcomer at least) with 
anything other than exploitation, penury and angst. In King Rat, they find an 
easy metaphor for the kind of rapacious developer who wilfully degrades 
London’s housing stock, the easier to replace it with luxury flats when its 
occupiers are forced out. Whether, in real life, they do so by luring rats to 
their properties with cheese – well, you wouldn’t bet against it, would you?

Rob Carter brings lashings of relish to the baddie role, twirling his 
metaphorical moustachios as he whispers villainy into the ear of Ricky’s 
gormless new mayor. Williams and Johnson deploy the character as a vehicle for 
their bleak take on super-rich psychology, as depressed, debased King Rat 
expounds on the sordid lengths he’d go to actually feel something – a routine 
comedy fans may recognise from the pilot version ofSheeps Skewer the News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/28/whats-the-one-consolation-of-10-years-of-tories-some-decent-political-comedy>
 two summers ago.

Elsewhere, they derive as many laughs from their send-ups of panto (or musical 
theatre) convention. ComedianDavid Elms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/21/fringe-comedy-shows-last-minute-fun-edinburgh-festival-2014>
 supplies a beady dame, Big Pam. Instead of booing or cooing with sympathy, 
we’re invited to call out “murp 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=murp>” and “pleeshb”. There are 
excellent musical numbers (by Johnson and David Pegg), including a memorable 
spoof “nonsense song” in the manner of Chim Chim Cher-ee or 
Bibbidi-Bobbidi-Boo. And your romantic expectations of panto will be 
remorselessly undermined, as Ricky’s amorous overtures to rival mayoral 
candidate Alice Fitzwarren (very amusing Ellie White, reprising her plummy 
Princess Beatrice voice from Channel 4’sThe Windsors 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-windsors>) are bluntly batted aside. 
(“I love you, Alice” / “And you’re … good value.”)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fricky-whittington-and-his-cat-pantomime-comedy-new-diorama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22e2d19224cbd252ddd768aad3ef038c02bf3de0%2F0_74_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Capital%20panto%3A%20Ricky%20Whittington%20surveys%20modern%20London's%20malaises&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fricky-whittington-and-his-cat-pantomime-comedy-new-diorama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Capital%20panto%3A%20Ricky%20Whittington%20surveys%20modern%20London%27s%20malaises&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fricky-whittington-and-his-cat-pantomime-comedy-new-diorama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22e2d19224cbd252ddd768aad3ef038c02bf3de0%2F0_74_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 ‘Pleasingly irreverent’ … Rob Carter as King Rat and Charlotte Ritchie as 
Ricky Whittington. Photograph: Richard Davenport 
All of which is highly enjoyable – even if panto send-ups are now almost as 
familiar as pantos themselves (and often the same thing), Ricky Whittington 
does add a new dimension of anarchy, as its story now and then cuts away to 
sci-fi interludes featuring a mysterious “Time Cop” (played by a different 
comedian nightly;Richard Gadd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/12/richard-gadd-review-banshee-labyrinth-edinburgh>
 when I saw it). The explanation, when it comes, is pleasingly irreverent: the 
show as a whole feels appealingly unrestrained, as if Williams and Johnson 
decided rarely to self-censor when it came to jokes and daft ideas.

Yes, that means it’s too long. And no, their theatre show isn’t as innovative, 
finally, as their comedy: I’ve seen Sheeps dostriking new things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/aug/19/sheeps-review-bedlam-edinburgh>
 with sketch comedy, whereas Ricky Whittington is theatrically fairly 
conventional. But it’s fun, and funny. It doesn’t end as a call to arms – 
surprisingly, given the savagery of its attitude to London throughout most of 
the show. By the end, we’re being invited to keep the faith that the capital 
will come good – which feels like an uneasy embrace between social satire and 
the requirements of Christmas entertainment. That’s almost the only time you 
hear the gears grind, though, in a show that otherwise demonstrates, with 
riotous flair, that panto, millennial savvy and trenchant political comedy can 
make for very entertaining bedfellows.

 * Ricky Whittington and his Cat 
<http://newdiorama.com/whats-on/ricky-whittington-his-cat> is at the New 
Diorama theatre, London, until 7 January.
 