
Carlisle’s long trip to QPR – 310 miles separate them by road and 62 places 
separate them in the league – was rewarded with a 2-1 win at Loftus Road. Jason 
Kennedy scored the decisive goal 11 minutes from time for the side 18th in 
League Two, after Derek Asamoah, forCarlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle>, and Jay Emmanuel-Thomas had 
traded first-half goals.

In another of the night’s upsets, Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford>, who are yet to win in the 
Premier League this season, lost 1-0 at Preston thanks to Marnick Vermijl’s 
first goal for the club.

Leicester’s manager Claudio Ranieri made several changes to the side that drew 
with Tottenham at the weekend but there were no repercussions. One of those 
changes, Joe Dodoo, 20, scored a hat-trick on his debut while Andrej Kramaric 
was on target too as Leicester progressed to the third round courtesy of a 4-1 
win atBury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bury>, for whom Danny Mayor 
scored.

Arsenal handed trip to Tottenham in Capital One Cup third-round draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/25/arsenal-tottenham-capital-one-cup-third-round-draw>
Bournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth>, who won their 
first Premier League game on Saturday, followed that victory against West Ham 
with a convincing win at Hartlepool.

Junior Stanislas scored twice while Yann Kermorgant and Dan Gosling each 
scored in the first half of the 4-0 victory.

Ricky van Wolfswinkel’s first Norwich goal in two years followed Jonny 
Howson’s first-half effort, before Paul Green pulled one back, as Alex Neil’s 
side beatRotherham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham> 2-1.

Ipswich were taken to extra-time at Doncaster but David McGoldrick, after 102 
minutes, made it 2-1 and Mick McCarthy’s side eventually won 4-1.

Nathan Dyer, Matt Grimes and Marvin Emnes scored for Swansea in a 3-0 win at 
home toYork <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/york>.

Wes Thomas scored both Birmingham City’s goals in their 2-0 home win over 
Gillingham and Ross McCormack also scored twice in Fulham’s 3-0 win over
Sheffield United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited>, who 
had two men sent off at Craven Cottage.

Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink came up against one of his former clubs, Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough>, but the Burton Albion 
manager’s side lost 2-1 in extra-time. The game was 1-1 after 90 minutes and 
Christian Stuani scored his second goal of the game with 11 minutes remaining.

Greg Luer scored the only goal of the game as Hull beat Rochdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale> 1-0 at the KC Stadium.

Charlton, unbeaten this season in the Championship, were 4-1 winners against 
Peterborough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough> – Mikhail 
Kennedy, Karlan Ahearne-Grant, Ahmed Kashi and Igor Vetokele scored for Guy 
Luzon’s side.

Garath McCleary’s 84th-minute finish earned Reading a 2-1 win at Portsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth>, who had led through Conor 
Chaplin before Nick Blackman equalised.

Walsall won 2-1 at home to Brighton, with Rico Henry scoring the winner four 
minutes from the end. Wolves defeated Barnet at Molineux by the same scoreline, 
with Sheyi Ojo scoring the decisive goal after 56 minutes. Atdhe Nuhiu earned
Sheffield Wednesday <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> a 
1-0 win over Oxford at Hillsborough.

MK Dons’ home game against Cardiff went to extra-time after Carl Baker 
equalised Alex Revell’s goal for the visitors. Josh Murphy scored the winner 
for MK with 12 minutes of extra-time remaining as Karl Robinson’s side won 2-1.
 