
Neil Warnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/neil-warnock> said he will 
read the riot act to Sol Bamba after the defender spectacularly blew his top 
and was sent off for angrily confronting the fourth official – and his own 
manager – in Cardiff’s 1-1 draw at Ipswich.

Bamba reacted badly to a late tackle by Jonathan Douglas before jabbing his 
finger in the direction of the fourth official, Charles Breakspear, and then 
physically brushing off Warnock’s attempts at acting the peacemaker.

The centre-back was shown a red card with 20 minutes left to play but Ipswich 
were unable to capitalise on the numerical advantage after Aron Gunnarsson and 
Luke Varney had swapped goals prior to the sending-off.

Warnock said: “I think Douglas has been clever – he has left his studs on the 
ankle. If the referee had just blown for a foul, it would have stopped all the 
hassle. But he tried to give advantage, which we didn’t want, and it erupts.

“I have no complaints about the red card. It is disappointing that we lose one 
of our best players for three matches.

“I didn’t really want to talk to Sol after the game so I will see him 
tomorrow. He just lost his rag but it was an aggressive attitude and I don’t 
condone Sol’s behaviour. He is distraught in the dressing room and quite 
rightly. For me, he is one of the best in the Championship and that was a 
blemish I haven’t seen in his make-up.”

Mick McCarthy said of the incident, in which Bamba raged a few yards from the 
Ipswich manager: “I have seen players lose it and I have lost it myself, but 
never on the fourth official. It probably was a foul but you can’t condone what 
he did – he thoroughly deserved to be sent off.”

McCarthy believed the sending-off actually hit his team more than Cardiff. “I 
think the fear of actually losing against 10 men can get into players’ heads 
and Cardiff are no mugs, by any stretch of the imagination,” he said.

Dwight Gayle bags a hat-trick as Newcastle thrash sorry Birmingham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/newcastle-birmingham-championship-match-report>
Football On 5 (@FootballOn5) 
Who's next?! 😡 Sol Bamba takes on the officials and his own manager as he 
loses his head and earns himself a red card.pic.twitter.com/nd8oY1YAeo 
<https://t.co/nd8oY1YAeo>
 <https://twitter.com/FootballOn5/status/807644540211339265> December 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/FootballOn5/status/807644540211339265>  