
Amid all the anguish, anger, frustration and fear inflicted on Cumbria by 
Storm Desmond there have been some unexpectedly light-hearted moments. One of 
the most notable concerned three koi carp found floating above the Brunton Park 
pitch when the floods hitCarlisle <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/carlisle> 
United, with water levels reaching crossbar height. The fish were rescued from 
the ground’s appropriately named Waterworks End and the club’s press officers 
used social media to try to reunite them with their owner.

When a man swiftly came forward it seemed a happy ending but Dave Mitchell 
takes up the story. “Apparently the next day someone else arrived to claim 
them,” says Carlisle’s multi award-winning head groundsman-cum-stadium manager. 
“So let’s hope they ended up at the right home.”

Carlisle united: community rallies round flood-hit football club
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/carlisle-united-community-rallies-round-flood-hit-football-club>
On Saturday it will be 49 days since Desmond did its worst and, with Mitchell 
having overseen the complex task of laying a brand new pitch in mid-winter, 
Brunton Park will welcome York City for aLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> fixture – its first 
game since the floods. If staff are disappointed that one of the club’s two 
prized goldfish is still missing, no one will care that the ground’s temporary 
catering and toilet facilities are not quite up to their usual high standards.

After weeks devoted to a massive clean-up operation, there promises to be 
quite a party atmosphere. This mood would be heightened appreciably should 
Keith Curle’s side winTuesday night’s FA Cup replay at Yeovil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/yeovil-earn-replay-injury-time-equaliser-shaun-jeffers-bloomfield-road>
 and be looking forward to entertaining Everton in a fourth- round tie preceded 
by the rumble of broadcast trucks trundling down Warwick Road.

A main artery leading into the city centre, the road on which Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> United is situated, was 
particularly badly affected by December’s floods. Today many local homeowners 
still face months of upheaval and wrangling with insurance companies after 
being forced to vacate badly damaged properties.

The past few, vexing weeks have seen the bond between club and locals 
strengthen appreciably with Curle leading teams of players on missions to help 
homeowners shift sodden carpets and ruined furniture. Despite Carlisle being 
forced to play recent home fixtures more than 90 miles down the road in 
Lancashire, fans have travelled south in force to watch them compete on 
borrowed grounds at Blackburn, Preston and Blackpool.

“Saturday will be quite emotional,” says Suzanne Kidd, the club’s finance 
director. “You get a bit choked up just thinking about it. The floods are 
something that you hope never, ever, happens again but being part of it all has 
created something special around here. We’ve all come out of it a bit closer to 
each other. The players all wanted to get out and help people in the local 
community.”

As the striker Charlie Wyke puts it: “The club was right in the heart of the 
floods. We couldn’t just stand by. You couldn’t just train or play and forget 
about it.” Curle hopes the whole salutary experience can aid his side’s 
play-off ambitions. “Being close to people experiencing that degree of hardship 
has given my players an increased sense of responsibility and pride,” says the 
former Manchester City captain. “They feel a responsibility to produce 
performances this community can be proud of.”

Not that the squad escaped unscathed. Dan Hanford, a goalkeeper, found his BMW 
submerged by water and filled with slurry in Brunton Park’s car park. Meanwhile 
Mark Gillespie, another keeper, had to be rescued through an upstairs window 
and rowed to safety after the water level inside his house climbed half way up 
the stairs.

“In a funny kind of way the floods connected everyone,” says Mitchell who, 
once the waters finally receded, was horrified to see his precious pitch 
covered by dark sludge resembling “a horrible thick layer of chocolate icing”. 
After consultations with agronomists it quickly became apparent that it needed 
ploughing up and replacing at the worst possible time of year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F19%2Fcarlisle-united-floods-fa-cup-replay-yeovil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99cacaba8c86b710213be167016a7598d052a65c%2F0_0_1915_1074%2F1915.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carlisle%20pitch%20perfect%20and%20preparing%20for%20emotional%20return%20home%20after%20floods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F19%2Fcarlisle-united-floods-fa-cup-replay-yeovil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carlisle%20pitch%20perfect%20and%20preparing%20for%20emotional%20return%20home%20after%20floods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F19%2Fcarlisle-united-floods-fa-cup-replay-yeovil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99cacaba8c86b710213be167016a7598d052a65c%2F0_0_1915_1074%2F1915.jpg>
 The scene at Brunton Park after the flooding. Photograph: ITN 
“Essentially we’re growing a crop,” says Mitchell, pointing out that not only 
is January a far from ideal time for planting but that modern football pitches 
are based on sand rather than nutritious soil. Essentially he and his 
assistants, Matt Henry and Paul “Nobby” Butler, have been asked to create a 
beautiful oasis in the middle of a harsh desert winter.

“Pitch management’s a science and Dave’s brilliant at it,” says Kidd. “The new 
surface looks very good. Seeing it being relaid was another emotional moment; 
it’s exciting to see him start painting the lines on it.”

While its £150,000 costs have been covered by insurance, Carlisle could still 
do with the £144,000 live television broadcast fee a fourth-round tie with 
Everton would guarantee. At League Two level money is always tight and the 
generosity of those anxious to assist in getting them up and running again has 
eased the potential financial pain of recent weeks.

The local haulage firm Eddie Stobart dispatched a fleet of 22 trucks to 
transport the new playing surface from north Lincolnshire to Carlisle without 
charge. “The key to achieving our target of being ready for the York game was 
being able to move a significant amount of turf across the country, from 
Scunthorpe, within a very tight timescale and Eddie Stobart have been 
magnificent,” says Phil King, Carlisle’s marketing director. “It’s been another 
example of the generosity and desire to help which has come out of the 
adversity so many flooded people have faced.”

Now all that remains is for Mitchell to nurture that new pitch and protect it 
from Cumbria’s current arctic weather. “It always takes time to acclimatise 
after transplantation,” frets a man whose 19-year-old daughter has suggested he 
talk to the grass like a friend. “If it was talking to me, I know what it would 
say,” he says. It would tell me: ‘I was quite happy in Scunthorpe but I’m not 
feeling it here, Dave, so you’d better get your finger out’ … I think it would 
like having Everton play on it, though.”
 