
Bride-to-be Sophie Watters was inconsolable when she saw pictures of Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/carlisle> United’s submerged stadium on 
television – and not only because she’s a huge fan of the club.

Watters, 28, and her fiancé Richard Cakans, 38, were due to have their wedding 
reception at Brunton Park this Saturday. But those plans now lie in ruins 
thanks toStorm Desmond <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/storm-desmond>.


Storm Desmond: Osborne announces £50m flood fund – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2015/dec/09/storm-desmond-recovery-threatened-by-more-rain-live-updates>
Speaking as teams of volunteers helped clear debris from the devastated 
stadium on Wednesday, Watters said she was “gutted, devastated” that her big 
day had been ruined. “It was perfect. I’d planned it in four weeks so I could 
get back to my business and then this happens,” she said.


Watters and her fiancé still plan to marry on Saturday, although a replacement 
reception venue has been near impossible to find, with most places either hit 
by power cuts or already booked for Christmas parties.


In spite of it all, she said, the club had been great. “I’m here to help them 
because they’ve helped us,” Watters said, donning heavy duty gloves to help 
lift sodden objects from the stadium.


“I woke up on Sunday morning and my fiancé’s sister texted him to say it [the 
stadium] was under water,” she said. “Everything’s up the wall at the minute. 
We don’t have a clue what’s going to happen. Obviously the wedding is still 
going to go ahead but we’re still unsure about the venue.”

Dozens of volunteers helped club staff shift debris including televisions, 
washing machines, benches, tables and gym equipment as the full scale of the 
devastation inside the stadium became clear.

The club’s medical room lay in tatters when journalists were shown the ruin on 
Wednesday morning. In Carlisle’s home dressing room, sodden football kit was 
strewn across the muddy floor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcarlisle-united-community-rallies-round-flood-hit-football-club%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99cacaba8c86b710213be167016a7598d052a65c%2F0_0_1790_1074%2F1790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carlisle%20united%3A%20community%20rallies%20round%20flood-hit%20football%20club&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcarlisle-united-community-rallies-round-flood-hit-football-club%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carlisle%20united%3A%20community%20rallies%20round%20flood-hit%20football%20club&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcarlisle-united-community-rallies-round-flood-hit-football-club%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99cacaba8c86b710213be167016a7598d052a65c%2F0_0_1790_1074%2F1790.jpg>
 The extent of the flood water’s reach seen from above Brunton Park on Monday. 
Photograph: ITN 
In the stadium tunnel, whose walls were lined by an 8ft high silt mark, the 
pitch was still under standing flood water.

The volunteers were responding to a callout for help posted on Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> United’s Twitter account on 
Tuesday evening, hours after 15 of the club’s players took to the streets 
around the stadium to help clear houses in one of the worst-hit parts of the 
county. Large parts of Warwick Road, Carlisle’s main artery where the stadium 
is based, was under 8ft of water until late on Monday.

Lynne Carruthers, 53, a lifelong Carlisle fan, said she was motivated to help 
because she personally had escaped the worst of Storm Desmond. “I’m just here 
to support the Carlisle community, it’s a tragedy for the county. I couldn’t 
believe it had happened again. Just horrendous,” she said. “It’s not a very 
well-off club and I’ve been very lucky, that’s why I feel I need to do 
something.”

Lee Fearn, 30, the club’s fitness and conditioning coach, was heaving ruined 
equipment out of the stadium gym on Wednesday morning with the help of about 30 
volunteers.

The state of the stadium was “much worse” than he had expected, he said. 
“Pretty much everything from the gym is destroyed,” he said. “The last time it 
happened up here you see the pictures on television and newspapers but they 
disappear after a week or so.

“Maybe naively you see the water disappear and you don’t really think anything 
more of it, but you can just see the magnitude of the operation that’s going to 
have to take place now. It’s going to take months and months to repair.”

Fearn, who joined Carlisle two seasons ago, also felt the pain of the floods 
at home, when the house he shares with his girlfriend near the stadium was 
swamped.
He was getting updates on the situation at home throughout Saturday but it was 
only on returning to Cumbria from Sunday’s FA Cup win at Welling that the scale 
of the floods hit home.

“We’re just the same as everyone else in the area, everything’s ruined. It’s 
heartbreaking to see but there are families that are a lot worse off – families 
with young kids, coming up to Christmas, it’s the worst time of the year,” he 
said.
Fearn said he hoped the crisis would spur the club on this season like it did 
in 2005, when Carlisle were promoted out of the non-league conference in spite 
of a flood-hit year. They currently sit sixth in League Two, seven points 
behind the leaders.

“It’s been heartbreaking but at the same time we’ve found a bit of solidarity. 
If we can take that onto the pitch it might even, in a perverse way, benefit 
us,” he said.

Heavy rain is forecast to return to Cumbria later with up to 12 hours of 
rainfall and further flooding possible. The Environment Agency said up to 58mm 
(2.3in) of rain could fall on Wednesday evening into Thursday, potentially 
hampering the recovery of the areas worst hit at the weekend.

However, any flooding would not be of the same magnitude as that caused by 
Storm Desmond, which saw thousands of people evacuated from their homes and 
many more without power for days.

 