
Carlos Tevez scored a magnificent first-half goal, and later missed a penalty, 
asJuventus, the runaway Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> leaders, won 1-0 at home 
to mid-tableGenoa.

Juve’s third straight victory by the same scoreline put them on 67 points and 
they remain 14 points clear ofRoma, who also won 1-0 at lowly Cesena, with 10 
games left.

Despite the size of his team’s lead, the Juve coach, Massimiliano Allegri, 
remained cautious, telling Sky Sport Italia: “We haven’t won anything yet. 
We’ll celebrate when the time comes.”

Tevez scored when he collected a pass from Claudio Marchisio on the edge of 
the area in the 25th minute and ran past Andrea Bertolacci and Sebastian De 
Maio before rifling a shot past Mattia Perin from an acute angle that went in 
off the bar.

The Argentinian, the league’s top scorer with 16 goals, then missed a penalty 
just past the hour when Genoa’s substitute keeper, Eugenio Lamanna, who had 
replaced the injured Perin nine minutes earlier, made a terrific save.

Daniele De Rossi’s first-half strike from close range gave struggling Roma 
their first win in five games atCesena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cesena>.

“Today there was a battle to be won. We have 10 [games] left awaiting us,” the 
Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> midfielder Radja Nainggolan 
told reporters.

De Rossi, filling in as captain for the injured Francesco Totti, took 
advantage of José Holebas’s low cross in the 41st minute to score his second 
goal of the season.

Lazio remain one point behind Roma after a 2-0 win at home to Verona. A Felipe 
Anderson header and a powerful Antonio Candreva free-kick handedLazio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> a sixth straight victory.

Sampdoria stayed in the hunt for a spot in next season’s Europa League after 
defeating visitorsInternazionale 1-0 with a ferocious free-kick by Eder that 
went in off the post.

Sinisa Mihajlovic’s side are fourth on 48 points, one above Napoli who scored 
a last-gasp goal to salvage a 1-1 draw at home to relegation-threatenedAtalanta
, who had Alejandro Gómez sent off for a second yellow card.

The home side, despite playing for 35 minutes with an extra man, fell behind 
in the 72nd when Mauricio Pinilla took advantage of an Henrique blunder. The
Napoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> substitute Duvan Zapata 
headed in the equaliser one minute from time.

Sixth-placed Fiorentina drew 2-2 with Udinese thanks to Mario Gómez’s 
second-half double and they now have 46 points.

The bottom side, Parma, declared bankrupt last week, went down 2-0 at home to 
Torino, their 20th defeat in 26 games coming after their captain, Alessandro 
Lucarelli, was sent off in the 36th minute.

Empoli’s Riccardo Saponara struck a second-half double as they defeated 
Sassuolo 3-1 in a mid-table clash.
 