
When Carlisle’s players kicked off their FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> tie against Welling on Sunday 
lunchtime, it is fair to say that they had other things on their minds. With 
their home ground, Brunton Park, submerged under 4ft of water after the 
devastation of Storm Desmond, three players had arrived at Park View Road to 
the news that their cars had been washed away by the rising flood waters after 
leaving them parked outside the stadium earlier in the week.

“We’ll go back tonight and get as close to the training ground as possible,” 
said Keith Curle, theCarlisle <https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlisle> 
manager, after Charlie Wyke’s hat-trick helped seal their place in the third 
round. “If we haven’t got somewhere to train then we’ll find somewhere on the 
outskirts of town. We’ll be OK.”

Yet while the goalkeeper Dan Hanford – who joked that his Mercedes “was 
probably halfway down the M6” by now – the right back Alexander McQueen and the 
striker Troy Archibald-Henville will discover the fate of their cars soon 
enough, this was a feelgood story for a city in desperate need of something to 
cheerafter the worst floods in the area for 30 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/live/2015/dec/06/storm-desmond-uk-severe-flooding-and-extreme-weather-live-blog#block-56641aafe4b03756b2e5af1b>
.

More than 500 supporters who had already bought tickets were unable to make 
the trip to south east London so to see 550 of them in the away end was a 
remarkable effort. Their Welling counterparts did their best to show some 
solidarity by passing around charity buckets at half-time, with £522 raised for 
theCumbria Relief Fund 
<http://campaign.justgiving.com/charity/cumbriafoundation/cumbriafloodappeal2015>
.

“It’s very much appreciated,” said Curle afterwards. “It shows the hospitality 
that has been shown to us by Welling. Now is the time that the football club 
has to play its part as the hub of the community and do what we can to help.”

After the match Carlisle’s Twitter feed posted a message saying that the team 
would help with the flood relief efforts in their hometown.

The message, posted over a series of tweets said: “Just speaking to club 
captain @Dannyg31986 on the team bus. A lot of concern from the lads about all 
those affected by this weekend’s events up in Cumbria and the Borders. Every 
member of the squad has agreed that they want to help, if at all possible so, 
they have spoken to manager Keith Curle, and it has been agreed that we will 
all be available, after training on Tuesday to help out in any way possible. 
Clearing furniture, cleaning, tidying - anything that is needed and that will 
help. Contact us on media@carlisleunited.co.uk if you think the lads can help 
you with your situation.”
Carlisle United FC (@officialcufc) 
Just speaking to club captain @Dannyg31986 <https://twitter.com/Dannyg31986> 
on the team bus. A lot of concern from the lads about all those afffected by 
this weekend's ...
 <https://twitter.com/officialcufc/status/673543779891019776> December 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/officialcufc/status/673543779891019776> Carlisle United FC 
(@officialcufc) 
... events up in Cumbria and the Borders. Every member of the squad has agreed 
that they want to help, if at all possible ...
 <https://twitter.com/officialcufc/status/673543940193193985> December 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/officialcufc/status/673543940193193985> Carlisle United FC 
(@officialcufc) 
... so, they have spoken to manager Keith Curle, and it has been agreed that 
we will all be available, after training on Tuesday ...
 <https://twitter.com/officialcufc/status/673544133085032450> December 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/officialcufc/status/673544133085032450> Carlisle United FC 
(@officialcufc) 
... to help out in any way possible. Clearing furniture, cleaning, tidying - 
anything that is needed and that will help. Contact us ...
 <https://twitter.com/officialcufc/status/673544309627490305> December 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/officialcufc/status/673544309627490305> Carlisle United FC 
(@officialcufc) 
... on media@carlisleunited.co.uk if you think the lads can help you with your 
situation#oneteam <https://twitter.com/hashtag/oneteam?src=hash> #cufc 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/cufc?src=hash> #community 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/community?src=hash> #staypositive 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/staypositive?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/officialcufc/status/673544637882040321> December 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/officialcufc/status/673544637882040321> 
But any Welling hopes that their opponents may be distracted by events at home 
were immediately dispelled within 30 seconds, when Jabo Ibehre picked out 
Antony Sweeney and he headed just wide. It was to become a recurring theme.

Since beating Barwell in the previous round, Welling had taken only two points 
from their past four league games and sit perilously close to the relegation 
zone in the Conference. Appointed in April at the age of 30, the manager, Loui 
Fazakerley, could choose from a mix of promising youngsters on loan and 
non-league journeymen as his side looked to reach the third round for only the 
second time in their history.

Yet after a 900-mile round trip to Plymouth in the last round, Carlisle were 
in no mood to stand aside without a fight. Sweeney, who spent 13 years at 
Hartlepool before moving to Brunton Park last year, could have opened the 
scoring again inside three minutes but was denied by Mike McEntegart in the 
Welling goal.

Playing up the sizeable slope in the first half, the hosts played some decent 
football in midfield and the right-back Barney Williams looked a threat on the 
overlap. But the three-pronged attack of George Porter, Kieron St Aimie and 
Michael Bakare did not possess the necessary nous to find a way through a solid 
Carlisle defence.

Having failed to create a chance of any note, Welling’s attempt to play a 
patient possession game was their undoing in the 18th minute. Wyke was lurking 
on the shoulder of Ben Jefford and took his opportunity when the pass to the 
left-back was not hit firmly enough, holding off the defender and rounding the 
goalkeeper to give Carlisle the lead.

Welling had to wait until the 26th minute to muster a shot on goal and when it 
finally arrived, Bakare’s effort sailed into the park behind the stand. A 
one-goal deficit was still salvageable but the manner in which they conceded a 
second just before half-time took the wind out of Welling’s sails. Having 
failed to clear a corner, Ibehre’s shot hit Sweeney in the chest and cruelly 
deflected into the net.

Playing with the slope in the second half, Welling attempted to push more men 
forward but always left themselves vulnerable to a breakaway. Having seen his 
first effort from the spot saved by McEntegart following a foul on Ibehre, 
their captain, Danny Grainger, made no mistake second time around after Harry 
Osborne was shown a straight red card for bringing down Sweeney to make it 3-0 
just after the hour mark.

Two late tap-ins from the former Middlesbrough trainee Wyke rounded things off 
in style on his 23rd birthday to send Carlisle home with a third-round tie to 
look forward to.

“They are top scorers in League Two so we knew Carlisle would be a threat to 
us and they showed their quality at the right time,” admitted Fazakerley. “The 
first two goals were sloppy and you can’t afford to do that against teams like 
that.”
 