
The National Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre> is 
to take on Brexit as part of its new season, in a verbatim work compiled from 
interviews conducted in towns across the UK and woven together by the poet 
laureate, Carol Ann Duffy, and NT artistic director Rufus Norris.

My Country: A Work in Progress will draw on material collected by the National 
Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> through a listening project 
that began in June. An expansive archive of conversations around the EU 
referendum, recorded everywhere from Londonderry and Glasgow to Leicester and 
Merthyr Tydfil, will form the basis of the play.

Norris said the final shape of the show was still unknown and that material 
was still being being gathered. However, he stressed that considering the 
National Theatre usually programmed works at least two years in advance, “this 
is pretty much as quick as we can get something into the theatre. We don’t know 
how that’s going to grow and develop.”

The play will be staged not just in London but in each of the towns which 
participated in the listening project, and may even be taken toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> at the end of its UK run.

“One of the dangers in this situation is going to be ‘we need to tell the 
world what we think about this’ when one of the problems that was highlighted 
by the referendum was that people are really fed up of being told by other 
people what to think about this,” added Norris.

“So it really did feel that our first duty in this situation was to get out 
and give voice to people who have expressed the fact that they have no voice.”

Next year will see several big names return to the National Theatre. The full 
cast of the revival of Tony Kushner’s magical-realistic epic on the Aids 
pandemic, Angels in America, will include Nathan Lane,Denise Gough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/07/denise-gough-people-places-and-things-addiction-interview>
 and Russell Tovey, alongside the previously announced Andrew Garfield.

Norris said he had also finally “wooed” Olivia Colman back to the National to 
play one of two sisters in Lucy Kirkwood’s new play Mosquitoes, which will 
premiere at the Dorfman in 2017.

“One of the problems is when actors get that kind of success in television and 
film, before you know it you can have five or 10 years going by without them 
having been on the stage,” said Norris.

“So it is really important to get those people back in and to keep that side 
of their craft up and keep their love for this side of the whole ecology. So 
I’m totally thrilled she’ll be joining us.”

Imelda Staunton will also be appearing on the National Theatre stage next year 
in a revival of Stephen Sondheim’s musicalFollies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/20/musicals-we-love-stephen-sondheim-follies>
, directed by Dominic Cooke.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fcarol-ann-duffy-to-collaborate-in-brexit-inspired-national-theatre-production%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98313b51087c7e6fe473faea4c8dfbdcddc878cc%2F0_0_5300_3840%2F5300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carol%20Ann%20Duffy%20to%20collaborate%20in%20Brexit-inspired%20National%20Theatre%20production&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fcarol-ann-duffy-to-collaborate-in-brexit-inspired-national-theatre-production%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carol%20Ann%20Duffy%20to%20collaborate%20in%20Brexit-inspired%20National%20Theatre%20production&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fcarol-ann-duffy-to-collaborate-in-brexit-inspired-national-theatre-production%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98313b51087c7e6fe473faea4c8dfbdcddc878cc%2F0_0_5300_3840%2F5300.jpg>
 Us/Them by the Belgian company Bronks at Summerhall, Edinburgh, in 2016. 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Next year’s offerings will also include Us/Them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/07/us-them-edinburgh-festival-review-summerhall-beslan-seige>
, a hostage drama that was one of the most talked-about productions at this 
year’s Edinburgh fringe, and an experimental new play, Lost Without Words, 
which will take actors in their 70s and 80s, who have spent their lives in the 
theatre, and put them on stage in an improvised work without a script.

Norris said the play, which has been in development over the past two years, 
would include some of the most “well loved” actors, although he conceded that 
Ian McKellen was not among them.

“Some of the stuff I’ve seen has been very moving and hilarious. It’s an 
experimental way of using that theatre … I dare say it will change radically 
night by night but one thing’s for sure, it’s that those people will know how 
to enter through the French windows.”

As well as a theatrical experiment, Norris said the production would also 
prove interesting in terms of the audience it brought through the door.

“It’s funny we obsess all the time about getting a younger audience and trying 
to bring the average age down, but it’s great to be doing a project which will 
hopefully drive that in the opposite direction,’’ he said. “It would be great 
to have a show where the average age was 85.”
 