
Last year, I visited a regional theatre whose work – both on stage and off – I 
greatly admire. I had a conversation with the artistic director about the 
theatre’s determination to increase access and make it a place that serves 
everyone. Then I went into the theatre and opened the programme. There were 
pages of adverts for private schools.

If you’re someone who thinks that theatre is only for posh people, but are 
persuaded into the auditorium to see a show, surely those adverts signal that 
your initial instincts about the arts were right and it’s not for you after 
all? The arts, you might conclude, are indeed for that wealthiest, best 
educated and least ethnically diverse 8% of the population that is,as the 
Warwick commission discovered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/17/arts-and-culture-systematically-removed-from-uk-education-system>
, the arts’ most culturally active segment.
 Producer Sonia Friedman says the relationship between the commercial and 
subsidised sectors has become increasingly complex. Photograph: Jason Alden 
I’m not a complete fool; I appreciate that theatres are operating in testing 
financial times.Increasing earned income 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/opinion/2016/revealing-tale-of-two-theatres/> has 
become the mantra, and some venues have easier ways of doing it than others.
Soho theatre <http://www.sohotheatre.com/> has cannily transformed its fortunes 
through taking control of its bar. The theatre’s central London location – and 
the fact it has a producing model tied to creating a sort of year-long 
Edinburgh fringe – allows it to make the greatest financial and artistic 
capital.

The National and the Royal Shakespeare Company, as War Horse and Matilda 
prove, have the kind of funding that allows them to spend money on R&D and 
develop shows which have lengthy runs. As Sonia Friedman suggested in 
interviews following her top ranking inthe Stage’s annual Power 100 list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2017/jan/05/harry-potter-plays-fly-sonia-friedman-to-top-of-stage-100-power-list>
 – which measures industry influence – the relationship between the commercial 
and subsidised sectors has become increasingly entwined and complex. That’s not 
necessarily a bad thing. Commercial is not a dirty word, as long as the 
subsidised sector doesn’t see the possibility of West End and Broadway 
transfers as more alluring than serving the local community and prioritising an 
education department, and realises that, while there are financial returns to 
be made, there are alsosubstantial risks 
<http://www.whatsonstage.com/london-theatre/news/matt-trueman-self-producing-blog_37532.html>
.

The omens do not look rosy for public funding of the arts, and we may never 
see a return to the kind of levels we saw from the 1960s through to the 2007/8 
crash. Maybe we are at the end of an era? Funding is tight at the Arts Council 
England, lottery receipts are down and has a direct impact on Grants for the 
Arts, which is already under severe strain. Crucially for those outside London,
local authority funding has fallen by up to 50% in the years leading up to 
2014/15 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/oct/20/arts-council-england-releases-report-on-british-theatre>
. In what could be a sign of things to come elsewhere, shortly before Christmas 
theBirmingham council announced slashes to arts funding 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2017/mac-birmingham-hit-by-record-70-council-funding-cut/>
 that will leave Birmingham Rep£325,000 the poorer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/15/birmingham-arts-council-spending-cuts-symphony-orchestra>
 from 1 April. The cuts also mean the council’s MAC is losing £280,000 from its 
current grant of £400,000, constituting a 70% cut.

Related: No theatre is too big to fail | Lyn Gardner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jan/31/no-theatre-is-too-big-to-fail-arts-funding>

If replicated elsewhere by local authorities, such sweeping cuts raise 
questions about the longer term viability of some theatres. The Arts Council 
has always been clear that funding for national portfolio organisations 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/our-investment-2015-18/national-portfolio-organisations>
 is dependent on the financial viability of the organisation, although larger 
organisations and theatres have often been recipients of emergency funding to 
bail them out when the going gets tough. Well, the going is getting tough.

Earned income – Birmingham Rep has done so by 54% since 2010 – is increasingly 
the most widely touted way forward, but as the recentTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Report demonstrated, when it comes 
to philanthropy and sponsorship, large organisations with 50 or more permanent 
staff generate 78% of all unearned income, while those with fewer than 10 staff 
members generate a mere 1% of all unearned income. Arts organisations also have 
to aware of where exactly sponsorship and philanthropic funding came from – 
unless you are one of those who believe that, wherever the money comes from, it 
becomes good money when it goes into the arts, and is justified because it 
might help develop access or be used for education projects.

As the arts faces an increasingly uncertain funding future, the subsidised 
sector needs to ask itself some big questions. What is it that makes it 
different from the commercial sector?What is an arts organisation’s mission and 
purpose? <https://batterseaartscentreblog.com/2016/11/20/whose-culture-is-it/> 
Why does it exist beyond ensuring its own continued survival? How can theatres 
and arts organisations make themselves truly valued and be considered essential 
by becoming fully embedded in the local community, working with local 
authorities, universities, charities and other agencies in a mutually 
supportive and altruistic way, and slowly and painstakingly building 
deep-rooted relationships? I suspect that a long-term approach may ensure a 
theatre’s survival far better than turning that quick buck.
 