
The traditional January sales may have taken a hit from Black Friday but the 
football world still loves a good bargain.

With less than six months left on their contracts when 2017 is ushered in on 
Sunday, almost 70 Premier League first-team squad members will be free to 
discuss terms with clubs from overseas under Fifa’s rules on transfers. That 
means the likes of Arsenal’s Santi Cazorla, Yaya Touré ofManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity>, Manchester United’s 
Michael Carrick and Chelsea’s John Terry could all sign pre-contract agreements 
if they fancy a change of scenery.

A 2016 football moment to remember: Iceland light up Euro 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/2016-football-moment-to-remember-iceland-euro-2016>
Sam Allardyce faces a busy few months, with nine of his Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> squad including the 
goalkeeper Wayne Hennessey only having six months left on their contracts, 
while Stoke have the same number, albeit with one-year options on Glen Johnson, 
Charlie Adam, and Daniel Bachmann. Tottenham are the only club not to have a 
single player with an expiring contract.

Here’s a breakdown of which players at every Premier League club will be out 
of contract this summer.

Arsenal (3): Santi Cazorla, Per Mertesacker, Yaya Sanogo.

Bournemouth (2): Andrew Surman, Artur Boruc.

Burnley (3): George Boyd, Michael Kightly, Paul Robinson.

Chelsea (4): Mikel John Obi, Branislav Ivanovic, John Terry, Eduardo.

Crystal Palace (9): Joe Ledley, Wayne Hennessey, Martin Kelly, Mathieu 
Flamini, Fraizer Campbell, Zeki Fryers, Damien Delaney, Julian Speroni, Kwesi 
Appiah.

Everton (3): Arouna Koné, Tyias Browning, Conor McAleny.

Hull City (4): Shaun Maloney, Dusan Kuciak, Greg Luer, Brian Lenhihan.

Leicester (1): Marcin Wasilewski.

Liverpool (1): Alex Manninger.

Manchester City (6): Jesús Navas, Yaya Touré, Pablo Zabaleta, Gaël Clichy, 
Bacary Sagna, Willy Caballero

Manchester United (1): Michael Carrick.

Middlesbrough (3): Grant Leadbitter, Emilio Nsue, Dimitrios Konstantopoulos.

Southampton (3): Cuco Martina, Stuart Taylor, Lloyd Isgrove.

Stoke City (9): Glen Johnson (one-year option available), Ibrahim Afellay, 
Charlie Adam (one-year option available), Peter Crouch, Phil Bardsley, Stephen 
Ireland, Shay Given, Dionatan Teixeira, Daniel Bachmann (one-year option 
available).

Sunderland (5): Jan Kirchoff, Sebastian Larsson, Victor Anichebe, Steven 
Pienaar, John O’Shea.

Swansea (1): Gerhard Tremmel.

Tottenham (0).

West Bromwich Albion (6): Saido Berahino, Chris Brunt, Darren Fletcher 
(one-year option available), Jonas Olsson, Gareth McAuley, Jack Rose.

West Ham United (2):Adrián, Álvaro Arbeloa.

Watford (2): Mathias Ranagie, Rene Gilmartin.
 