
Celtic's impressive run is edging ever closer to returning tangible reward. 
Neil Lennon's team have gone 18 domestic matches without defeat. Their deserved 
victory at Hampden, albeit over an impressively enterprisingFalkirk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk> side, secured a League Cup final 
meeting with Kilmarnock on 18 March. Celtic's run aside, the fact that 
Kilmarnock have competed in five finals in this competition without winning a 
single one points towards the likely outcome.

An uplifting contest could not pass without controversy. Steven Pressley, the 
Falkirk manager, watched the second period from the stand after complaining a 
little too vociferously as the teams left the field at half-time about the 
award of the penalty which led to Celtic's opening goal. In reality Darren Dods 
was guilty of something akin to a rugby tackle on Thomas Rogne.

"I haven't seen it again so I will not say it wasn't a penalty," Pressley 
said. "IÂ would just ask, would it have been given in the other penalty box? 
That's all I'll ask. I am not proud of what happened at half-time. I am a 
passionate manager and I have to keep my emotions in check. I was just 
disappointed with a decision that had a huge bearing on the game."

Neil Lennon, the Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> manager, 
was nonplussed about the affair. "I know Steven was complaining about the 
penalty but Thomas said Dods had his arms round him and he was impeded," he 
said.

Lennon was more interested in an earlier disallowed Gary Hooper strike for 
Celtic, on account of a non-existent offside. "It was onside. For me we had a 
good goal chalked off so I don't think they [Falkirk] can complain about the 
referee."

Such matters should not detract from an engaging semi-final. Pressley and his 
batch of promising young players are worthy of credit for their approach. Scott 
Brown sent Celtic in front after 27 minutes with a forceful spot-kick, at a 
time when the game was essentially even. Falkirk highlighted that with a fine 
equaliser, slotted home by Jay Fulton after a pass from the outstanding Karl 
Higginbotham.

Yet Celtic should have been back in front by the break. Rogne wasted a 
glorious opportunity from Brown's free-kick before James Forrest dallied 
sufficiently when through on Michael McGovern to allow the Falkirk goalkeeper 
to save. Fulton scooped over the bar six minutes into the second half but from 
there Lennon's men took a firm grip on proceedings. Rogne headed against the 
bar before Anthony Stokes sent the Premier League team back in front, with a 
sublime free-kick from 25 yards.

The Celtic goalkeeper Fraser Forster produced an excellent double save to deny 
Dods and Stewart Murdoch, emphasising why a third goal was needed to settle the 
tie. Stokes supplied it at close range after Hooper's cut-back.

Afterwards Lennon confirmed the Polish striker Pawel Brozek is on the verge of 
sealing a loan move to Celtic from Trabzonspor. Rangers had hoped to coax the 
28-year-old to Ibrox. "His record in Poland is excellent," said Lennon. "Things 
haven't gone his way in Turkey but he's got the European Championship coming 
up, in his come country, so he'll be very motivated to book a place in the 
Polish squad. What we know is he's a goalscorer. I know Rangers were interested 
but we have been tracking him for a long time."

The manager will not let anybody at his club talk about a domestic treble but 
there is a growing possibility of Celtic achieving it.
 