
Stuart Armstrong scored twice as Celtic moved 11 points clear at the top of 
the Ladbrokes Premiership with a comfortable 4-1 win overPartick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/partick> Thistle at Firhill.

The former Dundee United midfielder opened the scoring in the 39th minute to 
give an otherwise dull first half a notable end.

The champions came out flying at the start of the second half and notched two 
goals in a minute from Armstrong and the returning striker Leigh Griffiths and, 
although the Jags defender Liam Lindsay reduced the deficit with a header just 
after the hour, the substitute Callum McGregor restored the cushion for Brendan 
Rodgers’ side, who still have two games in hand over second-placed Rangers.

Patrick Roberts has no regrets about Celtic loan move from Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/patrick-roberts-manchester-city-celtic>
For a game that Celtic were odds-on to win, Rodgers made three changes to the 
side which started in the 1-1 Champions League draw with Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/manchester-city-celtic-champions-league-match-report>
 on Tuesday night.

The defender Cristian Gamboa, winger Gary Mackay-Steven and striker Leigh 
Griffiths came in for Jozo Simunovic, James Forrest and Moussa Dembélé, the 
last of whom started on the bench.

David Amoo and the midfielder Chris Erskine returned to the Thistle line-up at 
the expense of Ade Azeez and Ryan Edwards, who were among the substitutes.

Thistle also looked solid enough defensively in the early stages although in 
the 23rd minute the Jags keeper, Tomas Cerny, had to make a fine save from 
Griffiths’ low drive after Patrick Roberts had set him up with a cut-back.

Moments later the Scotland attacker drove wide from 25 yards with an effort 
which was as unconvincing as the visitors’ play.

Celtic reap reward of Moussa Dembélé’s rendezvous with Brendan Rodgers | David 
Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/06/celtic-moussa-dembele-brendan-rodgers-champions-league>
The Maryhill men were even less potent. Erskine’s angled drive from 16 yards 
in the 33rd minute flashed past Craig Gordon’s far post with no real chance of 
beating theCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> keeper before 
Cerny had to race outside his box to thwart Griffiths after he ran on to a Tom 
Rogic through-ball. However, it was Griffiths who became provider in the 39th 
minute when he got past the right-back Ziggy Gordon and drove the ball across 
the six-yard box and past Cerny for Armstrong to slam into the net for his 
fifth of the season.

Armstrong’s second four minutes after the restart was a finish of real quality 
as he accepted a free-kick from Griffiths before curling a left-footed shot 
from 25 yards past Cerny and into the far corner.

The visiting fans were still celebrating when Griffiths took a pass from 
Rogic, rolled the Thistle defender Adam Barton with some ease before lifting 
his shot high into the net.

When Lindsay, making his 50th appearance for Thistle, looped a header from a 
Sean Welsh free-kick over Gordon, a comeback was hinted at and the Celtic fans 
in the 7,609 crowd revealed some relief moments later when Welsh’s header from 
a Callum Booth free-kick which found the net was ruled offside.

As the Parkhead side reasserted themselves, Roberts fired over from close 
range, Cerny made a great save from Griffiths’ close-range drive and Lindsay 
blocked a drive from Dembélé, on for Roberts, for a corner which came to 
nothing.

In the 81st minute the left-back Emilio Izaguirre sat a cross up for McGregor, 
on for Rogic, to volley in the fourth and keep Celtic unbeaten in the league - 
they have dropped two points - and inexorably on their way to a sixth 
successive title.
 