
There was a glint in Nolito’s eye and grin on his face. “A turd,” he said. “A 
turdy turd”. It was the build up to Barcelona’s visit to Balaídos and theCelta 
Vigo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtavigo> forward was sitting in 
the sun at the club’s A Madroa training ground, a camera pointing his way. “If 
Messi, Neymar and Suárez are the MSN,” he was asked, “what does that make 
Aspas, Nolito and Orellana?” Going by the initials would have been bad enough – 
a, n and o spells anus in Spanish – but Nolito went further, before then 
adding: “OK, let’s just say we have a little something, we understand each 
other well and we try to score goals to help our team. [But] Messi, Suárez and 
Neymar are the best attackers in the world.”

The fact that he was asked at all underlined that Iago Aspas, Nolito and 
Fabián Orellana have more than a little something; together they’re one of the 
most exciting, dynamic forward lines in Spain. Going into the match, Celta were 
unbeaten, three wins and a draw from four, and around the same time theBarcelona
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> manager Luis Enrique warned 
that Nolito is impossible to stop on his day. Nolito was joking of course. But,
stillthe point remained: how could he, Orellana and Aspas compete with the men 
who scored 122 goals last season?

How about like this?

On Wednesday night, Barcelona were beaten for the first time in the league 
this season.Not just beaten, torn apart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/23/celta-vigo-barcelona-match-report>
. Nolito curled in a superb opening goal after 26 minutes, his fifth of the 
season. Four minutes later, Aspas was sent sprinting away from the halfway line 
and scooped the ball superbly over Marc-André Ter Stegen. And nine minutes into 
the second half Aspas had his second, clean through again. If the energy levels 
inevitably dropped, the advantage had been established, and although Neymar 
made it 3-1 with 11 minutes left, John Guidetti scored Celta’s fourth four 
minutes later, promoting Marca to lead on: “The turd team destroys Barcelona.”

Iago Aspas scores twice as Celta Vigo give Barcelona shock thrashing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/23/celta-vigo-barcelona-match-report>
It was, said the headline in AS “a bath”. Sport agreed, but it wasn’t water 
filling their tub. “A bath” – for the uninitiated – is a Spanish way of saying 
a drubbing, or a whitewash; a real beating. And Barcelona certainly took a 
beating at Balaídos.

This was the first time Barcelona had lost in the league for 16 matches and 
the first time they had conceded four in the league since 2008, yet it was also 
the third time they had conceded four goals this season and after just nine 
matches: against Sevilla in the European Super Cup, against Athletic Bilbao in 
the Spanish Super Cup, and last night. They had not conceded four or more three 
times in an entire season since the mad, crisis-ridden, post-Figo, Joan Gaspart 
days of 2000-01; now they had equalled that with more than 50 games to go. The 
squad is short, the fixture list tough and there is a sense of Barcelona just 
trying to make it to January in one piece, conserving as much energy as they 
can in the meantime. For now they have ceded the league leadership toReal 
Madrid, who defeated Athletic Bilbao 2-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/23/real-madrid-athletic-bilbao-la-liga-match-report>
 in a hugely enjoyable game at San Mamés.

It is true that things might have been different had Barcelona taken chances 
at key moments last night. Messi and Neymar both had opportunities at 0-0 when, 
briefly, it looked like they might have overcome the first, intense wave of 
pressure; Messi hit the post at 2-0, Celta immediately racing up the other end 
to score; and at 3-1 Munir El Haddadi had a chance too. Barcelona had 18 shots, 
as many as Celta and with more on target. Sergio Álvarez was superb in goal for 
the home side. But that does not really tell the story, not least because it 
was not the fact that Barcelona could not finish that was striking; it was that 
much of the time they could not even start.

It proved that Barcelona may have problems but, more importantly, showed just 
how good this performance by Celta was. The talk should not be about Barcelona 
– although it always is, of course – but about their opponents. This, after 
all, was no one off: Madrid are top ofLa Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>, but it is Celta who are 
second, level with them on points.

There is something different about Celta, something good. “We went into it 
head first,” Nolito said. They always do: as Santiago Segurola put it on Onda 
Cero radio on Wednesday night: “If there’s an ‘author’s team’ in Spain now, it 
is probably Celta”, built according to their manager Eduardo Berizzo’s belief 
in a particular way of playing and his players’ willingness to put that into 
practice. “We enjoy playing like this,” Nolito said.

Barcelona did not; the tables were turned. “Celta were Barça,” ran the 
headline in El Mundo and afterwards Javier Mascherano admitted: “they played 
better than us, that’s the worrying thing.” From Andrés Iniesta to Sergio 
Busquets to Sergi Roberto, his team-mates agreed. Barcelona had been beaten; 
they had also been impressed. “If I have to lose, let it be against a team that 
plays like Celta,” Enrique said. “We’ve honoured football,” Berizzo said.

Before the game, Enrique had warned that if his side were not ready, Celta 
would fly right past them at “200km/h. They’ll steamroller us.” He was right.

After six minutes, Gerard Piqué slid in to make a key interception inside his 
penalty area. The pattern had been set early, Barcelona’s players already 
breathing hard, pushed back, denied time and space. Augusto Fernández had 
already sent Nolito running at them twice with two superb diagonal balls to the 
left, each struck on the bounce. Every time a Barcelona player looked up, there 
was a Celta player running towards them; every time a Barcelona man paused, 
there was a Celta player running away from them. They were coming from 
everywhere, the left particularly. Barcelona couldn’t stop them.

“Barcelona were like a baby deer in the middle of the motorway,” wrote Santi 
Giménez in AS. “They saw the headlights, but paralysed by fear, instead of 
running, they stood there. Celta were the lorry, Barcelona became deer puree.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fla-liga-celta-vigo-barcelona-attacking-trio-msn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443110446052%2F72ffddb5-a909-4e1d-ae95-f034e89659fb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celta%20Vigo%20cut%20Barcelona%20off%20at%20source%20as%20their%20attacking%20trio%20outshine%20MSN%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fla-liga-celta-vigo-barcelona-attacking-trio-msn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celta%20Vigo%20cut%20Barcelona%20off%20at%20source%20as%20their%20attacking%20trio%20outshine%20MSN%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F24%2Fla-liga-celta-vigo-barcelona-attacking-trio-msn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443110446052%2F72ffddb5-a909-4e1d-ae95-f034e89659fb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Barcelona’s front three of Lionel Messi, Luis Suárez and Neymar were never 
allowed to get going at Celta Vigo. Photograph: Lavandeira Jr/EPA 
Barcelona could not get going. The talk is often of a team struggling to find 
the final pass; Barcelona could not find thefirst. Berizzo, a disciple of 
Marcelo Bielsa who he first worked under aged 14, pushes his team high up the 
pitch and at great speed; the ball moves quickly, the players too. Barcelona 
could rarely escape the pressure, and were swiftly suffocated. That pressure is 
led by Orellana, Aspas and Nolito – Celta’s front three won the ball back 25 
times to Barcelona’s eight. And all over the pitch, Celta bettered Barcelona’s 
players, singling them out in one-on-ones.

Mostly, Celta won those battles. Often in key positions too. The pressure was 
so quick and coordinated that Barcelona struggled to even begin moves. When 
Celta had the ball, Celta looked dangerous; when Barcelona had the ball, Celta 
looked dangerous too. The second goal came with pressure applied to Piqué, 
alone and unprotected on the halfway line, his exits barred. He was robbed and 
Aspas was away. The third came from a Barcelona corner, Aspas dinking the ball 
over Dani Alves and running through once more; two goals coming after runs of 
almost 50m apiece.

It was a huge win for Celta and for Aspas this was especially significant. 
Born in Moaña, he joined Celta aged eight, scored the goal that rescued them 
from relegation to the third tier and the 23 goals that brought them back to 
the top tier the following year. He was easily their most important player in 
the first division too, scoring and assisting more than anyone else.

Aspas is a Celta fan who says that never mind playing for fierce rivals 
Deportivo de La Coruña he would not even have a girlfriend from A Coruña – 
although that might be because no self-respecting girl from there would go out 
with a Celta player. Even when he left them for Liverpool in 2013, it was 
reasonably good for Celta: however much they missed him, and they did, his move 
allowed Celta to sign Nolito. But it was not good for him. He played just 378 
minutes at Anfield and last year at Sevilla, he was joint top scorer in the 
Copa del Rey but rarely played in La Liga, scoring just twice. Things did not 
go well with Unai Emery; on one occasion, Canal Plus’ cameras caught Fernando 
Navarro desperately clamping a hand over his mouth as he ranted about his 
manager, standing just a few metres away.

How different he looked last night standing on the advertising boards, arms 
stretched wide, back where he belongs. “We’re going to enjoy this,” Aspas said 
after the game. “I came home to be happy, to have playing time, and to be with 
my people. The reality is that I didn’t play much and there wasn’t much I could 
do: I had Suárez and Sturridge ahead of me.” He had Suárez ahead of him here 
too. And Neymar, and Messi. But on Wednesday night it did not matter because it 
was then that he provided a different answer to the question. “If Messi, Suárez 
and Neymar are the MSN, what does that make Aspas, Nolito and Orellana?”

Better.

Talking points

• On Wednesday morning Marca welcomed “the league as we like it.” Atlético 
were top having beaten Getafe on Tuesday night and on Wednesday, Barcelona went 
to Vigo and Real Madrid to Bilbao. Here was one of those rarejornadas when both 
the big two were going to grounds where dropping points was plausible, maybe 
even probable. Rarer still, their games overlapped, with Barcelona starting at 
8pm and Madrid at 9pm – which was a bit daft as it prevented people watching 
both games in full. But it did at least help to create a sense of this being a 
match day in which all the games were interconnected, a sense of the league 
being a collective occasion rather than a load of random games. Better still, 
there were four teams who could end the round of games top of the table: 
Atlético, Barcelona, Madrid, and Celta.

In the end, it was Real Madrid. Up in Bilbao, it was football the way it is 
supposed to be: raining. In San Mamés. Two teams going at each other. “We 
passed the test with a good grade,” Rafa Benítez said after Madrid’s first 
really difficult fixture of the season, “we come through this stronger.” 
Benítez also said Madrid were “two-faced”: impressive in the first half, they 
were resilient in the second, winning 2-1 with goals from Karim Benzema – the 
first after a ludicrous mistake from Mikel San José. This was fun. Oh, and Luka 
Modric was class.

• High in the south stand at the Vicente Calderón is the away section. On 
Tuesday night, for the “other” Madrid derby between Atlético and Getafe, there 
was no one in it. Not one person. Atlético won 2-0. Griezmann scored twice.

• Real Sociedad’s players posed in the dressing room, all smiles and thumbs 
up. At the front was Imanol Agirretxe, holding the match ball after his 
hat-trick defeated Granada 3-0, giving la Real their first win of the season 
and taking them up to 11th. It also reduced the pressure on David Moyes, whose 
position was looking increasing precarious. Agirretxe played ahead of the big 
summer signing Jonathas for the second game in a row. He scored in both. “We 
needed a game like this,” he said. Next up: the Basque derby on Sunday night.

• The crisis deepens. Valencia lost again. And it was worse than ever. There 
was no Alvaro Negredo, no Paco Alcácer, no Sofiane Feghouli, no Pablo Piatti, 
no Dani Parejo, no Shkodran Mustafi and no André Gomes in the starting XI. 
Pretty much no football, either.

• You couldn’t make it up. At last, 71 minutes into their fifth game of the 
season, the only team in Spain’s top three divisions and the only team in 
Europe’s top leagues without a goal finally scored when Málaga’s Tissone buried 
a superb diving header past the goalkeeper and into the back of the net. There 
was just one tiny flaw: it was his own goalkeeper he beat. Málaga still haven’t 
won and still haven’t scored. They’re second bottom, which probably isn’t a 
huge surprise when you look at the way their assets have been sold off this 
summer. “I’ve already said what had to be said,” Javi Gracia insisted, 
referring to his very public complaints when Sergi Darder was sold. “Now, I 
have to be conciliatory. I’m still optimistic.”

• Five weeks into the season the team at the bottom are ... Sevilla. The 
Europa League champions were beaten again, 2-0 at Las Palmas this time. It was 
Las Palmas’ first win; Sevilla still don’t have any. Not domestically, anyway: 
they did of course win their first Champions League match. “I don’t know what’s 
happening,” Vitolo admitted. “If you look at the players we have got, there’s a 
good team here but we’re just not finding a way of being a compact team.” Emery 
has told his players not to look at the league table, but Vitolo described this 
weekend’s meeting with Rayo as a “final” already.

• It’s not looking good for Andalucía. Last season Córdoba and Almería were 
relegated. Right now, Sevilla, Malaga and Granada are in the bottom three. Stay 
like that (which it surely won’t) and only Betis would be left. 

Results: Atlético Madrid 2 - 0 Getafe, Espanyol 1 - 0 Valencia, Granada 0 - 3 
Real Sociedad, Celta Vigo 4 - 1 Barcelona, Levante 2 - 2 Eibar, Rayo Vallecano 
2 - 1 Sporting Gijón, Athletic 1 - 2 Real Madrid, Las Palmas 2 - 0 Sevilla, 
Málaga 0 - 1 Villarreal

To be played: Real Betis v Deportivo
 