
Mikael Lustig is not expecting a European hangover when Celtic travel to St 
Johnstone for their lunchtime kick-off on Sunday. The Hoopsdrew 1-1 with 
Fenerbahce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/10/celtic-fenerbahce-europa-league-match-report>
 in Istanbul on Thursday night to finish their Europa League campaign at the 
bottom of Group A.

Ronny Deila’s men stayed overnight in Turkey before travelling back to Glasgow 
on Friday afternoon to prepare for the trip to Perth, where they look to resume 
their quest to win their fifth successive Premiership title.

Lustig, standing in as Celtic captain in the absence of the injured Scott 
Brown, is relaxed about getting back into domestic action following another 
European foray, pointing to the fact that the league leaders have won every one 
of the nine matches that followed a European tie this season, includinga 3-1 
win over Saints at Parkhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/29/celtic-st-johnstone-premier-league-match-report>
 in August.

“We have done really well this season when returning to domestic football. I 
think we have won in every game after a European game,” said the defender. “So 
we will try to recharge the batteries and get a good performance on Sunday.”

Lustig will take positives from the draws away to Fenerbahce and third-placed 
Ajax into next season. However, the full-back concedesCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> were not good enough over the 
course of a campaign where Deila again spoke of “small details” being the 
difference between winning and losing after the game at the Sukru Saracoglu 
stadium.

“It was a tough place to go to, said Lustig. ”But we got one point in Istanbul 
and as a team it builds confidence to know that we can go away from home. “We 
did it against Ajax and in Istanbul, so we know that we are capable of taking 
points away from home so that is probably the positive thing about the campaign.

“But it was not good enough. Before we started this group we thought that we 
should take six points against Molde and if we do that we are through. “But we 
weren’t good enough and the only positive thing is that we went away to Ajax 
and Fenerbahce and took points.”
 