
Celtic’s 1-0 home win over Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> set a record for Brendan 
Rodgers but the Hoops manager quickly passed the praise on to his players.

Leigh Griffiths’s strike after 36 minutes gave the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> leaders a deserved 
victory and ensured that Rodgers has now had the best domestic start of any 
manager, with his side unbeaten in 19 fixtures.

The reigning champions moved 11 points clear of second-placed Rangers with two 
games in hand but Rodgers, who has alreadywon the Betfred Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/aberdeen-celtic-scottish-league-cup-final-report>
 in his first season in charge, was keen to play down his part.

He said: “It is very nice, it is a great mark of the players’ concentration, 
how relentless they have been to keep going. The point I make to them is very 
simple. When you are winning, the attitude is very simple, work like you are 
losing and keep working and be relentless. If you are going to succeed you have 
to have drive and desire. You need many qualities to keep winning but the 
biggest one is that drive and determination and hunger, and we show that in 
bucket-loads.”

Celtic reap reward of Moussa Dembélé’s rendezvous with Brendan Rodgers | David 
Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/06/celtic-moussa-dembele-brendan-rodgers-champions-league>
Griffiths praised his strike partner, Moussa Dembélé, for setting him up for 
his 11th goal of the season. Rodgers usually prefers to play one or the other 
as a lone striker but paired them both against Hamilton, and after the Hoops 
huffed and puffed for the first 36 minutes the France Under-21 forward raced 
clear before sliding the ball across for the Scotland striker to knock into the 
net.

Griffiths said: “We were trying to link up as much as we could and I can’t 
thank the big man enough for his very unselfish act running through on goal.

“I was speaking to Browny [captain Scott Brown] at the hotel and said I 
thought one of us was going to run through and square it for the other and 
thankfully the big man has put it on a plate for me and I have tucked it away. 
It is always nice to get three points and a clean sheet and we keep getting 
results, and that is the most important thing at this time of the season.”

The Hamilton manager, Martin Canning, took some positives from the game. “I 
thought the boys were excellent, thought the work-rate was different class,” he 
said. “They did what we asked them to do and the shape was good. You have to 
concentrate for 90 minutes which I thought we did, and we hoped we could stay 
in the game long enough to make the last 10 minutes uncomfortable forCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>. I thought towards the end we put 
them under a bit of pressure and had a couple of half-opportunities that we 
could have nicked something with.”
 