
Celtic have told fans who disrupted the minute’s silence to commemorate 
Remembrance Sunday beforethe 4-1 win over Ross County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/08/celtioc-ross-county-match-report>
 they have “embarrassed the club” and are “not welcome” at games in the future.

It was a small minority of travelling fans in a crowd of 6,042 who made 
themselves heard but there were audible boos from all around the stadium at the 
start as well as the conclusion of the match.

Leigh Griffiths double helps Celtic to easy victory at Ross County
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/08/celtioc-ross-county-match-report>
The club said in a statement: “The silence was impeccably observed by the 
overwhelming majority of our fans, as it always is. Clearly we are disappointed 
a handful of individuals have chosen to embarrass the club and our supporters 
in this way. These individuals are not welcome atCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>.”

Ronny Deila, the Celtic manager, also declared his disappointment in the 
action of the supporters. Deila said: “I am disappointed in it. It is something 
the club maybe say something about but personally it is disappointing.”

Asked if it surprised him, he said: “Yes, of course. I come from Norway and I 
don’t know too much about these things but it is something the club has to deal 
with.”

Celtic fans had plenty to cheer about during the game as a quick-fire double 
after the break from Leigh Griffiths following Tom Rogic’s first-half opener 
put the home side into a commanding lead. Tony Dingwall pulled a goal back for 
the hosts but Nir Bitton made it four to re-establish the champions’ six-point 
lead over Hearts at the top of the table.

Deila and his players had been heavily criticised after the 2-1 Europa League 
defeat to Norwegian side Molde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/05/celtic-molde-europa-league-match-report>
 at Celtic Park kept them at the bottom of Group A with qualification hopes 
damaged most likely beyond repair, and the former Stromsgodset manager said: 
“It is always important to bounce back.

“It is tough mentally to get over Thursday and be ready for the game on 
Sunday. We did that in a very good way and scored some nice goals and got three 
points and that is very good. The most pleasing thing is first of all we won, 
that is the most important thing, and that we scored four goals. In the end we 
controlled it, played the game out and that was the pleasing thing.”

Deila was pleased with the added desire he had asked his players to show. “I 
feel it was better,” he said. “Having said that, there is a lot of tired boys 
in that dressing room now. It will be good to have days for players to get some 
rest [during the international break] and get ready for the second stage of 
every competition.”

There was something of a surprise for Celtic fans when Carlton Cole – the 
31-year-old former West Ham strikerrecently signed by Deila as a free agent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/22/carlton-cole-signs-celtic-west-ham-united>
 – was on the bench, but the Celtic manager resisted the temptation to bring 
him on to make his debut.

“He hasn’t trained so much yet,” said Deila. “It was good to have him on the 
trip and in the dressing room so he can get to know even more how we do things 
on match day.”

The Ross County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosscounty> manager, Jim 
McIntyre, rued missed chances, with the striker Liam Boyce heading past the 
post and Martin Woods failing to get enough on his shot when the game was 
goalless.

He said: “I don’t think it was a 4-1, that’s for sure. There were pivotal 
moments in the game. Celtic showed their quality by punishing us when we made 
mistakes, but we had glaring opportunities in that match and we have got to be 
better in front of goal – it’s as simple as that – especially when you play the 
top sides.

“As disappointed as I am with goals conceded, I was pleased with what we have 
going forward, but the final bit was missing.”
 