
As regular readers of this column will know, my blue editing pencil hovers 
mainly over words which indeed have made it into the latest edition of Chambers 
or Collins, but which still give me lingering doubts as to whether they have 
matured to the point of being fair crossword fodder.

Doodling a week or so ago with the crossword in AN Other national paper (I 
almost wrote "broadsheet" but alas it is no more), I was stuck to complete an 
answer that was clearly *CJ**, where the clue had "poor placement" as the 
operational bit. Then I remembered that last year I, too, slightly against my 
better judgment had allowed in the word McJob (poorly paid employment in the 
fast food industry). The slope is slippery.

But on January 13 we had an Araucaria puzzle (No 23,350) that threw up the 
reverse problem: a word which is blatantly fair and in general usage, but 
which, on being challenged by a solver, I cannot find in any dictionary. The 
clue was: "Singer said Roman officer made a big score (6,9)". The answer: 
TREBLE CENTURIAN.

It would never have occurred to me to question Len Hutton or Brian Lara being 
described as treble centurians. Yet the word "centurian" does not appear at all 
in either Collins or Chambers. For "centurion" Collins only has the old Roman 
officer, but Collins also gives "a person who has scored or achieved a hundred 
in any way".

At this point, I assumed that at least the Oxford English Dictionary would 
come to my aid. There was a flicker of hope when I saw that it does allow that 
the word "centurian" exists, or at least existed. But the entry is both marked 
(Obs) and contains the unusual and slightly worrying notation (?). The word is 
defined only as "a hundred", ie a historical subdivision of a county, or the 
officer in charge of a hundred. The sole reference is from some obscure 
document of 1641, which read: "Those earls divided [each county] into 
centurians or hundreds; and in every hundred there was appointed a centurian or 
constable." Not much help there.

So are Araucaria and I wrong in thinking that those who write and talk about 
cricket know perfectly well that a centurian is someone who has scored a 
hundred runs and that a treble centurian is a cricketer of remarkable talent, 
concentration and patience? If we are right, then perhaps we should start a 
campaign to get the editors of the OED to bring their cricketing terms into 
line with common usage. Any evidence that you can provide will be useful 
ammunition in the cause.

__________

This uncomfortable experience of having no authority for an obviously fair 
word has happened to me once before. In September 1999 (Quick puzzle No 9,161) 
a solution called for a fish and a flower called WANDA. All true 
horticulturalists, of course, know that a wanda is a kind of purple primula. 
But it does not appear in the OED or any other standard dictionary. A campaign 
for the proper recognition of the wanda is under way, but these things take 
time.

__________

The news is now old, but came too late to include in last month's column. For 
those of you who may have missed it, Araucaria (John Graham) got an MBE in the 
New Year's honours list. It was a well-deserved and long overdue recognition of 
the pleasure that his puzzles have brought readers of, first, the Manchester 
Guardian and, then, the Guardian over the last 46 years.

Araucaria is not as prone as some compilers to go for the really long anagram, 
but here is one of his classics that must rank high on any list of all time 
greats:

"Poetic scene with chaste Lord Archer vegetating (3,3,8,12)"

Â· Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor.
 