
Bayern Munich’s hopes of finishing top of their Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group disappeared after 
they lost 3-2 atRostov, who recorded their first ever win in the competition.

The German champions had already qualified for the last 16 but will now finish 
second in Group D after Atlético Madrid’s victory overPSV Eindhoven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/psveindhoven> later on Wednesday evening 
ensured Diego Simeone’s side progress as pool winners.

Lionel Messi scores twice as Barcelona send Celtic crashing out of Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/celtic-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
Rostov, who are merely battling to finish third and get into the Europa 
League, fell behind when Douglas Costa swept home after 35 minutes but an 
excellent finish from the Russian side’s livewire forward Sardar Azmoun 
levelled the game and Dmitri Poloz’s penalty put the hosts ahead.

Bayern, whose defence was frequently exposed by Rostov’s pace on the break, 
equalised when Juan Bernat drove the ball into the roof of the net but 
Christian Noboa curled in a precise free-kick to earn Rostov a famous victory.

The defeat came four days after Bayern lost in the Bundesliga for the first 
time this season,1-0 at Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/borussia-dortmund-bayern-munich-bundesliga-match-report>
.

Kevin Gameiro and Antoine Griezmann gave Atlético a comfortable 2-0 win at 
home toPSV.

Manchester City through after David Silva earns draw at Mönchengladbach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/borussia-monchengladbach-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
Gameiro broke the deadlock in the 55th minute with an arrowed first-time 
finish and his fellow French striker partner clinched the Spanish side’s fifth 
win in five Champions League games with a near-post finish not long later. 
Simeone’s team are the only one in the competition with a 100% record in the 
group stages.

Besiktas hit back from three goals behind at half-time, scoring twice in the 
last 10 minutes, to force a 3-3 draw withBenfica in an enthralling Group B game.

The Portuguese champions raced to a 3-0 lead in 31 minutes, helped by a 
sublime effort from Nélson Semedo and a bizarre goal by Ljubomir Fejsa who 
scored after the ball hit the woodwork three times. Cenk Tosun pulledBesiktas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/besiktas> back into the game with a 
scissors kick, Ricardo Quaresma scored from the penalty spot seven minutes from 
time and Vincent Aboubakar, like Quaresma a former player for Benfica’s 
arch-rivals Porto, equalised in the 89th minute.

PSG and Lucas draw Arsenal’s sting to seize initiative in Group A
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/arsenal-psg-champions-league-match-report>
Napoli’s goalscoring problems surfaced again when they were held to a 0-0 
Champions League draw at home byDynamo Kyiv, their third Group B game in a row 
without a win.

Last year’s Serie A runners-up won 17 corners and had five shots on target 
compared to none for the Ukrainians but could not find a way past Artur Rudko. 
The result left Napoli level at the top of the group on eight points with the 
leadersBenfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica>, their opponents 
in their final group game. A draw would guarantee them a top two place as it 
would give them a better head-to-head record against the Portuguese champions. 
Besiktas have seven points and visit Kiev in their final game, where a win 
would send them through to the knockout phase.

Ludogorets Razgrad and Basel drew 0-0 in Group A, sending their fight for 
third placebehind PSG and Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/arsenal-psg-champions-league-match-report>
 to the final round of group matches. Basel looked the more dangerous of the 
two sides in Bulgaria but the Ludogorets goalkeeper Vladislav Stoyanov did his 
best to keep alive hopes of continuing in a European competition. Neither team 
has recorded a win so far in this year’s competition, Wednesday night’s 
stalemate following the 1-1 draw between the sides in Switzerland in September. 
In the final round of matches Basel host Arsenal while Ludogorets travel to 
Paris Saint-Germain.
 