
Borussia Dortmund <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> 
achieved their biggest European win, hammering the Polish champions Legia 
Warsaw 6-0 away from home to get off to the perfect start in their Champions 
League Group F campaign.

Mario Götze led the rout, opening the scoring and also assisting on two goals 
on a miserable night for the Poles that was marred by crowd trouble with home 
fans involved in fighting.

Dortmund dominated from the outset with Götze finishing off a cross from the 
youngster Ousmane Dembélé after seven minutes.

New Uefa president Aleksander Ceferin vows to review Champions League deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/slovenian-federation-leader-aleksander-ceferin-elected-uefa-president>
Fans of the first Polish team in 20 years to reach the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group stages, who packed 
the 28,000-seater stadium in Warsaw, quickly turned silent as Sokratis 
Papastathopoulos and Marc Bartra each scored in the next 10 minutes.

Dortmund visibly slowed the pace of their attacks in the second half but still 
effortlessly scored another three goals through Raphaël Guerreiro, Gonzalo 
Castro and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang.

The easiest of wins enabled Dortmund to take an early lead in the group on 
goal difference ahead of Real Madrid who beatSporting Lisbon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sporting-lisbon>.

In the stands a group of hooligans wearing balaclavas tried to break into the 
Dortmund sector from Legia’s side in the first half and ended up fighting and 
spraying gas at the security guards .

Juventus were held to a 0-0 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/juventus-sevilla-champions-league-match-report>
 by the three-time Europa League winnersSevilla in Italy, while Porto and 
Copenhagen also shared the spoils having drawn 1-1, with the former Cardiff 
City striker Andreas Cornelius scoring for the visitors.

Bayer Leverkusen, who led 2-0 after 15 minutes, could only draw 2-2 at home 
withCSKA Moscow in Tottenham’s group but Lyon had no such issues at home, 
recording a comfortable 3-0 success overDinamo Zagreb.

Leicester City made a dream start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/club-brugge-leicester-city-champions-league-group-g-match-report>
 in their first Champions League game by defeatingClub Brugge 3-0 in Belgium. 
Marc Albrighton broke the deadlock for Leicester before two set pieces from 
Riyad Mahrez either side of half-time, one free-kick and the other a penalty, 
ensured the club’s historic night will be remembered fondly.

Leicester City ease to victory over Club Brugge on Champions League debut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/club-brugge-leicester-city-champions-league-group-g-match-report>
It was a landmark night for Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-monaco-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
, too, as they broke an English club home attendance with 85,011 watching at 
Wembley, yet the majority were left disappointed asMonaco emerged with a 2-1 
win. Bernardo Silva and the substitute Thomas Lemar had put the French side two 
goals up. Toby Alderweireld headed in an Erik Lamela corner prior to the break 
but Spurs were unable to muster a leveller.

Sergio Agüero put his domestic suspension to one side to grab a hat-trick as 
Manchester City defeated Borussia Mönchengladbach 4-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-group-c-match-report>
 in their rearranged clash. Having seen the contestpostponed on Tuesday night 
due to heavy rain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/manchester-city-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-postponed>
 in the north-west, Agüero opened the scoring with a near-post finish before 
converting a penalty to make it 2-0 prior to half-time.

The holders Real Madrid were two minutes from losing at home against Sporting 
Lisbon in their opening group game before staging a late comeback to win 2-1. 
Bruno César’s second-half goal looked to have given the Portuguese side a 
memorable triumph at the Bernabéu, yet the former Sporting forward Cristiano 
Ronaldo scored a late leveller before Álvaro Morata snatched a winner four 
minutes into stoppage time.
 