
Matuidi outshines PSG’s foreign imports

Zlatan Ibrahimovic had one of his best knockout games, Ángel Di María 
decorated the occasion with the kind of dainty touches that will have left 
Manchester United’s supporters wondering where it all went wrong, Edinson 
Cavani took his opportunity to settlethe first leg in Paris Saint-Germain’s 
favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/16/paris-saint-germain-chelsea-champions-league-match-report>
 with aplomb, Lucas Moura caught the eye with his twinkle-toed surges and Marco 
Verratti was typically velvety in midfield. Yet in a team packed with star 
quality, one of the standout performances came from Blaise Matuidi, who never 
seems to go close to having a bad game, overwhelming Chelsea with his 
impressive blend of powerful running and clever passing. Matuidi has seen a lot 
of high-grade midfielders come and go during his five years at the Parc des 
Princes and he is a rare thing at PSG, a French player who has survived the 
influx from foreign leagues, rising to the challenge, feeding off the pressure 
and developing into one of the finest players in his position in Europe.

He joined from St Etienne when PSG were at the beginning of their 
Qatari-funded evolution into a European mega power, at a time when Lille, Lyon 
and Marseille were France’s three representatives in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>, and the dizzying extent 
of PSG’s expenditure on A-list talent means that it would not have been a 
surprise if opportunities for Matuidi had become more scarce, bearing in mind 
how Yohan Cabaye toiled for 18 months before leaving for Crystal Palace in 
search of regular starts. Adrien Rabiot, a product of the youth system, has 
also wondered if the grass would be greener elsewhere, yet Matuidi has 
flourished, forming a crucial part of an imposing midfield trio with Verratti 
and Thiago Motta. Others will grab the headlines but PSG’s hopes of 
successfully defending their 2-1 lead in the second leg at Stamford Bridge on 9 
March and reaching the last eight for the fourth consecutive season will be 
enhanced if Matuidi has another influential game.JS

Zenit fail to hit ground running

Perhaps it was understandable that Zenit St Petersburg were a shade off colour 
at the Estádio da Luz on Tuesday night,succumbing to a late goal from Jonas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/16/benfica-zenit-st-petersburg-champions-league-match-report>
 in their first competitive outing since 9 January. The Russians will need a 
little time to loosen their limbs, shake their heads clear and get rid of any 
lingering rust after their mid-season break and the challenge for André 
Villas-Boas is to ensure that his players are physically and mentally prepared 
for the second leg against Benfica in three weeks’ time, when they will attempt 
to overhaul a 1-0 deficit and reach their first Champions League quarter-final.

Zenit breezed through a weak group, winning five of their six matches, but 
they were stodgy against Benfica, bereft of ideas going forward, forced to play 
with 10 men when Domenico Criscito was sent off for a second booking and 
punished when Jonas headed in Nicolás Gaitán’s free-kick in stoppage time. They 
will need to play with greater ambition in the second leg. Without an away goal 
to take back to Russia, Zenit will be vulnerable to a sucker punch, however, 
and it is imperative that they find the right balance between defence and 
attack.Benfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> will be watching 
carefully, looking for signs of desperation, waiting for the perfect moment to 
pounce.JS

Gent freeze on their biggest night – but somehow keep tie alive

In terms of quality it was awful. In terms of entertainment it was brilliant. 
On the biggest night in the club’s modest history, it took 80 minutes for Gent 
to start playing against Wolfsburg, maybe whenthey believed the tie was out of 
sight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/17/gent-wolfsburg-champions-league-live>
. They coughed up numerous cheap balls in midfield and looked nervous for the 
opening hour. When Max Kruse tucked home the Bundesliga side’s third goal an 
hour in, and hit a post a couple of minutes later, it looked like the best Gent 
could hope for would be avoiding a cricket score. Yet the first Belgian side to 
reach the Champions League knockout stages rallied and made the most of some 
error-strewn defending from a Wolfsburg team bereft of confidence and with an 
uninspiring second-choice goalkeeper between the posts to keep the tie alive.


Dozens of scouts were at the Ghelamco Arena to cast an eye over the underdogs 
versus the underachievers but they were unlikely to take much away from it. 
Julian Draxler, scorer of Wolfsburg’s first two goals (the first a delightful 
team move, the second a stupendous solo run ending with a nonchalant nutmeg and 
a lobbed finish) and previously said to have been on the radar of Arsenal among 
others, was the only first-rate performer.Wolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> will have felt disappointed 
despite scoring three away goals, but it would take another capitulation for 
them to be knocked out. On the basis of previous first leg results, they have a 
96.9% chance of progressing. On this evidence though, do not expect them to 
trouble any of the big teams.AS

Have we just seen Totti’s European swansong?

Maybe it is time to count ourselves fortunate. The Roma captain, Francesco 
Totti, in oversized shorts, ran out against Real Madrid for what could be his 
final Champions League swansong. The Italian, who has spent his entire 23-year 
career with theGiallorossi, ran on for the last three minutes of their 2-0 
defeat to Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/17/roma-real-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
. Totti is slowly readying himself for retirement, according to his wife, Ilary 
Blasi. “The time has come,” she said last month. “Francesco is going to be 40 
next year.”

Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> are not exactly 
in thegaláctico era anymore. Lucas Vázquez and Jesé came through the Madrid 
youth system, known asla fábrica, and full-back Dani Carvajal has been at the 
club since the age of 10, although all are light years away from going down in 
club history. How nice it would be, though, if a club the size of Madrid could 
be propped up by their own local hero again. Raúl, Guti and Iker Casillas, 
among others, celebrated after steering Madrid to endless silverware in recent 
years. Totti and Roma have shared some fun, too. The bond between Totti and 
Roma is charming and totally synchronous. For now, Totti is one of few one-club 
men left still standing and we should cherish him while we still can.BF

Further reading

 * Barney Ronay: Is Ibrahimovic’s brilliance a hindrance as well as a help to 
PSG? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/17/zlatan-ibrahimovic-psg-kung-fu-colossus>

 * Dominic Fifield: Di María fires PSG’s grand ambitions and panics Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/16/angel-di-maria-psg-chelsea-champions-league>

 * Chelsea’s Hiddink envious of squad options available to PSG  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/17/chelsea-guus-hiddink-paris-saint-germain-champions-league>

 * Marina Hyde: Aurier’s rant spewed insults but his impudence was exhilarating
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/17/serge-aurier-psg-laurent-blanc-zlatan-ibrahimovic>
 * Ronaldo: I rarely spoke to Giggs, Ferdinand and Scholes at Man Utd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/17/cristiano-ronaldo-rarely-spoke-to-giggs-ferdinand-scholes-manchester-united>
Stat time
Infostrada Sports (@InfostradaLive) 
Chances of reaching QF based on historic results:
97.7% - @RealMadrid <https://twitter.com/realmadrid>
96.9% - @VfL_Wolfsburg <https://twitter.com/VfL_Wolfsburg>#ucl 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ucl?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/700075416925683713> February 17, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/700075416925683713> 
Best images
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d0757654dd887f4c5def9e53de70f68223ba4d4%2F0_130_2416_1640%2F2416.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Matuidi%20shines%20for%20PSG%2C%20Totti's%20Roma%20farewell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Matuidi%20shines%20for%20PSG%2C%20Totti%27s%20Roma%20farewell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d0757654dd887f4c5def9e53de70f68223ba4d4%2F0_130_2416_1640%2F2416.jpg>
 Real Madrid’s Cristiano Ronaldo feels the pain against Roma. Photograph: 
BPI/Rex/Shutterstock  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F106c2d28956f5a7224fb984ed053140eb9fda7d1%2F0_0_2245_3500%2F2245.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Matuidi%20shines%20for%20PSG%2C%20Totti's%20Roma%20farewell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Matuidi%20shines%20for%20PSG%2C%20Totti%27s%20Roma%20farewell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F106c2d28956f5a7224fb984ed053140eb9fda7d1%2F0_0_2245_3500%2F2245.jpg>
 Ronaldo shows his head for heights against Roma at the Stadio Olimpico. 
Photograph: Tony Gentile/Reuters  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5636fecb66fa01d64fa477dde2f0eac6b266d1f%2F553_168_4375_2625%2F4375.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Matuidi%20shines%20for%20PSG%2C%20Totti's%20Roma%20farewell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Matuidi%20shines%20for%20PSG%2C%20Totti%27s%20Roma%20farewell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5636fecb66fa01d64fa477dde2f0eac6b266d1f%2F553_168_4375_2625%2F4375.jpg>
 Gent’s Kalifa Coulibaly scores his side’s second goal as Wolfsburg’s Dante 
tries to block the header at the Ghelamco Arena in Belgium. Photograph: Geert 
Vanden Wijngaert/AP  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfe2192c54b050746dd2f84229cf39370404ed05%2F869_0_1291_1936%2F1291.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Matuidi%20shines%20for%20PSG%2C%20Totti's%20Roma%20farewell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Matuidi%20shines%20for%20PSG%2C%20Totti%27s%20Roma%20farewell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfe2192c54b050746dd2f84229cf39370404ed05%2F869_0_1291_1936%2F1291.jpg>
 Edinson Cavani points to the sky after scoring the late winner for PSG against 
Chelsea at the Parc des Princes. Photograph: Franck Fife/AFP/Getty Images  <> 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86b3b43a489459bdae3b2fcbecdf3a8ca2192a77%2F0_0_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Matuidi%20shines%20for%20PSG%2C%20Totti's%20Roma%20farewell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Matuidi%20shines%20for%20PSG%2C%20Totti%27s%20Roma%20farewell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86b3b43a489459bdae3b2fcbecdf3a8ca2192a77%2F0_0_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Benfica’s Renato Sanches is outnumbered by Zenit St Petersburg players. 
Photograph: Jose Sena Goulao/EPA  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb479621ff8e57edb1e02fa1aeb192c97549e7e91%2F1264_0_1991_2986%2F1991.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Matuidi%20shines%20for%20PSG%2C%20Totti's%20Roma%20farewell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Matuidi%20shines%20for%20PSG%2C%20Totti%27s%20Roma%20farewell%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fchampions-league-review-matuidi-shines-for-psg-tottis-roma-farewell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb479621ff8e57edb1e02fa1aeb192c97549e7e91%2F1264_0_1991_2986%2F1991.jpg>
 A Benfica supporter during their Champions League match against Zenit in 
Lisbon. Photograph: Armando Franca/AP  