
Two goals from Robert Lewandowski ensured Bayern Munich progressed to the 
knockout phase of theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> as they came from a goal 
down to beatPSV Eindhoven 2-1 in their Group D match at the Philips Stadium.

Manchester City turn on style to stun Barcelona in Champions League victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/manchester-city-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
Lewandowski twice struck the woodwork before equalising from the penalty spot 
after a handball by Andrés Guardado and then steering home a superb 73rd-minute 
winner as Bayern advanced to nine points, second in the group standings with 
two rounds to play. The Polish international turned home a square ball from 
David Alaba to win the match, showing a deft touch and superb skill to steer 
the ball into the net. Alaba had made a defence-splitting run to set up the 
chance.

Santiago Arias had earlier reacted quickest to Manuel Neuer’s parry from a 
Davy Pröpper header to give PSV an early lead.

Atlético Madrid remain top of Group D after Antoine Griezmann’s two goals, one 
of which arrived in the 93rd minute, gave the Spanish side a 2-1 win against
Rostov that preserved their 100% record in the tournament. Griezmann joined 
Atlético’s top 10 scorers in European competition by putting the home side 
ahead in the 28th minute with an improvised volley. Sardar Azmoun levelled 
barely two minutes later, becoming the first player to score against Diego 
Simeone’s side in the competition this season. Atlético’s passage to the last 
16 was guaranteed nonetheless by Bayern Munich’s win at PSV but Griezmann beat 
the offside trap in the dying seconds to ensure the runners-up last season held 
on to their perfect record.

Arsenal’s fightback from two down at Ludogorets eases them into last 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/arsenal-ludogorets-razgrad-champions-league-match-report>
Paris Saint-Germain joined Arsenal in progressing from Group A and set up a 
mouth-watering head-to-head for top spot at the Emirates when Thomas Meunier 
volleyed a spectacular last-minute goal for a 2-1 win atBasel. PSG had taken 
the lead with a Blaise Matuidi goal two minutes before half-time butBasel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/basel> rattled the Ligue 1 champions when 
Luca Zuffi equalised out of the blue in the 76th minute. In a dramatic finale 
the Swiss champions had the midfielder Serey Die sent off for a second yellow 
card following a foul on Marco Verratti and could have snatched a win seconds 
before Meunier’s strike.

Benfica moved top of Group B, Eduardo Salvio earning a 1-0 win against Dynamo 
Kyiv from the penalty spot. Júnior Moraes had the chance to level from the spot 
but Ederson made the save.

Besiktas held visiting Napoli 1-1, Ricardo Quaresma’s 79th‑minute penalty 
giving the Turkish side the lead for just three minutes before Marek Hamsik 
struck.
 