
Robin van Persie and Nani endured frustrating debuts for Fenerbahce in a 
goalless first leg of their new club’s Champions League third-qualifying-round 
tie againstShakhtar Donetsk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shakhtardonetsk>. The two former 
Manchester United players had chances at opposite ends of the game but failed 
to convert as the Turkish side were held to a draw against the nine-times 
Ukrainian champions.

Nani’s chance came in the sixth minute when the Portuguese forward struck a 
low shot that was saved by the Shakhtar goalkeeper Andriy Pyatov. Van Persie, 
who was on as a 68th-minute substitute, had a great chance to give his side the 
aggregate lead two minutes from time, but the Dutchman was unable to find the 
telling connection with a volley.

Elsewhere, CSKA Moscow twice took the lead but on both occasions were quickly 
pegged back as they were held to a 2-2 draw at home toSparta Prague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/spartaprague>. Alan Dzagoev gave them a 
14th-minute lead but just a minute later the Nigerian striker Kehinde Fatai 
equalised.

Early in the second half Zoran Tosic calmly finished to regain the lead but 
four minutes later Ladislav Krejci scored to provide the Czech side with a 
valuable second away goal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fchampions-league-third-qualifying-round-first-leg-fenerbahce-shakhtar-donetsk-robin-van-persie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9f19879a90c176609a10345990669744730257c%2F0_62_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20roundup%3A%20Van%20Persie%20and%20Nani%20draw%20blank%20for%20Fenerbahce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fchampions-league-third-qualifying-round-first-leg-fenerbahce-shakhtar-donetsk-robin-van-persie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20roundup%3A%20Van%20Persie%20and%20Nani%20draw%20blank%20for%20Fenerbahce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fchampions-league-third-qualifying-round-first-leg-fenerbahce-shakhtar-donetsk-robin-van-persie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9f19879a90c176609a10345990669744730257c%2F0_62_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 CSKA Moscow’s Alan Dzagoev scores the opening goal in his side’s 2-2 draw with 
Sparta Prague. Photograph: Mikhail Japaridze/ITAR-TASS Photo/Corbis 
Monaco, who finished third in Ligue 1 last season, have a healthy advantage 
after three second-half goals gave them a 3-1 win away atYoung Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/young-boys-berne>. Mario Pasalic, the 
20-year-old Croatia midfielder on loan from Chelsea, rounded off the scoring 
after Layvin Kurzawa and Guido Carrillo had put their side 2-0 up.

Panathinaikos <https://www.theguardian.com/football/panathinaikos> were the 
only home side to win on the night, a 65th-minute penalty from Nikos Karelis 
completing a 2-1 comeback win after Club Brugge had taken an early lead.

Midtjylland, who won the Danish Superliga for the first time last season 
thanks to investmentfrom the Brentford owner Matthew Benham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/27/how-fc-midtjylland-analytical-route-champions-league-brentford-matthew-benham>
, face an uphill struggle to make the next qualifying round after they went 
down 2-1 at home to Apoel Nicosia. Tomas De Vincenti scored both goals for the 
Cypriot side but Jakob Poulsen scored three minutes from time to keep the home 
side’s hopes alive.

The Brazilian defender Vinícius scored in the 89th minute as Videoton held the 
Belarusian side Bate to a 1-1 draw in Hungary, whileDinamo Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dinamozagreb> were held to the same 
scoreline at home to Norway’s Molde.

Maccabi Tel-Aviv went down 2-1 to Plzen in Israel, after the Czech side took a 
two-goal lead in the first 21 minutes through Aidin Mahmutovic and Milan 
Tetrzela.

Finally, the Moldovan champions Milsami were undone at home by the Albanian 
Superliga title Skenderbeu. The visitors take a 2-0 advantage into the second 
leg after two goals from the Albania international forward Hamdi Salihi, his 
second coming from the spot in the 73rd minute.

Champions League third qualifying round, first leg 

CSKA Moscow <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cskamoscow> 2-2 Sparta Prague

Dinamo Zagreb 1-1 Molde

Fenerbahce 0-0 Shakhtar Donetsk

Maccabi Tel-Aviv 1-2 Plzen

FC Midtjylland 1-2 Apoel Nicosia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/apoel-nicosia>

Milsami 0-2 Skenderbeu

Panathinaikos 2-1 Club Brugge <https://www.theguardian.com/football/clubbrugge>

Videoton 1-1 Bate

Young Boys 1-3 Monaco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco>
 