
Despite Raul Meireles's fantastic finish, Benfica were the equals of Chelsea 
for much ofWednesday night's Champions League quarter-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/apr/04/chelsea-benfica-champions-league>
 and O Jogo highlighted the fine margins between victory and defeat.

"The road to glory is almost always parallel to the road of failure. In their 
tie withChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, Benfica almost 
always trod the middle of those two paths and eventually took the exit on the 
wrong side, the one of failure." Although the paper agrees with the Benfica 
coach, Jorge Jesus, that Benfica scored a "moral victory", it also points out 
that Benfica were responsible for "the failures that led to the English goal in 
the Stadium of Light, as well as the red card for Maxi Pereira in the match 
last night".

The paper wasn't happy with the referee's performance calling it "almost 
pornographic". Damir Skomina "particularly in the first half, tilted the match 
in favour of Chelsea … Obi Mikel, for example, must still be wondering how it 
was 79 minutes before he was booked". Diario de Noticias noted that Benfica 
"only surrendered to Meireles's bomb". The paper said Chelsea were made to 
"suffer until the very end by aBenfica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> who never stopped searching for 
the goal." Indeed Diario de Noticias doesn't hold much hope for Chelsea in the 
semi-finals: "Chelsea will now face Barcelona after a sweaty tie and won't have 
convinced the fans."

It's safe to say Marca is excited about Real Madrid's semi-final with Bayern 
Munich "Clásico of Europe" reads its headline, following the Spaniards' victory 
over Apoel Nicosia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/apr/04/real-madrid-apoel-nicosia-champions-league>
. Bayern and Real are, according to Marca, "two haughty teams who know they are 
superior - the elect, backed by a history available to very few. Bayern and 
Real are two giants ablaze when they come face-to-face."

The Bernabéu isn't the easiest destination when you're already 3-0 down from 
the first leg, and Phileleftheros tried to concentrate on the positives for 
Apoel "on a beautiful and wistful night". The Cypriots proved "that their 
presence here was anything but accidental … they left with a smile and a 
promise to return soon" as they scored two goals in defeat.
 