
Paris Saint-Germain v Chelsea

One win apiece from their knockout meetings in the last two seasons, this 
should be one of the hardest of the ties to predict. Yet if Chelsea’s poor 
domestic form is anything to go by then PSG will start as heavy favourites. 
Despite having Zlatan Ibrahimovic sent off at Stamford Bridge, Laurent Blanc’s 
sidetriumphed on away goals  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/11/chelsea-psg-champions-league-match-report>
at this stage of the competition last season courtesy of Thiago Silva’s late 
header and will take some stopping again.

Verdict: PSG to edge it.

Arsenal v Barcelona

All that hard work and you draw one of the greatest teams ever to grace a 
football pitch? Sounds about par for the course when it comes to Arsenal and 
the Champions League knockout stages. One straw to clutch at for Arsène Wenger 
could be that Barça are trying to become the first team to retain the trophy 
since the introduction of theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> format in the early 
1990s. But whether Lionel Messi and co will be weighed down by history appears 
unlikely.

Verdict: Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> to fall at 
this stage yet again.

Arsenal draw Barcelona and Chelsea face PSG in Champions League last 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/14/champions-league-draw-last-16-arsenal-barcelona-chelsea-psg>
Dynamo Kyiv v Manchester City

Any City fans already looking forward to the last eight after what appears a 
simple draw should remember their trip to the Ukrainian capital in 2011.A 2-0 
defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/mar/10/dynamo-kiev-manchester-city-match-report>
 in freezing conditions inspired by Andrey Shevchenko saw Roberto Mancini’s 
side knocked out the Uefa Cup despite winning the return leg. Things have moved 
on since then but Shevchenko’s old partner-in-crime Serhiy Rebrov has assembled 
a decent side who could cause City problems.

Verdict: City to scramble through.

Ghent v Wolfsburg

Not exactly the kind of tie TV executives will be salivating over but an 
interesting one nonetheless. Both sides are newcomers to this stage of the 
competition and will fancy their chances of going at least one round further. 
Belgian champions Ghent knocked out Lyon and Valencia to make it this far and 
have a solid team lacking in star names, while big-spenders Wolfsburg are 
slowly recovering from losing Kevin De Bruyne toManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> and should have enough to 
edge it.

Verdict: Wolfsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> to reach 
the quarter-finals.

Roma v Real Madrid

Remember when Real Madrid could never get past the last 16 of the Champions 
League? For six successive seasons they were eliminated at the first knockout 
stage and Roma fans will have fond memories of their exploits in 2008. A pair 
of 2-1 wins took Luciano Spalletti’s side through on that occasion, although 
repeating those heroics may be beyond the Italian side this time given their 
leaky defence thatwas hit for six by Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/barcelona-roma-champions-league-match-report>
 in the group stages.

Verdict: Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> to 
cruise through.

Juventus v Bayern Munich 

German sides traditionally don’t have the greatest record against their 
Italian counterparts and this meeting of old rivals looks like one of the ties 
of the round.Last year’s beaten finalists Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/06/barcelona-juventus-luis-suarez>
 have recovered from an uncharacteristically slow start to the season but 
showed their fallibility in the group stages, while Pep Guardiola will be 
desperate to win his first Champions League title for Bayern in what could be 
his last opportunity if all the rumours are to be believed.

Verdict: Bayern to edge it, but only just.

PSV Eindhoven v Atlético Madrid 

PSV used to be regulars at this stage of the competition and made it through 
the group stages at the expense of Manchester United. Yet any chance of the 
Dutch champions going any further appear on the slim side. Atlético have hauled 
themselves back into La Liga’s title race thanks to five successive victories 
and Diego Simeone’s side should have far too much to spare.

Verdict: Atlético Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> 
with plenty to spare.

Benfica v Zenit St Petersburg

These teams met at the same stage in 2012, with Benfica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> going through 4-3 on aggregate 
having lost the first leg away from home. It should be similarly close this 
time, even if André Villas-Boas’s Zenit were most impressive in qualifying. 
Home advantage in the second leg should work in their favour, although the 
Russian Premier League’s long winter break until the end of February could work 
against them.

Verdict: Zenit to make the last eight for the first time.
 