
Paul will be here shortly. In the meantime read below to familiarise yourself 
with the varied list of teams who will be in Uefa's Big Pot.

The quarter-finalists: AC Milan (Ita), Apoel Nicolsia (Cyp), Barcelona (Spa), 
Bayern Munich <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> (Ger), 
Benfica (Por), Chelsea (Eng), Marseille (Fra), Real Madrid (Spa).

And if you need something else to fill your time here's Daniel Taylor's take 
on the chances of the remaining eight teams:

In ordinary circumstances this would be the point when the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> is top-heavy with the 
usual suspects from England, Spain and Italy and the question for Chelsea is of 
whether they would rather avoid Premier League opposition when the alternative 
is probably a team from Serie A or La Liga.

These, however, are not ordinary circumstances given that, for the first time 
since the expansion of the Champions League 15 years ago, there will be 
representatives of seven nations involved in quarter-final draw in Nyon. Last 
year there were only five countries involved. Two years before that, it was 
four. In fact, there has been only one occasion since 1999 when there have been 
half a dozen different leagues involved.

Continue reading here … 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/mar/15/champions-league-quarter-finals-2012>

10.47am: Ah-ha, there he is! Rafa Benitez is in the Sky studio previewing 
today's draws. Of course he is! The man is like a politician on the hustings at 
the moment, popping up at everywhere from supermarket openings to NHS 
fundarisers, pressing the flesh, kissing babies and generally talking tactics 
for votes. Someone give the man a job, for crying out loud!

10.52am: Uefa are currently showing an epic trailer for the event that we are 
all gathered here to watch. This is a practice that Match of the Day, and the 
BBC generally, also delight in - showing you ads for something you're already 
watching. From what I can deduce, it's purpose is to show you how clever and 
powerful they are, and to irritate you. Stop it!

10.54am: Paul Breitner takes to the stage to particiapte in the draw and, 
inevitably, to swap chitchat with the presiding Uefa wonk. Breitner is asked 
which team has impressed him most so far this season: he namechecksApoel Nicosia
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/apoel-nicosia> and Barcelona.

10.57am: The Uefa wonk reminds us that this is an open draw, with no seeding 
and no country protection. That means tahtChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> can't meet any of the other 
English tea... oh.

10.58am: The first quarter-final line-up is: Apoel Nicosia v Real Madrid Tough 
one Jose!

10.59am: Nest up is Marseille v Bayern Munich.

11.00am: Benfica v Chelsea

11.01am: AC Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> v Barcelona

11.02am: The next step is to draw the possible semi-final match-ups.

11.03am: The winners of Bayern/Marseille will contest a semi-final against the 
winners of Apoel/Real.

11.03am: The winners of Benfica/Chelsea will play Milan or Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>. So the Barça-Real final is 
still on.

11.05am: So Chelsea will probably be happy enough with avoiding the big guns, 
but will surely also know thatBenfica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> are capable of beating them, 
having alraedy been of several sides to have outplayed Manchester United this 
season.

11.12am: Sky interview Chelsea chief Ron Gourlay, who says the following: 
"It's a good draw for us. It was important to get the away game first and build 
from there." He fobs off the question about a possible semi against Barcelona, 
aware that the chances of Chelsea's old guard reproducing the vigour they found 
against Napoli are slim.

11.14am: Gourlay is still talking. But yet to say anything interesting.

11.17am: Gourlay on AVB's sacking: "It was a very, very difficult decision. 
Andre brought many positives to the club but unfortuantely that just wasn't 
reflected in results and performances."
 