
Bristol City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> have appointed 
their former midfielder Lee Johnson as new head coach on a 
three-and-a-half-year contract.

Johnson has left the League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> club Barnsley with 
immediate effect to take up the vacant role at Ashton Gate.

The 34-year-old attended the Valley on Saturday to watch the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> club defeat fellow 
strugglers Charlton 1-0.

Johnson fills the void left by the former manager Steve Cotterill, who was 
sacked by the club last month. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/14/bristol-city-sack-manager-steve-cotterill>

“Lee is a very bright, intelligent young man who is highly motivated and very 
detailed in his approach. He’s well-known to the club; fans, stakeholders and 
staff,” said Bristol City’s chief operating officer Mark Ashton.

“He is one of the up and coming coaches in the country and having interviewed 
him, I had no hesitation in recommending to the board that Lee is the right fit 
for this football club.

“Lee also has the advantage of knowing Bristol City very well and will be able 
to fit seamlessly back into Ashton Gate.”

At the age of 31, Johnson became the youngest manager in the Football League 
when he was appointed Oldham Athletic manager in 2013. He guided the Latics 
away from the League One relegation zone before leaving to joinBarnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> just over 12 months ago.

During his time at Oakwell, Johnson helped Barnsley to a top-half finish in 
League One last season and currently leaves the Tykes just outside the play-off 
places.

Johnson made almost 200 appearances for Bristol City across six seasons, most 
of which came under now Cheltenham manager Gary Johnson, Johnson’s father.

The interim manager John Pemberton, who took charge of the Robins’ trip to 
Charlton on Saturday, will work alongside Johnson as the club’s new first-team 
coach.
 