
Basel missed the opportunity to take advantage of Paris Saint-Germain’s and 
Arsenal’s draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/psg-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 as the Swiss champions drew 1-1 againstLudogorets. Cafu’s goal on the 
counter-attack gave the Bulgarians a surprise lead on the stroke of half-time, 
but Renato Steffen levelled for the hosts 10 minutes from the end.

Bayern Munich opened their campaign with a one-sided victory in Group D as 
they brushed asideRostov 5-0 at home. Robert Lewandowski, from the penalty 
spot, and Thomas Müller put Bayern in the ascendency before the break and a 
second-half brace from Joshua Kimmich and a late Juan Bernat effort completed 
the rout. It means Bayern have now recorded 13th successive home victory in the 
competition.

Same old Arsenal, but Arsène Wenger’s team in transition earn a useful point | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/13/same-old-arsenal-but-arsene-wengers-team-in-transition-earn-a-useful-point>
“It was a good start to our Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> campaign,” Carlo 
Ancelotti, the Bayern manager, said. “It was difficult to score early on, we 
didn’t have many chances. We got there. At the moment, the team is in good 
condition, both physically and mentally.”

Bayern’s triumph puts them top of a tough-looking Group D, ahead of last 
season’s runners-upAtlético Madrid, who were 1-0 victors at PSV Eindhoven. Saúl 
Ñíguez’s acrobatic effort in the 43rd minute settled the contest in favour of 
Diego Simeone’s team, with PSV missing a controversially awarded penalty 
moments later as Jan Oblak superbly kept out Andrés Guardado’s spot-kick.

Napoli are the early front-runners in Group B after Arkadiusz Milik’s brace 
fired them to a 2-1 a comeback victory at 10-manDynamo Kyiv. Denys Garmash gave 
Dynamo a 26th-minute lead, but their hopes of earning a point after Milik’s 
first-half brace were all but ended when the midfielder Serhiy Sydorchuk was 
sent off in the 68th minute. The match betweenBenfica and Besiktas in Portugal 
finished 1-1 as Anderson Talisca’s brilliant stoppage‑time free-kick for the 
Turkish side cancelled out Franco Cervi’s early opener.
 