
Brighton moved up to second place in the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>, six points behind Burnley, 
after beatingReading 1-0 at the Amex Stadium thanks to the Manchester United 
loanee James Wilson’s first-half goal.

Aitor Karanka says he never wanted to leave Middlesbrough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/15/aitor-karanka-never-leave-middlesbrough>
Chris Hughton’s side, who have now kept five successive clean sheets and won 
five of their last six home games, held on against late pressure to secure 
their first league win overReading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> in 12 attempts.

Reading provided an early scare, with Hal Robson-Kanu shooting just wide after 
a move involving Matej Vydra and Yann Kermorgant, but Brighton were soon on the 
offensive. Anthony Knockaert fired into the side-netting after a surging run by 
Sam Baldock; the Israeli international midfielder Beram Kayal, recalled in 
place of Steve Sidwell, had a low free-kick saved; and Reading’s goalkeeper, 
Ali Al Habsi, blocked a low drive from Dale Stephens with his leg.

Wilson, restored to Brighton’s attack in place of Tomer Hemed, failed to get 
sufficient contact on a teasing ball across the six-yard box by Baldock but the 
England Under-21 international made no mistake after 25 minutes. Baldock 
outpaced the Reading captain, Paul McShane before setting up Wilson for a 
left-footed finish.

Brighton should have increased their lead just after the hour when Baldock set 
up Jamie Murphy, but the Scottish winger fired wide as Al Habsi narrowed the 
angle.

Phil Brown in frame after Neil Lennon leaves Bolton ‘by mutual consent’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/15/neil-lennon-leaves-bolton-wanderers>
Hull City slipped to fourth in the table after being held 1-1 at home by 
Nottingham Forest, for whom Paul Williams was in charge for the first time 
since being appointed manager following the sacking of Dougie Freedman.

Forest took a first-half lead through Gary Gardner’s long shot before Sone 
Aluko slid home a second-half equaliser for Hull, whose winless run in the 
league extended to four games.

Daryl Murphy celebrated his 33rd birthday by scoring his first goals for two 
months asIpswich Town continued their push for a play-off place with a 2-0 
victory overBlackburn Rovers. The Ipswich striker scored his first from the 
penalty spot in the 67th minute after Luke Chambers had been fouled and added 
the second three minutes before the end with a shot from 18 yards.
 