
BARCELONA v ATLÉTICO MADRID: Tuesday 7.45pm

■ Barcelona have won their past six games against Atlético – but their only 
previous European meeting ended in a2-1 aggregate defeat, in the 2013-14 
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> 
quarters.

■ Luis Enrique has won all 10 of his Champions League games at the Camp Nou as 
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> manager – 27 goals 
scored, five conceded.

■ Atlético have failed to score in their past 453 minutes of knockout football.

■ Luis Suárez, Neymar and Lionel Messi have scored 42 of Barcelona’s 51 
Champions League goals since last season – 82%.

■ Atlético’s Gabi has the second-highest attacking pass completion rate in 
this season’s competition.

BAYERN MUNICH v BENFICA: Tuesday 7.45pm

■ Bayern have knocked Benfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> 
outin each of their three European meetings (the European Cup in 1975-76 and 
1981-82, and the Uefa Cup in 1995-96). Each time, Bayern reached the final.

■ Benfica have lost all three of their away games against Bayern, conceding 13 
goals, an average of4.3 per game.

■ Bayern have scored the most goals in this season’s competition (25 in eight 
games), and have the highest possession (71.6%).

■ Robert Lewandowski has scored 10 in his past seven Champions League games at 
the Allianz Arena.

■ Nicolás Gaitán has been directly involved in all Benfica’s three goals in 
this season’s knockout stage.

PARIS SAINT-GERMAIN v MANCHESTER CITY: Wednesday 7.45pm,

■ The two sides’ only previous meeting was in December 2008, in the Uefa Cup 
group stages. It ended 0-0 at the Etihad.

■ Only once in six games has an English club beaten PSG at the Parc des 
Princes – José Mourinho’sChelsea in September 2004 (3-0).

■ Zlatan Ibrahimovic  – who got a hat-trick in the 4-1 win against Nice on 
Saturday – has scored in each of his past four Champions League games.

■ No team has scored more goals than Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> in the final 15 minutes 
of games in the competition this season (6).

■ Sergio Agüero (right) has scored 16 goals in his past 18 Champions League 
starts.

WOLFSBURG v REAL MADRID: Wednesday 7.45pm

■ Wolfsburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> have never faced 
Real in a competitive game – but their four encounters with Spanish clubs in 
European competition have produced17 goals, a rate of more than four per game.

■ Real are one of two clubs still unbeaten in the Champions League this 
season, the other being Barcelona. They now have seven clean sheets in their 
eight Champions League games this season, more than any other team.

■ Julian Draxler has been directly involved in three of Wolfsburg’s four goals 
in knockout stages.

■ Cristiano Ronaldo has scored more Champions League goals than anyone else, 
90, with 13 this season.

Statistics supplied by Opta
 