
Ajax were turfed out of the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> at the third qualifying 
round stage by Rapid Vienna, who scored three times in Amsterdam to win the 
second leg by the odd goal in five and advance 5-4 on aggregate.

The Austrian team led 2-0 at half-time thanks to goals from Robert Beric and 
Louis Schaub, but a youthfulAjax <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax>, 
with an average age of 21, were on level terms through Arkadiusz Milik and 
Nemanja Gudelj. Schaub scored 13 minutes from the end, however, to send Rapid 
into the play-off round where they could meet Manchester United.

Uefa dismisses Fenerbahce’s protest against Shakhtar Donetsk fielding Fred
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/04/uefa-dismiss-fenerbahce-protest-fred-shakhtar-donetsk-champions-league-qualifier>
Louis van Gaal’s team could also be paired with Monaco in Friday’s draw, after 
the Ligue 1 team had no problem in dismissingYoung Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/young-boys-berne>. Having won the away 
leg 3-1, Monaco scored four in 23 second half minutes at the Stade Louis II to 
inflict a 7-1 aggregate hammering on the Swiss. Ivan Cavaleiro broke the 
deadlock after 54 minutes, Lavyin Kurzawa scored the second 10 minutes later, 
while Anthony Martial and Stephan El Shaarawy added a goal each.

Dinamo Zagreb <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dinamozagreb> advanced by 
the skin of their teeth having taken a 3-0 lead away to Molde only to let it 
slip and rely on away goals to progress. Marko Pjaca, Arijan Ademi and Marko 
Rog put the Croatians in a commanding position, 4-1 up on aggregate, after 23 
minutes. However Etzaz Hussain pulled one back before the break and Mohamed 
Elyounoussi and Ola Kamara struck to level the tie. Molde had Vegard Forren 
sent off 18 minutes before the end, though, and could not find a winner.

Jasper Cillessen’s injury could impact on Manchester United’s De Gea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/29/ajax-jasper-cillessen-manchester-united-de-gea>
Apoel Nicosia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/apoel-nicosia> were also 
thankful for the away goals rule against FC Midtjylland. Leading 2-1 from the 
away leg, the Cypriots fell behind after only two minutes as Erik Sviatchenko 
put the visitors in front, while the Danish team were given another lifeline 
when Apoel’s Vincius was shown a red card half an hour in. Midtjylland, owned 
by Brentford’s Matthew Benham, could not find a second goal however and bowed 
out 2-2 on aggregate.
 