
Monaco’s Kamil Glik scored a fine goal in the fifth minute of stoppage time to 
salvage a 1-1 home draw withBayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayerleverkusen> and keep them top of 
Champions League Group E.

André Schürrle’s late equaliser denies Real Madrid in Dortmund thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/borussia-dortmund-real-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
Glik’s scorching strike from just outside the box to cancelled out Javier 
Hernández’s second-half opener for the German side. Monaco have four points 
from two games and lead Tottenham Hotspur,who won 1-0 at CSKA Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/tottenham-hotspur-cska-moscow-champions-league-match-report>
, by one point. Leverkusen have two points and CSKA one. “It’s probably the 
finest goal of my career,” said the Poland defender Glik. “I think it’s a 
deserved draw because neither side really dominated.”

Leicester City’s Group G counterparts FC Copenhagen earned their first win of 
the campaign after thrashing Club Brugge 4-0 thanks to an own goal from Stefano 
Denswil and strikes from Thomas Delaney, Federico Santander and Mathias 
Joergensen. It could have been 5-0 but Ludwig Augustinsson missed a second-half 
penalty.Leicester’s 1-0 win against Porto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/leicester-city-porto-champion-league-match-report>
, during whichRiyad Mahrez impressed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/27/riyad-mahrez-champions-league-leicester-porto>
, gave the Premier League champions their second win of the competition and
keeps them top of the group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague/table>.

Goals from Bryan Ruiz and Bas Dost earned Sporting Lisbon their first win of 
Group F, with a 2-0 win over Legia Warsaw. The Portuguese side lie a point 
behind Real Madrid and Borussia Dortmund, who played out athrilling 2-2 draw in 
Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/borussia-dortmund-real-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
.

Pep Guardiola tells Manchester City to ignore ‘little record’ at Celtic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-record-celtic-champions-league>
Juventus and Sevilla registered wins against Dinamo Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dinamozagreb> and Lyon in Group H 
respectively. Miralem Pjanic starred in the Croatian capital, opening the 
scoring before setting up Gonzalo Higuaín to give Massimiliano Allegri’s men a 
2-0 lead. Pjanic hobbled off just after the restart before Paulo Dybala’s 
30-yard stunner stretched their advantage. The Dinamo goalkeeper, Adrian 
Semper, fumbled Dani Alves’s late deflected effort into his own net as the 
Serie A champions ran out 4-0 winners.

Meanwhile, Wissam Ben Yedder’s second-half header was enough to give Sevilla a 
1-0 victory over Lyon. The Frenchman headed home from close range after Luciano 
Vietto nodded Steven N’Zonzi’s long ball back across goal. Lyon club will count 
themselves unlucky as they hit the woodwork twice, first when Nabil Fekir 
crashed an effort off the crossbar before Corentin Tolisso’s curling effort 
also hit the bar. Vietto missed the chance to put the game out of reach for
Sevilla <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> when he skied a penalty 
kick over the bar but the Europa League holders clung on to claim all three 
points.
 