
1 Athletic Bilbao

A club who still honour their cantera tradition of exclusively being comprised 
of Basque players, Ernesto Valverde’s side finished seven points clear of 
fifth-placed Sevilla last season. The sale of Fernando Llorente – once their 
talisman but who became a disruptive influence under the former coach Marcelo 
Bielsa – to Juventus in the summer of 2013 did not preventLos Leones from 
moving forward.

In the same way that Javi Martínez joining Bayern Munich galvanised the squad 
to reach the Europa League and Copa del Rey finals at the end of the 2012-13 
campaign, the eight-times La Liga champions have gone from strength to strength 
in the past 12 months, with the veteran forward Aritz Aduriz replacing 
Llorente’s goals, and the 21-year-old Iker Muniain pulling the strings in 
midfield.

Their absence from European competition last season enabled Bilbao, who have 
never been relegated from La Liga, to focus solely on domestic matters and on 
re-establishing themselves – in their new 53,000-capacity San Mamés stadium 
that is still under construction – as the “best of the rest” in Spanish 
football, behind Real Madrid and Barcelona.The sale of the midfielder Ander 
Herrera to Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/26/ander-herrera-signs-manchester-united>
 will have come as a blow, but it was one that was very much expected.

Bilbao last played a competitive fixture against an English side in March 2013,
with a 5-3 aggregate win eliminating Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/mar/15/athletic-bilbao-manchester-united-europa-league>
 in the last 16 of the Europa League.

2 Lille

René Girard’s side reached the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> play-offs after 
defeating the Swiss side Grasshoppers 3-1 on aggregate in the third qualifying 
round. Having last appeared in the group stages of the competition in 2012-13, 
the three-times Ligue 1 champions have, like many teams, been forced to feed 
off the scraps left by the cash-rich duopoly of Monaco and Paris Saint-Germain 
at France’s top table in recent times.

The sight of the former Chelsea forward Salomon Kalou will be familiar to 
Arsenal fans should the sides draw each other, and the Ivorian is joined in 
attack by Divock Origi, whose performances at the World Cup for Belgium earned
him a £10m move to Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/29/liverpool-complete-divock-origi-deal>
. Loaned back toLes Dogues (The Great Danes) for the duration of the 2014-15 
season, the 19-year-old holds the key to Lille’s chances of joining Europe’s 
elite in the Champions League proper.

Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> will also need to be at 
their most potent going forward should they face French opponents for the first 
time at this stage of the competition, with Nigeria’s standout World Cup 
performer Vincent Enyeama between the sticks for the club who last played a 
competitive match in England against Liverpool in the last 16 of the Europa 
League in March 2010, losing 3-1 on aggregate.

3 Copenhagen 

Having finished second to AaB in the Danish Superliga last season, Copenhagen 
overcame Dnipro to advance to the play-offs. The only potential opponents who 
have already begun their domestic campaign, Stale Solbakken’s side finished 
bottom of a group which included Real Madrid, Galatasaray and Juventus in last 
year’s competition.

A squad who include the former Southampton winger Steve De Ridder in their 
ranks might appear the least problematic of the five potential opponents for 
Arsenal but they have long-been a side who are greater than the sum of their 
parts.

Cardiff City’s £8m flop Andreas Cornelius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/13/andreas-cornelius-cost-transfer-cardiff-malky-mackay>
 returned to the 10-times Danish champions in January following a desperate six 
months in Wales. The 21-year-old striker scored 18 times in his first stint at 
the club and has hit the ground running once more in his second spell. A 
two-legged tie with English opponents for the first time since losing to 
Chelsea in the last 16 three years ago would represent an opportunity for 
Cornelius to prove his worth.

4 Standard Liège 

The Israeli coach Guy Luzon guided his side through the third qualifying 
round, knocking out Panathinaikos of Greece 2-1 on aggregate.Les Rouches, who 
finished second behind Anderlecht in the Belgian Pro League last campaign, made 
their solitary Champions League group stage appearance in the 2009-10 season.

The 10-times Belgian champions were drawn with Arsenal on that occasion, 
losing 3-2 at the Stade Maurice Dufrasne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/sep/16/champions-league-standard-liege-arsenal>
while going down 2-0 at the Emirates. They collected the Belgian Cup in 2011 
but have since failed to win domestic silverware.

Captained by Jelle Van Damme, who both at Southampton and then with Wolves 
failed to establish himself in the English game, Luzon moved to sign the former 
Celtic striker Tony Watt this summer. Remembered as the scourge of Barcelona 
following hismatch-winning strike against the Catalans in November 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/nov/07/celtic-barcelona-champions-league-report>
, Watt will be looking to create more Champions League shocks following a 
successful loan spell in Belgium with Lierse last season.

5 Besiktas 

An awkward trip to Istanbul to face Slaven Bilic’s Besiktas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/besiktas> is the final possible 
destination for Arsenal, after the 13-times Turkish champions comfortably beat 
a depleted Feyenoord 5-2 over two legs. Fresh from his £8m switch from Chelsea, 
Demba Ba scored a hat-trick at the Vodafone Arena on Wednesday to leave the 
Black Eagles on the brink of qualifying for the group stages of the Champions 
League for the sixth time in their history.

Fenerbahce and Galatasaray have dominated the Süper Lig in the past four 
seasons with two titles apiece but Besiktas have slowly been improving, 
finishing third last season. The Istanbul club, who failed to progress from a 
Europa League play-off 12 months ago, will not been overawed by the prospect of 
facing Premier League opponents having beaten Manchester United at Old Trafford 
in that last Champions League group stage appearance in 2009.
 