
PSG still searching for extra spark

Paris Saint-Germain once again demonstrated that they are not for away in 
their ongoing quest to climb to the summit of European football and once again 
they came up frustratingly short, losingnot because they were massively 
inferior to Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/03/real-madrid-paris-saint-germain-champions-league-match-report>
 but as a result of the kind of small details that make a telling difference at 
this level going against them. Laurent Blanc’s side were impressive for long 
stretches at the Bernabéu, creating several excellent chances and hitting the 
woodwork twice, but despite their best efforts they were still left to deal 
with that gnawing lack of professional fulfilment when the final whistle blew.

Something is still missing. PSG beat Barcelona 3-2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/30/paris-saint-germain-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
 when the eventual champions visited the Parc des Princes in the group stage 
last season, a win that in theory should have furnished them with more 
self-belief, and they looked poised to join the elite when they knocked Chelsea 
out in the last 16 with a performance of rare authority, elegance and maturity, 
classily battling against the odds to overcome Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s 
controversial red card in the first half, winning the tie despite playing 
almost 90 minutes of the second leg at Stamford Bridge with 10 men and twice 
finding themselves a goal down when time was running out.

Nacho goal gives Real Madrid win against PSG and place in last 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/03/real-madrid-paris-saint-germain-champions-league-match-report>
Had PSG’s moment arrived? Plenty of good judges suspected that it had. Yet PSG 
were weighed down by injuries and Ibrahimovic’s suspension when they faced 
Barcelona in the last eight and although Lionel Messi did not score in either 
leg, Neymarand Luis Suárez ran riot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/15/psg-barcelona-champions-league-quarter-final-match-report>
. Judging PSG on those matches would be unfair given the extent of their 
injuries, but it was possible to detect a pattern emerging. They were also 
comfortably beaten when they had visited Camp Nou in their final group match. 
PSG would have won the group if they had avoided defeat and they were on course 
to do so when Ibrahimovic gave them the lead in the 15th minute, yet they 
failed to press home their advantage and capitalise on Barcelona’s 
vulnerability. The way that the season panned out makes it easy to forget how 
out of sorts Barcelona were before Christmas.

Sure, Barcelona have better players than PSG and maybe that is all there is to 
the matter. Case closed, move along, nothing to see here. Yet PSG have been in 
control on more than one occasion against this calibre of opposition, only to 
let them wriggle free, as though this highly accomplished team suffers from a 
mental glitch that stops them making the most of their various gifts. It 
happened when they had Barcelona on the ropes in 2013, succumbing against a 
team that needed a wounded Lionel Messi to clamber unsteadily off the bench and 
set up the winning goal for Pedro Rodríguez, and it happenedwhen they 
squandered a 3-1 advantage against Chelsea in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/02/psg-chelsea-champions-league-match-report>
. The root cause could be anything from self-doubt to complacency to fear. It 
could be that they are still afflicted by self-consciousness, a desperation to 
prove to the established clubs that they belong in their company, a little like 
Manchester City. PSG know that greatness will not be achieved by repeatedly 
winning Ligue 1 against little or no competition. Something, perhaps, that PSG 
cannot control is timing their injuries. They can win the French league on 
autopilot, but their financial advantage lessens their domestic achievement and 
places extra pressure on their performances in Europe, making it a tricky 
balancing act for them to ensure that they are in peak condition when the 
knockout stage begins.

The other scenario is that they simply are not good enough. There is no need 
to overreach and say that a bottler gene is at the core of this team. Yet if 
PSG do have an obvious weakness against the best, perhaps it is that their 
strikers, Ibrahimovic and Edinson Cavani, are not ruthless enough in games 
where missed chances are invariably punished at the other end. Both are 
undoubtedly wonderful talents, but Ibrahimovic’s critics (yes, most of them are 
supporters of English clubs) have long pointed to his iffy record at the 
business end of the Champions League, while Cavani’s finishing can be flakey – 
Exhibit A here is when he rounded Courtois at Stamford Bridge last season and
sent his shot against the near post 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PHJsG8DWsNY> from, admittedly, a tight angle. 

Ibrahimovic shaped a clever early shot just wide against Madrid – you had to 
admire the improvisation and vision, but wide it went – and Cavani really 
should have scored when he was sent clear by Ángel Di María, only to take a 
poor first touch and mess up his attempted dink over Keylor Navas. Those misses 
were compounded by a woeful error from PSG’s goalkeeper, Kevin Trapp, who 
allowed Nacho to steer in the only goal after losing the flight of Toni Kroos’s 
deflected shot.

Football transfer rumours: Real Madrid's Cristiano Ronaldo to PSG for £100m?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/05/football-transfer-rumours-real-madrid-cristiano-ronaldo-psg-100m>
PSG’s 1-0 defeat means that they will probably finish second behind Madrid, 
which will probably make their task in the last 16 harder, and they should 
regard it as a wasted opportunity. Madrid have not been at the height of their 
powers and they are still … let’s be kind and say that Cristiano Ronaldo is 
still warming to life under Rafael Benítez. The Spanish giants were missing key 
players when they travelled to Paris a fortnight ago and instead of taking the 
game to them, PSG seemed almost overawed by the thought of beating mighty 
Madrid, mustering few worthwhile attempts on goal in a disappointing stalemate.

Yet ruling out PSG would be foolhardy given that they appear to be the 
strongest team behind the usual suspects, Barcelona, Bayern Munich and Madrid 
(Manchester City may argue otherwise and justifiably soafter their victory over 
Sevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/04/manchester-city-manuel-pellegrini-tactics-sevilla>
). They have a tough, resolute defence when David Luiz is switched on and not 
trying too much, a sophisticated, stylish midfield and raw incision on the 
flanks following the signing of Di María, whose ordinary performances for 
Manchester United should be placed into the context of his family’s struggle to 
acclimatise to north-west England. Di María, who struck the bar with a 
free-kick on Tuesday night, was the man of the match when Madrid beat Atlético 
Madrid in last year’s final and there is not a full-back alive who relishes 
marking the Argentinian when he is on form. Despite the doubts about the 
potency of Cavani and Ibrahimovic, they are two of the best strikers in the 
world and should flourish with Di María providing the bullets.

PSG did not do enough to beat Madrid but there are reasons for them to be 
encouraged about their chances of prospering if they meet again later in the 
competition. This can be a champion team if they develop that killer mentality.
JS 

Gent still in the running after stunning Valencia

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Zenit St Petersburg 4 6 12 
2 Valencia 4 0 6 
3 AA Gent 4 -1 4 
4 Lyon 4 -5 1 
Hats off to plucky little Gent, who electro-shocked their hopes of making the 
knockout stages back to life withan unexpected 1-0 win over Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/gent-valencia-champions-league-match-report>
 to record the first Champions League victory in their history, courtesy of 
Sven Klum’s second-half penalty. With two rounds of group games to go, the 
Belgian club are just two points behind the Spanish side and remain very much 
in contention for a place in the last 16. Should they secure one, it would 
perhaps be the story of the tournament thus far. Having saved themselves from 
financial oblivion at the end of the 1990s through judicious wheeling and 
dealing in the transfer market, Gent have since become the model of a small but 
beautifully run club. In 2013 they upped sticks from their old home the 
Ottenstadion to the Ghelanco Arena, in a move that has resulted in their 
average attendance almost doubling to 18,500, resulting in huge increases in 
matchday revenue. Meanwhile on the field, their coach, Hein Vanhaezebrouck, has 
performed miracles to turn a group of fairly mediocre players into national 
champions ahead of the traditional Belgian powerhouses of Anderlecht and Club 
Brugge, then keep them competitive in the Champions League. The Belgian minnows 
were expected to be Group H whipping boys, but have turned out to be anything 
but.BG

Clubs should be falling over themselves to hire Villas-Boas

Zenit St Petersburg stroll into last 16 after Artem Dzyuba’s double at Lyon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/lyon-st-petersburg-champions-league-match-report>
As difficult as it is to praise a club boasting so many charmless fans, one 
can’t help but be impressed by the ease with which Zenit St Petersburg have 
already strolled into the knockout stages with two matches to spare after four 
wins from four games. Their manager, André Villas-Boas, is due to leave at the 
end of the Russian league season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/10/andre-villas-boas-announces-quit-zenit-st-petersburg-manager>
. The Portuguese has been a big hit in Russia since taking over in March 2014, 
but turned down a new contract at the beginning of this season, which he 
declared would be his last in charge of Zenit. On Wednesday night he reiterated 
his decision, insisting life in Russia, away from his family, is starting to 
get him down.

“At different moments in different situations I get asked these questions,” he 
told Zenit’s website, upon being asked if he’d reconsider his position. “I am 
very happy to be coach of the Zenit, but you know that my family lives in 
Portugal, and it is not easy. I am particularly pleased that we have reached 
the next round. It is important for the Zenit and Russia in the Uefa 
coefficients.”

While Villas-Boas may have certain Mourinho-esque shortcomings in the people 
skills department, he is clearly a knowledgable man with obvious talent as a 
manager. He was never made to feel particularly wanted by supporters, players 
or the press pack during two previous stints in the Premier League, but would 
clearly be an asset to any ambitious club should he ever deign to return.BG 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe32e3c3a7aa64dc4714e9096b314a6d34fe474ea%2F0_0_3768_2770%2F3768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe32e3c3a7aa64dc4714e9096b314a6d34fe474ea%2F0_0_3768_2770%2F3768.jpg>
 Hulk and Axel Witsel celebrate Zenit’s victory and their qualification for the 
last 16 after the win at Lyon. Photograph: Jean Catuffe/Getty Images 
Oh Arsenal …

Despite boasting such stellar names and Premier League has-beens as Brown 
Ideye and Pajtim Kasami in their starting XI,Olympiakos now sit six points 
ahead of the Gunners with two games to go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/olympiakos-dinamo-zagreb-champions-league-match-report>
. We’re guessing the famously myopic Arsène Wenger didn’t see that coming. 
Without wishing to riff on the pain of unhappy Gooners, our player of the week 
award goes to the Greek side’s Felipe Pardo. The Colombian came off the bench 
to score twice inthe come-from-behind win over Dinamo Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/olympiakos-dinamo-zagreb-champions-league-match-report>
 to compound the misery of Arsenal fans already distraught at sight of their 
team beingripped to shreds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/bayern-munich-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 by a Bayern Munich team playing in second gear.BG

Winners and losers

Winner … Stephan Lichtsteiner

What a comeback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/juventus-stephan-lichsteiner-heart-surgery-return-goal>
 the Juventus and Switzerland right-back made against Borussia Mönchengladbach. 
Lichtsteiner recently had to undergo heart surgery after he suffered breathing 
problems in a match against Frosinone in September and tests indicated he was 
suffering from an atrial flutter. He needed a month to recover after his 
operation and he had only been back in training for two days before starting 
and scoring against Gladbach, volleying in Juve’s equaliser after he was 
brilliantly picked out by Paul Pogba, whose stabbed pass with the outside of 
his right foot will go down as one of the assists of the season. It was gutsy 
stuff.JS 

Losers … Maccabi Tel-Aviv and Borussia Mönchengladbach

With just two rounds of group games to go and only Manchester City, Real 
Madrid and Zenit St Petersburg assured of their places in the knockout stages, 
there are still 27 teams in with a chance of qualifying for the 13 remaining 
places. The prospects for some – hello Arsenal! – look bleak, but where there’s 
life there’s hope. For Maccabi Tel-Aviv and Borussia Mönchengladbach, all hope 
of playing further in this competition has evaporated. The Israeli champions
lost 3-1 at home to Porto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/maccabi-tel-aviv-porto-champions-league-match-report>
 and go into the next round of matches with no points and just one goal to 
their name in Group G. As mentioned above, Gladbach were unable to carrythe 
fine Bundesliga form 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/02/andre-schubert-borussia-monchengladbach-bundesliga>
 that brought them six consecutive victories under new coach André Schubert 
into the Champions League, allowing10-man Juventus to rescue a point at 
Borussia-Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/03/borussia-monchengladbach-juventus-champions-league-match-report>
. For the German side, the Europa League remains a possibility, but the 
European jig looks as good as up for Maccabi already this season.BG

Further reading

 * Wenger blames Arsenal defence for thrashing at Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/05/arsene-wenger-arsenal-defence-bayern-munich>
 * Jacob Steinberg: Arsenal’s defensive deputies devoured by ruthless Bayern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/04/arsenal-defence-devoured-ruthless-bayern-munich>
 * Mourinho salutes Chelsea fans’ ‘unforgettable’ support after win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/jose-mourinho-chelsea-fans-dynamo-kyiv>
 * Barney Ronay on Cesc Fàbregas, Chelsea’s strolling master 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/04/cesc-fabregas-chelsea-master-loyalties-dynamo-kyiv>
 * Daniel Taylor: Van Gaal’s United antagonise fans but he won’t change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/04/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-fans>

 * Manchester United’s Van Gaal feels vindicated after dissent from fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/03/manchester-united-louis-van-gaal-fans-disapproval>
 * Joe Hart consigns Manchester City’s reckless and naive days to the past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/joe-hart-manchester-city-naive-reckless-champions-league>
 * Jamie Jackson: City benefit after Pellegrini finally shows he can be 
flexible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/04/manchester-city-manuel-pellegrini-tactics-sevilla>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd8782ba17877c6c1424140d3d53dda12034ffaa%2F0_0_3098_2065%2F3098.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd8782ba17877c6c1424140d3d53dda12034ffaa%2F0_0_3098_2065%2F3098.jpg>
 Raheem Sterling coolly opens the scoring for Manchester City in their 3-1 win 
at Sevilla. Photograph: Daniel Gonzalez Acuna/Demotix/Corbis 
Stat time
OptaJoe (@OptaJoe) 
5 - Petr Cech has conceded 5 goals for the first time since playing for Chelsea
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> in their 5-3 defeat to Arsenal 
in Oct 2011. Switcheroo.
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJoe/status/662023119796834305> November 4, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJoe/status/662023119796834305> Infostrada Sports 
(@InfostradaLive) 
Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> set a CL record 
by staying unbeaten in 19 consecutive group matches. They shared record with 
Barcelona (18, Nov 2009 - Oct 2012)
 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/661660036507258880> November 3, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/661660036507258880> OptaJoe 
(@OptaJoe) 
19 - Man City have kept just one clean sheet in their last 19 Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> matches. Leaky.
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJoe/status/661636915762974720> November 3, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJoe/status/661636915762974720> Infostrada Sports 
(@InfostradaLive) 
Most #UCL <https://twitter.com/hashtag/UCL?src=hash> matches won: 91 - Iker 
Casillas 91 - Xavi 79 - Raúl 74 - Ryan Giggs 73 - Cristiano Ronaldo
@CasillasWorld <https://twitter.com/CasillasWorld> @FCPorto 
<https://twitter.com/FCPorto>
 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/662024175217963009> November 4, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/662024175217963009> OptaJose 
(@OptaJose) 
14 - Neymar has been involved in 14 goals in his last 7 appearances for Barca 
(8 goals, 6 assists), a run started with Messi's injury. Star.
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJose/status/662019791994114048> November 4, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJose/status/662019791994114048> Infostrada Sports 
(@InfostradaLive) 
Raheem Sterling is the 2000th player to score in the Champions League 
(including own goals).#UCL <https://twitter.com/hashtag/UCL?src=hash> #MCFC 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/MCFC?src=hash> #sfcvcity 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/sfcvcity?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/661633112317820928> November 3, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/661633112317820928> OptaJoe 
(@OptaJoe) 
3 - Olivier Giroud has scored in three of his last four CL matches against 
Bayern Munich. Consolation.
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJoe/status/662014619909779457> November 4, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJoe/status/662014619909779457> Infostrada Sports 
(@InfostradaLive) 
Roma have now failed to keep clean sheet in last 26 matches in Europe. Only 
Malta's Valletta (29) and Northern Ireland's Coleraine (28) more
 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/662009866295320577> November 4, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/662009866295320577> 
Best images
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65fedb296c2d711ad063c6e6f83c64970486d9ed%2F0_69_3500_2098%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65fedb296c2d711ad063c6e6f83c64970486d9ed%2F0_69_3500_2098%2F3500.jpg>
 A terrific tifo at the Karaiskaki stadium in Athens before Olympiakos’s 2-1 
win over Dinamo Zagreb. Photograph: Panagiotis Moschandreou/EPA  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1c5cd619538eaf96c2f37e784d1b7e7550e2f3b%2F0_0_2992_1991%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1c5cd619538eaf96c2f37e784d1b7e7550e2f3b%2F0_0_2992_1991%2F2992.jpg>
 It was all white on the night as despite being on the back foot for most of 
the game, a Nacho goal gave Real Madrid victory over Paris St Germain and a 
spot in the last 16. Photograph: GmbH/Rex Shutterstock  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F774099231e468af53b0449b867405920fd16d6e4%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F774099231e468af53b0449b867405920fd16d6e4%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 Imagine his face if Juve had lost! Juventus captain and keeper Gianluigi 
Buffon reacts at the end of their 1-1 draw at Borussia Mönchengladbach. 
Photograph: Wolfgang Rattay/Reuters  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28e7671cbb6e7d82eeec2458ac2e44a19d8e11d8%2F542_331_3128_2042%2F3128.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28e7671cbb6e7d82eeec2458ac2e44a19d8e11d8%2F542_331_3128_2042%2F3128.jpg>
 Neymar gets airborne during Barcelona’s 3-0 win over Bate Borisov, in which 
the Brazilian scored twice. Photograph: Manuel Blondeau/Corbis  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e6dcb0dec96a683ec3f7b727446bca9ae38cb3d%2F0_0_3031_2001%2F3031.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e6dcb0dec96a683ec3f7b727446bca9ae38cb3d%2F0_0_3031_2001%2F3031.jpg>
 Where’s the call? Manchester City’s Aleksandar Kolarov and Nicolas Otamendi 
both decide to clear the ball away from Sevilla’s Vicente Iborra. Photograph: 
Marcelo Del Pozo/Reuters  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82a1263a47db7b77ddabbac208804bc727eb8b07%2F0_0_3631_2421%2F3631.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20PSG%20lack%20killer%20instinct%2C%20Gent%20not%20spent%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampions-league-review-psg-real-madrid-gent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82a1263a47db7b77ddabbac208804bc727eb8b07%2F0_0_3631_2421%2F3631.jpg>
 Gent keeper Matz Sels avoids flying boots as he collects the ball during their 
win over Valencia. Photograph: Laurent Dubrule/EPA 
And finally …

Jesse Lingard proved why perseverance pays off in Manchester United’s scratchy 
1-0 victory over CSKA Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/04/manchester-united-wayne-rooney-louis-van-gaal-cska-moscow>
. The young winger was given another chance to impress by Louis van Gaal and 
although he started brightly, he was beginning to frustrate the Old Trafford 
crowd with some questionable decisions towards the end of the first half, and 
he missed a glorious chance when he blazed over from close range after 
excellent work on the right by Ashley Young and Juan Mata. Yet Lingard never 
stopped trying, causing problems for CSKA’s full-backs with some darting runs, 
and Van Gaal decided not to take him off when other managers might have 
substituted the 22-year-old. Young players need to learn and they need to feel 
wanted and in the end Van Gaal’s faith was rewarded when Lingard set up Wayne 
Rooney’s winner by cushioning a volleyed cross into the middle. In a way, 
Lingard’s willing endeavour has set an example for his team-mates to follow.JS
 