
Charlton’s captain Johnnie Jackson has pledged to reimburse fans who travelled 
to watch the team get thrashed 5-0 atHuddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> on Tuesday.

Goals from Mark Hudson, Nahki Wells, Jamie Paterson, Duane Holmes and Jason 
Davidson gave Huddersfield their biggest victory of the season, extending 
Charlton’s run without a win to 10 games.

The visitors’ misery was compounded by the late dismissal of the substitute 
Reza Ghoochannejhad for two yellow cards in the space of just over a minute 
following reckless tackles on Davidson and Harry Bunn.

Charlton fans have held regular protests this season against the club’s owner 
Roland Duchâtelet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/01/roland-duchtelet-charlton-the-valley-addicks-nick-miller>
 and the chief executive Katrien Meire, who recently suggested that supporters 
were “weird” forfailing to see themselves as “customers” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/said-and-done-bayern-munich-qatar>
.

Charlton remain second from bottom of the Championship, now three points from 
safety, and the pressure is mounting on the interim manager Karel Fraeye, who 
refused to face the media after the game.

Is Roland Duchâtelet leading Charlton into the valley of no return? | Nick 
Miller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/01/roland-duchtelet-charlton-the-valley-addicks-nick-miller>
Jackson told fans via Twitter: “I know words are cheap 
<https://twitter.com/johnnie_jackson/status/687049486775009284> but on behalf 
of myself and the players, I want to apologise for tonight. It was disgraceful 
and you deserve better.We are going to reimburse fans 
<https://twitter.com/johnnie_jackson/status/687050505147813890> who travelled 
up to support us. I will arrange this with the club and they will let you know 
how to be refunded.”

Speaking to the press after the match in place of Fraeye, the goalkeeper 
Stephen Henderson said: “As you can imagine I think the lads are lower than 
they have ever been in their careers right now.

“I feel numb and a few players are unable to speak. It’s a position I’ve not 
been in before and that’s all I can say. Let’s be honest, it could have been 
more at Colchester in the FA Cup as well. I take responsibility for the second 
goal. Second half they were confident and we gave them another three goals.

“It’s embarrassing really, we didn’t have our first shot until the 92nd 
minute. I’d like to apologise to our travelling fans. I know they think I won’t 
mean it but the real fans will know I genuinely want to apologise for that 
shocking performance.”

Asked about Fraeye’s future he said: “Does there have to be a change made? 
Without a doubt. I don’t know what to say to that because I’m in a position 
where I’m not too sure what’s going on. I’m numb because I can’t believe we’re 
getting done like that to Huddersfield, no disrespect to them but we can’t be 
losing 5-0 to them, we just can’t.”

Fraeye left the dressing room without comment and went straight to the waiting 
team bus.
 