
If Antonio Conte was shocked this week by Diego Costa’s reaction to a transfer 
offer from China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/diego-costa-dropped-chelsea-row-china>
, the manager enjoyed a pleasant surprise here thanks to Marcos Alonso. The 
Spanish wing-back struck two goals as Chelsea made light of their top scorer’s 
absence and inflicted a heavy defeat on the team whose title they intend to 
take. A later goal by Pedro emphasised the point.

Related: Antonio Conte insists he did not lie over Diego Costa’s absence from 
team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/antonio-conte-diego-costa-chelsea->

The line from Conte is that Costa was unavailable here because of pain in his 
back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/antonio-conte-diego-costa-chelsea->
 but the whiff around the absence of the Premier League’s leading scorer 
highlighted what a pain in the neck China risks becoming to English clubs. But 
Chelsea’s immediate task here was to respond to domestic threats. They did so 
emphatically, even if Leicester’s resistance was feeble.

Chelsea’s winning streak had been brought to a shuddering end  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
in their last league match by Tottenham Hotspur, who moved even closer to the 
leaders bymauling West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/mauricio-pochettino-tottenham-premier-league-title-challenge>
 in Saturday’s early game. Chelsea restored their lead at the top of the table 
by outclassing the flagging champions.

Without Costa Chelsea deployed Willian in a fluid front three, just as he had 
done on Boxing Day, when Chelsea were deprived of the striker by suspension but 
still proved too strong for Bournemouth, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/chelsea-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
 winning 3-0. Here, too, the relentless movement and mischief-making of the 
Brazilian, Pedro and Eden Hazard ensured they had a fearsome attack. Leicester 
were toothless. They, at least, need not worry about anyone bidding for their 
main striker, not with Jamie Vardy in this form.

In fairness to Leicester they were shorn of more players than Chelsea, with 
Riyad Mahrez, Islam Slimani and Daniel Amartey at the Africa Cup of Nations. 
But Nigeria’s failure to qualify for the tournament in Gabon meant that Ahmed 
Musa and Wilfred Ndidi were available here. Ndidi’s first league appearance 
since his£15m purchase from Genk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/wilfred-ndidi-leicester-city-transfer>
 provided a handy opportunity to compare him with N’Golo Kanté, the man who 
left a void in Leicester’s midfield when lured away by Chelsea’s riches after 
helping City win last season’s title.

The Frenchman was given a warm welcome back by Leicester fans, who used to 
refer him affectionately as “the Kanté twins” because his dynamism made him 
akin to two players. Claudio Ranieri sought to outnumber him here and counter 
Chelsea’s other threats by switching to a 3-5-2 formation, with Ndidi, Nampalys 
Mendy and Danny Drinkwater deployed in the middle. Ranieri later explained that 
the ploy had worked in the second half of the sides’ meeting at Stamford Bridge 
this season and insisted that it worked well here, too, even though the result 
was another 3-0 defeat.

In truth, Leicester rarely bothered Chelsea after the second minute, when 
Courtois had to make a smart save from Musa. ThenChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> flexed their muscles and 
Leicester wilted.

In the sixth minute a cross from the right by Azpilicueta triggered chaos in 
Leicester’s three-man central defence, where Hazard summoned the poise to apply 
a telling touch. While all around him panicked, the Belgian tamed a loose ball 
and rolled it calmly to Alonso, who scored with an impeccable curling finish of 
which Costa would have been proud.

Related: Diego Costa dropped by Chelsea after row over huge offer from China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/diego-costa-dropped-chelsea-row-china>

Chelsea controlled proceedings after that. Leicester did not seem at ease with 
their new system, their discomfort exacerbated by the visitors’ slickness. Not 
until the 36th minute did the hosts so much as fluster the Chelsea defence 
again but no Leicester player was on hand to take advantage of a vicious cross 
by Vardy, which Courtois intercepted with difficulty.

That faint chance was Leicester’s clearest sight of an equaliser before the 
break. Ranieri decided against tinkering during the interval, seemingly 
confident that his side could creep back into the game so long as they did not 
let Chelsea go farther ahead. Six minutes into the second half that theory was 
binned. And Alonso’s stock soared even higher.

After a foul by Christian Fuchs on Willian, the latter floated a free-kick 
into the Leicester box. Again the attempted clearance was flawed and when the 
ball broke to Alonso at the edge of the area, he trapped it with one touch 
before lashing it into the net, a deflection off Wes Morgan helping to confound 
Kasper Schmeichel.
 Marcos Alonso, with the help of a deflection off Wes Morgan, scores the 
second Chelsea goal. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Observer 
That was Ranieri’s cue to scrap his original plan and revert to a more 
familiar 4-4-2 formation, with Shinji Okazaki coming on for Robert Huth. But 
getting back into the game would entail subduing visitors who were starting to 
revel. Gary Cahill exemplified that in the 61st minute with an overhead kick at 
goal. Fuchs’s block foiled a splendid effort but no one could get in the way of 
a spectacular 18-yard volley by Alonso moments later that whizzed inches past 
the far post.

Chelsea gave themselves further cause for celebration with a third goal that 
resembled a party trick. In one movement at the edge of the area Pedro spun and 
back-heeled the ball to the overlapping Willian, who clipped it over Schmeichel 
and back into the path of Pedro, who nodded into the empty net.

Related: Leicester City 0-3 Chelsea: Premier League – as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/14/leicester-city-v-chelsea-premier-league-live>
 