
Michy Batshuayi is determined to fight for a starting spot at Chelsea despite 
reports linking him with a return toMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> on loan despite his £33m 
summer move.

Batshuayi is with the Belgium squad for their World Cup qualifier against 
Bosnia-Herzegovina on Friday, having yet to start a league match for his new 
club. The 23-year-oldscored against Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/watford-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 on 20 August after coming off the bench and has made five substitute 
appearances, although he has been on the pitch for only 53 minutes in total in 
the Premier League.

Batshuayi has started both of Chelsea’s matches in the EFL Trophy, scoring 
twice against Bristol Rovers, but has so far been second choice behind Diego 
Costa, who is the league’s top scorer with six goals. A report in France this 
week suggested that Batshuayi may be interested in going back to the Stade 
Vélodrome on loan in search of first-team football after rumours emerged that 
he was not Antonio Conte’s first choice as a signing. However it is understood 
that the player is happy in London and wants to show he can make an impact 
under the Italian manager.

Next Generation 2016: 60 of the best young talents in world football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/oct/05/next-generation-2016-60-of-the-best-young-talents-in-world-football>
Chelsea signed Batshuayi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/michy-batshuayi-chelsea-medical-33m-marseille>
 from under the noses of Crystal Palace and West Ham United in June after 
sending medical staff to Belgium’s Euro 2016 training camp in Bordeaux. He was 
the first arrival at Stamford Bridge after Conte’s appointment, although the 
former Standard Liège striker was scouted extensively before then and it is 
understood that Conte gave his blessing to the deal with Marseille.

“Absolutely I think Michy can make an impact because he is a young player but 
very strong, with good technique,” Conte said in July. “He uses two feet. He is 
a great talent. I am very happy that Batshuayi is with us and I know the club 
bought a great player for the present and the future.”

Belgium <https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> host Bosnia-Herzegovina 
in Brussels before travelling to Gibraltar next week in Group H. The Everton 
striker Romelu Lukaku is expected to start up front for Roberto Martínez’s 
side, with Palace’s Christian Benteke also vying for a place.
 