
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> have discussed terms 
with the France goalkeeper Steve Mandanda over a transfer that could speed 
Asmir Begovic’s departure from Stamford Bridge.

Mandanda, who is Hugo Lloris’s understudy at Euro 2016, is set to leave 
Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/01/marseille-ligue1-angers>when 
his contract ends this month after nine years at the Stade Vélodrome and has 
expressed an interest in pursuing his career in the Premier League.

Chelsea to step up attempts to sign Álvaro Morata from Juventus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/06/chelsea-alvaro-morata-juventus-antonio-conte>
The 31-year-old, who once had an unsuccessful trial with Aston Villa, has been 
voted the best goalkeeper in Ligue 1 four times and has 22 caps, with this 
summer’s tournament his fifth major finals with France. He has previously been 
monitored by Everton, while at least one Ligue 1 club have offered him terms.

“Abroad would be something good at 31,” he said last month after intimating 
his involvement in the French Cup final, whichMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> lost 4-2 to Paris 
Saint-Germain, would be his last appearance for the club. “It would be a nice 
adventure on both a sporting and a personal level. The two leagues that 
interest me most are the Premier League and La Liga.”

Chelsea are willing to let Begovic, an £8m addition from Stoke City a year ago 
on a four-year contract, leave if they secure an experienced goalkeeper to act 
as the back-up to Thibaut Courtois. The Bosnian grew frustrated last season at 
a lack of opportunities and lost his place as the club’s FA Cup goalkeeper 
under Guus Hiddink, despite performing capably when Courtois was absent through 
injury and suspension. He is understood to be keen to remain in the London area.

Crystal Palace, who have also been alerted to Mandanda’s availability, have 
expressed an interest in securing Begovic’s services but would have to explore 
whether the deal would be cost effective.

The Newcastle United winger Andros Townsend has indicated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/06/crystal-palace-newcastle-andros-townsend-release-clause>
 he would be reluctant to move to Selhurst Park despite Palace’s eagerness to 
trigger a £10.5m release clause in his contract. Townsend will consider his 
options and could still be at the Championship club next season.
 