
Eden Hazard watched Chelsea overcome Schalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/06/chelsea-schalke-champions-league>
 from the stands after the Belgian was dropped from the squad having missed 
training on Monday after his late return from a visit to his former club Lille.

José Mourinho, who made six changes to the team defeated 2-0 at Newcastle 
United on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/02/newcastle-united-chelsea-premier-league>
, opted against selecting Hazard after confirming he had missed the session 
earlier this week.

Hazard had been invited to Lille's Ligue 1 game against Monaco and, as a 
returning hero, had been presented to the crowd before kick-off before taking a 
seat in the directors' box.

The £34m midfielder, who is Chelsea's joint top scorer this season, was due 
back at Cobham on Monday morning but was delayed in his return and his omission 
from the team for the 3-0 victory overSchalke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> was duly considered punishment 
for that indiscipline. Mourinho was initially reluctant to address the subject, 
merely replying: "Willian played fantastically well," when considering Hazard's 
absence. He had earlier confirmed the 22-year-old had missed training and, when 
pressed, added: "I don't want to lie. He is not injured.

"Did he forget the time? Look, he's a kid. Kids make mistakes and fathers have 
to be clever in the way they educate their sons. He didn't play. He wanted to 
play. He was sad because he didn't play. We won without him. On Saturday 
[against West Bromwich Albion] he is back. So, end of story. Let's forget Eden 
because I didn't select him and, on Saturday, he will be with the team. We know 
his talent. He will be on the bench or playing but he will be in the squad, for 
sure."

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> will have welcomed the 
impact made by Samuel Eto'o and Demba Ba, given that scans on Fernando Torres' 
adductor problem have revealed he will be unavailable until after the 
international break. Torres suffered the injury in the training session missed 
by Hazard but faces "two to three weeks" out. "We hope he's back after the 
national teams but, of course, no chance for this weekend," said Mourinho. "And 
still a doubt to be back after."

Yet the manager was glowing about Eto'o's contribution. "My favourite players 
are the players who win matches for me, not the ones who lose matches for me, 
and Samuel worked with me in the best season of my career [at Internazionale]," 
he added.

"We won everything. So he's in a good position. He was, for two years, playing 
without big motivations, training without big motivations, and when you do that 
you lose condition, sharpness and even appetite. It was not a surprise for me 
that he arrived here not in the best condition after two years in Anzhi.

"Now, step by step, he's growing. He's 32 but fit and slim. Not a heavy boy. 
He's intelligent of course, and goals give confidence. The first one was a 
'fox' goal. The second goal was a very good collective goal: Willian's choice 
was fantastic, Ramires' run to give him an extra option was fantastic and 
Samuel's movement was excellent."
 