
Chelsea have confirmed that they have agreed a deal to sign the Werder Bremen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/werderbremen> attacking midfielder Marko 
Marin.

A fee has been agreed for the Serbian-born Germany international and the deal 
will be concluded when the transfer window re-opens in the summer. Sky Germany 
are reporting thatChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> will 
pay in the region of €8m (£6.5m) for the 23-year-old.

Marin, who joined Bremen from Borussia Mönchengladbach in 2009 and was 
contracted to the club until June 2013, has passed a medical in London and will 
sign a contract in the next few weeks, according to his current club. Speaking 
ahead of Bremen's Bundesliga match with Wolfsburg today, Marin said he cannot 
wait to play in the Premier League.

"I had a really good time with Werder, together with many great guys here, and 
I have lots of nice memories, but I am looking forward to the challenge of 
playing in the Premier League with such an established club," he said.

Marin made his Germany debut in 2008 and was part of their 2010 World Cup 
squad. However, he has spent much of this season on the sidelines due to injury 
and is not assured of a place in Joachim Low's squad for Euro 2012. He has made 
21 appearances this season, scoring one goal.

Bremen's director of sport Klaus Allofs said in a statement: "We have always 
said that we would be open to talk if any of our players receives a good offer 
which was also interesting for Werder and we had good talks with the management 
at Chelsea, so that we were able to reach an agreement quickly. In the coming 
weeks, we will then deal with the last formalities. We wish Marko all the best 
for this new challenge."

There have been suggestions that Chelsea may loan striker Romelu Lukaku, 
signed for £17m from Anderlecht last summer, to Bremen next season as part of 
the deal but this has not been confirmed.
 