
1) Clubs that wear red, white and black are cursed in the play-offs

When prying into the play-offs version of “specialists in failure” there is a 
worrying factor that unites some of the worst offenders. Four clubs are banded 
together not only for their particularly dismal record of repeated 
disappointments but also by the fact they traditionally wear the same strip. 
This is the curse of the Red, White and Blacks. Step forward Brentford, Lincoln 
City,Sheffield United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> 
and Sunderland. Between this sorry bunch, who have shared the same kit of red 
and white striped shirts with black shorts, there have been 24 attempts to 
achieve promotion through the pay-offs but none of them have actually done so. 
For these clubs the play-offs act as a modern version of the Sword of Damocles, 
hovering menacingly over their sorry heads. The only exception – somewhat 
proving the rule – was Sunderland’s promotion in 1990, when they sneaked 
through the back door left ajar by Swindon’s financial shenanigans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a149aeb2bdd047f853ebe856db67834bf964d73%2F0_37_5256_2374%2F5256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a149aeb2bdd047f853ebe856db67834bf964d73%2F0_37_5256_2374%2F5256.jpg>
 Design: Mick Kinlan 
2) Chelsea were relegated from the top division through a play-off

Former Scottish and Chelsea winger Pat Nevin remembers the second leg against 
Middlesbrough as being predominantly one-way traffic – “we absolutely battered 
them” – but Chelsea could not add to Gordon Durie’s 18th-minute opening goal. 
Nevin makes no bones about what a shock to the system for players such as 
Durie, Kerry Dixon, Steve Clarke and himself, to be involved in this damaging 
relegation. Nevin duly left the club to join Everton in the close season but he 
still distinctly recalls the overriding feeling of unease and embarrassment at 
Chelsea’s failure; the sort of feeling he never experienced throughout the rest 
of his career. Even the pain of three successive semi-final failures with 
Tranmere Rovers between 1993 and 1995 did not come close to the desolation he 
felt in thatChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> dressing 
room. “It was bad, but not that bad, as we were striving to get up, so it was a 
great deal more positive,” Nevin admitted.

3) Dion Dublin scored the first play-offs goal at Wembley

Even a successful Premier League player and England international such as Dion 
Dublin was clear about the importance of the play-offs when asked to nominate 
the outstanding highlight of his career. That career encapsulated some 
impressive landmarks, including the honour of gaining the first of his four 
England caps, winning the English and Scottish Premier Leagues with Manchester 
United and Celtic respectively, and being the Premier League’s joint top scorer 
in 1997-98 season. Above all those considerable achievements, Dublin is certain 
about where he achieved his greatest personal triumph: “At Wembley in 1990. The 
match finished Cambridge 1-0 Chesterfield and I scored the only goal, which was 
also the first in a play-offs final. It ensured that we went up from the fourth 
tier.” He might have scored over 80 goals in the Premier League and played for 
some of Britain’s biggest clubs, but this was the goal he ranks above all 
others as his most valued and valuable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4481c522a1905c1f1a72f495758632298eaee016%2F0_0_2844_825%2F2844.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4481c522a1905c1f1a72f495758632298eaee016%2F0_0_2844_825%2F2844.jpg>
 Design: Mick Kinlan 
4) Play-off finals bring in higher attendances than World Cup finals

The healthy crowds for the first ever Wembley play-offs finals across all 
three divisions in 1990, drawing an aggregate of almost 130,000 people, 
underlined their immediate popularity. Attracting an average crowd of over 
43,000, the play-offs stood in good comparison with Division One attendances, 
where, for example, Manchester United averaged just shy of 39,000 that season, 
while the champions Liverpool’s highest league attendance was below 40,000 and 
their average was just under 37,000. Swindon’s ill-fated win over Sunderland in 
the Division Two final attracted a gate of 72,873, which dwarfed the highest 
attendance of the top division, a relatively paltry 47,000 at Old Trafford for 
their opening-day match with Arsenal. Within the context of domestic football 
support at this time, these were impressive numbers and a strong indicator of 
the increasing popularity of the play-offs.

Indeed the crowd for what was the biggest match of the English league season 
matched that of the World Cup final in Rome two months later (there was a 
minimal difference of less than a thousand between the two). This not only 
provided instant vindication for Williamson’s idea but most importantly, as a 
result of the final being played at Wembley, it gave many smaller clubs a 
golden and increasingly rare opportunity to enjoy being in the limelight and 
sampling a taste of being in the big time. More people have watched each of 
last nineChampionship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> 
Play-Offs Finals than any of previous five World Cup finals.

5) Notts County earned promotion via the play-offs in 1990 and 1991

As the oldest surviving professional football club in the world and one of the 
founding members of theFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league>, Notts County have a 
pedigree that stretches back over 150 years. Having had some early involvement 
in the old Test Matches, the 19th Century predecessor of the modern play-offs, 
County can lay claim to a play-offs ancestry spanning well over a century. Over 
a hundred years after their initial brush with the test matches, they became 
the only team to have gained two successive promotions through the play-offs in 
1990 and 1991 under the guidance of that wily young rascal, Neil Warnock. This 
remains a feat unrivalled over the 28 years of play-offs history.

When Tranmere Rovers were beaten 2-0 in 1990, it was Notts County’s first ever 
appearance at Wembley and of course the first year the play-offs finals had 
been held at the national stadium, so their timing was impeccable if a little 
delayed. It was deeply ironic that one of the original English football clubs 
had to wait such a long time to taste action at Wembley; they clearly enjoyed 
it so much that they returned there in the following year, when Brighton were 
dispatched 3-1 in the Second Division final.

So County returned to the First Division, with the Magpies reversing 
successive relegations of a few years beforehand. As the Nottingham Post put 
it, this was arguably “County’s finest hour in all their 129 years.” Warnock’s 
reputation was being forged through these play-offs successes to the extent 
that Chelsea expressed an interest in appointing him. Tommy Johnson was their 
hero, scoring three times in those two finals. He remains the only player to 
have scored in successive finals in different divisions. Johnson also scored 
for Derby in 1994 and, with four goals in total, is the highest individual 
scorer in play-offs finals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39fbd7e2409de1b060e35f091001eae75d6e112a%2F0_0_875_2237%2F875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39fbd7e2409de1b060e35f091001eae75d6e112a%2F0_0_875_2237%2F875.jpg>
 Design: Mick Kinlan 
6) Tony Cascarino scored five goals in the first year of the play-offs


“Before the second leg of the semi-final at Roker Park I was in a room with a 
bunch of journalists who were asking me about the chances of an imminent move 
to Sunderland, of all clubs. It was really weird as Bob Stokoe [the Sunderland 
manager] was in there while I was being interviewed.” That Cascarino managed to 
focus on playing for Gillingham, his club at the time, rather than possibly his 
future one is shown by the fact he added two more goals to his first-leg 
hat-trick, so there was no indecision there.

Ultimately Cascarino rebuffed Sunderland’s interest as they were heading 
towards Division Three, courtesy of his five goals in the semi-final. He went 
on to play at the top level for both club, domestically and abroad, as well as 
for his country but says those five semi-final goals are the ones about which 
he still remembers every single detail as if they were yesterday, whereas he 
can barely recall the majority of his league goals.

Cascarino started a trend that continues to this day, whereby players make 
their mark through the increased focus of the play-offs, which provide the 
springboard for the next stage in their playing careers. Almost every year 
since 1987 a clutch of players have emerged and blossomed via the play-offs 
before moving on to a higher level, having proved themselves when the pressure 
is on. Without the stimulus of the play-offs, Cascarino says he may have never 
thought about getting further ahead in his playing career and could have stayed 
among the lower leagues for the remainder of his days rather than moving on to 
represent the likes of Chelsea, Celtic and Marseille.

7) Overall earnings have leapt from £500,000 to £200m in 30 years

When Charlton beat Leeds in the first year of play-offs finals to retain their 
top-flight status, winning that match was probably worth less than £500,000. 
The size of the television deal was so small that it hardly had any impact on 
the overall value. In 1986-87, the deal was around £18m for three years, 
averaging out at £6m per annum for all 92 clubs, of which half went to Division 
One clubs and a quarter to Division Two. The difference equated to 
approximately £72,500, so when added to match-day income and commercial 
revenues, which at this stage far outweighed those of broadcasting, the figure 
would have possibly quadrupled so would still not have been much more than 
£500,000. There were no scheduled parachute payments either, so this was not 
even a consideration. The board at Charlton no doubt viewed their play-offs 
triumph as more of a face-saving exercise, a matter of pride, than a financial 
imperative. The projected value for the Championship play-offs final of 2017 is 
£200m.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ce8056957b79a49ac3518b6216e3b061a519243%2F0_0_1490_2412%2F1490.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ce8056957b79a49ac3518b6216e3b061a519243%2F0_0_1490_2412%2F1490.jpg>
 Design: Mick Kinlan 
8) Ipswich’s misfortune led to a change in the away-goals rule

In 1999, for a second time in three years of trying, Ipswich were thwarted by 
the away-goals rule. Their fans were at their wit’s end, players were 
dumbstruck, coaching staff bereft of answers, so enter club chairman David 
Sheepshanks, who decided enough was enough. He put forward a motion to the 
Football League to remove the away-goals rule and ensure that, in future, if 
aggregate scores were the same after extra-time then penalties would decide the 
outcome. Sheepshanks’ basic argument for changing the away-goals rule was that 
it was unfair on the team that had finished higher in the league.

Previously, it had been perceived as an advantage to play the second leg at 
home with the full knowledge of what you needed to achieve but Sheepshanks 
argued that, when it came to games that were level on aggregate, the advantage 
switched to the away team as they had 30 more minutes of extra time to score a 
crucial goal. Sheepshanks must have been very persuasive in his argument to the 
League as they passed the motion unanimously. It may also have helped their 
cause that he was chairman of the Football League between 1997 and 1999. Or 
maybe he cited the fact that on all six occasions play-offs semi-finals had 
been tied on aggregate the lower-placed team won through. Whether this was 
evidence that the playing field was slanted against the higher-placed team or 
not, Sheepshanks got his way. By comparison, European competitions such as the 
Champions League still operate an away-goals rule but few teams have suffered 
in the way Ipswich did through the play-offs so the Sheepshanks-inspired rule 
change has remained in place since 2000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80e2627e17abba45493edb6398cdb7207d28a2ab%2F0_0_1488_1219%2F1488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80e2627e17abba45493edb6398cdb7207d28a2ab%2F0_0_1488_1219%2F1488.jpg>
 Design: Mick Kinlan 
9) Blackpool have won all three divisional play-offs

Just as when they were promoted via the play-offs in 2001, Blackpool spent a 
couple of years establishing themselves in more elevated company, with 
mid-table finishes. Then the mercurial Ian Holloway arrived for the 2009-10 
season, after the briefest of spells at Leicester, and the rise to the top 
division in the space of a decade was in sight. With Blackpool always on the 
fringes of the play-offs throughout the season, none of the late charges that 
had characterised previous campaigns were required to make the play-offs this 
time around. Forest were dispatched with the obligatory home win in the first 
leg of the semi-finals, and, coupled with Forest’s traditional generosity at 
the City Ground in the second leg, Blackpool sealed a 6-4 aggregate victory 
with a DJ Campbell hat-trick. This set up a final with Cardiff which proved to 
be a marvellously attacking match from the off, featuring one of the finest 
first halves seen at Wembley in recent years.

The match began with Michael Chopra’s early strike for Cardiff being cancelled 
out by Charlie Adam’s fulminating free-kick. It was a Paul Gascoigne-like 
strike in its purity and accuracy. Joe Ledley continued the run of excellent 
goals with a slick finish after a neat one-two on the edge of the area, only 
for Blackpool to notch twice in the last five minutes of the first half to take 
the lead, and even then there was still time to squeeze in a disallowed goal by 
Darcy Blake. There was enough action in the opening forty-five minutes to 
satisfy the most demanding of fans, and naturally the game petered out in the 
second half especially in the searing heat – a temperature of over 106 degrees 
Fahrenheit was recorded at pitch-side – but it was mission accomplished for 
Holloway and his team.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F226f6440f162b28c10456fffc8deafcd53ce9ae6%2F0_0_1550_1423%2F1550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F226f6440f162b28c10456fffc8deafcd53ce9ae6%2F0_0_1550_1423%2F1550.jpg>
 Design: Mick Kinlan Photograph: Mick Kinlan 
10. All 22 players hit penalties in the 2012 League One final

The League One final in 2012, between Sheffield United and their Yorkshire 
rivals,Huddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> Town, 
was not the most exciting final, even when it stretched into extra time. The 
BBC report was not exactly glowing with praise “as in normal time, the extra 30 
minutes did not provide a feast of action in the goalmouth.” As the game went 
to a penalty shoot-out there was at last to be some action but few could have 
anticipated quite how dramatic this denouement would be.

The teams’ inability to score in open play did not seem to change terribly 
much as six of the first eight penalties were missed. Then, having reached 1-1, 
both sides woke up to the idea that penalties should be scored more often than 
not and managed to reel off 13 successful kicks, including Huddersfield’s 
goalkeeper Alex Smithies. However, in perfect Sheffield United play-offs 
fashion, the last of the 22 players to take a penalty was their goalkeeper 
Steve Simonsen, who, unsurprisingly and quite horribly, hoisted the ball way 
over the bar.

Simonsen’s reflections on his experience in an interview with BBC Sheffield in 
the aftermath are brutally frank and illustrate that depth of emotion, which 
typifies the Play-Offs. “It’s been horrendous. Obviously it’s the lowest part 
of my career. I’ve replayed it a million times in my head and I just can’t bear 
to watch it. I’m gutted for myself, the club, the fans and my family.” This 
proved to be Simonsen’s epitaph as a Sheffield United player as he was released 
by the club soon afterwards and ended up being relegated the following season 
with Dundee from the Scottish Premier League. Simonsen’s comments are 
reminiscent of Gary Bennett’s when he was recovering from the disappointment 
that Sunderland suffered during the first year of Play-Offs. We have travelled 
full circle, from the first to one of the most recent, and the common factor is 
the intensity of anguish both Bennett and Simonsen display.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F662cacc3a343b0e33cd9bcef15b891fcd85b938b%2F0_0_1444_1423%2F1444.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%2C%20a%20curse%20and%20Tony%20Cascarino%3A%20lesser-known%20facts%20about%20the%20play-offs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-league-play-offs-agony-ecstasy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F662cacc3a343b0e33cd9bcef15b891fcd85b938b%2F0_0_1444_1423%2F1444.jpg>
 Design: Mick Kinlan 
The Agony & The Ecstasy: A Comprehensive History Of The Football League 
Play-Offs is available now in paperback from Ockley Books 
<http://www.ockleybooks.co.uk/product/17-the-agony-the-ecstasy-a-comprehensive-history-of-the-football-league-play-offs>
 