
Chelsea continue to be dogged by accusations that their players tumble too 
easily to the turf after Sam Allardyce claimed Branislav Ivanovic “went down 
looking for a penalty” as the home side maintained their three-point advantage 
at the topwith a 2-0 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/26/chelsea-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
.

Ivanovic fell after a clash with Andy Carroll in first-half stoppage time, the 
West Ham United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> forward 
initially appearing to grab hold of the full-back’s shirt but loosening his 
grip before the Serb fell. The incident provoked a furious reaction from 
Carroll and the goalkeeper, Adrián, with players from each side going head to 
head in the penalty area.

The incident came after two Chelsea players were booked for simulation in the 
recent victory over Hull City,when Gary Cahill was fortunate to escape a second 
yellow card 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/13/hull-city-steve-bruce-gary-cahill>
 in that fixture for a similar offence. “I thought he went down looking for a 
penalty,” said the West Ham manager, his frustrations at a number of decisions 
having regularly been aired to the fourth official. “I don’t know about players 
being ‘entitled’ to go down looking for penalties but they do try and make the 
referee’s mind up. Staying on your feet does not get rewarded if you’re fouled. 
We all know that.

“I don’t think the decisions went for us today but we all know the script for 
games like this, when you’ve been in involved in games like this as long as I 
have. Some of the free-kicks given against us were very harsh indeed. None of 
them were particularly major. But you’ll have to ask the referee. I’m not 
paying any more money to the Football Association.”

José Mourinho <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho> has 
consistently defended his players over the allegations of diving in recent 
weeks and claimed Ivanovic had been fouled. “I think it’s a penalty,” he 
claimed. “The other guy grabs him if you look at it on television. But it was 
an isolated situation. The game was good, aggressive but correct. The only guy 
who dived was [West Ham’s Enner] Valencia and that was not in the box, and no 
one reacted negatively. A good victory for us, a good performance from the 
referee, a good performance, even if it was a defeat, for West Ham.”

The win was a fifth in succession for Chelsea since they suffered their only 
defeat this season, at Newcastle in the first week of December, to maintain a 
three-point lead over Manchester City,who won 3-1 at West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/26/west-bromwich-albion-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
. “I am delighted,” said John Terry, whose second goal in successive matches 
had established the lead. “We are playing well, everyone can see that, and the 
pressure is on [the teams below] now to win. If we continue to play well, it 
will be tough for everyone else. That is the target for us. We have had a good 
start and if we continue our form it will be tough for anyone. It is important 
we remain calm and keep doing what we are doing.”

Asked about his captain’s form, Mourinho added: “He’s always had that [knack] 
of scoring goals. He’s full of confidence. I see my John of 2004, 2005, 2006. I 
see him back. I don’t see the difference. The only difference is when I see his 
twins at the training ground. They were born in that period when I was first at 
the club but now they are there running around and kicking balls. In him, there 
is no difference. He’s playing so well. But when the team is playing so well, 
it’s easy for the individuals to be performing at this level.”
 