
Bournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> became the 
latest side to try to find a way through Antonio Conte’s relentless Chelsea 
side at Stamford Bridge on Boxing Day. They also became the latest side to fall 
short.

Chelsea were missing both Diego Costa and N’Golo Kanté, ever present in the 
club’s march to the top of thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>. Bournemouth, meanwhile, 
switched their formation to a back three in an attempt to mirror and counter 
Conte’s successful shape.

Eddie Howe’s men were brave, determined and gave their all, but so did Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> and a difference in quality 
asserted to leave the home side just two games short of equalling Arsenal’s 
record of 14 consecutive victories in the Premier League.

Manchester United’s Mkhitaryan rounds off easy win over Sunderland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/manchester-united-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
All the talk before the match had been about Michy Batshuayi, Chelsea’s £33m 
striker who had yet to start for the club since joining in the summer but now 
had an opportunity in Costa’s absence. Conte however, considers the 23-year-old 
to be a work in progress. Instead, he opted to go without a No9 and with 
experience, as he pushed Eden Hazard through the middle with Willian and Pedro 
Rodríguez alongside him. Pedro scored twice while Hazard was successful from 
the penalty spot.

“Eden has a real talent,” Conte said, “but the most important thing is that he 
is putting his talent into the team. It’s so important he is doing such great 
things with the ball and without it. It is fantastic, I hope he continues to 
improve in this way. I am pleased for him and I am pleased for all my players 
because they did so well.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fantonio-conte-chelseas-12th-straight-win-sends-a-message-to-league-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antonio%20Conte%3A%20Chelsea's%2012th%20straight%20win%20sends%20a%20message%20to%20the%20league%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fantonio-conte-chelseas-12th-straight-win-sends-a-message-to-league-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antonio%20Conte%3A%20Chelsea%27s%2012th%20straight%20win%20sends%20a%20message%20to%20the%20league%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fantonio-conte-chelseas-12th-straight-win-sends-a-message-to-league-video&media=>
Conte: Chelsea’s 12th straight win sends a message to the league 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/27/antonio-conte-chelseas-12th-straight-win-sends-a-message-to-league-video>
Chelsea’s altered lineup felt their way into the match and it was not until 
the 15th minute that Hazard managed to create space for himself around the box, 
a low shot coming to nothing after an exchange of passes with Willian. From 
that point, however, the Belgian just got stronger. His blind pass sent Pedro 
clear for an opportunity in the 21st minute and it was a brilliant dribble from 
the Belgian that led to the corner from which Chelsea scored the opening goal.

Cesc Fàbregas took the corner, but played it short before heading for the 
penalty area. The ball found its way to Hazard who once again span his marker 
and found his Spanish team-mate on the edge of the box. Fàbregas found the 
delicate through-ball and the onrushing Pedro who took one touch wide and then 
another to chip the ball back, over Artur Boruc and into the far side of the 
net.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fchelsea-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4250202f34011abb7207210a208535e6924327e%2F0_0_3829_2298%2F3829.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chelsea%E2%80%99s%20Pedro%20torments%20Bournemouth%20to%20stretch%20league%20winning%20run%20to%2012&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fchelsea-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chelsea%E2%80%99s%20Pedro%20torments%20Bournemouth%20to%20stretch%20league%20winning%20run%20to%2012&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fchelsea-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4250202f34011abb7207210a208535e6924327e%2F0_0_3829_2298%2F3829.jpg>
 Pedro leaves the Bournemouth defence standing with a chipped finish beyond 
Artur Boruc. Photograph: Frank Augstein/AP 
It was a goal of real class, and an opening that came from nowhere. That is 
the quality Conte’s team have in their locker and for a minute Bournemouth 
looked shocked; they had matched the hosts for effort but could nothing to stop 
their quality.

“I don’t think the first goal turned the game but it certainly didn’t help,” 
said a typically honest Howe. “We started well, looked solid and compact as a 
unit. I was pleased with how they were playing and then Chelsea produce a bit 
of magic. After that you’re looking at how you respond. We did well, had 
opportunities and it was the second goal that was a key moment in the game.”

Howe’s appraisal of the game was correct; Bournemouth could have drawn level 
after falling behind and perhaps should have had a penalty when Adam Smith was 
brought to the ground. But come the second half Chelsea emerged with a 
determination to settle the encounter.

Now noticeably sharper to the ball than Bournemouth, César Azpilicueta robbed 
them of the ball after Jack Wilshere played a pass marginally behind Harry 
Arter. Chelsea broke like a wild fire and advanced into the box with the 
defence on the turn. Simon Francis, who had struggled to get near Hazard in the 
previous 49 minutes, stuck out a leg and tripped the playmaker for a definite 
penalty. Hazard himself stepped up and send Boruc the wrong way to score.

Arsenal’s Olivier Giroud snatches late win against West Brom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/arsenal-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
Two-nil may be a dangerous scoreline but it carries less risk for this Chelsea 
team, so effective are they in defence and so deadly on the counter. Five 
minutes after the penalty Hazard nearly scored again as Chelsea broke from one 
end to the other in seconds. Willian led and finished the next break, with 
Boruc doing well to hold the Brazilian’s shot. Moses drove just wide in the 
58th minute, Pedro curled beyond the far post in the 64th. In between times 
there was an impudent vignette as Hazard worked his way around a prone Fàbregas 
by deftly lifting the ball over his body.

Chelsea were oozing confidence and Conte was also at his most animated, 
slapping his thighs in frustration at imperfections that were imperceptible to 
most spectators. His side gave up just one chance for the remainder of the 
game, Thibaut Courtois doing enough to stop a shot from the substitute Benik 
Afobe.

Conte’s final gesture was to instruct that the ball be cleared into touch so 
that Batshuayi could come into the play for the final seconds of added time. 
Instead Chelsea went on another counterattack, Pedro shimmied into space and 
hit a fearsome shot that deflected off Steve Cook and into the net. Batshuayi 
made it on to the pitch just in time to hear the final whistle.
 