
Chelsea will face Benfica in the quarter-finals of the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> but could face the 
reigning holders Barcelona in the semi-finals.

England's last remaining club in Europe will face the Portuguese side for the 
first time in European competition with the second leg at Stamford Bridge.

Should they progress, Chelsea would face the winners of the quarter-final 
between Milan andBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>.

In the other quarter-finals, Real Madrid were drawn against the Cypriot side 
Apoel Nicosia while Marseille will take onBayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich>.

The first legs are to be played on 27/28 March with the second legs to be 
played on 3/4 April.

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> have two former Benfica 
players in their squad – the Brazilians David Luiz and Ramires. The Portuguese 
club are second in their domestic league, a point behind Porto, and emerged 
triumphant in the group phase during which they drew home and away with 
Manchester United.

Benfica also overcame a 3-2 first-leg defeat by Zenit St Petersburg in the 
first knockout stage, winning 2-0 at the Estádio da Luz to secure their place 
in the quarter-finals.

Reacting to today's draw, caretaker manager Roberto Di Matteo said: "When you 
get down to the last eight teams, any draw is difficult. I've seen Benfica many 
times. They were in Man United's group.

"It's a tough game for us. I think the fact that we play the first game away 
for us is good."

Di Matteo refused to contemplate a potential semi-final against Barcelona. 
"Are you writing off ACMilan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> 
straight away, as easy as that - the leaders of Serie A?" he said. "(We will 
take it) game by game. That's what I've learnt in my playing career and my 
coaching career."

Benfica's former player, and current director, Rui Costa says his side the 
Portuguese have nothing to fear. "We have our own threats and we do not fear 
anyone," he said. "We are prepared for anything. We have the energy and the 
will to go on in this competition."

Chelsea's chief executive, Ron Gourlay, claimed it was a decent draw for the 
club, especially with the second leg being played at Stamford Bridge.

He told uefa.com: "It's a good one for us but it doesn't matter who you get at 
this stage. It was important to get the away game first and hopefully we can 
build the foundation from there. We're pleased.

"Ramires and David Luiz will know a lot about Benfica – we also know a lot 
about them because they topped Manchester United's group."

If Chelsea do go on to meet Barcelona in the semi-finals, it would be a chance 
to avenge their agonising defeat in 2009 when Andrés Iniesta scored in injury 
time at Stamford Bridge to seize a place in the final for the Catalan side.

Milan, however, matched Barcelona at the Camp Nou in the group stage, drawing 
2-2, although they lost at home 3-2, and the Italian club's director Umberto 
Gandini insisted they were confident.

He said: "At least it will be easy to organise the away game as we have been 
there recently and we know the place. We faced them in the group stage and the 
aggregate score was 5-4 so I think it will be balanced.

"We drew 2-2 there and played well also at home despite losing 3-2, so we have 
confidence because I think we have also improved since then."

He added: "It's a game every player dream to play, both teams will be very 
motivated and we will see the winner of Benfica-Chelsea in the semi-finals!"

Quarter-finals draw (ties to be played March 27/28 and April 3/4)

APOEL v Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid>

Marseille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> v Bayern Munich

Benfica v Chelsea

AC Milan v Barcelona

Semi-finals draw (ties to be played April 17/18 and 24/25)

Marseille/Bayern Munich v APOEL/Real Madrid

Benfica/Chelsea v AC Milan/Barcelona

Europa League quarter-final draw (first legs to be played on March 29. Second 
legs to be played on April 5)

AZ Alkmaar v Valencia

Schalke v Athletic Bilbao

Sporting Lisbon v Metalist Kharkiv

Atletico Madrid v Hannover
 