
Guus Hiddink has never lost a game in the FA Cup and with Scunthorpe aiming to 
emulate on Sunday afternoon what Bradford somemorably and humiliatingly achieved
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/24/chelsea-bradford-city-fa-cup-fourth-round>
 in last season’s fourth round by beating Chelsea at Stamford Bridge he has no 
intention of starting now.

With a round of Premier League games scheduled for midweek, when the champions 
will host West Bromwich Albion, and his employers desperate to improve their 
current 14th position in the table, Hiddink could be excused for making 
sweeping changes to his side to play a team 15th in League One and that boast a 
single victory from their past six league games. But while a couple of 
unfamiliar young faces might find their way into Sunday’s squad, he said: “We 
take theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> seriously. I’m not 
changing five, six, seven players to bring in five, six, seven players from the 
academy.”

Guus Hiddink: Diego Costa and Oscar like bulls in Chelsea training clash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/diego-costa-oscar-bulls-chelsea-training-clash-guus-hiddink>
Hiddink guided Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> to FA 
Cup success in 2009 and though he politely evaded the suggestion that it might 
be his greatest moment in management – he did, after all, win six league titles 
and a European Cup with PSV Eindhoven and the Intercontinental Cup with Real 
Madrid – he described it as “an achievement which is considered worldwide as a 
huge achievement”. “The impact of the FA Cup is huge worldwide,” he said. “You 
get an impact from Australia to Asia to the United States. It’s huge.”

What with the much-publicised training-ground spat between Diego Costa and 
Oscar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/diego-costa-oscar-chelsea-training-confrontation>
 the squad have had other things to talk about than their memories of losing to 
Bradford but their coach sees no need to remind them. “I haven’t heard anyone 
talking about it, but we take it seriously,” he said. “We see the concentration 
in training. They are not going into this game as a game [they feel forced] to 
play, no, they’re eager to play. And the people I have around me, they have 
that feeling as well. [First team coach] Steve Holland, he’s very aware of not 
falling a second time into the trap.”

Asked whether, during a career in management that is approaching the end of 
its third decade, he has ever been the victim of a giantkilling, Hiddink sat 
silent for a few moments and then shook his head. “Not that we were as a 
favourite beaten by a club,” he said. “Not one that you say: ‘Oh, I feel 
embarrassment about getting knocked out.’”

Hiddink continues to insist that he will not be in charge of Chelsea next 
season, but may continue to have some involvement.

“I’ve come back here with a lot of affection for the club. I don’t say I will 
stop with Chelsea after 28 May.”

Hiddink is likely to have the striker Radamel Falcao as part of his squad 
until then, after Monaco ruled out taking him back early. The on-loan Colombian 
has struggled to make a contribution and has not featured at all since the end 
of October due to a thigh injury, on which he underwent checks at Monaco’s 
training ground last week.

Monaco’s vice-president Vadim Vasilyev said: “He has six to eight weeks to go 
with this injury. We have decided not to take him back for the moment.”
 