
Chesterfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> have been 
ordered to replay their FA Cup second-round tie with MK Dons by the Football 
Association.

The Spireites beat the Dons 1-0 but after the game admitted a charge of 
fielding an ineligible player, George Margreitter, and will now have to face 
Karl Robinson’s side again.

Margreitter, who is on loan from Wolverhampton Wanderers, played in the 
fixture, despite not the necessary paperwork not being completed in time.

In a statement released on the their official website, the FA confirmed that 
submissions from Chesterfield had been considered ahead of the decision to 
order a replay.

“Following an FA Cup sub-committee hearing at Wembley Stadium on Monday, 
Chesterfield have been ordered to replay theirFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> Second Round Proper fixture 
against Milton Keynes Dons,” the FA confirmed.

“Chesterfield had admitted a breach of FA Cup Rule 15(j), after fielding an 
ineligible player, namely Georg Margreitter, in their 1-0 win atMK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons> on Saturday 6 December 2014.

“Margreitter – on loan to Chesterfield from Wolverhampton Wanderers – played 
in the fixture without the necessary written permission having been received by
The FA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa> as at the 12 noon deadline on 
Friday 5 December 2014.

“After considering submissions made by Chesterfield in relation to the charge, 
the committee has ordered the tie to be replayed at MK Dons on the earliest 
available date as decided by The FA.

“The tie will be played to a finish, with no further replay. No further action 
was taken against Chesterfield as ordering the tie to be replayed was deemed 
sufficient punishment.

“Full written reasons will follow. The decision is final and binding on all 
parties.”

The winner of the replayed tie will face a trip to either Worcester City or 
Scunthorpe United in the third round.
 