
Chesterfield have appointed Dean Saunders as their new manager on a two-year 
contract followingPaul Cook’s departure for Portsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/12/portsmouth-paul-cook-chesterfield>
. Cook left the club on Tuesday after the4-0 aggregate defeat by Preston in the 
League One play-off semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/10/preston-north-end-chesterfield-league-one-play-off-match-report>
.

Saunders, who has previously managed Wrexham, Doncaster and Wolves, finished 
the season in interim charge of Crawley but was unable to prevent them from 
being relegated to League Two. The former Wales and Liverpool striker took 
charge of the Crawley in December after John Gregory stepped down to undergo 
heart surgery.

Portsmouth appoint Paul Cook after meeting Chesterfield’s release clause
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/12/portsmouth-paul-cook-chesterfield>
Crawley’s relegation means Saunders has now taken a team down in three of the 
past four seasons, having been in charge when Doncaster were relegated from the 
Championship in 2012 and Wolves the following year.

Saunders won eight of his 24 league games with Crawley but they were relegated 
on the last day of the season.Gregory announced on Saturday that he would not 
be returning to the club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/09/john-gregory-leaves-crawley-town-post>
.

Despite relegation, the West Sussex club were keen for Saunders to remain as 
manager and talks were planned with the Crawley chief executive, Michael 
Dunford, for later this week.

Saunders has big shoes to fill after Cook guided Chesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> to the Johnstone’s Paint 
Trophy final, the League Two title and a sixth-placed finish in League One 
during his two and a half years at the Proact Stadium.

Saunders told Chesterfield’s website: “It is a great opportunity as this is a 
club on the rise, run by good people, and I am inheriting a very good team from 
Paul Cook. Taking over now gives me a full pre-season to make a fresh start, 
put my plans in place and work with the squad, which is a great position to be 
in.”
 