
A member of Chesterfield’s staff has left the club following an internal 
investigation into a raffle for a place at the club’s pre-season training camp 
that sold only four ticketsand was won by a “falsified” entry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/19/chesterfield-issue-apology-fans-faked-winning-raffle-entry>
.

The League One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> club 
said their head of commercial and marketing, Kevin Fitzgerald, has left after a 
supporter spotted that the winner for a place on the training camp in Hungary 
possibly did not exist.

Chesterfield issue apology to fans over faked winning raffle entry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/19/chesterfield-issue-apology-fans-faked-winning-raffle-entry>
“After a thorough internal investigation, I can now confirm the person 
responsible for this total farce has now left the football club,” said the
Chesterfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> director and 
company secretary, Ashley Carson.

“I am still reeling from the shameful incident that has attracted nationwide 
headlines for the club for all the wrong reasons,” Carson said. “Kevin 
Fitzgerald has been a hard-working, respected, likeable employee who has, for 
some reason, made a massive error of judgment and has paid the consequences for 
his actions. The board were unaware of his actions and have taken swift action 
after uncovering the truth.

“I do hope we can look for a replacement to head our commercial department, 
move forward and pick up the pieces from the whole sorry mess.”

Chesterfield had stated the competition had been won by Surrey-based James 
Higgins. The club had even sent him a get well soon message in a press release 
because Higgins was apparently too ill to attend the training camp in Hungary.

In a statement, Carson said: “I have discovered that a winning entry was not 
legitimate and the information supplied to the club’s communications department 
had clearly been falsified with regards to the winner of a place at the 
pre-season training camp.

“Fortunately, no supporters have been affected financially or inconvenienced. 
However, the club has a zero-tolerance approach to such misleading activities 
and we remain committed to supporting our supporters on every level, which 
includes transparency and clear communications.”

Carson, who was tipped off by a supporter who had “concerns” about the 
competition, for which tickets cost £20, added: “Chesterfield Football Club 
apologises unreservedly to the four supporters who entered the competition.”
 