
One of Chesterfield’s sponsors has pulled out in the wake of the club signing 
the striker Ched Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/chesterfield-sign-ched-evans-three-months-before-retrial>
 three months before he faces a retrial for rape.

The fitting company HTM Products said it had withdrawn its support of the 
League One club “in light of recent events”.

Evans was convicted of the 2011 rape of a 19-year-old woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/apr/20/ched-evans-found-guilty-rape> 
and sentenced to five years in prison. He served half his term before being 
released in October 2014.

The 27-year-old Welsh striker has always insisted he is innocent and succeeded 
in having hisconviction quashed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/21/ched-evans-wins-appeal-against-conviction>
 at the court of appeal earlier this year. The court has ordered a retrial, due 
to begin on 4 October.

Chesterfield’s current manager, Danny Wilson, was previously manager at 
Sheffield United, where Evans played before his conviction. The club released 
him from his contract at the end of the 2011-12 season. An offer in 2014 from 
the Blades to use their facilitiesto train after his release from prison was 
rescinded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/20/ched-evans-training-offer-withdrawn-sheffield-united>
 following a backlash from fans and patrons, anda possible deal with Oldham 
Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/08/ched-evans-signing-called-off-oldham>
 was abandoned under pressure from the club’s sponsors.

HTM Products, which has sponsored Chesterfield FC for six years, describes 
itself as a “well established family-owned and run business operating from two 
sites in Chesterfield and Knottingley”on its website 
<http://www.htmproducts.co.uk/>.

A post on its Facebook page <https://en-gb.facebook.com/htmfloorsandwalls/> 
said: “In light of recent events, HTM products has ceased all sponsorship 
arrangements with Chesterfield football club. Jon Knapp-managing director.”

At the time of Evans’s signing, Chesterfield’s chairman, Dave Allen, said the 
club was “delighted to have secured the services of an outstanding footballer, 
who is now keen to get back to work and score goals”.

He added: “Chesterfield Football Club have given a great deal of thought to 
this signing and, following the court’s decision, we are in no doubt thatChed 
Evans <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ched-evans> should be welcomed back 
into his profession as a professional footballer.”

HTM Products said it had no further comment to make.

A Chesterfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> spokesman 
said: “HTM Products had already advised us at the end of last season that they 
were not planning to renew their stand sponsorship.

“The reaction to the signing of Ched Evans from other current sponsors has 
been very positive and we have also attracted new sponsors since the signing 
was announced.”
 