
Ajax have long been synonymous with all that is worthy in developing talent. 
But now the Dutch institution could be at the forefront of another trend, with 
Chinese investors thought to be targeting a stake in the club in the hope of 
unlocking the potential to grow football from the bottom up in the world’s most 
populous country.

Manchester City owners announce £265m deal with Chinese investors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/01/manchester-city-265m-deal-chinese-investment-group>
There were no Chinese Super League matches in Beijing in early September 
because the Workers’ Stadium was storing tanks for a huge military parade.

It seemed an apt metaphor for a domestic league that has spluttered, stuttered 
and occasionally attracted headlines for all the wrong reasons during two 
decades in whichDidier Drogba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jan/30/shanghai-shenhua-didier-drogba-galatasaray>
,Nicolas Anelka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/jan/18/nicolas-anelka-shanghai-shenhua-china>
,Paul Gascoigne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/feb/02/sport.features> and 
Sven-Goran Eriksson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/18/england-sven-goran-eriksson-shanghai-east-asia>
 have passed through.

In the shadow of that same stadium, however, bars were packed late into the 
evening with young fans watching Premier League action.

Following a shaky start, when the Premier League ceded ground to the NBA and 
other European leagues by opting to show matches exclusively on pay TV, English 
clubs have become the means by which young middle-class Chinese choose to 
express themselves.

Two Premier League matches per weekend are shown free to air on China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Central Television, which reaches 
more than 320m homes across the country. Meanwhile, it has also invested in 
growing its presence on Chinese social networks and websites. Football as a 
spectator sport is huge business.

Yet later that week, as if to demonstrate the scale of the challenge facing 
the sport, the Chinese national team drew 0-0 with Hong Kong to leave them 
third in their qualifying group for the 2018 World Cup.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchina-focus-football-global-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbcf0d344043624b8471c6c706e8a6b053512638%2F0_190_3883_2332%2F3883.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%E2%80%99s%20focus%20on%20football%20could%20tilt%20the%20global%20game%20on%20its%20axis%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchina-focus-football-global-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%E2%80%99s%20focus%20on%20football%20could%20tilt%20the%20global%20game%20on%20its%20axis%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchina-focus-football-global-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbcf0d344043624b8471c6c706e8a6b053512638%2F0_190_3883_2332%2F3883.jpg>
 Hong Kong players celebrate after they held China to a 0-0 draw in 2018 World 
Cup qualifying. Photograph: STR/AFP/Getty Images 
The result was seen by fans as the latest humiliation for the national side 
and an embarrassment for the country’s president, Xi Jinping, who this year 
published a 50-point plan toturn China into a “soccer powerhouse” 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/china-announces-plan-become-soccer-powerhouse-host-world-cup-part-xi-jinpings-chinese-1849208>
, proposing to overhaul the sport at every level.

“Revitalising soccer is a must to build China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/china> into a sports powerhouse as part 
of the Chinese dream. It is also what the people desire,” said the central 
reform leading group, led by Xi, who has targeted improving the “sport economy” 
as a key priority, even against the backdrop of recent market turmoil.

With hosting and qualifying for the World Cup finals listed as long-term goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/17/china-sets-goal-of-hosting-world-cup-with-master-plan-for-football>
, the authorities plan to substantially increase the number of young people 
playing football, with the number of special “soccer schools” raised to 20,000 
after five years and to 50,000 in a decade.

According to Gorden Song, who runs a private equity Chinese sports investment 
fund, the goal is to achieve that aim partly by encouraging investors to sink 
money into football academies and local clubs across the country.

“The Chinese government has decided to turn the FA into more of a social 
organisation,” he says over coffee in a hotel within a stone’s throw of the 
Bird’s Nest stadium, built for the 2008 Olympics but little used since. “It’s a 
big change, there will be elections for the leader and it could be a 
businessman rather than a state official.

“To develop faster it will focus on participation to try to grow the pyramid 
and grow football at different levels. In China there are no community clubs 
traditionally – there have been very few in the past, normally built by retired 
professional football players. In the last two or three years, we have seen 
more start.”

Traditionally there has been no football pyramid in China, because clubs were 
effectively banned for political reasons, with restrictions on gatherings of 10 
people or more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchina-focus-football-global-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee03ae0e0292a58bcd361487fb438e573bf47d43%2F0_197_4038_2423%2F4038.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%E2%80%99s%20focus%20on%20football%20could%20tilt%20the%20global%20game%20on%20its%20axis%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchina-focus-football-global-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%E2%80%99s%20focus%20on%20football%20could%20tilt%20the%20global%20game%20on%20its%20axis%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchina-focus-football-global-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee03ae0e0292a58bcd361487fb438e573bf47d43%2F0_197_4038_2423%2F4038.jpg>
 Shanghai Shenhua fans during their dramatic 8-7 penalty shoot-out victory over 
local rivals Shanghai SIPG in last month’s Chinese Cup quarter-finals. 
Photograph: Marcio Machado/ZUMA Press/Corbis 
“How could you think about organising a football team when you couldn’t even 
talk to your friends?” wondered Rowan Simons in his book Bamboo Goalposts, 
which documented his spluttering efforts to kick-start community football in 
the country. Under the new scheme, the country’s football association has been 
separated from the State General Administration of Sports for the first time, 
in an attempt to give it more autonomy and the ability to determine its own 
staffing and resources.

“You have to develop interest and provide places to play,” says Song. “Some of 
the growth will come from companies investing in youth development and 
participation. Football is different to other sports, where you can identify 
talent at an early age – we call it soldier training. In football, you need a 
pyramid and a wide base.” This is one of the reasons why China has been able to 
succeed in individual Olympic sports such as table tennis and gymnastics but 
has struggled when it comes to football.

There is hope changes in society will also help, with parents being encouraged 
to consider the health of their children as well as academic achievement and 
the carrot of learning English from European coaches while exercising.

One fascinating spin-off from this ambitious scheme to build a football 
infrastructure virtually from scratch across this vast land is the potential 
effect in Europe.

Chinese investors were among those interested in buying Aston Villa last 
season. Although that approach foundered, Chinese investors have this year 
acquired the French second division club Sochaux and the Eredivisie side Den 
Haag.

Professor Simon Chadwick, the chair in sport business strategy and marketing 
at Coventry University, believes that other similar investments are inevitable 
and that the rationale is as much to learn from them commercially and 
technically as for business reasons. Ajax are believed to be among the clubs on 
the radar of Chinese investors.

“The Chinese government has recently taken the decision to build the world’s 
biggest sport economy, which it wants to have reached $850bn in size by 2025,” 
says Chadwick. “At the heart of the country’s sporting investment is football, 
which the state is very keen to promote.

“Specifically, China would like to host and win football’s World Cup, which 
the country sees as being a way to assert its global status and power. As a 
result, both the government and corporations in China are investing in football 
– from the grassroots through to the elite professional level, which includes 
buying stakes in European football clubs.”

In China, the national side have long been a joke and the domestic Super 
League hit a nadir in 2009 whena match-rigging scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/dec/31/china-football-match-fixing> 
known as “chip shot gate” illustrated the extent to which it had become riddled 
with corruption.

The brittle, almost nonexistent nature of amateur and youth football in China 
meant that the top tier became an unhealthy combination of big money, 
superannuated big names and clubs used as the playthings for local businessmen.

Anelka, who had a short stint at Shanghai Shenhua, was just one who complained 
of “games behind my back”. For some, the CSL represented the disastrous amalgam 
of the worst aspects of China’s bureaucratic system and the controlled 
capitalism that encouraged chaotic private investment.

The country has only once qualified for the World Cup, playing in the 2002 
finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/worldcup2002/countries/page/0,11937,690502,00.html>
, and is determined to put that right before bidding for the right to host the 
tournament, possibly in 2030. As Simons pointed out in his book, China is one 
country for which Fifa has long been prepared to overlook its “government 
interference” rules and this year football’s governing body renewed its 
“memorandum of understanding” with the state.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchina-focus-football-global-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1c8f718f1322beac66a5a2b2976efc3bc93450f%2F0_90_2464_1479%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%E2%80%99s%20focus%20on%20football%20could%20tilt%20the%20global%20game%20on%20its%20axis%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchina-focus-football-global-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%E2%80%99s%20focus%20on%20football%20could%20tilt%20the%20global%20game%20on%20its%20axis%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchina-focus-football-global-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1c8f718f1322beac66a5a2b2976efc3bc93450f%2F0_90_2464_1479%2F2464.jpg>
 Brazil’s Roberto Carlos scores the first goal in a 4-0 win over China at the 
2002 World Cup. Photograph: John Sibley/Action Images 
“Before ordinary people ever actually played the game and long before European 
football became a lucrative TV sport, the dream of elite football success had 
already been hijacked by those with ulterior motives, including foreign powers, 
nationalist and Communist governments and, more recently, commercial 
enterprises,” lamented Simons.

“Fifa has handed the very game itself to the Chinese government and, under its 
control, football has become an entertainment show based on a sport the people 
have forgotten they are meant to play.”

The 50-point plan, with its emphasis on encouraging the billionaires who have 
sprung up in China over the past decade to sink funds into chains of private 
academies and facilities rather than overseas stars – and its recognition that 
top-down state control may not be the best way to run the sport – represents 
the latest attempt to set football on a new course.

Whether it can reduce the gap between rhetoric and reality and make Chinese 
youngsters as enthusiastic about playing as they are about consuming the sport 
is another question entirely.

China remains a magnet for the world’s biggest clubs when it comes to 
extending their brand and increasing commercial revenues, while players too are 
increasingly aware of the potential upside – John Terry spent the early part of 
his summer touring the country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchina-focus-football-global-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43ff200043c97151bc8406631338b6ec6d54057a%2F0_91_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%E2%80%99s%20focus%20on%20football%20could%20tilt%20the%20global%20game%20on%20its%20axis%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchina-focus-football-global-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%E2%80%99s%20focus%20on%20football%20could%20tilt%20the%20global%20game%20on%20its%20axis%20%7C%20Owen%20Gibson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchina-focus-football-global-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43ff200043c97151bc8406631338b6ec6d54057a%2F0_91_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Chinese fans of Bayern Munich cheer for the team before a pre-season friendly 
against Internazionale in Shanghai in July. Photograph: Xi Ya/dpa/Corbis 
But as the game’s biggest clubs continue to engage in an arm’s race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/25/bayern-munich-real-madrid-china-football>
 to reach China’s burgeoning middle classes, the trend of the country’s 
investors to scour Europe for clubs in which they can invest and from which 
they can learn is equally fascinating.

For Chadwick, the lesson from other business sectors is that China will get it 
right eventually. If and when it does, it could tilt the sport on its axis. 
“Given China’s recent record in other industrial sectors, one suspects that 
ongoing Chinese interest in football could well have a profound effect on the 
world’s favourite sport,” he concludes.
 