
There may soon be a way to get rid of an undesirable double chin, without 
going under the knife.

ATX-101, an experimental drug made by the California-based Kythera 
Biopharmaceuticals, is designed to be injected into the fat under the chin in a 
series of treatments spaced a month apart. The drug is a version of deoxycholic 
acid, a naturally-occurring molecule that helps the body break down fat, the 
company said on itswebsite 
<http://www.kytherabiopharma.com/pipeline/ATX-101-mechanism-of-action>.

The drug is in late-stage clinical trials and has not yet been approved by the 
federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The injections have been tested on 
more than 1,600 people, with more than 90% of patients reporting a long-term 
reduction of fat under the chin, Kythera said.

The number of treatments needed is determined by the amount of fat under a 
patient’s chin. On average, in clinical trials, patients underwent four to six 
treatments. According to the company, the drug was well tolerated by most 
patients and the most common side effects were pain around the treatment area, 
numbness, bruising, swelling and redness.

While a host of injectables exist to tighten and fill the rest of the face, 
there is currently no FDA-approved injectable to reduce fat under the chin. 
Approval of Kythera’s ATX-101 would be a first of its kind.

Age, genetics and weight all play a role in causing fat to store under the 
chin, creating the appearance of a double chin. In recent years, an increasing 
number of Americans have chosen to undergo surgery to get rid of such rolls, 
though some swear by neck-strengtheningexercise regimens 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D4RYqHeatYQ> or diets 
<http://www.livestrong.com/article/340903-diet-for-double-chin/>.

A 2012 report by the American Society of Plastic Surgeons found that chin 
augmentation was the fastest growing plastic surgery trend among men and women. 
with 20,680 such procedures having been performed in 2011. The society 
suggested that evolving video technology had helped to spur the rise in chin 
procedures.

“The chin and jawline are among the first areas to show signs of aging. People 
are considering chin augmentation as a way to restore their youthful look just 
like a facelift or eyelid surgery,” said then-president of ASPS Dr Malcolm Roth.

“We also know that as more people see themselves on video chat technology, 
they may notice that their jawline is not as sharp as they want it to be. Chin 
implants can make a dramatic difference.”

An advisory committee is set to discuss the new drug in a meeting on 9 March, 
Kythera said. The panel of advisors and experts will evaluate the merits of the 
treatment, and determine whether it should be recommended for approval by the 
FDA, though the agency is not required to follow the panel’s recommendation.

The FDA is set to complete its review of the drug on 13 May. Until then, those 
hoping to get rid of their double chins may just have to keepswiveling their 
head 
<http://www.livestrong.com/slideshow/1011117-10-exercises-reduce-double-chin/> 
and making silly faces.
 