
Rex Tillerson’s appointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-named-as-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-exxon-mobil-chief-putin>
 as Donald Trump’s secretary of state has paved the way for a new round of 
US-Russia energy talks that could open up investment in oil and gas, according 
to a former Russian energy minister.

Igor Yusufov, who served during Vladimir Putin’s first term and is a former 
Gazprom board director, said the formerExxonMobil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/exxonmobil> chief executive’s 
“business-like manner” and America’s changing political climate had created 
hopes for a revival of bilateral energy summits that last took place more than 
a decade ago.

Can Rex Tillerson live down his ties to Russia? | Jamie Weinstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/can-rex-tillerson-live-down-his-ties-to-russia>
ExxonMobil has huge oil assets in the Russian Arctic but is barred from 
exploring them by sanctions, and would be the main beneficiary of any thawing 
in relations.

Tillerson told a confirmation hearing on Wednesday 
<http://www.npr.org/2017/01/11/509216287/watch-live-rex-tillersons-secretary-of-state-confirmation-hearing>
 that sanctions harmed US businesses, but said he had personally never lobbied 
against sanctions despitereports saying ExxonMobil did so under his leadership 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/exxon-mobile-russia-sanctions-rex-tillerson-232770>
.

Tillerson was involved in US-Russia energy summits in 2002 and 2003, where he 
met Yusufov, who now runs a $2bn (£1.6bn) Russian oil and gas fund,Fund Energy 
<http://fundenergy.ru/>. 

There is mention of the possibility of future US-Russia energy talks in a 
dossier published by BuzzFeed on Wednesday on Trump’s alleged close ties with
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

In a claim the Guardian is unable to verify, the dossier says a Putin 
associate, Igor Sechin, met Trump adviser Carter Page in Moscow and raised with 
him the prospect of “future bilateral energy cooperation”.

Page – an oil industry consultant – is claimed to have reacted positively but 
to have been noncommittal in response.


Page, however, has said that while he did he did visit Moscow, he did not meet 
Sechin.

Yusufov told the Guardian Trump’s success had “evoked hopes” that energy 
dialogues between the US and Russia could be revived.


“Russia possesses both political and economical will to resuscitate this 
important international interaction format, possibly convoking the third energy 
summit with participation of leading ministries and private companies,” he said.

The 2002 and 2003 energy summits sprang out of meetings between George W Bush 
and Putin, and were seen by the US as a chance to identify new opportunities 
for investment in Russia.


Yusufov said a third summit could generate investments and help drive up the 
price of oil, which has rallied after anOpec deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/01/opec-deal-pushes-oil-price-up-to-54-a-barrel>
 last year to curb production that included Russia.

“[It would bring] stability to the global oil market, which means a just price 
for crude oil,” he said.

“In their turn, these relations of global partnership can lead to a reasonable 
exchange of both investments and technologies.”

Anything that pushes up the oil price is in Russia’s strategic interests, as 
the low price over the last two years has severely strained the country’s 
budget and seen living standards for ordinary Russians decline.

ExxonMobil has said 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-russia-exxon-mobil-arctic-idUSKCN0XG1VP> 
that when and if sanctions are lifted, the company would return to its joint 
venture with Rosneft in Arctic waters, where it holds oil licences spanning 
600,000 sq km (230,000 sq miles).

In 2014, Exxon suspended cooperation with Rosneft 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/rosneft-arctic-exxon-mobil-idUSL6N0RU07B20140929>
 after Russian intervention in Ukraine.

Observers said that even if Yusufov was not speaking on behalf of the Russian 
government, he was advocating an agenda that served the Kremlin’s interest.

“It might just be one of his personal initiatives that are not really backed, 
but the other side of story is he has certain connections to people in power,” 
said Vladimir Milov, a Russian opposition politician at theInstitute of Energy 
Policy <http://english.mgimo.ru/international-institute-of-energy-policy-and>, 
a Moscow-based thinktank.

Milov, who was deputy minister to Yusufov in 2002, said: “Here, a lot of 
people are hoping for some reopening of relations with US and potential 
involvement of Americans in certain projects – the energy industry in the first 
place.

“They want to unfreeze the projects with Exxon and I assume there’s mutual 
interest from big corporations in the US.”

This week US thinktank the Center for American Progress said it expected the 
Trump administration to change US policies to aid ExxonMobil’s interests in 
Russia.

“As secretary of state, Tillerson could presumably align state department 
policy in the Middle East, China, Russia and elsewhere with the financial 
interests of Exxon,”it said in a report 
<https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/green/news/2017/01/10/296277/how-exxon-won-the-2016-election/>
.

“At no time in recent US history has one company been at the brink of 
attaining so much power and influence over US policy, both domestic and 
foreign.”

A Kremlin spokesman on Wednesday said Russia stood by its assessment of 
Tillerson as someone who was constructive but tough.

“We understand that Tillerson will continue to be quite tough in pursuing his 
line,” said Dmitry Peskov, Putin’s press secretary.
 