
It turns out there is no category for war films told solely through the 
language of dance. But that never occurred to us as we set about turning a 
preposterous idea into our first full-length dance film. AndYoung Men, the film 
version of our 2015 stage production that explored the theme of war and the 
bonds that develop between the men consumed by it, feels like the project we 
have been leading up to for most of our working lives.

A decade of daring: Wayne McGregor at the Royal Ballet – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2016/nov/08/wayne-mcgregor-at-the-royal-ballet-in-pictures>
Our mission as artistic directors of BalletBoyz has always been to present the 
highest quality dance to as many people as possible, and we have tried many 
things during our unusual working partnership of nearly 30 years, including a 
number of films and documentaries. We began withBalletBoyz, our original 
fly-on-the-wall documentary about our lives as classical ballet dancers and, 
despite our reservations, the name stuck. We have followed up with films based 
onThe Rite of Spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/29/stravinsky-rite-of-spring> and 
The Kama Sutra <http://www.balletboyz.com/productions/kama-sutra/> and 
documentaries shot with the Bolshoi Ballet in Moscow, the Royal Ballet in 
Havana and Adugna Dance in Addis Ababa.

While our competitors were almost all choreographer-led companies, creating 
evenings of their own work and hiring a company of dancers to perform it, we 
felt our skill was in inviting choreographers to create work for our company of 
10 young men. This has left us frustrated at times, with a feeling of losing 
our artistic voice, and it has been through film-making that we have been able 
to retain a sense of creative power.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchoreographing-conflict-how-balletboyz-remembering-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32ba6b97552d5938cce6fec91772551551764dc2%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Choreographing%20conflict%3A%20how%20BalletBoyz%20are%20remembering%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchoreographing-conflict-how-balletboyz-remembering-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Choreographing%20conflict%3A%20how%20BalletBoyz%20are%20remembering%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchoreographing-conflict-how-balletboyz-remembering-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32ba6b97552d5938cce6fec91772551551764dc2%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 The horror of the battlefield in Young Men. 
When we first floated the idea of a group of unknown, untested and, in some 
cases, untrained dancers there were many who thought we had gone mad. “Student 
companies will never work,” we were told, but we had faith in our eclectic mix 
of young men. We believed that as they grew in experience they would gain 
confidence, but still there was a concern that they weren’t the finished 
article. Working with choreographer Iván Pérez changed that for good. Iván’s 
quality of movement had really struck a chord with us; fluent and original, it 
had a balance and logical integrity that gave it a great deal of freedom. At 
that time we didn’t realise that a few of our dancers already knew Iván’s work 
and also knew him as a dancer. It helped forge even stronger ties.

In some ways the mix of styles, skills and training within this group of 
dancers represented the kind of random selection you would get from 
conscription. Their backgrounds vary from conventional ballet training from an 
early age to routes into dance through hip‑hop and ballroom dancing and a basic 
inability to sit still. We engaged them in a simple audition process, asking 
those who would like to be in our company to come and dance for us. We weren’t 
interested in CVs or training histories or qualifications, looking instead at 
who in the room caught our attention and who looked like they would fit into 
our group.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchoreographing-conflict-how-balletboyz-remembering-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfad360431ce16ea5790d150cb86ab19fa022dec%2F103_0_2693_1616%2F2693.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Choreographing%20conflict%3A%20how%20BalletBoyz%20are%20remembering%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchoreographing-conflict-how-balletboyz-remembering-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Choreographing%20conflict%3A%20how%20BalletBoyz%20are%20remembering%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchoreographing-conflict-how-balletboyz-remembering-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfad360431ce16ea5790d150cb86ab19fa022dec%2F103_0_2693_1616%2F2693.jpg>
 Dancing with death in Young Men. Photograph: BalletBoyz 
For the stage production we had imagined Young Men as an ambiguous depiction 
of soldiers and war. The original theme had emerged unexpectedly and only later 
presented itself to us, and we therefore wanted to remove all explicit 
references to nationalities and battles and present an abstract evocation of 
conflict. Audiences would project their thoughts on to the frame that the 
choreography and dancers built in the same way as projections threw imagery on 
to the set.

Despite having a series of wonderful female dancers in our company from the 
outset, we have recently become better known as an all-male dance group. This 
has been true of our theatre output, but war is not just a male domain. We also 
wanted to acknowledge stories of the tenacity and great courage of women, so we 
held an audition for female dancers, not knowing exactly what we were looking 
for, but hoping similarly confident and accomplished performers would force 
themselves into the cast. We were not disappointed. This new dynamic allowed 
Iván to create more complex scenes and relationships and further helped avoid 
any casual slipping into an overtly macho portrayal of heroic and glorious 
death.

Including female dancers helped avoid any casual slipping into an overtly 
macho portrayal of heroic and glorious death

Of course choreography must convey emotion and meaning, but it is nothing 
without the right score, which is why we introduced Iván to Keaton Henson, who 
was exploring orchestral worlds to create atmospheric soundscapes. They joined 
forces in our studio, choreographing and composing side by side, sparking off 
one another to rapidly build scenes.

The conversion from stage to screen was decided more or less on the opening 
night atSadler’s Wells <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sadlers-wells>. We 
all felt that there could be another life for the work. Already committed 
elsewhere, Iván showed great faith in our ability to take the component parts 
of his choreography and rework them into a film. Character and narrative had to 
become more central, and to that end we switched the running order, changed 
casting and added extra material so that we could follow the journeys of 
particular soldiers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchoreographing-conflict-how-balletboyz-remembering-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e8c4fcee0140d2d3e9333f1340f4f38b3f91fce%2F420_126_1701_1020%2F1701.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Choreographing%20conflict%3A%20how%20BalletBoyz%20are%20remembering%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchoreographing-conflict-how-balletboyz-remembering-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Choreographing%20conflict%3A%20how%20BalletBoyz%20are%20remembering%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fchoreographing-conflict-how-balletboyz-remembering-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e8c4fcee0140d2d3e9333f1340f4f38b3f91fce%2F420_126_1701_1020%2F1701.jpg>
 A scene from Young Men. Photograph: BalletBoyz 
One scene that we knew we wanted to expand on was called Lookout and featured 
the men peering up over the top of the trenches, daring to look the enemy in 
the eye. This became the anchor for the period of the film, and placed us in 
the era of the first world war. Everything else then had to fit with that but 
we made a decision to create our own fictional army with no specific uniform, 
nation or battle, allowing us to take some liberties with historical accuracy.

Shooting for two weeks in Normandy in November 2015, we followed a gruelling 
schedule, keeping open minds to accommodate changing weather and shifting 
locations, but throughout the dancers were the solid, reliable backbone of the 
production. The crew would sometimes only get a glimpse of what a scene 
entailed before the take, but we knew the dancers would deliver.

Young Men looks almost exactly as we hoped it would, and we are delighted it 
will be shown on Remembrance weekend. So many elements came together in the 
most fortuitous ways that it has perhaps made us overconfident for the next 
film, and we are already developing ideas for the follow-up. In the meantime 
our mission remains unchanged whether on stage or on screen: to get dance out 
there.

• Young Men will be screened on BBC2 at 8.30pm tonight12 November.
 