
It was one of those moments that makes you either stand up from your chair or 
fall back into it, and forChristian Benteke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/christian-benteke> the perfect way to 
mark his first appearance for Liverpool. Shortly after half-time, and finding 
himself just outside Swindon’s area, the striker collected a pass on his chest 
and with the ball in mid air, thundered a right-foot volley into the top corner 
of the net. Pre-season or not, it was some goal and some way for the £32.5m man 
to introduce himself to a new set of fans.

Certainly the away contingent who filled the Adkins Family stand were 
delighted with the goal that had just been scored in front of them, and for 
Benteke there may have been a sense of relief given how this contest had gone 
for him to that point. The Belgian’s display had been scratchy to say the least 
and, in fairness, what could have been expected from someone playing his first 
meaningful football for some weeks having been the subject of a drawn-out 
transfer from Aston Villa.

HJK Helsinki 0-2 Liverpool | Friendly match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/01/philippe-coutinho-and-divock-origi-score-for-liverpool-with-christian-benteke-set-for-debut>
There was a very first touch that was miscontrolled, then a failure to read a 
cross, before a shot from close range that was struck too close to the 
opposition goalkeeper, Lawrence Vigouroux.

“What a waste of money” came the chant from the home supporters. They could 
only look on in shock and awe, however, when Benteke collected João Teixeira’s 
stabbed pass on 48 minutes and with a swing of his right boot showed in part 
why Liverpool decided to make the 24-year-old the second most expensive signing 
in their history. “You won’t see too many better goals – that was top-level 
technique,” saidBrendan Rodgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brendan-rodgers>, the Liverpool manager. 
“Overall he looked fairly sharp considering. He’s a real presence for us. I was 
impressed by him.”

Rodgers also had warm words for Roberto Firmino, the other of Liverpool’s 
major summer acquisitions making a first appearance. The Brazilian was signed 
from Hoffenheim for £29m in mid-June but has had to wait until now to show what 
he can do having been involved at the Copa América.

His day looked as if it was going to come to a quick end when, after 90 
seconds, and having run on to Lucas Leiva’s first-time pass, he crumpled under 
a challenge from Vigouroux. The 23-year-old soon got back to his feet, however, 
and showed why he developed a reputation for being an energetic and creative 
presence during his four and a half years in the Bundesliga.

Premier League 2015-16 preview No8: Liverpool | Sachin Nakrani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jul/30/liverpool-premier-league-preview-2015-16-brendan-rodgers>
Initially positioned on the left of a three-man attack, with Lazar Markovic on 
the right and Benteke the central striker, Firmino had the licence to roam and 
did just that, consistently moving across and through Swindon’s defence during 
the first half. “You can see he [Firmino] wants to create and he has a 
wonderful touch,” said Rodgers. “Whenever we were in and around the box, he 
looked a threat. And he wants to work hard. I was pleased with him.”

Benteke and Firmino were taken off on 69 minutes and it is now to be seen if 
they again feature from the start whenLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> begin their Premier League 
campaign away to Stoke next Sunday.

Rodgers claims he all but knows his team for that, and on the basis of the 
pre-season programme, which has involved four fixtures as part of a tour to 
Australia and Asia as well as a 2-0 victory overHJK Helsinki 24 hours prior 
this game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/01/philippe-coutinho-and-divock-origi-score-for-liverpool-with-christian-benteke-set-for-debut>
, it is likely he will go with a 4-3-3 formation. Who the three attackers will 
be is unclear, and it should not be assumed Benteke and Firmino will start 
given their relative lack of fitness and the pre-season form of fellow summer 
arrivals Danny Ings and Divock Origi. Then there is the 19-year-old winger 
Jordon Ibe, who has well and truly caught the eye during the summer.

One player who appears certain to miss out against Stoke, however, is Joe 
Allen after the Wales midfielder was forced to leave the field here after just 
12 minutes due to a suspected tweaked hamstring.

This was a less than convincing display by Liverpool who showed typical 
defensive sloppiness to allow Jonathan Obika to equalise for Swindon on 63 
minutes but secured a late winner through Sheyi Ojo after Vigouroux, who is on 
trial from the visitors, made a hash of the shot. Rodgers and the travelling 
fans appeared happy enough at the end, however, given the contributions of 
Benteke and Firmino. They both showed they can do it on a warm Sunday inSwindon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swindon>. Now for the real tests.
 