
Move over prawn cocktails and vol-au-vents. Sales of upmarket readymade 
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> canapes are 
booming as hosts stock up with delights such as miniature prawn doughnuts and 
salmon carpaccio.

With tills ringing as Christmas food shopping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/17/brexit-price-hikes-push-up-cost-christmas-britons>
 gets under way, this week will be the busiest in the UK for sales of party 
food and snacks over the festive season, according to supermarkets. This year, 
unusual and eye-catching modern “sweet made savoury” treats inspired by luxury 
delicacies from top Parisian stores and patisseries such asFauchon 
<http://www.fauchon.com/?gclid=CI2-htPv_dACFaEK0wod1r0J5Q> have emerged as a 
striking trend in some supermarket aisles.

New from Marks & Spencer <https://www.theguardian.com/business/marksspencer>, 
for example – which has launched a record 260 new food and drink products for 
this year’s festive season – are seafood knickerbocker glories, hot and sour 
prawn doughnuts and smoked salmon carpaccio, while amongWaitrose’s  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/waitrose>nibbles with a savoury twist are 
salmon and crab profiteroles and mini beef and chicken pies that resemble mince 
pies. With Christmas Day breakfast of growing importance, breakfast canapes are 
expected to be popular.

“It’s clear customers are getting more and more sophisticated in their taste 
and are really looking for something out of the ordinary,” said Sandra Ziles, 
head of product development at M&S.

“Food has become the most important part of Christmas and customers want to 
wow their guests. It’s interesting to see how traditions have changed – 1970s 
favourites prawn cocktail and vol-au-vents are now losing out to fresher, 
cleaner flavours with a twist.”

M&S expects to sell a staggering 140m pieces of party food over the festive 
season, washed down by 10m glasses of Prosecco.


The best Christmas food specials on TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/16/the-best-christmas-food-specials-on-tv>
A key source of inspiration for Ziles and her team is Paris – which they 
typically visit at least a year ahead of Christmas to scour the shelves and 
aisles of top groceries, tasting the products as they go along. The smoked 
salmon carpaccio in its new range, for example, was inspired last year by a 
similar product in the department store Le Bon Marché’s Grande Épicerie – a 
recently reopened food hall famous for its desserts and patisserie as well as 
gourmet savoury products. The retailer was similarly inspired by sweet products 
for the smoked salmon mousse-filled, gilded baubles that adorn its seafood 
starters and terrine.

The Co-op – the UK’s largest convenience retailer with 2,800 outlets – 
predicts revellers will snap up a record 56m canapes and 26m glasses of 
Prosecco. It is expecting to see sales of buffet favourites soar – including 
22m cocktail sausage rolls and 4.4m mini-bites. Sales of chilled party foods 
are up 4% on the same time last year, according to a spokesperson, who added: 
“Co-op is the country’s leading community food retailer and our stores are open 
over the festive period to meet customer needs. We are expecting a busy 
Christmas Eve and our stores have been manned efficiently to ensure customers 
receive the best service.”



Now on sale at Waitrose is its large version of arguably the most eye-catching 
dessert to grace the Christmas table –a bacon and banana-flavoured trifle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/28/heston-goes-the-whole-hog-this-christmas-with-bacon-and-banana-trifle>
 devised byHeston Blumenthal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/hestonblumenthal> – which, dusted 
with gold “nibs”, is among the many puddings this year with the bling factor.

Fresh and pre-ordered turkeys go into most stores on Monday. The big 
supermarkets are expecting Christmas food shopping to start in earnest mid-week 
and peak on so-calledfestive Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/18/christmas-food-shoppers-braced-battle-frenzied-friday>
, which will be the busiest trading day of the whole year. Shoppers are likely 
to leave buying festive fresh vegetables as late as possible to ensure tip-top 
condition, but the latest supermarket price war means they can snap up 
potatoes, carrots and sprouts for as little as 19p from German discounterAldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi>, 20p from Asda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> and 29p from Lidl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl>.


Last year’s trend of “posh crisps” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/06/posh-crisps-supermarkets> 
– featuring flavours such as gin and tonic and even pulled pork – has gone from 
strength to strength. The Co-op has already raised eyebrows with its Christmas 
Dinner crisps, described as “a delicious mix of turkey and stuffing, carrot, 
maple parsnip, and everyone’s favourite... sprout crisps”.
 