
Christian Benteke brought Liverpool a place in the last 32 of the Europa League
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> and Jürgen Klopp 
reassurance with an exquisite winner against Bordeaux. A reminder of the £32.5m 
striker’s predatory quality proved timely for the Liverpool manager with Daniel 
Sturridge returning to the treatment table yet again.

Liverpool v Bordeaux: Europa League – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/nov/26/liverpool-v-bordeaux-europa-league-live>
The Belgium international has endured a fitful start to his Anfield career but 
his fifth goal for the club, following James Milner’s disputed penalty, secured 
qualification with a game to spare.Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> will finish top of Group B 
with a point against Sion in the finale.

It was far from the intense, dazzling destruction of Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/21/manchester-city-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday but the display delivered a fifth win in six matches for Klopp and 
an opportunity to rest key players in Switzerland in a fortnight.

“It was difficult at times but you have to win the tough games and this was a 
tough game. It was a cool night,” said the Liverpool manager. It was for his 
team, their confidence and for Benteke, but not for Sturridge.

With embarrassing inevitability, the England international’s designs on a 
first appearance under Klopp were postponed by a fresh injury problem. The 
Liverpool striker had trained for over a week following his recovery from a 
knee injurybut complained of a sore foot  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/26/liverpool-daniel-sturridge-scan-foot>
shortly before kick off.

Sturridge was sent for a scan while Liverpool played on without him, as they 
have done for 72 of their 144 games since the 26-year-old joined the club from 
Chelsea in January 2013. A truly abysmal record. “I don’t know too much about 
the situation,” said Klopp. “We’ll have to wait.”

Sturridge missed a dominant display, albeit from the referee Alon Yefet. The 
Israel official was instrumental in the first two goals to leave his fourth 
official, Dvir Shimon, on the receiving end of an ear-bashing from Klopp and the
Bordeaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> coach Willy Sagnol. In 
response, Shimon could have replied that Yefet had merely applied the letter of 
the law.

Harry Kane continues streak to sink Qarabag and send Tottenham through
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/26/qarabag-tottenham-europa-league-match-report>
Simon Mignolet served notice of an alarming performance when he almost gifted 
the visitors an early breakthrough. The Liverpool goalkeeper sprinted out of 
his area to prevent Diego Rolán latching on to Joe Allen’s poor backpass and 
headed the ball to the Bordeaux midfielder Clément Chantôme.

The Belgium goalkeeper was indebted to Kolo Touré for blocking Chantôme’s 
first-time shot towards an empty goal. Liverpool came into the contest 
gradually, Benteke steering the first chance wide from Milner’s through ball 
and being penalised for offside when he converted Jordon Ibe’s measured pass. 
Too many lax touches in the final third, from Benteke and Roberto Firmino 
especially, undermined the home side’s attempts to establish control and they 
fell behind in bizarre circumstances.

Yefet penalised Mignolet for the often overlooked rule of holding the ball for 
longer than six seconds. To his credit, the goalkeeper managed 22 seconds 
before the referee blew.

As Klopp turned in disbelief to the fourth official, Jaroslav Plasil rolled 
the indirect free-kick to Henri Saivet and Bordeaux’s defensive midfielder 
swept a fine finish over the Liverpool wall and into the top corner. Mignolet 
looked suitably sheepish. “I’m a long time in the business and never had a 
time-play against a team who are dominating possession, so I don’t understand,” 
said a bemused Klopp.

Celtic out of Europa League after Vaclav Cerny’s late Ajax winner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/26/celtic-ajax-europa-league-match-report>
Moments later it was the French team’s turn to bemoan Yefet’s officiousness, a 
good trait in a referee. Benteke went down easily under a nudge from Ludovic 
Sané as they attacked Milner’s cross and the referee had no hesitation in 
pointing to the penalty spot and booking the incredulous defender. Milner sent 
Cédric Carrasso the wrong way from 12 yards with Klopp looking at the crowd 
rather than his penalty taker.

There was no controversy over the goal that gave Liverpool victory with the 
final kick of the first half. Nathaniel Clyne broke down the right and found 
the Belgium striker lurking on the edge of the area. With one touch he 
controlled the cross and took Sané out of the equation, with a second he 
snapped a superb finish inside Carrasso’s left-hand post from 18 yards.

Yefet continued to enrage both camps after the interval, disallowing another 
Benteke goal for an alleged push on a defender, booking Ibe for a shoulder 
charge and denying Bordeaux a penalty when Saivet’s corner struck the Liverpool 
centre-forward’s raised hand. The visitors pushed for a late equaliser but in 
vain. Klopp’s team march on.
 