
On a bleak night last November, the Northampton Town manager, Chris Wilder, 
stood pitch-side at Meadow Lane preparing for a post-match interview. His 
League Two side had just beaten Notts County but he could scarcely have looked 
less interested in, or pleased with, the result. When the BBC’s reporter from 
RadioNorthampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> inquired 
about the game, it quickly became clear he was quizzing a man with more 
important matters on his mind. “I’ll talk a little about football,” Wilder 
said. “And then I’ll talk a little bit more about other things.”

Other things. Important things. By the standards of the post-match 
blandishments to which football fans have become accustomed since the departure 
of José Mourinho, what followed was extraordinary. The 48-year-old from 
Sheffield embarked on ameasured but impassioned 10-minute soliloquy 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/34891594> during which he addressed the 
various financial horrors that were being visited on his club. He was not being 
paid. His staff were not being paid. The Cobblers were facing imminent oblivion 
as the subject of a winding-up order for an unpaid tax bill of £166,000.

Northampton Town raided by police over council’s missing millions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/23/northampton-town-police-council-criminal-investigation>
Back home at Sixfields, the skeletal beginnings of what was supposed to be a 
new East Stand stoodas a constant reminder of the £10.25m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/06/northampton-town-extinction-missing-millions>
 the club owed the borough council. Loaned the money for ground improvements, 
very little of it had been spent on refurbishment and the rest was missing. The 
one silver lining in this dark cloud? An offer from Wilder’s former chairman at 
Oxford United, Kelvin Thomas, who was willing to purchase the controlling stake 
of the Northampton chief executive chairman, David Cardoza.

“I can’t stand looking at that stand and I imagine all the supporters and the 
staff are the same,” said Wilder, of the barely-begun white elephant that had 
become a depressing symbol of a club mired in crisis. “I’ve not said anything 
because I’ve gone along with it and I’ve trusted that things would be looked 
after. What’s happened is an absolute shambles, a complete shambles and there’s 
[Thomas] who wants to take it forward. I just do not understand what is going 
on at this football club because it’s tearing us all apart. It can’t go on 
forever. This club needs the investment.”

Wilder’s courageous entreaty was heard around the country less than five 
months ago and a lot has happened in the interim. Off the field, Thomas took 
over the club on the understanding that its debt will be wiped out in exchange 
for the council acquiring land around Sixfields for development, whileCardoza 
has been arrested 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-northamptonshire-35411230> and released 
on bailby police investigating “alleged financial irregularities” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/23/northampton-town-police-council-criminal-investigation>
 in relation to the £10.25m loan. The outstanding tax bill has also been 
settled, while building work has resumed on the East Stand, which is being used 
but not yet finished.

It has been needed as the most implausible plot-line in an otherwise grim 
chapter in Northampton’s history has been the manner in which Wilder and his 
players somehow managed to ignore the off-field hoopla for which their club had 
been making headlines to secure promotion to League One with five games of the 
season to spare.

Last weekend’s draw against Bristol Rovers ensured Northampton became the 
first Football League clubto win promotion this season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/northampton-town-promoted-league-one-bristol-rovers>
, prompting scenes of delirium among loyal fans who, as recently as five months 
ago, were rattling buckets in an attempt to raise spare change for a club that 
owed the kind of sums you just do not find down the back of sofas. On Saturday, 
they were crowned champions with four games to go, drawing at Exeter while 
rivals slipped up.

“It’s all about putting smiles on the faces of the supporters, especially 
after the season we’ve had,” said a champagne-drenched Wilder last weekend. 
“It’s their club, I’ve always said that and we are there to look after it and 
do our best as employees. I’ve never gone along with the notion that players 
just come along and pick their money up and they move on, because you’ve seen 
the scenes at the end … of what we’ve tried to do by connecting with the 
supporters and them backing us in numbers right the way through. So we’re here 
to do our best and try to put out a team they can be proud of.”

Having seen their team secure promotion at a canter in the face of almost 
unbearable distraction, Northampton’s supporters have every right to be proud 
of their players but it is almost certainly their manager who deserves most 
plaudits for the November rallying cry that galvanised and united those with 
the best interests of the club at heart. Whether their manager, who has been 
linked with Bolton Wanderers, will be part of that future remains to be seen, 
but if he walks away Cobblers fans will remember him fondly. They may also 
ponder the fact the stand he used to hate looking at will soon be finished and 
in need of a name.
 