
The heat has been oppressive here in Hungary and is set to remain so for 
Sunday’s race but it has failed to subdue a reinvigorated Williams team who are 
making a robust bid to return to their glory days in the sun. So positive has 
been their recent form that from the team’s lowest ebb only two years ago it is 
now wins and the world championship being targeted by the deputy team 
principal, ClaireWilliams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams>.

This venerable and much-loved British racing institution, Frank Williams’s 
great privateer adventure that began in 1977 and took nine constructors’ and 
seven drivers’ titles in those heady 80s and 90s, delighted the crowd at that 
other great homegrown institution, the British Grand Prix. Beating the Mercedes 
of Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg off the start line,Felipe Massa and Valtteri 
Bottas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/05/williams-silverstone-british-grand-prix-f1-felipe-massa>
 took first and third which swiftly turned into a one-two and , for 20 laps,the 
underdogs were having their day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/05/williams-silverstone-british-grand-prix-f1-felipe-massa>
.

Williams thwarted by weather in British Grand Prix but future looks brighter | 
Giles Richards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/05/williams-silverstone-british-grand-prix-f1-felipe-massa>
The rain that enlivened a great race cost them, however. The FW37 lacks 
downforce in the wet and controversial tactics also played their part, so 
fourth and fifth finishes were a disappointment. Yet in 2013 Williams were 
ninth in the constructors’ championship, scoring only five points. Last year 
they were third, ahead of Ferrari and this year are third again but targeting 
the second-placed Scuderia, whom they trail by 60 points.

Claire Williams explains that this sudden resurgence has forced the team to 
adjust their ambitions upwards. “Our goal when we began our transformation, our 
big turnaround, was short-term to move up the grid,” she says. “But then we did 
it, so that was adjusted. So now let’s look at how we are going to win the 
world championship. We are closing that gap to hopefully getting race wins and 
a championship week on week and month on month at the factory. That is what our 
development plan is geared towards.”

This revival has not happened by accident. Of course the Mercedes power unit 
has been crucial but so have been changes within the team. A positive decision 
was taken to invest in improvement. Pat Symonds was brought in as chief 
technical officer, Rob Smedley as head of performance, alongside various other 
new senior technical positions. Massa, who had come from Ferrari, said it felt 
like a new team and, high praise indeed, that the aero department was stronger 
than the Scuderia’s. His experience alongside the now highly sought-afterpace 
of Bottas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/24/williams-valtteri-bottas-ferrari-f1>
 completed the picture.

“When the team doesn’t perform on the track, it is inevitably because 
something is not working back at base,” says Williams. “We have a very stable 
team at the moment. It is a happy team.There are no politics. We have our 
structure in place, everyone is working well together and that will enable us 
to hopefully continue this progress forward.”

A mark of this can be seen in their aggressive development. Behind Ferrari at 
the start of the season, they have caught and passed them. Even the 
disappointment at a very poor showing at Monaco, a circuit that admittedly does 
not suit the FW37, was met with a strong comeback withpodiums in Canada  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/07/lewis-hamilton-canadian-grand-prix>
and Austria. While in Hungary, another tight track with characteristics similar 
to Monaco they have clearly addressed some of the shortcomings they had in the 
principalitywith a sixth and eighth place in qualifying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/25/lewis-hamilton-pole-position-f1-hungarian-gp>
.

Equally, there was further cause for optimism when the team’s development 
driver, Alex Lynn, scored his debut GP2 victory a little later in the afternoon.

Competing at this level after such a long time has its problems, as 
Silverstone showed. The team took flak for not allowing Bottas, who appeared 
quicker than Massa, to take the lead and then to use the Brazilian to back up 
the chasing Mercedes – a bold strategy and one that, had it stayed dry, might 
even have resulted in a win. But telling the drivers to hold station was a call 
Williams defends. “We don’t know if Valtteri was quicker. He thinks he was. We 
don’t know if he was,” she insists. “It was one lap during which the engineers 
tried to take some time to think what were the best strategies for the two. The 
level of criticism that was angled towards us was slightly unfair.”

These decisions, Williams believes, are part and parcel of being in a team 
that is feeling its way back to the top. “This is a team that is still 
addressing the issues that we’ve had for years,” she says. “When you are a team 
that’s fighting further back, you don’t have these issues. The engineers aren’t 
thinking: ‘How on earth are we going to manage this race with a one-two and the 
likes of Mercedes biting at our heels?’ So for them it was a new experience and 
I think they did a great job to deal with the stress and pressure in a very 
difficult race.”

The team have, she admits, been “risk averse” in the past 18 months. Making 
the most of scoring points and not slipping up in the constructors championship 
and the crucial lucrative rewards a high finish ensures, has led to a sense of 
consolidation rather than aggression. But, with an optimistic team, still on an 
upward path, this is a case where success is likely to breed success. “We need 
to have some more races under our belt where we are in that position,” she 
says. “We have to feel a bit more comfortable with our operations, feel more 
confident in ourselves.”
 