
This winter I’ve hardly stirred out of doors. I can’t walk far and it takes me 
two minutes to get out of a taxi. But this week I had a dental appointment. I 
went to it, wondering why: for someone in my condition, keeping a date with the 
dentist is a testimony to one’s faith in doctors. You have to bet that the 
stuff the doctors do will give you enough extra time to show off the stuff that 
the dentist does. What do you want for the 10 minutes you’ve got left, a smile 
likeGeorge Clooney 
<https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/4/29/1398767011832/George-Clooney-at-the-Gra-011.jpg?w=620&q=55&auto=format&usm=12&fit=max&s=88e69f262c28471f40fd34a6a5e1bedb>
’s? Trigger warning: there will be teethist remarks in this essay.

I’m lucky with my dentist. He plays good jazz records in the background and 
his hygienist, when she’s got my mouth jacked open, asks only simple questions. 
“Did you seeSkyfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/25/skyfall-review> on TV last 
night?” she asks. “Ngh,” I reply. Her assistant asks harder questions (“What 
did you think of Javier Bardem’s teeth?”), but is starting to realise that a 
strangled cry might mean that I am croaking. Basically, nowadays, I don’t mind 
a visit to the dentist, whereas when I was young I minded like hell. But even 
now I can’t see the point of the big white set of American teeth.

The Americans can’t see the point of anything else. They want their mouths to 
prove that eternal youth is a social obligation. It’s in their culture, which 
combines an excess of professionalism with a deficient sense of proportion. 
Back in my days as a journalist for print and TV, I gradually got used to 
visiting Hollywood, but never got used to the teeth, which were dazzling not 
only in the case of the star, but of any male in his entourage. To be smiled at 
byErnest Borgnine <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000308/>’s lawyer was to incur 
flash-burns.

One day I was introduced to the veteran comedian Milton Berle 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000926/>. I had already realised that large and 
even teeth were an American standard, but his teeth weren’t just evenly large, 
they were blindingly white. The rest of his kindly head was about 100 years 
old, but when he peeled back his lips, it wasto reveal the killing weapons of a 
charging adolescent Tyrannosaurus 
<http://inkwellmanagement.com/images/authors/berle_milton.jpg>. He is buried in 
Hillside Memorial Park Cemetery, and the glow must come up through the ground.

Clive James: in the matter of how women are treated, Australia is the reverse 
of a stupid country
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/05/clive-james-on-australian-journalism>
Happy to be on screen mainly in the UK and Australia, I was able to confine 
any cosmetic attention to my person within the bounds of normality. I had my 
teeth cleaned professionally, but not rebuilt. I was allowed to go bald 
naturally. But when a series of mine about the artificial effects of fame was 
shown in the US, an important critic denounced my unreconstructed appearance as 
if I had burned the flag.
 