
It's midweek, it's sport, and it's... well, anyway, tonight sees Forfar take 
on Rangers andManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> host Fulham. Which is 
special enough to give me an excuse to post...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfWyA2koq3h8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfWyA2koq3h8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfWyA2koq3h8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfWyA2koq3h8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfWyA2koq3h8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfWyA2koq3h8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
close 

this.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDxv6bDc7LQ4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDxv6bDc7LQ4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDxv6bDc7LQ4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDxv6bDc7LQ4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDxv6bDc7LQ4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDxv6bDc7LQ4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
close 

And this, which was on the other side at the same time.

7pm: Nothing much is going to happen on my watch until 7.45pm, but Aston Villa 
have kicked off against CSKA Moscow, so I might as well mention any major 
incidents from that, before forgetting about the match entirely during its 
second half when I have something else to occupy my mind. Luckily, Paul Doyle 
is fielding that one with anall-singing, all-dancing minute-by-minute report 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2009/feb/18/aston-villa-cska-moscow-uefa-cup>
*. So you're losing out on the square root of absolutely eff all. So sue me!**
* Does not sing or dance
** Please do not sue me

7.10pm: And don't forget the cricket 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2009/feb/18/west-indies-england-cricket-third-test>
.

7.15pm: GOAL! Aston Villa 0-1 CSKA Moscow Wagner Love is sent clear of the 
Villa back line down the inside-left channel, tears into the box, manages to 
avoid getting his feet tangled up in those preposterous blue dreadlocks, and 
slips the ball under the advancing keeper and home.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FeVjyzoi3Enw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FeVjyzoi3Enw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FeVjyzoi3Enw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FeVjyzoi3Enw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FeVjyzoi3Enw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FeVjyzoi3Enw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
close 

7.25pm: Paul Neilan is talking my language. "Have a gander at this," he 
insists. OK... ah, what a theme, and an extended remix as well! Plus a potted 
history of all 1980s football. "Whatever happened to Elton Welsby?" wonders 
Paul. No idea, I'm afraid, though"CREEME ENTERTAINMENTS", who have "extensive 
experience in providing Star Entertainers, Comedians and Celebrity Speakers for 
all CORPORATE EVENTS" and "also plan and arrange PRIVATE FUNCTIONS for all 
types of Company or Family Events" <http://www.creeme.co.uk/> may be able to 
help.

7.30pm John Carew has just missed a peach of a chance for Villa, heading over 
from six yards with only the keeper to beat. Meanwhile the teams for the 
Forfar-RangersScottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> 
game are in. Here they are...

Forfar: Brown, McNally, Tod, Tulloch, Elliot Smith, Gordon, Winter, Brady, 
Graham Gibson, Lilley, Campbell.
Subs: John Gibson, Donachie, Sean Kilgannon, Fotheringham, McGuigan.

Rangers: McGregor, Whittaker, Papac, Weir, Bougherra, Edu, Beasley, McCulloch, 
Naismith, Miller, Boyd.
Subs: Alexander, Dailly, Lafferty, Niguez, Davis.

7.35pm: The teams for Manchester United's win over Fulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> are in. Wayne Rooney is back on 
the bench to face a team who haven't won away all season, and aren't about to 
start at Old Trafford tonight.

Man Utd: Van der Sar, O'Shea, Ferdinand, Vidic, Evra, Ronaldo, Carrick, 
Scholes, Park, Berbatov, Tevez.
Subs: Kuszczak, Rooney, Nani, Rafael Da Silva, Evans, Fletcher, Gibson.

Fulham: Schwarzer, Pantsil, Hangeland, Hughes, Kallio, Baird, Gera, Murphy, 
Davies, Dempsey, Zamora.
Subs: Zuberbuhler, Nevland, Dacourt, Gray, Milsom, Brown, Smalling.

7.40pm: "Who allowed Elton Welsby to wear all those clashing stripes?" wonders 
Gary Naylor. "This is why we should be grateful for Trinny and Susannah. And 
let's not go near the hair." Well, you say that - and surely the set designer 
is partly at fault here - but at least Elton's game was tight during the 1980s.
These days - and Paul Neilan (7.25pm) will be interested in this - he's gone a 
bit jazz. <http://www.bdaltd.co.uk/speakerdetails.asp?ActID=179> For a man 
trousering up to Â£999 for after-dinner speeches, a salt-and-pepper goatee is 
surely inexcusable.

7.45pm: It's half time at Villa Park, CSKA Moscow leading their hosts by that 
Wagner Love goal. Third Division Forfar, meanwhile, set the ball rolling against
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>.

7.53pm: GOAL! Forfar 0-1 Rangers. Edu, his back to goal on the edge of the 
Forfar area, rolls the ball back to Millar, who nearly breaks through the home 
defence. He doesn't get past theForfar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/forfar> back line, but the ball does, and 
it finds Papac eight yards out. The defender makes no mistake, slipping the 
ball under the keeper. Ally McCoist, in charge of the team tonight, will be 
very pleased to see an early goal go in.

8pm: And we're off at Old Trafford. Ronaldo has already gone for one 
skittering run down the right wing, Kallio eventually guiding him out of play.

8.03pm: Gera gives the ball away in midfield, allowing Park to bowl forward. 
The United midfielder should really find Tevez free in the centre, but his ball 
rolled across from the left wing goes behind the Argentinian striker, and 
Murphy - a very livid Murphy, it has to be said - is able to clean up. Danny 
Murphy has scoredthree winners against Manchester United at Old Trafford, by 
the way, a total I don't expect him to add to this evening.

8.09pm: Forfar are holding their own at the moment against Rangers, refusing 
to buckle after conceding that early goal. Meanwhile at Old Trafford, it's 
pretty much all United as you'd expect; Fulham are totally incapable of holding 
on to the ball for any length of time. Already it seems just a matter of time 
before they buckle. "Elton Welsby shares a promoter with Tommy Docherty who 
appears still to be knocking 'em dead over the port and cigars at the age of 
80," notes Gary Naylor. "I'm torn between thinking that this news is marvellous 
and thinking that it is tragic." There will be some pensioners who struggle to 
get two words from the bloke at the counter of the corner shop when they totter 
out to buy their weekly bottle of budget gin, the poor buggers, so I know 
exactly which side of the argument I side with here. The people who go to 
listen to Docherty, on the other hand...

8.14pm: GOAL!!! Manchester United 1-0 Fulham. Remember the goal Paul Scholes 
scored at Bradford in 2000, volleying home direct from a David Beckham corner 
on the left? Well, for Beckham, read Carrick, and there you have it. Schwarzer 
makes a hash of the save, diving down to his right and allowing the ball to 
squirm under his body to his left and over the line, but you can't take too 
much away from that strike.

8.17pm: A lovely move from Fulham, who spray it around the centre of the park 
for a while, Murphy in the middle of everything. The ball's eventually fed out 
right to Pantsil, who swings in a peach of a cross for Zamora, who heads not 
far wide left of goal. That was promisiing for the visitors.

8.19pm: And that was nearly it all over for Fulham, as Schwarzer flaps at a 
right-wing Ronaldo cross, the ball falling at Berbatov's feet four yards out 
with a gaping net. He rolls it goalwards - but somehow Hughes gets a boot to 
the effort and shovels clear.

8.25pm: Schwarzer nearly shanks the ball into his own net. Dear lord. Miller's 
overhead kick at Forfar is denied by Brown at point-blank range. What a lovely 
save. Villa are now level against CSKA, Carew shooting crisply under the keeper 
from 10 yards. Some other scores for you. Derby and Blackpool are 1-1 at Pride 
Park. Milan are a goal up at Werder Bremen in the Uefa Cup, thanks to Pippo 
Inzaghi. Ipswich lead 1-0 at home to Nottingham Forest, through a James Perch 
own goal.

8.28pm: Rangers really should be 2-0 up, Boyd curling a snapshot well wide 
left while standing on the penalty spot.

8.31pm: GOAL!!! Manchester United 2-0 Fulham. It's 1-0 to Rangers against 
Forfar at half time. And it's 2-0 at Old Trafford, Hughes and Schwarzer - who 
is putting in a risible performance tonight - allowing a harmless O'Shea ball 
bumble across goal to Berbatov, who can't miss.

8.37pm: These two matches are over, aren't they.

8.45pm: Schwarzer holds onto the ball! Yes, he really has managed to catch it! 
From Scholes, at the second attempt. United are stroking it around nicely, but 
Fulham are very poor indeed. "Not seen much of United recently, what with the 
11 hours difference here in Melbourne (roll on BST)," begins James Smith. 
"Seems they - and Scholes in particular - are playing rather well. With Scholes 
actually winning the ball fairly about 20 minutes in, could it be that the 
hyperbole I've been reading in the UK press is not so hyper after all? Surely 
not."

8.47pm: Berbatov slaps the ball into the Fulham net, but he's miles offside. 
It's not 3-0, but this is a complete non-event. It's half-time: I'm going to 
concentrate on the Forfar-Rangers game, which has restarted, and not just for 
the next 15 minutes either.

8.52pm: The game at Villa Park has ended 1-1. Boyd puts the ball into the back 
of the Forfar net, hammering a shot home from 12 yards after bowling down the 
inside-left channel to latch onto a pass from the centre. But he's mistimed his 
run and the effort is chalked off for offside.

8.55pm: GOAL! Forfar 0-2 Rangers. A terrible McNally clearance falls to Miller 
on the right-hand edge of the box. Miller juggles the ball inside, then hammers 
a shot high into the centre of the goal; Brown has no time to get his hand to 
the ball. This game really is over now.

9pm: "Yes Scott, these two matches are over," agrees Gerard Kelly. "Can we 
have more Nick and Elton?" OK.

9.03pm: Actually, while looking for more Welsby, I've found this:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FU7STSGw7OPU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FU7STSGw7OPU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FU7STSGw7OPU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FU7STSGw7OPU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FU7STSGw7OPU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FU7STSGw7OPU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
close 

Bad news for Colchester but good news for Darlo, brought to you by Bob Wilson, 
Bruce Hornsby & the Range.

9.06pm. "You're concentrating on Forfar v Rangers?" splutters Duncan Edwards. 
"No you bloody well aren't! You're keeping us up to date with crucial action 
from Old Trafford with a smile on your face and being bloody quick about it! I 
dunno, think World Service, ongoing mission to serve, whatever works." Well, 
you're quite right, I'm not concentrating on Forfar v Rangers. Not really. But 
it doesn't follow that I'll therefore be covering the United game; I'm afraid 
our feed for that has gone down. So basic updates are all I can offer. You're 
gonna love this.

9.11pm. Forfar's Elliot Smith has been sent off for a frankly disgusting 
studs-on-shin challenge on Beasley. The Rangers striker, who has had more than 
his fair share of injuries, gets gingerly to his feet and is eventually 
substituted.

9.15pm: Beasley limps round the perimeter of the pitch to warm applause. The 
player gives his gloves to a supporter, who generously gives one of his bits of 
booty to a young kid next to him. The young kid looks up to his mother as if to 
say: "One glove? What the effing eff do you expect me to do with this?"

9.16pm: Rangers are just stroking it around in a vaguely disinterested fashion 
now. "That lad from Forfar who has just got the red card should be banned for 
12 matches," opines Gary Naylor. "It's absurd to treat a foul like that as the 
equivalent of 'raising your hands'." Preach on, brother. It was a disgraceful 
lunge, one which could easily have broken Beasley's leg.

9.20pm: It's 3-0 to Manchester United against Fulham, Wayne Rooney scoring on 
his comeback from injury. No idea what's happened, there's no point trying to 
wing it. I don't even know when he came on. Apologies for this farce, there's 
not much I can do about it.

9.25pm: GOAL!!! Forfar 0-3 Rangers. I can still see the Rangers game, so can 
report that Aaron has scored his first goal for Rangers, latching onto a long 
Lafferty ball that was misread by a Forfar defender, cutting inside from the 
left, and sweeping a majestic shot into the net. He's booked for taking off his 
shirt.

9.27pm: At least Elton Welsby told you what was happening.

9.31pm: GOAL!!! Forfar 0-4 Rangers. Miller crashes home a simple header from 
six yards out. After a brave fight by ten men, and a cowardly lunge by another, 
this score now reflects the gulf in status between the two sides.

9.33pm: That's it all over at Forfar. Meanwhile at Old Trafford...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2qhddEuciVA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2qhddEuciVA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2qhddEuciVA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2qhddEuciVA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2qhddEuciVA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2qhddEuciVA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
close 

.

9.38pm: According to Sky Sports, Vidic has just handled in his own area - but 
a penalty hasn't been awarded. But, for all I know, he could have balanced the 
ball on his nose, or on the end of his front tail, then somersaulted all the 
way up the pitch singing The Star Spangled Banner. The same applies to what 
you're about to read from James Smith, but we may as well trust him, I've 
certainly got no reason not to. "My Chinese feed's still working. Rooney came 
on, about two minutes later Utd worked space for Park on the right side of the 
penalty area, in his usual style he creamed a shot that was heading about 
halfway to the corner flag, but Rooney came in and bundled it with a bit of 
shin into the top of the net with his first touch of the game. Poor Carlito - 
all that time to establish himself ahead of Rooney and he comes back and scores 
with his first touch. Gibson now on for O'Pies, with Dacourt on for Pantsil."

9.40pm: "Rooney's goal is actually being credited to Anderson," reports Adam 
Hirst. "I think he got the last touch but my understanding of French patios 
from telecaraibes may be wrong." Meanwhile on our feed...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPH54cp2ggFk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPH54cp2ggFk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPH54cp2ggFk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPH54cp2ggFk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPH54cp2ggFk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPH54cp2ggFk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
close 
.

9.45pm: During one of tonight's many new lows, I wrote that "at least Elton 
Welsby told you what's happening". Duncan Edwards very kindly has responded: 
"Nonsense Scott. Even on this form you're more than a match for Welsby's smarmy 
gibberish." Setting the bar low there, but still, I'll take what I'm given. 
Thank you very much. "Plus he looked like the bastard child of David Essex and 
Brian Moore and was always saying things like Liverpool had scored, or won." 
Speaking of results, Derby have trounced Blackpool 4-1 at Pride Park, while 
Ipswich ran out 2-1 winners at Portman Road over their guests Nottingham Forest.

9.50pm: ANOTHER NEW LOW! James Smith points out that Anderson isn't on the 
pitch - nor is he on the bench - so it's fair to say he didn't get United's 
third, as was rumoured: "Fulham, bless their cotton socks, are still trying and 
did come close to scoring about ten minutes ago when Zamora toepoked one about 
a metre wide, bringing a rueful smile from van der Saar (the only meaningful 
contribution he's been required to make). Other than that, Scholes is MOTM."

9.51pm: And that's it. United win 3-0 to go five clear of Liverpool at the top 
of thePremier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> 
table. This Clockwatch could only have been more of a debacle had I been forced 
to type with boxing gloves on, which I may as well have been. Thanks for those 
of you who stuck with me through thin and wafer-thin.
 