
A new way to tackle the much-maligned unpredictability of solar energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/may/29/intermittant-solar-wind-energy>
 is being deployed at a solar farm opening today in Western Australia – 
cloud-tracking cameras.



The 1MW solar farm at Karratha airport, made possible by a $2.3m grant from the
Australian Renewable Energy Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/08/large-scale-solar-to-triple-after-what-could-be-arenas-final-renewable-energy-grants>
 (Arena), has been fitted with state-of-the-art CloudCAM cloud-tracking 
technology by Fulcrum3D – a technology also backed by a separate $545,000 Arena 
grant.

Dips in power output from solar farms that occur when clouds pass over leads 
some solar farms to rely onbackup energy storage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/12/energy-storage-how-an-abandoned-goldmine-will-be-converted-into-a-world-first>
 to smooth out the output.

Large-scale solar to triple after what could be Arena's final renewable energy 
grants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/08/large-scale-solar-to-triple-after-what-could-be-arenas-final-renewable-energy-grants>
The unpredictability of those dips in output also makes it difficult for the 
operators to predict prices and can hinder their ability to bid in electricity 
markets.

According to the manufacturers, the cloud-tracking technology allows the solar 
operators to reliably predict the output of the solar farm 15 minutes ahead of 
time, meaning they can minimise the reliance on energy storage and can more 
effectively take part in market bidding.

The chief executive of Arena, Ivor Frischknecht, said that the technology 
“makes solar cheaper and reduces intermittency by giving the operators a 
clearer picture of the solar resource they can expect in the immediate future”.

“Cloud prediction makes solar cheaper and more reliable while reducing the 
need for batteries,” Frischknecht said. “That’s what makes this project so 
exciting.”

The marriage of two separate Arena-funded projects demonstrated the 
effectiveness of Arena grants and how they werebenefiting regional communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/25/queensland-solar-projects-that-could-create-2600-jobs-at-risk-in-federal-cuts>
, Frischknecht said.

Uncertainty about Arena halts renewable energy projects
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/biogas-projects-suspended-amid-uncertainty-about-renewable-energy-grants>
Frischknecht said the Karratha airport solar plant would be a good example, 
demonstrating why more renewables should be connected to Western Australia’s 
North West Interconnected System (NWIS).

The NWIS supplies electricity to Karratha, Port Headland and Goldsworth, as 
well as areas inland from there.

“The NWIS is a smaller network that requires renewable energy to meet 
performance criteria that are geared towards maintaining network stability,” 
Frischknecht said.

“Arena-supported projects like the Karratha airport solar farm and CloudCAM 
are important for demonstrating to network owner and operator Horizon Power 
that solar can provide sustainable, reliable power into the NWIS without the 
need for large amounts of expensive battery storage,” Frischknecht said.
 