
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has faced a revolt from state premiers demanding more spending on 
infrastructure and Labor premiers rejecting competition law reform at the 
Council of Australian Governments meeting.

After Friday’s meeting in Canberra, Turnbull announced that Victoria, 
Queensland and South Australia had rejected an agreement on competition and 
productivity reforms fromthe Harper review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/31/competition-review-urges-easing-of-rules-on-pharmacies-and-trading-hours>
, although the other states and territories signed up.

Victoria, Queensland and New South Wales, led by the Coalition’s Mike Baird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mike-baird>, also confronted the 
federal government over the need for more infrastructure spending.

Coag agenda: Turnbull gives ground on homelessness and family violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/09/coag-agenda-turnbull-gives-ground-on-homelessness-and-family-violence>
The meeting did produce agreement to reclassify the seven-shot Adler lever 
shotgun to category D, with the tightest possible restrictions.

Turnbull told premiers that the federal government was “not an ATM”, but added 
after the meeting that the federal government was committed to stronger 
infrastructure investment.

He cited the $240m “city deal” for Townsville, Queensland, for which the 
federal government chipped in $100m.

In his statement, Baird said further infrastructure investment was “the best 
thing we can do to drive more economic growth”.

He said Coag had agreed to look at what more could be done to bring forward 
investment, to fund infrastructure and potentially set a target for investment.

The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/daniel-andrews>, said governments “need to 
be a bit more hopeful” about boosting investment and called for a “big and bold 
public works agenda” to boost skills and employment beyond the four-year budget 
cycle.

Queensland’s Annastacia Palaszczuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/annastacia-palaszczuk> said the 
best way to deliver on talk of “jobs and growth” was to have an infrastructure 
plan.

“I think governments work best when they can deliver infrastructure not just 
for our respective states but right across the nation,” she said.

Turnbull said the competition reforms would “reduce regulatory burdens, boost 
innovation and promote more efficient investment and flows”.

Scott Morrison refuses to pay Victoria funds after East-West Link ditched
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/27/victoria-gets-less-infrastructure-funding-over-wilful-misunderstanding>
Under the plan, states and territories that signed up will be eligible for 
bonus payments if they implement reforms recommended by the Harper review, such 
as deregulation of trading hours.

Andrews explained he had refused to sign up to competition reform because 
there was “no money attached” for bonuses for achieving objectives and the 
federal government had not honoured its commitment to give the state funds for 
privatising assets.

Victoria and the federal government are in dispute over whether the state is 
owed $1.45bn in promised federal funds for the long-term lease of the Port of 
Melbourne.

The treasurer, Scott Morrison, has said the state is only eligible for $877m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/27/victoria-gets-less-infrastructure-funding-over-wilful-misunderstanding>
 because it has “wilfully interpreted” the rules of the asset-recycling 
agreement.

“We sold a port in good faith, achieved a good price and we’re being punished 
because we perhaps got too high a price for that,” Andrews said.

He said the Victorian government would continue to talk with the commonwealth 
in good faith but “I’m not minded to sign up to any new agreements until the 
current ones are honoured in full”.

As expected, Coag agreed to classify the Adler 110 shotgun in category D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/adler-shotgun-restrictions-come-from-the-smashed-avocado-curtain-say-nationals>
, which would make it accessible only to professional shooters. The agreement 
paves the way for the importation ban on the lever-action shotgun to be lifted.

Turnbull said the move to reclassify the Adler strengthened the national 
firearms agreement, the first time that had been done in 20 years.

After a push from Victoria for a new Medicare item for family violence 
counselling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/sussan-ley-rejects-royal-commissions-call-for-medicare-subsidy-for-family-violence-victims>
, Turnbull said that health ministers would address whether there were gaps in 
GP services for victims of family violence.

Coag: Victoria and Queensland push for new laws on family violence leave
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/coag-victoria-and-queensland-push-to-legislate-family-violence-leave>
No decision was made on a workplace entitlement to take domestic violence leave
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/coag-victoria-and-queensland-push-to-legislate-family-violence-leave>
, which will be decided by the fair work commission.

Andrews said: “Whilst I’m pleased to have at least had an opportunity to talk 
about family violence leave, I think we need to do more than talk about family 
violence leave. We need to deliver it in full.”

Coag agreed on a legal change to make it a crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/09/coag-agenda-turnbull-gives-ground-on-homelessness-and-family-violence>
 to breach personal protection injunctions issued by federal family courts, and 
decided to extend a $117.2m contribution to the homelessness sector by one year.
 