
“Don’t you dare call us old,” said 71-year-old Margaret Koroidovi, 
straightening one of the dozens of gold bracelets looped around her dainty 
wrists. “I call us recycled teenagers. We’ve retired, not expired.”

At the Posh Club <http://www.duckie.co.uk/events/the-posh-club> festive show 
at the Bishopsgate Institute in London she was joined by about 120 others 
determined to grow old disgracefully and take full advantage of the flamboyant 
extravaganza put on by the producers of Duckie, a long-established night at the
Royal Vauxhall Tavern <http://www.vauxhalltavern.com/>, the UK’s oldest LGBTQ 
pub.

With a limbo dancer, a handbag-wielding Santa’s elf compere and entertainment 
from the stunning six-foot Dame Delicious, it was not your typical senior 
citizens’ event.

But as the party season reaches its peak the Posh Club are not the only ones 
taking innovative approaches to tackling loneliness among older people.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fcocktails-and-cabaret-bring-the-generations-together-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feba4a2d6c0ae607a64cc8fd8b062cca47972a98a%2F0_102_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cocktails%20and%20cabaret%20bring%20the%20generations%20together%20for%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fcocktails-and-cabaret-bring-the-generations-together-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cocktails%20and%20cabaret%20bring%20the%20generations%20together%20for%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fcocktails-and-cabaret-bring-the-generations-together-for-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feba4a2d6c0ae607a64cc8fd8b062cca47972a98a%2F0_102_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
In increasing numbers, pubs usually filled with bright young things are 
harnessing hipster energy to serve free Christmas dinners to local seniors, 
while others are hostingcocktail parties in care homes 
<https://cocktails.magicme.co.uk/how-it-works/> or simply bringing older 
neighbours into their homes to share a few mince pies and the warmth of the 
season.

“We find that actually many younger people want to help, particularly at this 
time of year,” said Caroline Abrahams, charity director atAge UK 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/>. “There is a heightened awareness, so it’s a good 
time to remind people what a difference even calling an older relative can 
make, or just striking up a conversation on the bus.”

A 2015 study 
<http://www.webmd.com/mental-health/news/20150317/could-loneliness-shorten-a-life>
 suggested loneliness could increase your risk of premature death by up to a 
quarter and could be as harmful for health as smoking 15 cigarettes a day. 
Nearly a million older people feel lonelier over the festive period, with those 
who are single, separated or widowed feeling it the most,according to new 
figures from Abrahams’s charity 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/latest-news/nearly-1m-older-people-feel-lonelier-at-christmas/>
.

It is some of these that the Posh Club is trying to reach, said co-organiser 
Simon Casson. “I think we’ve lost a lot of interaction between the ages, it’s 
not the type of thing that capitalism encourages,” he said. “But it’s our 
responsibility to create that crossover between generations.”

The Posh Club – which is billed as “a glamorous cabaret for older folk” – will 
host at least 500 people in Hackney, Crawley and Bermondsey over the festive 
period for a fiver a pop with the support of the Peabody Housing Association 
and the National Lottery.

The club, which hosts events throughout the year is branching out to Hastings 
and Brighton. But it is not really about do-gooding, it’s about fun, according 
to Casson, with its eldest party girl 107. “People here don’t think they are 
coming to a voluntary service, they think they’re off for an afternoon at the 
Ritz,” he said.

They are certainly dressed for it. Barbara Krause, who is 75, looked stunning 
in a red silk dress. “People say we have to slow down – but you slow down you 
end up dead. As long as you can move these two legs, you’re alive,” she said.

Other events are more low-key, but no less effective. Polly Keane, 30, from 
Suffolk, volunteers with befriending networkNorth London Cares 
<https://northlondoncares.org.uk/>, a charity connecting older and younger 
people.

“I love visiting Audrey every week,” she said. “We’ve struck up a great, 
easy-going friendship. We also listen to each other’s problems – Audrey always 
has great advice. And most importantly we make each other laugh.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fcocktails-and-cabaret-bring-the-generations-together-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35177a5ac38ce2b973b6c3cb182eabaf7b230539%2F0_169_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cocktails%20and%20cabaret%20bring%20the%20generations%20together%20for%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fcocktails-and-cabaret-bring-the-generations-together-for-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cocktails%20and%20cabaret%20bring%20the%20generations%20together%20for%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fcocktails-and-cabaret-bring-the-generations-together-for-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35177a5ac38ce2b973b6c3cb182eabaf7b230539%2F0_169_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
The benefits to volunteering with older people were definitely mutual, agreed 
Karen, 43, an administrator from Wilkieston near Edinburgh and volunteer with 
Cyrenians, a befriending service for over-60s across West Lothian. “Taking a 
few hours out of the day for someone who needs it is nothing. I get a feeling 
of wellness and happiness.

“You don’t go and feel sorry for these older people, you socialise and get so 
much back,” she said. It was a sentiment echoed by Dame Delicious, the 
bejewelled drag artist, dancer and choreographer volunteering at the Posh Club. 
“I think people underestimate older people; they are up for anything, they just 
go for it.”

That is certainly true of 84-year-old Joan Huxtable, who is wearing sparkly 
leggings with matching nail varnish and a Santa hat festooned with extra 
flowers. “I’m not mad, I’m not stupid and I’m not senile,” she said. “I’m just 
enjoying myself.”

But while the numbers looking to volunteer may spike at Christmas, charities 
need people to harness some of that good intention for the rest of the year, 
said James Yelland fromContact the Elderly 
<http://www.contact-the-elderly.org.uk/>, which organises regular tea parties 
throughout the year. “It’s lovely that people want to help at this time of 
year, and we really appreciate it, but someone who is lonely at Christmas is 
also likely to be lonely throughout the year,” he said.

The charity asks volunteers to give their time as little as once a year to 
host a tea party or to drive regular participants once a month. People can also 
help charities identify older people who might need help. “One of the biggest 
challenges is reaching those who need help. We need the British public to keep 
their eyes open.”

Actor Tamla Kari, who stars in The Musketeers and The Inbetweeners films, is 
already planning her second party in the new year. “I hope the word will spread 
on social media that this is a really fun and easy way to help out,” she said.

Organisers of one-off festive events for older people were wising up to the 
good sense of hosting throughout the year, said Anthony Thomas, founder ofAntic 
pubs <http://anticlondon.com/>, which runs senior Christmas dinners in all its 
London establishments, staffed by volunteers. In 2017 the group is looking at 
starting regular events in an attempt to be more inclusive.

“Older people have great insight - they’ve been through all this stuff 
before,” he said. “We pride ourselves on running decent pubs, and that means 
being a venue where everyone feels welcome. Perhaps they are not going to come 
at midnight on New Year’s Eve on the pull. But then again, why not?”
 