
When death was represented in the neolithic age, it took the form of vultures 
feasting on headless human corpses. It may be a mark of how far we have come as 
a species that it can now be represented byHelen Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/helen-mirren> in blue beret and feather 
boa giving Will Smith a pep talk on a park bench. This is how death manifests 
itself inCollateral Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/nov/11/collateral-beauty-trailer-will-smith-keira-knightley-kate-winslet>
, a sentimental feel-good drama that will be a grislier proposition to some 
viewers than any amount of corpse-munching vultures. Mirren provides counsel to 
a grieving Manhattan man whose life has been hit by tragedy. Her get-up is a 
cross between Willy Wonka and Roxy Music-era Brian Eno, but then a 
cowl-and-cape combo is a real mood killer, and who has room in New York to 
carry a scythe?

Personifications of death in cinema have been predominantly menacing, from the 
Grim Reaper harvesting an entire dinner party’s worth of guests in Monty 
Python’sThe Meaning of Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/30/monty-python-meaning-of-life> – 
pointing his bony finger at the iffysalmon mousse 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YoBTsMJ4jNk> by way of explanation – to the 
shovel-faced,multi-eyed Angel of Death 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s-rl8q9jezU> in Hellboy 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/aug/15/sciencefictionandfantasy.guillermodeltoro>
: The Golden Army and the scarlet-clad figure in The Masque of the Red Death.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdee4720b83fe2d00417b471f8629195fa5acfbf8%2F0_0_3504_2318%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Collateral%20Beauty%3A%20how%20does%20Helen%20Mirren%20compare%20with%20film's%20great%20Grim%20Reapers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Collateral%20Beauty%3A%20how%20does%20Helen%20Mirren%20compare%20with%20film%27s%20great%20Grim%20Reapers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdee4720b83fe2d00417b471f8629195fa5acfbf8%2F0_0_3504_2318%2F3504.jpg>
 Springy curls … Virginia Madsen in A Prairie Home Companion, 2006. Photograph: 
Picturehouse/Rex/Shutterstock 
Mirren’s interpretation, though, is hardly the first radiant image of 
mortality to stalk the screen. A Grim Reaper figure mingles backstage at the 
recording of a radio show in Robert Altman’s final film,A Prairie Home Companion
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jan/05/comedy.drama>, though with the 
effervescent Virginia Madsen in the role, wearing springy vanilla curls and a 
crisp white mackintosh, the reaping was never going to be that grim. Death 
becomes her.


In the 1962 Twilight Zone episode Nothing in the Dark 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i9JZCo912kI>, it falls to a 25-year-old Robert 
Redford to convince a terrified elderly woman that there is nothing to fear in 
crossing to the other side. “You see?” says Redford, glowing handsomely and 
gesturing to the woman’s dormant body as he leads her spirit away. “No shock. 
No engulfment. No tearing asunder. What you feared would come like an explosion 
is like a whisper. What you thought was the end is the beginning.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e9caced9f8cd15cb7c625d77fb36ef64cff053a%2F0_0_1809_1204%2F1809.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Collateral%20Beauty%3A%20how%20does%20Helen%20Mirren%20compare%20with%20film's%20great%20Grim%20Reapers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Collateral%20Beauty%3A%20how%20does%20Helen%20Mirren%20compare%20with%20film%27s%20great%20Grim%20Reapers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e9caced9f8cd15cb7c625d77fb36ef64cff053a%2F0_0_1809_1204%2F1809.jpg>
 I’ve come for your waffle-maker … Brad Pitt in Meet Joe Black, 1998. 
Photograph: Allstar/Universal 
Brad Pitt <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradpitt> serves a similarly 
anaesthetising function in Meet Joe Black, pitching up at the home of dying 
billionaire Anthony Hopkins to escort him to the afterlife. It’s all remarkably 
painless for Hopkins, though not for audiences, who may need to check their 
vital signs after enduring three hours of inspirational waffle just to see him 
stroll across a symbolic bridge. Death Takes a Holiday, the 1934 romantic 
comedy on which Meet Joe Black is based, got the job done in less than half 
that time and with a good deal more charm.


It also inspired a killer sketch from the 1990s comedy show In Living Color 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xczQ5c26pWs>, where Jim Carrey as the Grim 
Reaper is spotted by star-struck celebrity-spotters who ask him whether Lee 
Harvey Oswald really acted alone (“That’s for me to know and Oliver Stone to 
find out,” quips Death). They then implore him to bump someone off for their 
entertainment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5163040f21662d621d457521b1a675b8e56189e0%2F0_0_3533_2485%2F3533.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Collateral%20Beauty%3A%20how%20does%20Helen%20Mirren%20compare%20with%20film's%20great%20Grim%20Reapers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Collateral%20Beauty%3A%20how%20does%20Helen%20Mirren%20compare%20with%20film%27s%20great%20Grim%20Reapers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5163040f21662d621d457521b1a675b8e56189e0%2F0_0_3533_2485%2F3533.jpg>
 Enduring … Bengt Ekerot, left, and Max Von Sydow in The Seventh Seal, 1957. 
Photograph: Ullstein Bild/Getty Images 
Carrey’s white-powdered face and swishing black robes owe everything to the 
dominant image of Death – as played by Bengt Ekerot – in Bergman’s 1957 
masterpieceThe Seventh Seal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2007/jul/30/ingmarbergmansgreatestscene>
, where Max Von Sydow is a knight playing chess against Death in an effort to 
delay his own demise. That enduring scene was spoofed gloriously in the 1991 
comedy Bill & Ted’s Bogus Journey, in which Death, played by William Sadler 
with a strangulated eastern European accent, offers the deceased goofball 
heroes a chance to win back their lives through a game of their choosing — cue 
a joyful montage ofDeath being beaten at Battleship 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tg-IG7V5eZg>, Cluedo and Twister. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facd85d5cc3baa9f78858c9a91e1a9219192020fd%2F0_0_704_374%2F704.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Collateral%20Beauty%3A%20how%20does%20Helen%20Mirren%20compare%20with%20film's%20great%20Grim%20Reapers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Collateral%20Beauty%3A%20how%20does%20Helen%20Mirren%20compare%20with%20film%27s%20great%20Grim%20Reapers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facd85d5cc3baa9f78858c9a91e1a9219192020fd%2F0_0_704_374%2F704.jpg>
 … and being sent up in Bill & Ted’s Bogus Journey, 1991. Photograph: Interscope
Sadler had originally tried out this version of Death on a short-lived 1985 
sketch show, Assaulted Nuts, which brought together US comic actors with 
British talent such as Emma Thompson and Tim Brooke-Taylor. “I pulled this 
funny Czechoslovakian accent out of my butt,” he tells me. “It made the 
character sound so easily bruised. All you have to do is look at him sideways 
and he starts to unravel.” In the original sketch, he is disappointed to find 
that the woman he has come to collect isn’t perturbed in the least: “Aren’t you 
a-fred juss a leetle beet?” he asks plaintively.


Both Christopher Lloyd and Christopher Walken had been considered for the part 
in Bill & Ted’s Bogus Journey — Walken would eventually get his chance to play 
Death in the Adam Sandler comedyClick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/sep/29/comedy> — but Sadler thinks it 
was his accent that swung it. “I had this character right there in my pocket. 
He was silly, he was funny, he mangled the language and when he lost at games 
he became this petulant little boy. You see those cracks in him and he starts 
to lose all his authority.”

Given freedom to ad lib, Sadler came up with the choice moment when Death 
spooks a smoker by telling him: “See you real soon.” The actor believes that 
personifying and ridiculing death is a natural way of coming to terms with it. 
“It makes it a little less scary. We’re all frightened of death and maybe we 
need to poke fun at it sometimes, to let the air out of that particular 
balloon.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec0a798df03d154e87556322573c63dade7b80a0%2F0_0_3600_1999%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Collateral%20Beauty%3A%20how%20does%20Helen%20Mirren%20compare%20with%20film's%20great%20Grim%20Reapers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Collateral%20Beauty%3A%20how%20does%20Helen%20Mirren%20compare%20with%20film%27s%20great%20Grim%20Reapers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec0a798df03d154e87556322573c63dade7b80a0%2F0_0_3600_1999%2F3600.jpg>
 Christopher Walken plays Morty in Click, 2006. Photograph: 
Sony/Columbia/Rex/Shutterstock 
It’s a belief shared by Julian Richings, who played Death in five episodes of 
the hit TV seriesSupernatural 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/may/31/your-next-box-set-supernatural>
. “To humanise death, to turn it into someone recognisable and even 
sympathetic, reduces its power,” he explains. Richings is first seen on 
Supernatural emerging from his 1959 Cadillac Eldorado (licence plate: BUH-BYE). 
We can’t help but warm to him from the moment he kills, with one casual flick 
of the wrist, a mobile-phone-user who bumps into him onto the pavement.

But Death also turns out to be an urbane, chatty, fairly ordinary guy with a 
penchant for junk food and a nice line in understatement. “I always play 
against the power of Death,” says Richings. “I never have to show how tough I 
am. I play up the humorous and wistful qualities instead.All I have to play is 
my delight at eating this crappy food while everyone knows what I’m really 
there for.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F145fba08d13b32409abcfd1443eec42becbfef46%2F0_141_1318_1827%2F1318.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Collateral%20Beauty%3A%20how%20does%20Helen%20Mirren%20compare%20with%20film's%20great%20Grim%20Reapers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Collateral%20Beauty%3A%20how%20does%20Helen%20Mirren%20compare%20with%20film%27s%20great%20Grim%20Reapers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdeath-movie-depictions-grim-reaper-collateratal-beauty-helen-mirren-beret%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F145fba08d13b32409abcfd1443eec42becbfef46%2F0_141_1318_1827%2F1318.jpg>
 Wistful … Julian Richings in Supernatural, 2011. Photograph: 
Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
There is a tradition of Death as an upper-class Englishman in films such as 
the 1939 weepieOn Borrowed Time <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kqOnT66vwq0>, 
with Cedric Hardwicke coming to claim the elderly Lionel Barrymore, and The 
Last Action Hero, where Ian McKellen explains he has no dominion over the movie 
tough-guy played by Arnold Schwarzenegger: “I don’t do fiction. Not my field.”

Richings knows that his own British accent is a boost. “I grew up watching 
Hammer films so I feel very much in that Peter Cushing tradition.” He played 
Death again in the Canadian short filmDave vs Death <https://vimeo.com/42232762>
, which borrows the chess-game conceit from The Seventh Seal. “When you look 
like I do — gaunt, craggy, let’s say ‘interesting’ — you do tend to fall into a 
certain category of roles,” he sighs.


What these portrayals of death represent ultimately is our defiance in the 
face of oblivion. Stephen King once noted that Stanley Kubrick regarded horror 
as essentially reassuring: “He thought that any vein of the supernatural story, 
whether it is horrifying, or whether it is pleasant, is inherently optimistic 
because it points towards the possible survival of the spirit.”

The same must be true whenever death is personified. The mere appearance of 
the Grim Reaper, whichever form it might take, is evidence that there is 
something on the other side: we wouldn’t need an escort if there were nowhere 
to be escorted to.Collateral Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/collateral-beauty> proves that we aren’t 
quite ready to stop telling ourselves that story. There’s life in death yet.


 * Collateral Beauty is released in the US on 16 December, in the UK on Boxing 
Day
 