
Comedy <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/comedy> is hard to predict – young 
stars arise from nowhere, old favorites fall from grace, and tastes change 
quicker than a six-second Vine (RIP). With that crucial caveat, here are few 
comedic things piquing our interest in the new year.

Whether you’re heading out to a show or curling with Netflix, there will be 
plenty of standup to see in 2017. After his sharp turn at the Oscars last year, 
Chris Rock is returning to his roots withhis first standup tour in nearly a 
decade 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/culture/news/chris-rock-announces-total-blackout-stand-up-tour-w453980>
. That tour will eventually result intwo Netflix specials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/13/chris-rock-netflix-comedy-specials>
 for anyone who can’t catch him on the road.

Best comedy of 2016: Samantha Bee and Seth Meyers ace the Trump test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/13/best-comedy-2016-samantha-bee-seth-meyers-donald-trump>
Rock’s fellow superstar Dave Chappelle has been back on the road for a while 
now, and he’s also signed on with the streaming service to producea new standup 
special next year 
<http://variety.com/2016/tv/news/dave-chappelle-netflix-3-comedy-specials-1201923480/>
. Fans of Chappelle can also discover two older, previously unreleased live 
performances, which will be added to Netflix sometime next year.

For fans of international comedy, Gad Elmaleh – France’s answer to Jerry 
Seinfeld, who has been attempting to “break” America for the last year –has 
landed two standup specials with Netflix 
<http://splitsider.com/2016/11/netflix-orders-two-standup-specials-from-gad-elmaleh/>
. The first, to premiere in January, is a mostly French language hour entitled 
Gad Gone Wild, while an English language set will be released later in the year.

In other streaming news, Kevin Hart is set to launch his own video-on-demand 
channel,Laugh Out Loud 
<http://variety.com/2016/digital/festivals/kevin-hart-just-for-laughs-comedy-vod-1201806564/>
, in early 2017. The service will serve as a hub for Hart’s deep back catalog, 
as well as feature new original shows with the standup superstar. But it’s not 
exclusively a vanity project; Laugh Out Loud will also present shows from 
up-and-coming acts and a series of standup specials filmed at the Montreal Just 
for Laughs festival last summer.

Comedy Central remains a hub for standup specials, and the network has already 
announced four for this winter 
<http://splitsider.com/2016/09/comedy-central-announces-standup-specials-from-lewis-black-kurt-braunohler-roy-wood-jr-and-more/>
. The first few months of 2017 will see new hours from Kurt Braunohler, Joe 
DeRosa, Mark Normand and Roy Wood Jr, with many more surely to come as the year 
goes on. And over at HBO, fans can look forward tostandup specials 
<http://splitsider.com/2016/08/hbo-announces-standup-specials-from-jerrod-carmichael-t-j-miller-and-pete-holmes/>
 from Jerrod Carmichael, TJ Miller and Pete Holmes.

For those willing to travel for comedy, there are already some festivals with 
their eye on the new year.San Francisco’s Sketchfest 
<http://www.sfsketchfest.com/lineup/>, in late January, boasts a lineup 
including the Kids in the Hall, Rachel Bloom, Tim and Eric, John Hodgman and 
Jesse Thorn, and Andy Richter – and, enticingly, jazz music from Jeff Goldblum 
and his band, the Mildred Snitzer Orchestra. And in April in Austin, Texas,
Moontower Comedy & Oddity Fest <http://www.austintheatre.org/moontower-comedy/> 
has announced a strong “first wave” lineup, including Patton Oswalt, Colin 
Quinn, the Sklar Brothers, Michelle Wolf and Ali Wong.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0-P1qqbjAi4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0-P1qqbjAi4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0-P1qqbjAi4&media=>
And there will be plenty of new narrative comedy to keep up with. HBO will 
grow its sitcom offerings – currently strong with Veep and Silicon Valley – 
with the new Judd Apatow-produced Crashing. The show, set to debut in February, 
stars Pete Holmes in a some-autobiographical series about a young standup who 
discovers his wife has been unfaithful and is leaving him. Also at the network, 
Bill Hader’sBarry 
<http://deadline.com/2016/06/bill-hader-barry-hitman-comedy-series-hbo-1201766406/>
 follows the former SNL cast member as a midwestern hitman who travels to a Los 
Angeles for a job and gets swept up in the local theater scene.

Over on network television, Fox is debuting its mid-season series Making 
History 
<http://deadline.com/2016/03/leighton-meester-cast-female-lead-making-history-fox-comedy-pilot-1201717411/>
, a time-travel sitcom starring Adam Pally and Leighton Meester, alongside a 
crew of comedy stalwarts like Yassir Lester, John Gemberling and Neil Casey. 
And Netflix has ordered a television series based on the 2014 indie satireDear 
White People 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/dear-white-people-tv-series-890882>
, about life at an Ivy League school from the perspective of several African 
American students.

Whether it’s on stage or screen, there’ll be plenty of comedy to check out in 
2017.
 