
Don’t worry, Mom. Yahoo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/yahoo> is not 
changing its name to Altaba.

Contrary to some news reports on Monday, only the part of Yahoo that is not 
being sold to Verizon will be renamed “Altaba”.

In addition, Yahoo’s CEO, Marissa Mayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/marissa-mayer>, is to step down from 
its board, but will continue to be CEO.

Verizon agreed to buy Yahoo’s search engine and web portal for $4.83bn back in 
July. However, Yahoo’s shareholders held on to the company’s lucrative 
investments – including a 36% stake in Yahoo Japan and a 16% stake inAlibaba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> – and patent portfolio. This 
remaining entity has no product and no staff members.

According to an SEC filing released on Monday, that entity will, provided the 
Verizon deal goes through, be know as Altaba and Mayer, along with five other 
board members, will resign from its board.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fyahoo-altaba-no-name-change-marissa-mayer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dd27f99b4dc30e5c70632a13d1c5cb842744ef9%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Contrary%20to%20reports%2C%20Yahoo%20is%20not%20changing%20its%20name%20to%20Altaba&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fyahoo-altaba-no-name-change-marissa-mayer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Contrary%20to%20reports%2C%20Yahoo%20is%20not%20changing%20its%20name%20to%20Altaba&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fyahoo-altaba-no-name-change-marissa-mayer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dd27f99b4dc30e5c70632a13d1c5cb842744ef9%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Marissa Mayer will resign from the company’s board if the Verizon purchase 
goes through, but will remain as CEO. Photograph: Elijah Nouvelage/Reuters 
The Yahoo-branded web portal, search engine, email service and news services 
will continue to exist but will be integrated with Verizon-owned AOL. The Yahoo 
brands, such as Yahoo Finance and Yahoo Sports, won’t go away,said an AOL 
spokeswoman in July 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/technology/la-fi-verizon-buys-yahoo-20160725-snap-story.html>
.

The Verizon deal, which puts an end to Yahoo’s 21-year history as an 
independent company, still needs be approved by regulators and is expected to 
be finalized in the first quarter of 2017.

The disclosure of a massive data breach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/yahoo-hack-security-of-one-billion-accounts-breached>
 that affected more than 1 billion accounts has raised questions over whether 
the deal will be finalised.

The company revealed in early December that an “unauthorised party” broke into 
Yahoo accounts in 2013, in the largest such breach in history. The number of 
accounts was double the number implicated in a 2014 breach that theinternet 
company disclosed in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/sep/23/yahoo-hack-video-report-video>
 and blamed on hackers working on behalf of a government.

Mayer joined Yahoo as CEO in 2012 from Google. She was tasked with turning the 
company around, but failed to do so. At the start of 2016 the company reported 
a $4.4bn loss following expensive gambles such as the $1.1bn acquisition of 
Tumblr in 2013.

It is unclear what Mayer’s role will be if the Verizon deal is completed, 
although she has said she plans to stay on in the newly merged company, writing 
in a Tumblr post last year: “I’m planning to stay 
<https://www.yahoo.com/movies/yahoo-ceo-marissa-mayer-post-verizon-deal-m-124310344.html>
 … It’s important to me to see Yahoo into its next chapter.”
 