Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fgui9eEO29J0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fgui9eEO29J0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fgui9eEO29J0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The referee Felix Brych awarded a freak goal that should never have stood as 
Sami Hyypia'sBayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayerleverkusen> went to the top of the 
Bundesliga on Friday by beating Hoffenheim 2-1. Already a goal up with 20 
minutes to play, Stefan Kiessling headed Gonzalo Castro's corner into the side 
netting. As the striker held his head in his hands, the ball rolled into the 
goal through a hole in the net and Brych pointed to the centre circle.

Several Hoffenheim substitutes raced behind the goal to examine the netting 
for themselves, calling the attention of the referee to a small hole where the 
ball had entered, but the official was then powerless to overrule his original 
decision.

Sidney Sam had put Leverkusen ahead against the run of play in the 26th 
minute, while Sven Shipplock scored a consolation for the home side with three 
minutes to play. Hoffenheim also missed a penalty, generously awarded when 
Roberto Firmino was fouled a foot outside the area. The Brazilian's initial 
kick was saved, and then the rebound was sent against a post, and then the 
rebound from that was also sent against a post.

The last time the Bundesliga witnessed a similar scandal was in April 1994, 
whenBayern Munich's Thomas Helmer "scored" in a 2-1 win over Nuremberg 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0qDV_9tqMtc>. On that occasion the match was 
replayed, with Bayern winning the second match 5-0.

"I think we will play this game again," said the Hoffenheim coach, Markus 
Gisdol. "At Bayern Munich that happened once. I can't judge Kiessling – we 
don't know how we would react in this situation. I think he's a good sportsman. 
Anything but a replay would be a joke – you can't give Bayern a replay, but not 
Hoffenheim."

Rudi Völler, Leverkusen's sporting director, said: "We're so embarrassed that 
the goal was given, but we can't be held responsible. Hoffenheim have spent 
such a lot of money on a nice stadium. Maybe next time they should buy some 
proper nets."
 