
А film about Sergei Magnitsky, the Russian lawyer who died in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/11/sergei-magnitsky-russia-trial-verdict-tax-fraud>
 after allegedly being tortured, is set to be shown in Washington after 
criticism and legal threats forced European TV channels to pull their 
broadcasts.

The private screening at the Newseum, scheduled for the 13 June, will be the 
latest skirmish in a battle over Magnitsky’s legacy, whose death led to the US 
launching sanctions against a host of Russian officials.

Sergei Magnitsky verdict 'most shameful moment since Stalin'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/11/sergei-magnitsky-russia-trial-verdict-tax-fraud>
Magnitsky was working for British-American financier Bill Browder in 2008 when 
he accused law enforcement and tax officials of involvement in a scam that used 
Browder’s investment company, Hermitage Capital, to defraud the Russian 
treasury out of an estimated $230m.

Magnitsky was later arrested on fraud charges himself and was jailed in a 
notorious Moscow prison, where his supporters allege he was beaten and denied 
medical care, leading to his death in November 2009. His family and friends say 
he was targeted as retribution forblowing the whistle on the tax scam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/08/sergei-magnitsky-posthumous-trial-russia-corruption>
.

His death led Browder and others to lobby US Congress to pass a law in 2012 – 
known as the Magnitsky Act – that imposed visa bans and financial sanctions on 
Russian citizens allegedly involved in the fraud and Magnitsky’s death.

A Russian presidential commission in 2011 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/russian_police_accused_over_dead_lawyer/16795196.html>
 concluded that Magnitsky’s detention – and the decision by prison officials to 
deny him access to healthcare – amounted to torture.A report by the Council of 
Europe <http://www.rferl.org/content/council-of-europe-russia/25027538.html> 
two years later supported those conclusions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fcontroversial-film-russia-lawyers-sergei-magnitsky-death-screening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffecec5a2740e4062b1747e6b1b1df6f42608271b%2F0_279_3124_1875%2F3124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Controversial%20film%20on%20Sergei%20Magnitsky%E2%80%99s%20death%20set%20for%20US%20screening&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fcontroversial-film-russia-lawyers-sergei-magnitsky-death-screening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Controversial%20film%20on%20Sergei%20Magnitsky%E2%80%99s%20death%20set%20for%20US%20screening&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fcontroversial-film-russia-lawyers-sergei-magnitsky-death-screening%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffecec5a2740e4062b1747e6b1b1df6f42608271b%2F0_279_3124_1875%2F3124.jpg>
 Flowers at the grave of anti-corruption lawyer Magnitsky in 2013. Photograph: 
Mikhail Voskresensky/Reuters 
The film to be shown at the Newseum, called The Magnitsky Act – Behind the 
Scenes 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/magnitsky-film-on-hold-european-tv-channel-arte/27704772.html>
, was shot by Russian-born film-maker Andrei Nekrasov and co-authored by a 
Norwegian company,Piraya Film <http://www.piraya.no/#/company/contact>.

It had been scheduled to premiere  
<http://www.rferl.org/content/magnitsky-film-on-hold-european-tv-channel-arte/27704772.html>
at the European Parliament on the 27 April, but the showing was cancelled 
following complaints from Magnitsky’s relatives and former colleagues, as well 
as objections from European lawmakers.

Petras Austrevicius, a Lithuanian member of the European Parliament who also 
serves on the Foreign Affairs Committee, said the push to screen the film for 
the chamber was one of several moves “by the Russian authorities” in order “to 
weaken western confidence in its policy line” and secure a review of EU 
sanctions againstRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> later this 
year.

Another screening scheduled for early May on the Arte European TV channel was 
also cancelled after Browder sent the channel a list of “factual errors” and 
warned they would be legally accountable for knowingly broadcasting false 
statements.

Browder said in a statement on the 8 June that “the lies presented” in 
Nekrasov’s film “are not new, and are based on the past narrative from the 
Russian authorities who covered up the murder of Sergei Magnitsky and the 
criminals who stole $230m from the Russian people – the crime Magnitsky 
exposed.”

Nekrasov has produced several films highly critical of Russian president 
Vladimir Putin. He was a friend of former Russian Federal Security Service 
officer Aleksandr Litvinenko, who was killed by a radioactive substance in 
London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/06/alexander-litvinenko-and-the-most-radioactive-towel-in-history>
 in 2006. His 2007 documentary about that case premiered at the Cannes film 
festival and was shown in Moscow at the Sakharov human rights organisation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fcontroversial-film-russia-lawyers-sergei-magnitsky-death-screening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9d9d832c7daa26e382e2da5699e255e41a2c6f8%2F0_371_5232_3139%2F5232.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Controversial%20film%20on%20Sergei%20Magnitsky%E2%80%99s%20death%20set%20for%20US%20screening&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fcontroversial-film-russia-lawyers-sergei-magnitsky-death-screening%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Controversial%20film%20on%20Sergei%20Magnitsky%E2%80%99s%20death%20set%20for%20US%20screening&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fcontroversial-film-russia-lawyers-sergei-magnitsky-death-screening%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9d9d832c7daa26e382e2da5699e255e41a2c6f8%2F0_371_5232_3139%2F5232.jpg>
 Bill Browder has vowed to avenge the death of the lawyer Magnitsky. 
Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer 
In an interview in April, the director said he initially intended to make a 
film about how Magnitsky uncovered the tax fraud and was killed in order to 
silence him, but that his research later made him change his mind.

The film now asserts that Magnitsky was not beaten while in police custody, 
and that he did not make any specific allegations against individuals in his 
testimony to Russian authorities.

“I didn’t abandon that narrative easily because I was ideologically very close 
to Browder,” he said. “I was also a regime critic, honestly, on a lot of 
counts. But if we are not telling the truth, then it makes it easier for the 
bad guys to carry on doing their bad things.”

The screening at the Newseum is a private event, according to a spokeswoman 
for the privately funded museum, who directed press inquiries to the Potomac 
Square Group, a Washington-based lobbying and public relations company.

The company in turn deferred to Rinat Akhmetshin, who runs a Washington 
organisation called the International Eurasian Institute.

Akhmetshin said the screening was private due to copyright issues, and that 
invitees included congressional staffers as well as representatives from the US 
State Department, the White House’s National Security Council, and members of 
the media.

Russia promises 'harsh' response over progress of Sergei Magnitsky bill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/27/russia-harsh-response-sergei-magnitsky-bill-us-senate>
The screening will feature a discussion moderated by celebrated investigative 
journalist Seymour Hersh. Speaking ahead of the event, Hersh confirmed he was 
moderating the event free of charge and said he had seen the film a couple 
months ago when he agreed to host the discussion.

“The film is very interesting,” Hersh said. “It’s hard to walk out of that 
film without thinking that Browder should be getting more heat than he’s gotten 
so far.”

The struggle over the screening comes as US lawmakers debate legislation 
modelled on the Magnitsky Act that would target human rights abusers worldwide. 
A House committeerecently passed the legislation 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/russia-us-magnitsky-global-act-passes-committee/27743557.html>
, though it’s unclear whether it will be taken up by the full House this year.

It also comes as the first legal proceedings 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/us-money-laundering-case-russian-corruption-browder-magnitsky-prevezon-katsyv/27494612.html>
 are held in the US regarding alleged proceeds of the original $230m tax fraud.

A version of this article first appeared on RFE/RL 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/nekrasov-browder-film-screening/27787150.html>
 