
Food of one sort of another has been causing problems of late, which is 
something of a relief from scientific and mathematical complaints. In October I 
was taken to task for a clue in a Quick puzzle (No 12,931 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/quick/12931>, 20 October) where the 
required answer to 'Thin slices of fried veal' was ESCALLOPS. The 'correct' 
spelling for this cut of veal (uncooked as well as cooked), I was told, is 
ESCALOPE. That may well have been the case at some point in the past but the 
Oxford Dictionary of English, for example, says that there is now a second 
'correct' spelling, with ESCALLOP being given as an alternative to ESCALOPE. 
Indeed it gives veal as its first definition of ESCALLOP (its second being 
another word for SCALLOP, the edible bivalve with a shell that is useful as an 
ashtray, and the third being a shell in heraldry).
This month it was a pasta problem. A lady from Horsham was shocked to see that 
the answer to 'Pasta dish' (10 across in QuickNo 12,965 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/quick/12965> for 29 November) was 
supposed to be LASAGNA. Not only did she have a degree in Italian but she had 
lived in Italy for a year and thus was able to put me right. LASAGNA, she said, 
is a single bit of that kind of pasta but the dish made with it uses its plural 
form, LASAGNE. A quick look in my Italian-English dictionary showed that she 
was, of course, right and I was already in full apology/correction mode when I 
thought that I had better just check my English dictionaries. Slightly to my 
surprise, I have to admit, I found that both Collins and Chambers give LASAGNA 
as an alternative spelling for the dish. However the full online Oxford English 
Dictionary has not yet accepted this meaning and, as a result, I cannot throw 
any light on when the singular form of the pasta may have first been used for 
the dish as well.
_____

On 7 November the Times celebrated the publication of its 25,000th Cryptic 
puzzle, a considerable milestone. However, as regular Guardian solvers will 
know, it is one that we passed a while ago: on 3 May 2010 to be precise, the 
first crossword puzzle having been published in the then Manchester Guardian on 
3 January 1929. The first British national daily paper to publish a crossword 
was the Daily Telegraph (on 30 July 1925), though both the Sunday Express and 
the Sunday Times had done so earlier. The first Times puzzle did not appear 
until 1 February 1930. In each case the pressure to run the puzzles came from 
the commercial and marketing sides of the paper, with the editorial staff 
taking a poor view of this dumbing down and loss of space that should be used 
for better purposes. In fact the puzzles were only accepted on the basis of 
being a temporary experiment to see if they had any effect on circulation and 
in the expectation/hope that the crossword craze imported from the United Sates 
would soon run its course.
_____ 

You may like to know that Araucaria's traditional Christmas puzzle will be 
published on Saturday 24 December. Given the two public holidays in the week 
after Christmas, there will be an extended deadline for submission for those 
who want to enter the prize draw. As it is always published on the Saturday 
immediately before Christmas this year it will come on Christmas Even itself. 
In other years the gap between the puzzle appearing and 25 December can be up 
to a week.

_____

Our November Genius puzzle (No 101 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/search/results/0,,,00.html?XTYPE=7&MONTH=11&YEAR=2011&AUTHOR=&VTYPE=java/new&SERIAL_NUMBER=>
 set by Brummie) was hit by a late technical problem. At some point in the 
early evening of Friday 2 December the system for accepting the online entries 
broke down. It was not possible to discover the reason and fix the fault over 
the weekend, as those who tried to send in entries late on Friday and on 
Saturday will have discovered. The problem also affected the early birds 
tackling the December GeniusNo 102 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/genius> 
by a new setter Qaos, uploaded today (Monday 5 December). Our apologies for 
this disruption, which will have been extremely vexing for those affected by 
it. We are working to restore normal service as soon as possible.
The November puzzle entries also had a slow start. Apart from Tony of London 
W5 (00:52) and Ian of London N4 a minute later, the next entry from Peter in 
Queensland was not until 03:28 and the one after from Mike in Kerikeri at 
03:41. These were followed by Paul from somewhere in Switzerland, Brian in 
Paderborn (Germany), Stephen in Rhode Island (USA), 'yatesg' somewhere else in 
the US and Chris in Norway. There was no further entry from the UK until we got 
one from Bryan at 20:18. I am at a loss to understand this pattern. There were 
only 18 entries on the first day and 257 in total by the time the system broke 
down on 2 December.

Congratulations to Alastair Hunter from Glasgow, who is November's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk>. 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>. For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 