
The Atlantic ocean off Cornwall <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/cornwall> 
and the west coast of Scotland show the greatest promise for generating 
electricity from the waves that crash around the British Isles, according to 
new research.

The regions came top in a report 
<http://www.carbontrust.com/media/202649/ctc816-uk-wave-energy-resource.pdf> 
which maps, for the first time, the sites around the UK with the most potential 
for wave power. Some of the highest waves, in the Rockall Trough to the west of 
Scotland, measure up to 29m from crest to trough.

Rows of wave "farms" up to 1,000km long facing the Atlantic could generate 
around 11% of the UK's current power generation, the Carbon Trust analysis 
suggests. While the theoretical resource is as high as 18GW, around 10GW of 
capacity is more realistic given practical and economic constraints, it said.

Stephen Wyatt, the report's author, said: "The promise is huge. The UK has 
become the world's proving ground for wave and tidal energy. The potential home 
market for wave power while significant is even greater abroad. The 
InternationalEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Agency 
have estimated a global market of up to 200GW of marine power by 2050. If the 
UK were to capture some 15% of this the benefits for the UK economy have been 
evaluated at £4bn."

While the technology to harness the renewable source of energy is still at an 
early stage, it is hopeda test bed off Orkney 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2012/jul/30/scotland-first-marine-energy-park>
 anda wave "hub" off Cornwall 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2012/jan/23/marine-power-south-west-england>
 will bring it to commercial scale. "We don't yet have commercial devices that 
have been built and tested at the scale needed to operate in such hostile and 
remote environments. But we may not be waiting for too long," said Wyatt.

The Scottish government, in particular, has talked up the economic and 
environmental promise of wave power, with first minister Alex Salmondsaying 
last year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2011/sep/27/wave-and-tidal-power-alex-salmond>
 that the machines will in the next few years move to "substantial commercial 
development". In August,Scotland launched a £10m competition 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2012/aug/28/orkney-green-energy-wave-power>
 for wave- and tidal-powered devices.MPs in February said 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2012/feb/20/uk-exporter-wave-tidal-power>
 the UK could become a leader exporter of such technology if given significant 
government backing.

The Carbon Trust examined the UK's Exclusive Economic Zone to see which areas 
had the most energy potential, at the lowest cost. It concluded the best sites 
could generate electricity at a cost of 20-25.3p/kWh, compared to around 
5.5-11p/kWh for gas power and 8-11p/kWh for onshore wind today.

The ideal sites were those that offered the best balance between how close 
they were to shore, water depth and raw wave energy. Wyatt told the Guardian: 
"It was surprising that the best sites were so far offshore – our analysis 
indicates that it is worth going so far offshore to harness the more energetic 
waves."
 