
Doctors carrying out cosmetic treatments must avoid two-for-one offers and 
allow a minimum two-week cooling-off period before surgery or risk being struck 
off, under long-awaited guidance to protect patients who may be vulnerable.

General Medical Council (GMC) directions published on Tuesday say doctors must 
avoidirresponsible advertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/18/boob-job-posters-banned-cosmetic-surgery>
 and aggressive inducements. The rules make it the responsibility of doctors to 
personally manage the consent process and ensure patients know who to contact 
in the event of complications.

They cover all cosmetic procedures, from breast augmentation to Botox, amid 
concerns that a boom in the number of people getting treatment to improve their 
appearance is beingfuelled by dubious practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/dec/31/cosmetic-industry-regulation>
.

The GMC rules are supplemented by professional standards specifically for 
cosmetic surgery <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cosmetic-surgery>, 
issued by the Royal College of Surgeons (RCS), which include the two-week 
cooling-off period.

Sara Pascoe: ‘Boob jobs are viewed as a decorative tweak, but these women are 
self-harming’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/10/sara-pascoe-boob-jobs-self-harm-animal-cosmetic-surgery>
Breach of either set of guidelines could lead to the GMC launching a 
fitness-to-practice investigation.

The chair of the GMC, Prof Terence Stephenson, said: “Patients considering 
whether to have such a procedure need honest and straightforward advice which 
allows them to understand the risks as well as the possible benefits.

“It is a challenging area of medicine which deals with patients who can be 
extremely vulnerable. Most doctors who practise in this area do so to a high 
standard but we do sometimes come across poor practice, and it is important 
that patients are protected from this and that doctors understand what is 
expected from them.”

The new GMC guidance, which comes into force from June and applies across the 
UK, follows a review of the cosmetic industry in England by NHS England’s 
medical director, Prof Sir Bruce Keogh.


The guidance forbids procedures being offered as prizes, stops doctors 
allowing salespeople to misrepresent treatments, and requires comprehensive 
record-keeping of consultations and outcomes.

Additionally, the RCS is launching a certification scheme later this year 
allowing patients to search more easily for a surgeon with the appropriate 
training and insurance for the procedure they are considering.


It wants the government to legislate to allow this information to be added to 
surgeons’ details on the GMC’s list of medical practitioners.

Stephen Cannon, RCS vice-president and chair of its cosmetic surgery 
interspecialty committee, said: “Our message to surgeons and doctors working in 
the cosmetic surgery industry is simple: if you are not working to the surgical 
standards we have set out and published today, you should not be treating 
patients at all.”

More than 51,000 Britons – a record number – underwent cosmetic surgery last 
year,according to the British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons 
<http://baaps.org.uk/about-us/press-releases/2202-super-cuts-daddy-makeovers-and-celeb-confessions-cosmetic-surgery-procedures-soar-in-britain>
, which is part of the RCS. Thevast majority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/28/cosmetic-surgery-normal-acceptable-face-womanhood>
 of patients (91%) were women, withthe most popular treatment breast 
augmentation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/10/sara-pascoe-boob-jobs-self-harm-animal-cosmetic-surgery>
, followed by eyelid surgery and then face/neck lifts.

The chief executive of the Patients Association, Katherine Murphy, said: “We 
welcome the guidelines. I think it’s really important that the professionals, 
the doctors, think about the patient and that people have cosmetic surgery for 
many different reasons. Explaining fully to the patient and providing them with 
the relevant information and support is very important.”

The health minister Ben Gummer described the guidance as “an important step 
forward in improving standards and ending the lottery of poor practice in parts 
of the cosmetic industry”.
 