
The grass is always greener than the shale gas on the other side, according to 
a British businessman who claims grasslands could provide enough gas to heat 
all of the UK’s homes.


Dale Vince, the chairman of renewable energy company Ecotricity, is investing 
£10m in the first of a generation of what he calls ‘green gas mills’ that he 
says could compete against gas from fracking.

The company said its Hampshire plant at Sparsholt College, which has planning 
permission and is slated to be operational in 2018, will take grass harvested 
from nearby fields and break it down in an anaerobic digester.

Grass at the plant would be turned into biomethane within 45 days and then 
injected into the national network, providing the heating needs of more than 
4,000 homes.

A report by Ecotricity on Thursday said there are around 6m hectares of 
suitable grassland in the UK, not including arable land for crops. It argued 
this would be enough to match the amount of gas theNational Grid forecasts 
homes will consume by 2035 <http://fes.nationalgrid.com/fes-document>, but 
doing so would require the building of around 5,000 mills akin to the Hampshire 
one.

Vince admitted that getting to that point would be a huge challenge, given no 
other country had done it before and it was a new approach in the UK.

“It would be a massive undertaking but it would be permanent. Grass keeps 
growing, it doesn’t run out, unlike gas from fracking. Most of the value would 
be in the hands of farmers who, post-Brexit, may be in need of it,” he told the 
Guardian.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fcould-gas-from-grass-rival-fracking-to-heat-uk-homes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d4b5a6646c1733ff71dcfebdc2628c53f9176b5%2F0_99_3983_2390%2F3983.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20gas%20from%20grass%20rival%20fracking%20to%20heat%20UK%20homes%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fcould-gas-from-grass-rival-fracking-to-heat-uk-homes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20gas%20from%20grass%20rival%20fracking%20to%20heat%20UK%20homes%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fcould-gas-from-grass-rival-fracking-to-heat-uk-homes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d4b5a6646c1733ff71dcfebdc2628c53f9176b5%2F0_99_3983_2390%2F3983.jpg>
 Grass at the plant would be turned into biomethane within 45 days. Photograph: 
Herbert Stolz/Courtesy of Ecotricity 
The company is planning four other mills in addition to the one at Sparsholt 
College – in Somerset, Cambridgeshire, Shropshire, Wiltshire. Ecotricity is 
lobbying the government to secure subsidies for the plants, via the renewable 
heat incentive, which currently excludes support for grass.

Vince said the environmental impact of cutting grass would be benign and would 
not harm farmers or hay harvesting. “It’s massively beneficial 
[environmentally] because the grassland gets managed and becomes wildlife 
habitat while the grass is growing, and we crop it at the right time of year,” 
he said.

The company said a small amount of the gas produced would be stored at its 
plant, to act as a buffer, with most continuously pumped into the UK gas 
transmission network. Most of the UK’s gas today comes from the North Sea, 
Norway and Qatar.

An industry source said that, in theory, biomethane could be injected into the 
network, provided it was of the same standard and quality as natural gas.
 