
The question has been raised (by a setter) as to whether we ought to change 
our policy on the letter count at the end of clues where initials are involved. 
Over 10 years ago we shifted from having apostrophes in letter counts: eg the 
solution ADAM'S ALE changed from being shown as (4'1,3) to (5,3) or ADAM'S 
APPLE from (4'1,5) to (5,5). The reason was that signalling the apostrophe gave 
too much of the game away at a glance. With initials the present policy for 
letter counts mirrors the paper's style for text: ie if the initials form a 
recognised and pronoucable acronym they are treated as a normal word; if not, 
not. Thus in text in the paper Nasa and Nato are written thus and in the 
crosswords as a solution would get (4) at the end of their clues. But PVC and 
FBI, for example, are not treated as words and would get (1,1,1) with their 
clues. There is a powerful argument that such letter counts for non-acronyms 
also give the game away too easily. But would (3) instead of (1,1,1) in such 
cases be excessively misleading? The problem is causing me sleepless nights 
such as I have not suffered since the build up to abolishing the hyphen in 
e-mail.

_____

I was taken to task for a clue in the Quick crossword for 27 November (No. 
12,652 <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quick/12652>) where 19 across 
had 'Old French kingdom (7)' for NAVARRE. Navarre is and always has been in 
Spain, with Pamplona (where the bulls run) being its capital, it was asserted. 
It is certainly the case that Navarre today is the name of an autonomous region 
of northern Spain (capital Pamplona) on the border with France. But the history 
of the old kingdom of Navarre is not so simple.

Originally called the kingdom of Pamplona, Navarre was an independent entity 
lying on both sides of the western Pyrenees, established after a Basque revolt 
against the Franks in the mid-820s. The southern part of the kingdom was 
conquered by Castille in 1513 and thus became part of Spain. But the part north 
of the Pyrenees remained independent until its last king, Henri III of Navarre, 
inherited the French crown in 1589. Then, as the result of an act of personal 
union, the kingdom of Navarre was joined with France when Henri III of Navarre 
became Henri IV of France (the Huguenot who ended the Wars of Religion by 
becoming a Catholic and issuing the Edict of Nantes). The kingdom of Navarre 
was not formally merged with the kingdom of France until 1620. Question: does 
the period 1589-1620, when Navarre remained a kingdom in its own right but had 
a French king, make it an old French kingdom or not. Answers, please, on one 
side of a piece of paper.
_____

Good news for those who, for whatever reason, want to search the archive for 
puzzles by a particular setter. The clever production people have risen to the 
challenge and found a short cut that did not require hours of programming. You 
can now get what you want by one of two routes from thecrossword home page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords>: either, at the top, click on Cryptic, 
Prize or Quiptic and a list of setters will appear down the left-hand side of 
your screen; or click on 'all crosswords' under the latest offering of the 
puzzle of your choice on the left-hand side and you will get the same result.
_____

For those who have become addicted to 3-D crosswords, this is a seasonal note 
to say that another series of these puzzles (many by Guardian and Observer 
setters) is on offer atcalendarpuzzles.co.uk <http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk> 
which is charitably linked to the BBC Children in Need appeal.
_____

November's Genius (No 89 by Araucaria) seems to have given much pleasure and 
produced a large entry of 410. The usual suspects were the first in: Ian (not 
of London N14 but of London SW3) was first at 01:40, Ian of N14 was second at 
02:02 and Peter of Montville, Queensland was third at 03:28. The first 
'newcomer' to finish was M1F from East Kilbride, Glasgow at 06:11. There were 
38 correct entries by the end of the first day.

Congratulations to Joan-Hilary Towell from Manchester, who is November's 
Genius winner.
We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any problems with it, 
please emailsubshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com>. If you 
have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email 
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk . For Observer crosswords please email
crossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 