
The world transfer record was broken twice in the summer of 1996. The 
Brazilian forward Ronaldo went from PSV Eindhoven to Barcelona for around 
£13.2m but his record did not last long. Twenty years ago on Friday, Newcastle 
United paid Blackburn Rovers £15m for Alan Shearer. Both theoretically had 
their best years ahead – Ronaldo was 19, Shearer 25 – and were probably the 
best strikers in the world at the time. In that year’s Ballon d’Or they 
finished second and third, behind the Germany sweeper Matthias Sammer.

Gonzalo Higuaín seals £75.3m move from Napoli to Juventus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/26/gonzalo-higuain-moves-napoli-juventus>
The contrast between those two and Gonzalo Higuaín, who has moved from Napoli 
to Juventus for £75.3m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/26/gonzalo-higuain-moves-napoli-juventus>
, shows the extent to which football has changed in the last two decades. Money 
doesn’t just talk; it never shuts up. Higuaín is a superb attacker, whose 36 
goals in 2015-16 equalled the record for a Serie A season, but he will be 29 in 
December and few would regard him as one of the world’s best players. Last 
October he did not even make a 23-man shortlist for the Ballon d’Or. And he is 
worth £75.3m.

The Higuaín transfer might mark the day the last sane person was bundled out 
of the asylum. He is the third most expensive player of all time, behind Real 
Madrid’s Gareth Bale (£85m) and Cristiano Ronaldo (£80m). He may soon be fourth 
on the list, ifPaul Pogba joins Manchester United or Real 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/27/zinedine-zidane-real-madrid-interest-paul-pogba-manchester-united>
 for a world-record fee. A 25-year-old Ronaldo or Lionel Messi would probably 
be worth £200m.

The reaction to the Higuaín move feels instructive. There was a bit of 
surprise but little disgust at a fee that not so long ago would have been seen 
as a vulgar indictment of the decadence of society. We have been desensitised 
to such grotesque transfer fees – and to reports Pogba’s agent, Mino Raiola, 
will receive £20m if his client leavesJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>.

Stratospheric agents’ fees are an accepted part of football. From October 2015 
to February 2016, Manchester United paid out £10m in them – and they did not 
buy a single player. That money was paid to agents for their part in 
negotiating contract extensions.

Football has developed its own economy, with its own inflation rate. While the 
real world is looking down the back of the sofa, football burns money for a 
laugh – literally in the cases of some especially offensive players. A 
socialist sport has become an orgy of unashamed, self-congratulatory avarice.

The transfer market has become such big business there are times when the 
actual football feels almost secondary. The excitement of buying players trumps 
the reality of watching them play, and transfer deadline day has replaced the 
FA Cup final experience as the most keenly anticipated date on the calendar.

Pep Guardiola confident of signing John Stones and waiting on Bonucci
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/27/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-vincent-kompany-john-stones-leonardo-bonucci>
Agents such as Raiola and Jorge Mendes are now some of the most important 
people in football. Except calling them agents is not enough: they are “super 
agents”, the football equivalent of Cindy Crawford, Eva Herzigova and the other 
supermodels on the famous Vogue cover of 1990. Their battle for supremacy is a 
game of its own. They even have their own power rankings on some websites.

The unprecedented worldwide popularity of football has allowed all this to 
happen. Twenty years ago, when the Deloitte Money League was published for the 
first time, Manchester United were top with revenues of £88m. The most recent 
table, for the 2014-15 season, hadReal Madrid top with £439m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/21/manchester-united-deloitte-football-rich-list-premier-league-real-madrid-barcelona>
. The broadcasting war between Sky and BT drove the last TV deal up to £5.14bn 
over three seasons, while theChinese Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/06/china-football-revolution-world-cup>
 has so much money Shandong Luneng can pay a reported£230,000 a week to 
Graziano Pellè 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/11/graziano-pelle-leaves-southampton-joins-shandong-luneng>
.

It is a culture that is hard to relate or warm to, even before you consider 
the nefarious elements that are inevitable when so much money is involved. Nor 
is this just an idle point of principle. Football’s obsession with money is the 
principal reason for the dramatic change in the game in the last 25 years, from 
pricing out younger fans to the lack of leaders and characters on the pitch.

It is hard to see how this greed-is-good culture can be arrested. If you don’t 
like it, you can go and watch cricket. This is not a midlife crisis or a 
temporary state; this is the value system of 21st-century football. A value 
system in which paying £75.3m for a 28-year-old barely raises an eyebrow.
 