
Crewe Alexandra <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crewealexandra>, the 
club most heavily implicated in the Barry Bennell case, were warned he had 
sexually abused one of his junior footballers but allowed the man who turned 
out to be a serial paedophile to stay at the club for a number of years, the 
Guardian has been told.

Bennell was the subject of a top-level meeting in the late 1980s but was kept 
in his job despite the chairman at the time, Norman Rowlinson, recommending at 
one point that the club “get him out” because of growing suspicions about his 
behaviour.

Victims of sexual abuse speak out in week that truly shook football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/sexual-abuse-football-andy-woodward-football-association>
Hamilton Smith, who was on the board from 1986 to early 1990, has told this 
newspaper he was so concerned at the time he asked for specially convened talks 
about concerns over Bennell’s relationship with young boys at the club and, 
specifically, to inform his colleagues that someone had marched over to him at 
a junior football match to allege that a friend’s son had been abused.

Smith recalls that the talks were held at Rowlinson’s house and the chairman 
was so disturbed by what he heard he suggested, at first, that the 
vice-chairman, John Bowler, should instruct the manager, Dario Gradi, to find a 
new youth-team coach, before an agreement was eventually reached that Bennell 
should be kept on but not left alone with boys and stopped from arranging 
overnight stays.

Gradi, according to Smith, was not present but he was there the next day at a 
follow-up meeting, attended by two other directors, in the manager’s office and 
made it clear he did not have any problem with Bennell – something he repeated 
in the 1996 Dispatches documentary when he said there was never “any cause for 
concern” about boys staying with the youth-team coach.

Bennell was finally arrested in Florida in 1992 after taking another junior 
team on tour and Smith has told the Guardian he believes it would be wrong for 
Crewe to say they were not warned about, and did not discuss at length, a man 
the American authorities later described as having “almost an insatiable 
appetite” for young boys.

“I’m incredibly angry the club continue to refute that they knew anything 
about suspicions of Bennell’s activities,” he said. “This was discussed at the 
club’s top level and, as much as I tried to resolve this, regrettably I 
couldn’t. I dread to think how many victims there are, and my heart goes out to 
them.”

Smith, described by Andy Woodward, one of Bennell’s victims, as “one of the 
people at Crewe who can hold their head high,” left the club shortly afterwards 
because of seriously deteriorating health but has been following the Bennell 
story with growing dismay. “Whatever I have been through is nothing compared 
what those poor boys went through,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcrewe-barry-bennell-former-board-member%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cec5dba0b484d273dca701ab7e47935cb3ee9bf%2F0_0_3690_2214%2F3690.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crewe%20were%20warned%20about%20Barry%20Bennell%20but%20he%20stayed%20on%2C%20says%20former%20board%20member&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcrewe-barry-bennell-former-board-member%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crewe%20were%20warned%20about%20Barry%20Bennell%20but%20he%20stayed%20on%2C%20says%20former%20board%20member&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcrewe-barry-bennell-former-board-member%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cec5dba0b484d273dca701ab7e47935cb3ee9bf%2F0_0_3690_2214%2F3690.jpg>
 Barry Bennell in Manchester City kit in 1983 
Some of his fellow directors, he said, had argued it was difficult to condemn 
Bennell on the word of a member of the public who had not passed on his details 
or lodged an official complaint. Smith, however, says he was already uneasy 
because he had heard a member of staff expressing concerns about Bennell’s 
relationship with young boys.

Andy Woodward: ‘It was the softer, weaker boys he targeted’
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward> 
Smith was also troubled by the amount of rumour and innuendo within Crewe and 
the surrounding area and in the same discussions – not an official, minuted 
board meeting – he says he explained to Rowlinson what he had heard. Rowlinson, 
who had been chairman since 1964, asked for clarification about the precise 
nature of what was being alleged.

After leaving the club, Smith was still so concerned about the set-up at Crewe 
he says he spoke about it on several occasions with Gwyneth Dunwoody, then the 
Crewe MP. In April 2001, he says he arranged to meet Tony Pickerin, the FA’s 
head of education and child protection, at Lilleshall and requested a 
wide-reaching investigation into the care of children at Gresty Road as well as 
asking about possible compensation for Bennell’s abuse victims.

Three months later, having not had a response, he contacted the FA, believing 
the delay meant a long, complex inquiry must be under way. After requesting an 
update a three-line letter, seen by the Guardian, arrived in the next few days 
from Pickerin saying the FA had “investigated the issues and is satisfied that 
there is no case to answer.”

Smith said: “My first thought was: ‘Well, what have you investigated, and who 
have you investigated?’”

Rowlinson, who died in 2006 aged 83, became sufficiently concerned about 
Bennell, a man he described as a “Pied Piper figure” with “a magnetic 
attraction with boys”, he contacted Manchester City, where they, too, had 
received a complaint about Bennell bringing boys into his room late at night.

Bennell, who has served three prison sentences, totalling 15 years, since 1994 
for multiple offences committed against boys, had previously worked with junior 
teams affiliated to City, including Whitehill FC, where he targeted the 
11-year-old David White, a future England international.

Former England footballer David White was sexually abused by Barry Bennell
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/david-white> 
The complaint to City came from a parent but Ken Barnes, the club’s former 
head scout, told Dispatches the incident was “something of nothing” and nothing 
more than a “bit irresponsible”. Chris Muir, one of the club’s directors, told 
the same documentary that Bennell was “looked upon as a fellow that wasn’t 
right”, adding that “football allowed him to stay because he was producing the 
goods.”

Crewe have declined to comment. The FA, meanwhile, has said it is treating all 
the stories surrounding the entire case with utmost seriousness, citing the 
comments of the chairman, Greg Clarke, earlier in the week. City stated on 
Thursday they were “undertaking a thorough investigation of any past links he 
(Bennell) might have had with the organisation.”

• The NSPCC’s hotline is 0800 023 2642 and ChildLine for children and young 
people can be contacted on 0800 1111.

• The National Association for People Abused in Childhood can be contacted on 
0808 801 0331.

• In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 