
Crewe Alexandra’s handling of the Barry Bennell affair is under new scrutiny 
after it emerged their former youth-team coach was so notorious he had been 
banned from attending fixtures in one of Manchester’s leading junior leagues.

Bennell’s reputation was so tarnished he was forcibly removed from at least 
one game while on talent-spotting duty for Crewe, and so badly thought of that 
on another occasion it led to a fight on the sidelines.

Crewe were warned about Barry Bennell but he stayed on, says former board 
member
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/crewe-barry-bennell-former-board-member>
Bennell’s behaviour was discussed at a meeting involving representatives of 
various junior teams, the Guardian has been told, and Andy Woodward, the former 
professional footballerwhose interview began the escalating story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward> of child sex 
abuse in the sport, has confirmed to this newspaper that he, too, witnessed his 
abuser being thrown out of junior games.

“If kids’ teams in Manchester knew about him, and Bennell’s reputation had 
stretched all the way to grassroots junior football 40 miles away from Crewe, 
it is strange, to say the least, that Crewe are saying they had heard 
absolutely nothing to trouble them about their own employee,” Woodward said.

Bennell became so infamous in the junior football scene in Manchester, his 
home city, that he was ejected from a game involving Cheadle Town’s youth team 
when the manager saw him on the touchline.

The manager, who has asked not to be named, told the Guardian that at a 1990 
meeting of the various teams from the now-defunct Manchester Youth Sunday 
Football League a senior official had told the clubs to be vigilant and not to 
allow Bennell to watch matches.

Bennell, who was running Crewe’s youth system at the time, subsequently turned 
up at Cheadle, a team who regularly attracted football scouts from professional 
clubs, and the game was temporarily halted. “Everyone in junior football at 
that time knew the rumours about Barry Bennell,” the manager said. “As soon as 
I saw him I marched across the pitch with one of the boys’ parents and we told 
him we had an issue with him being there. I didn’t stop the match but the 
referee had to blow his whistle because we had gone straight across the pitch, 
rather than walking round the edge, and made a direct beeline for him.

“It had been made clear to us that if he came to watch a match we were to ask 
him to leave immediately and that if he refused, the advice was that we should 
go to the police. He knew straight away he’d been rumbled. I got hold of him 
and walked him to the gate and slung him out. And if we hadn’t have done that, 
he would probably have been lynched.”

Barry Bennell in hospital as police widen football sexual abuse inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/greater-manchester-police-investigates-historical-sex-abuse-youth-football>
The manager added: “If junior teams in Manchester knew about him, something is 
surely wrong if people at Crewe are saying they had never heard anything amiss.”

Woodward was repeatedly abused, starting when he was 11, in Crewe’s set-up and 
his interview with the Guardian has been the inspiration for more than 20 
former professionals to come forward – as well as many others who did not make 
it that far in the game – to report sex-abuse cases involving Bennell and 
others.

Crewe, the most heavily implicated of the clubs named, say they have launched 
an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/crewe-independent-review-handling-child-abuse-allegations>
 into how the club dealt with allegations about Bennell when he was in their 
employment.

This follows the revelations in the Guardian from Hamilton Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/crewe-barry-bennell-former-board-member>
, the club’s former director, who has stated that in the late-1980s he raised 
concerns about Bennell’s behaviour, at a top-level meeting in the home of the 
then chairman, Norman Rowlinson.

Woodward said he could remember other times, going further back to the 
mid-1980s, when Bennell had taken him on scouting missions in the Manchester 
area only for it to lead to angry exchanges with parents and officials from the 
teams.

“There was even one occasion when it became a physical fight,” Woodward said. 
“I was around 12 at the time. I knew Bennell could be violent and I was 
frightened. We would walk round the side of the pitch and suddenly it would 
become obvious people didn’t want him there. Yet Bennell continued to work at 
Crewe without any apparent problem.”

Bennell, 62, is in hospital after being found unconscious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/barry-bennell-hospital> when 
police were called to a “fear for welfare incident” in Stevenage on Friday. 
Described as having “almost an insatiable appetite” for young boys, Bennell has 
served three prison sentences totalling 15 years in England and the United 
States since 1994 and has multiple convictions for offences of a sexual nature.

Crewe have been asked to comment.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffa-acted-very-quickly-response-sex-abuse-scandal-chairman-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20acted%20very%20quickly%20in%20response%20to%20sex%20abuse%20scandal%2C%20says%20chairman%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffa-acted-very-quickly-response-sex-abuse-scandal-chairman-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20acted%20very%20quickly%20in%20response%20to%20sex%20abuse%20scandal%2C%20says%20chairman%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffa-acted-very-quickly-response-sex-abuse-scandal-chairman-video&media=>
FA acted very quickly in response to sex abuse scandal, says chairman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/29/fa-acted-very-quickly-response-sex-abuse-scandal-chairman-video> 