
Shakespeare’s inclusiveness, the overwhelming sense in the plays that all 
human life is there, means that focusing on any aspect of the work will produce 
dividends. Shakespeare and war,Shakespeare and love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/18/bed-tricks-and-broken-women-shakespeares-guide-to-love>
, Shakespeare and medicine, Shakespeare and sodomy: all provocative, all 
surprising, all resonant. But Shakespeare and the family is in a different 
league. He is, in a particularly potent sense, the Family Man. These 
fundamental relationships – mothers, sons, fathers, daughters, brothers, 
sisters, uncles, aunts, nephews, cousins – are at the heart of one play after 
another. How else could it be for a writer whose theme is the experience of 
being human? Which of us has not been formed, for better or for worse, by those 
relationships, or by their absence? And beyond the domestic kingdom, the family 
looms large in his work in quite another way: the destinies of nations, equally 
determined by blood ties.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c9c468e2466070e5eec9d4584c7b270cbe01a0e%2F0_0_943_720%2F943.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c9c468e2466070e5eec9d4584c7b270cbe01a0e%2F0_0_943_720%2F943.jpg>
 Elizabethan family … a portrait of nobleman William Brooke and children, 1567. 
Photograph: Public domain 
 Of course, Shakespeare was a family man in a less universal sense: he was 
born into a large one and he became the head of another (rather smaller). We 
know nothing of his private thoughts; we have no diaries, no letters, no 
conversation books. But we do know the important things in his life: where he 
was born, to whom and in what circumstances; where he was married, who his wife 
and children were, and where he lived. In particular, we know quite a lot about 
his father John, the son of a farmer, who had set himself up with some success 
as a glove-maker and leatherworker who was also in the wool trade (illegally, 
as it happens). John Shakespeare rapidly worked his way through local 
government: first he was elected borough ale-taster – nice work if you can get 
it – then chamberlain, which required him to arrange visits of travelling 
players to Stratford. No doubt little William had a front-row seat, thanks to 
his father’s job. Soon, John was elected high bailiff – mayor, in effect. The 
name of Shakespeare really counted for something in Stratford.

His father's public disgrace – and the sudden poverty that followed – had to 
be character-forming

 But when William was 13, his father’s rise came to a shuddering halt. He was 
prosecuted forwool-dealing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/26/dodgy-dealings-william-shakespeare-father-wool>
 and, more seriously, for usury – extending loans with interest, a heinous 
offence in Elizabethan eyes. His debts barred him from attending council 
meetings and even prevented him from going to church, for fear of being 
arrested. Small-town dramas, these, but for a child, epic: seeing one’s father 
publicly disgraced, living with the obloquy – not to mention the sudden poverty 
– can only be character-forming. This traumatic jolt to the family may not be 
unconnected to Shakespeare’s astounding productivity and his drive towards 
stability and social standing, as well as providing the subject of much of his 
work: sudden dispossession, banishment, exile. Before his fall from grace, John 
Shakespeare had applied for a coat of arms; 25 years later it was finally 
granted, and it is widely assumed that it was his by now prosperous, renowned 
and well-connected son who had arranged it for him. The son had become his 
father’s father.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb28cce9b6dfedbfffa65c22fc1ef0f2ed35c8f58%2F0_82_5160_3098%2F5160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb28cce9b6dfedbfffa65c22fc1ef0f2ed35c8f58%2F0_82_5160_3098%2F5160.jpg>
 Social standing … Shakespeare’s coat of arms above the door of his childhood 
home. Photograph: Alamy 
We know much less about Shakespeare’s mother Mary, but the bare facts are 
suggestive. She was a cut above John socially – indeed, John’s father had been 
a tenant of Mary’s father. The Ardens were well-established Warwickshire 
gentry, and it is hard to believe that they regarded the vivacious young glover 
as a catch: it is not unreasonable to assume that it was love-match. Certainly, 
it was a productive partnership: Mary had eight children, though three of them 
– all daughters – died young. William had been preceded by two sisters, both 
killed by the plague. The boy was the first of John and Mary’s children to 
survive. A son and heir – how cherished he must have been.

His early years would have been dominated, according to Elizabethan custom, by 
his mother: fathers were more or less absent from their young children’s lives. 
Partly because of the high rate of infant mortality, children were lavished 
with affection, prized, coddled and adored; the early Elizabethans were the 
first generation to fill the nursery with toys. Until they went to school, boy 
children basked in the attentions of womenfolk: relatives, neighbours, even 
possibly, during the good years, a nurse. Shakespeare only rarely writes of the 
extraordinary intimacy between mothers and sons, but Hermione and Mamillius, in 
The Winter’s Tale, embody every affectionate and tender relationship of that 
sort; Hamlet and Gertrude, every dangerously close one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4da1601fe2212f2c7bc365dfa40b180dfba7d1aa%2F0_0_4256_2826%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4da1601fe2212f2c7bc365dfa40b180dfba7d1aa%2F0_0_4256_2826%2F4256.jpg>
 Paying his dues … Shakespeare’s will. Photograph: Imagewise 
Ltd/Rex/Shutterstock 
Shakespeare’s siblings, about whom we know only the bare essentials, followed 
at regular intervals – Gilbert, born when Shakespeare was two, Joan when he was 
four, Anne two years later (she died aged eight, when Shakespeare was 15). 
Richard was born three years later, and Edmund, the last, who became an actor, 
arrived when Shakespeare was 16. William outlived them all, except for Joan. 
The death of children tolls through Shakespeare’s life, most notably the demise 
– almost certainly from plague – of his own son, Hamnet, at the age of 11, 
leaving behind a twin, Judith, and another sister, the Shakespeares’ firstborn, 
Susannah.

Susannah, as it happens, had been conceived out of wedlock: Shakespeare’s wife 
Anne was three months pregnant when she walked down the aisle. It may have been 
a shotgun wedding; more interesting, perhaps, is the age gap between them. At 
26, Anne was eight years older. Her only appearance in the historical record 
is, famously, in Shakespeare’s will, in which he leaves her his “second-best 
bed”; equally famously, it has been established that this was no slight, but a 
mark of profound affection – it is the bed in which they would have spent their 
married life.

His daughter Judith married a dodgy vintner, who got them both excommunicated

Shakespeare himself disappears from the historical record for nearly a decade. 
Then, from 1592, he was mostly in London, so how much Anne saw of him is to be 
questioned. Certainly there were no more children, and it is to be presumed 
that Shakespeare missed his kids’ growing-up. From his mid-30s, though still 
based in London, he began to transfer his centre of operations back to his 
native town. The girls both married: Susannah satisfied every parent’s highest 
hopes by marrying a doctor, a brilliant and successful one. In 1608, she 
presented him with a child – the only grandchild Shakespeare knew, Elizabeth, 
of whom Shakespeare, relocated to Stratford, presumably saw more than he had 
done of his own children.

Meanwhile, Judith made a spectacularly bad marriage (at the age of 31) to a 
dodgy vintner who managed not to get the marriage licence in time, which led to 
both of them being excommunicated, a terrifying punishment for an Elizabethan. 
Thomas Quiney was then prosecuted for “carnal copulation” with a local woman 
who had died along with their baby. All this happened in Shakespeare’s last 
couple of months, in time for him to change the provisions of his will to 
protect Judith’s legacy. In due course, Quiney and Judith had three children; 
the first, Shakespeare Quiney, died in infancy. But Shakespeare knew none of 
these children; he returned to Arthur’s bosom on 23 April 1616, not long after 
the wedding.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3aeae5b2f556f6fa74125e7b4cec80d98cce27f8%2F0_0_2464_1648%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3aeae5b2f556f6fa74125e7b4cec80d98cce27f8%2F0_0_2464_1648%2F2464.jpg>
 The archetypal dysfunctional family … Ben Whishaw as Hamlet and Imogen Stubbs 
as Gertrude. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Families do not come out of the plays tremendously well, it has to be said. 
The two most famous ones are those in Hamlet and Romeo and Juliet. Hamlet’s 
family is a byword for all dysfunctional families, with its overwrought 
mother-son relationship, its physically absent though emotionally present 
father and its usurping stepfather. Nor is Hamlet’s the only family in the 
play: Polonius has two children whom he seeks to control, setting spies on to 
his own son when the boy goes to university, personally arranging for the King 
and Queen to eavesdrop on his hapless daughter Ophelia. The play’s third family 
– or dynasty, in this case – is that of Fortinbras, the young Norwegian crown 
prince who invades Denmark at the end of the play. Both he and Hamlet are named 
after their fathers, whom they live to avenge. But when Hamlet meets the ghost 
of the father with whom he is so obsessed, the spirit has no tenderness for his 
boy: he is in a lather of rage and agony, desperate to spur his son on to the 
revenge that alone will salve his soul.

Fathers do rather tend to rage in Shakespeare: they are forever erupting 
unconscionably. “Shall I be heard?” roars Leontes in The Winter’s Tale, 
breaking into the nursery where his boy Mamillius is luxuriating in the 
playfully loving atmosphere created by his mother and her ladies-in-waiting. 
Juliet’s father responds to her refusal to marry the man he and his wife have 
lined up for her with such sudden and violent rage that even the nurse is 
shocked:

 Wife, we scarce thought us blest 
That God had lent us but this only child


shouts Capulet.

 But now I see this one is one too much, 
And that we have a curse in having her: 
Out on her, hilding!

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd3a9e93dcc7b95240f055951a598842606a6973%2F0_128_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd3a9e93dcc7b95240f055951a598842606a6973%2F0_128_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Alternative father … Roger Allam (centre) as Falstaff. Photograph: John 
Haynes/Shakespeare's Globe 
Similarly, in Much Ado about Nothing, when Leonato, the Governor of Messina, a 
genial old buffer, hears an unsubstantiated rumour that his daughter Hero has 
had sex with a stranger before her wedding, his immediate response is to wish 
her dead. In The Winter’s Tale, King Leontes, in an ecstasy of jealousy, 
denounces his heavily pregnant wife Hermione, throwing her into prison, where 
she gives birth to a daughter, whom he commands to be left on a mountainside to 
die. The oracle of Delphi proclaims Hermione’s innocence, but Leontes refuses 
to believe it. Hearing this, she dies (or seems to); their adored son 
Mamillius, shattered by the grief and distress that Leontes has inflicted on 
them all, dies, for real.

Together they embark on a royal rampage, drinking, whoring, robbing and 
outraging respectability

Elsewhere in the Shakespearean universe, fathers are exigent, cold, haughty. 
Henry IV, having secured the throne by political cunning, expects his son, also 
Henry, to emulate his example of sobriety and focus, but the boy knows better 
what he needs both as a man and as a future king, and seeks out an alternative 
father in the brothels of London. This other father, Sir John Falstaff, 
disreputable to the core but with the airs of a fallen monarch, pairs up with 
the lad, nicknaming him Hal, and together they embark on a royal rampage, 
eating, drinking, whoring, robbing and outraging respectability wherever they 
encounter it. The Boar’s Head provides an alternative family for the young 
Prince, with Mistress Quickly a fussing mother, Doll Tearsheet a randy cousin. 
When Falstaff and the Eastcheap gang have restored Hal to the human race, Hal 
brutally ditches the old ruffian and makes his peace with the real father, now 
dying, that he is about to succeed in the actual world. No mention, again, of 
mothers. With Coriolanus, the opposite is true: altogether too much mother. 
Volumnia, terrifying in her rigidity, drives him first into standing, 
reluctantly, for consul and then to his death.

Brothers in Shakespeare are often contrasted, nice and nasty – Don Pedro and 
Don John in Much Ado, Edgar and Edmund in Lear, Orlando and Oliver in As You 
Like It – this pattern partly a reflection of the Elizabethan laws of 
primogeniture that resulted in the eldest brother taking the entire patrimony, 
leaving younger male siblings impoverished and at a loose end.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24fd44872a88943825457300bccdbf6074945451%2F0_0_2500_3646%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24fd44872a88943825457300bccdbf6074945451%2F0_0_2500_3646%2F2500.jpg>
 Nice brother, nasty brother … Denzel Washington as Don Pedro and Keanu Reeves 
as Don John in Much Ado About Nothing. Photograph: PR Image 
Brothers and sisters manifest the usual tensions: in Hamlet Ophelia resents 
her brother Laertes’s freedom, in Measure for Measure Claudio is bewildered by 
Isabella’s refusal to surrender her virginity if it will save his life. In 
Twelfth Night the twins Sebastian and Viola, each thinking the other dead, are 
profoundly grief-stricken; and the same play starts with the Countess Olivia in 
deep mourning for her late brother (“What a plague means my niece, to take the 
death of her brother thus?” testily demands the grumpy hedonist, her 
disreputable cousin Toby Belch).

Shakespeare's last act: a torrent of twisted fantasies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/17/shakespeares-last-act-a-torrent-of-twisted-fantasies>
 Of family life as such we see little in the plays, although the Nurse in 
Romeo and Juliet provides a stream-of-consciousness account of Juliet’s 
childhood, implying the great warmth of the extended family. She has forgotten 
nothing: how hard little Juliet gnawed at her nipple when she was breastfeeding 
her; how the little thing fell over one day and what she said. It is foolhardy 
to try to turn the plays into autobiography, but the particularity of the 
writing speaks of the closest observation and deep personal experience. Who was 
Juliet’s nurse, with her permanent memory haemorrhage? Or Prospero, the 
overcontrolling, deeply, desperately loving father? These are people 
Shakespeare has surely met – just as surely as they are people we have met. 
Another below-stairs witness, Launce, Proteus’s servant in Two Gentlemen of 
Verona, paints a particularly vivid picture of family grief at his 
leave-taking, with special reference to an honorary family member, his dog, 
Crab (“the sourest-natured dog that lives”).

 Nay, ’twill be this hour ere I have done weeping ... my mother weeping, my 
father wailing, my sister crying, our maid howling, our cat wringing her hands, 
and all our house in a great perplexity, yet did not this cruel-hearted cur 
shed one tear...
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8eb76f54ede5da44d4a67d6108311ce1dc11ffeb%2F0_0_1762_2260%2F1762.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crime%2C%20social%20climbing%2C%20shotgun%20weddings%3A%20meet%20the%20Shakespeares&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsocial-climbing-shotgun-weddings-meet-the-shakespeares%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8eb76f54ede5da44d4a67d6108311ce1dc11ffeb%2F0_0_1762_2260%2F1762.jpg>
 Playtime … a girl and her doll, 1596. Photograph: Museum Meermanno 
Such familial warmth is the exception. There are loving couples in 
Shakespeare: in Julius Caesar, both Brutus and Caesar have, in Portia and 
Calphurnia, caring and steady spouses. Had Caesar heeded his wife’s premonitory 
dream, he might have lived. Coriolanus’s wife, Valeria, endures the lot of the 
soldier’s wife anxiously; brushed aside, swatted away, she falls silent in the 
face of her mother-in-law’s absolute certainty. Lady Macbeth goads and drives 
on her wavering husband to fulfil the destiny she insists is his:

I have given suck, and know 
How tender ’tis to love the babe that milks me: 
I would, while it was smiling in my face, 
Have pluck’d my nipple from his boneless gums, 
And dash’d the brains out, had I so sworn as you 
Have done to this.


The deed once done, Macbeth falls apart. His wife, infinitely more resolute, 
castrates him verbally: “What, quite unmann’d in folly?”
 A 19th-century engraving of Shakespeare with his family. Photograph: 
bridgemanart.com 
We do not, famously, know how many children Lady Macbeth had, but Macbeth’s 
vision of the future kings of Scotland tells him clearly that he has not 
founded a dynasty: it has all been pointless. The plays in the Wars of the 
Roses cycle are based on the dynastic imperative – ending happily ever after, 
so the dramatist would have us believe, with the crowning of Henry Tudor, the 
future Henry VII, grandfather of the childless queen who reigned through the 
first 40 years of Shakespeare’s life. Elizabeth’s lack of offspring 
increasingly fed the paranoia and instability of her last years on the throne.
Under her successor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/17/shakespeares-last-act-a-torrent-of-twisted-fantasies>
, her cousin James VI of Scotland, the country (despite his well-attested 
sexual ambivalence) was well provided with male heirs and a very pretty queen; 
Britain had a royal family again, which seemed, for a while, to guarantee the 
safety and stability of families across the land. It was an illusion: within a 
few short decades family was set against family, father against son, brother 
against brother. The dread scourge ofcivil war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/may/13/featuresreviews.guardianreview3> 
again descended on the land.

He had another family – his colleagues in the theatre – and left them money to 
buy rings to remember him by

Shakespeare lived to see none of it: he died in the bosom of his own family, 
back in Stratford-on-Avon, prosperous, making due and detailed provision for 
his offspring and their issue. He had, of course, another family: his 
colleagues in the theatre, which so often feels like a second family for those 
who work in it. In his will he left to the star for whom he wrote so many of 
his greatest roles,Richard Burbage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/apr/26/theatre.shakespeare>, and to his 
colleagues John Heminges and Henry Condell, money to buy rings, so they would 
remember him. Little did he know that it was this other family that would 
guarantee his immortality.
 