
Not for the first time in the evening Cristiano Ronaldo put his hands to his 
face and struggled to contain the emotion. On this occasion it was overwhelming 
joy. The Portugal captain, who was cruelly knocked out of this 2016European 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/european-championship> final 
by a knee injury early in the first half, walked along the touchline to take a 
moment alone, as the hysteria exploded around him.

Portugal beat France to win Euro 2016 final with Éder’s extra-time goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
Éder had just scored the goal of his life – one of the goals of Portugal’s 
history – the bench had emptied on to the pitch and the country was set fair 
for its first major trophy. After all the semi‑final misses and the defeat 
against Greece in the Euro 2004 final – at their championship – it was finally 
to be Portugal’s time.

Ronaldo would have chosen to act the role of match-winner, of the star, but in 
the end even he did not seem to care that it was Éder, a substitute, who had 
conjured the decisive moment. The striker’s adaptation to life in the Premier 
League with Swansea City was so problematic last season that he spent the 
second half of it on loan at Lille and then joined them permanently. Here he 
wrote his name into folklore.

Those minutes from Éder’s stunning 25-yard finish to when Mark Clattenburg 
blew his whistle for the final time at the Stade de France seemed to stretch 
like an eternity for Portugal. By then Ronaldo appeared to have become the de 
facto manager, or at least Fernando Santos’s assistant, and he gestured this 
way and that. All of thePortugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal>
 bench did.

When the whistle did sound, the celebrations were frenzied. There were more 
tears. Ronaldo celebrated with one member of the staff, at first, as the 
players streamed on to the field to pile on to Éder. There were the bumps for 
Santos – the staunchly pragmatic architect of this triumph – and then there was 
the sight of Ronaldo, having limped up the steps towards the trophy, hoisting 
it high into the night sky.

The mind went back to the 2004 final, when a teenage Ronaldo had been on the 
losing team and was left distraught. This was atonement for him and his nation. 
Back then Portugal had wilted under the pressure of being the hosts and 
favourites. This time it wasFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france>
 who had failed to deliver, despite having had a number of chances during 
regulation time to have won it. Rui Patrício, the Portugal goalkeeper, was 
prominent on the list of the heroes.

No country had played more ties at the European Championship finals than 
Portugal without winning it – until now. They had lost their previous 10 
matches to France, including semi-finals at Euro 1984 and 2000 and at the 2006 
World Cup. The revenge tasted impossibly sweet. And what about their record 
under Santos, who took over in September 2014? He remains undefeated in 
competitive games, with the number now standing at 14.

Nine of the 10 wins have been by a single goal and that tells a story. This 
Portugal team, who scraped through to the knockout rounds afterfinishing third 
in their group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/hungary-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 – they have plenty of reason to approve the expanded format of this 
championship – have not been easy to love. Even Santos had admitted beforehand 
that they have been the tournament’s “ugly ducking”.

This was no grand spectacle but nobody in the red of Portugal cared. It was an 
attritional triumph, in which Santos kept things tight at the outset and even 
tighter after the loss of Ronaldo.

Portugal swarmed into tackles; they worked tirelessly to compress the space 
between the lines but their technique on the ball ought not to be overlooked. 
João Mário, the Sporting Lisbon midfielder, once again demonstrated his easy 
rhythm while Renato Sanches grew into the contest. When Santos withdrew the 
18-year-old in the 78th minute, the manager’s craggy features creased into a 
smile.

Ronaldo could not overcome the effects of the shuddering collision with 
Dimitri Payet on eight minutes, when the France winger had banged into the side 
of his left knee. It was an emotional scene in the 23rd minute when Ronaldo 
realised that his final was over.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-tears-portugal-greatest-night%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F414bd4d128415578fe198b732e255c6e914becc6%2F0_0_2558_1706%2F2558.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20tears%20of%20sadness%20turn%20to%20joy%20on%20Portugal%E2%80%99s%20greatest%20night%20%7C%20David%20Hytner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-tears-portugal-greatest-night%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20tears%20of%20sadness%20turn%20to%20joy%20on%20Portugal%E2%80%99s%20greatest%20night%20%7C%20David%20Hytner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-tears-portugal-greatest-night%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F414bd4d128415578fe198b732e255c6e914becc6%2F0_0_2558_1706%2F2558.jpg>
 Ronaldo reacts as medics arrive on the pitch to help him off. Photograph: 
Franck Fife/AFP/Getty Images 
Sitting on the turf, he removed the captain’s armband and insisted upon 
wrapping it around Nani’s biceps. He was inconsolable as he was taken from the 
field on a stretcher; hand across his face to hide the tears.

Santos tried to get Ronaldo’s replacement, Ricardo Quaresma, and the excellent 
João Mário closer to Nani as the second half wore on and his final change was 
the introduction of Éder up front; Nani moved out wide and João Mário dropped 
into midfield. Portugal’s flexibility was plain.

Portugal 1-0 France: five talking points from the Euro 2016 final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/10/portugal-france-five-talking-points-euro-2016-final>
They did not contribute too much in an attacking sense and they rode their 
luck, not least when Antoine Griezmann headed his gilt-edged 66th-minute chance 
over the crossbar and André-Pierre Gignac hit a post at the end of regulation 
time. Patrício was outstanding and he made four saves of the highest order, 
including two from Moussa Sissoko. He had stretched to keep out Griezmann’s 
header in the early running.

However, France ran out of ideas – they were eventually stifled – and it was 
Portugal who found the extra gear in extra-time. Éder worked Hugo Lloris and 
Raphaël Guerreiro hit the crossbar with a free-kick. The Portugal supporters 
had brought the noise throughout the occasion and it was this nation of 10m 
people who could rejoice.
 