
The plaque says it all. Quite literally. “Melhor Jogador Do Mundo” – “Best 
Player In The World”. A bold claim and one that would no doubt be disputed by 
backers of acertain Argentinian based in Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi>. But in Funchal there is 
only one contender for the crown. The plaque makes that clear too: “Cristiano 
Ronaldo”. All there in bronze underneath a 10ft bronze statue of the man 
himself in classic pose: arms stretched down by his side, legs spread, hair 
immaculately groomed. Peak Ronaldo? Not quite. That would be the building the 
statue is directly facing: Museu CR7.

No room for half-measures in Cristiano Ronaldo’s gilded world of 110% | Simon 
Burnton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/22/cristiano-ronaldo-hotel-watford-chesterfield>
That Ronaldo has his own museum in the city of his birth is not a surprise but 
what does raise an eyebrow upon visiting it, as I did on a sweltering August 
morning, is how easy it is to miss. From outside all you see is a single-storey 
building made up of an all-black frontage and a simple red-brick roof – hardly 
a sight that screams for your attention. But then you spot the statue, and the 
crowds gathered by it, and then, eventually, the giant “CR7” logos and it is a 
case of destination reached. Next up: entry, and everyone’s welcome. Even you, 
Lionel.

The museum is located at Praça do Mar, a square that stretches across the main 
port in Funchal, the capital of Madeira and where Ronaldo was born on 5 
February 1985 (that’s on the plaque, too). He is indisputably the most famous 
son of the city and of Madeira, an archipelago located 600 miles south of the 
Portuguese mainland that is inhabited by just over 267,000 people and draws 
thousands more in tourism each year, due, in part, to its fine wine and even 
finer weather.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3035f47923e1556497a08a6b00a288a64bff9615%2F0_115_2448_3060%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20museum%3A%20a%20reminder%20of%20a%20great%20ego%20and%20an%20even%20greater%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20museum%3A%20a%20reminder%20of%20a%20great%20ego%20and%20an%20even%20greater%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3035f47923e1556497a08a6b00a288a64bff9615%2F0_115_2448_3060%2F2448.jpg>
 The 10ft bronze statue of Ronaldo that stands outside the main entrance to the 
museum and declares him to be the ‘best player in the world’. Photograph: 
Sachin Nakrani for the Guardian 
Many of those who visit Madeira, and Funchal in particular, make going to 
Museu CR7 a must, with those who have done so since July visiting the new, 
improved and larger version of the museum.

The original opened in December 2013 and was located in the nearby hills, on 
Rua Princesa D Amélia. It was the brainchild of Ronaldo’s older brother, Hugo, 
who after travelling to see his sibling at his villa in Madrid and noticing 
that his various trophies were scattered across the property, thought it would 
make sense to house them in one place. There were over 140, so a decent-sized 
building would be required; fortunately the younger Ronaldo had one in Funchal 
that needed filling and so a museum in his honour was created.

And after the trophies kept on coming, it was decided a larger space was 
required. Hence the move to a site at Praça do Mar comprising of two stories 
and 1,400sq m of floor space shortly before Ronaldo was further enhancing his 
God-like status in Madeira by being a key part ofPortugal’s Euro 2016-winning 
squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
.

Museu CR7 is part of an empire, located as it is besides Pestana CR7 Hotel 
<http://www.pestanacr7.com/en/hotel/pestana-cr7-funchal>, which also opened 
this summer and comes fitted with 48 rooms (the most basic of which are priced 
at €135-a-night), a CR7 suite (which will set you back €565-a-night) and a 
roof-top swimming pool that overlooks the harbour and towards the north 
Atlantic Ocean.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33b5b5ea4f026604c3887c789d0c9a31f2b5332b%2F0_78_5600_3360%2F5600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20museum%3A%20a%20reminder%20of%20a%20great%20ego%20and%20an%20even%20greater%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20museum%3A%20a%20reminder%20of%20a%20great%20ego%20and%20an%20even%20greater%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33b5b5ea4f026604c3887c789d0c9a31f2b5332b%2F0_78_5600_3360%2F5600.jpg>
 One of the three replica Ballon d’Or trophies that sit in the middle of 
museum’s main section. Photograph: Octavio Passos/Getty Images 
Among the palm trees and white pebbled streets, the cafes and the bars, this 
is Ronaldo’s territory. And there outside the entrance to the museum is the 
statue, built by the sculptor Ricardo Veloza, himself a native of Madeira.

And so to the museum itself. The first thing to say is that it’s reasonably 
cheap to visit – €5 per person, with free entry for under-10s. I expected 
tickets to be more expensive, and it came as a surprise that in this most 
brand-aware of venues there was not a ‘7’ involved in the pricing structure. 
Perhaps that’s to come; an extra free ticket for every seven-year-old, or for 
people who arrive in groups of seven, or for anyone who simply shouts “seven!” 
as they walk inside and towards the staff behind the tills in their CR7 tops.

After buying a ticket it is a case of heading left and down the staircase, 
over which sit images of Ronaldo, most showing off that smile that says: “Look 
at me … marvellous aren’t I?” A short walk later and you find yourself in the 
main section, a white-walled, black-floored bunker filled with trophy cabinets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa76ca99d65cad80ae3d0aa061e4dd08efd2ce674%2F0_56_3052_1831%2F3052.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20museum%3A%20a%20reminder%20of%20a%20great%20ego%20and%20an%20even%20greater%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20museum%3A%20a%20reminder%20of%20a%20great%20ego%20and%20an%20even%20greater%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa76ca99d65cad80ae3d0aa061e4dd08efd2ce674%2F0_56_3052_1831%2F3052.jpg>
 Replicas of the Community Shield and the Premier League trophy. Ronaldo won 
both during his time at Manchester United. Photograph: Sachin Nakrani for the 
Guardian 
They are all there, every trophy Ronaldo has won, collectively and 
individually, in a career spanning 24 years, from when he was a seven-year-old 
playing for his local team, Andorinha (for whom his late father, José Dinis 
Aveiro, was the kit man), to the 31-year-old talismanic forward for Real Madrid 
and Portugal. There are over 160, the most recent being Uefa’s torso-shaped 
award forbest player in Europe 2015–16 
<http://www.uefa.com/uefachampionsleague/news/newsid=2398156.html>, which was 
presented to Ronaldo prior to last week’s Champions League draw in Monaco.

Some are obscure – like the one for being the best player at an unnamed 
under-13s tournament – some are tacky – like the one shaped as a beer tap and 
awarded by Carslberg for a man-of-the-match display – but most, like his most 
recent, merely testify to Ronaldo’s talents and achievements: the three replica 
Ballon d’Ors that are lined across the middle of the floor, the four replica 
Golden Boots, the various replica Premier League and Champions League trophies 
and, as of last month, a replica of the Henri Delaunay Cup, the original 
version of which Ronaldo held aloft at the Stade de France on 10 July to mark 
his country’s greatest sporting achievement.

Alongside the cabinets (one of which is packed with footballs), there are also 
an array of shirts on show, some signed and some there to ram home the point 
that Ronaldo is very good at football, such as the Real top that has “Ronaldo 
324 Histórico” emblazoned on the front to mark the moment last October when the 
31-year-oldscored his 324th goal for the club to overtake Raúl as their 
all-time top scorer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/17/real-madrid-levante-la-liga-match-report>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb73aa814f618f81410713cd444d22fa8bcb1837b%2F32_380_3232_1939%2F3232.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20museum%3A%20a%20reminder%20of%20a%20great%20ego%20and%20an%20even%20greater%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20museum%3A%20a%20reminder%20of%20a%20great%20ego%20and%20an%20even%20greater%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb73aa814f618f81410713cd444d22fa8bcb1837b%2F32_380_3232_1939%2F3232.jpg>
 One of the two Ronaldo mannequins that are located at Museu CR7 Photograph: 
Sachin Nakrani for the Guardian 
Then there are the two life-size mannequins, both of which depict Ronaldo in 
hisPortugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> strip with those 
arms once again stretched and those legs once again spread. Each, like the 
statute outside, offer visitors a hard-to-resist photo opportunity (something I 
can testify to) and further point to the self-awareness of the man.

And speaking of Ronaldo’s ego, it also caught the attention that among the 
clips that form part of the touch-screen “interactive timeline” located by the 
far wall is one of the forward directing his team-mates during the Euro 2016 
final after he had to leave the pitch in the first-half with a knee injury (one 
Ronaldo has yet to fully recover from and ruled him out of Portugal’s5-0 
friendly victory over Gibraltar <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_UI8gcF7BI8> 
last week - their first match since winning the Euros – and the World Cup 
qualifier away to Switzerland on Tuesday). Many saw his barking of orders from 
the touchline as a sign of disrespect towards the manager, Fernando Santos, but 
its inclusion in the video-telling of his career suggests Ronaldo thinks 
otherwise. It is a source of personal pride, a moment to be watched over and 
over again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6ed3eff1a0e299a3497fa9e4775da8740e474e7%2F231_33_2881_1729%2F2881.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20museum%3A%20a%20reminder%20of%20a%20great%20ego%20and%20an%20even%20greater%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20museum%3A%20a%20reminder%20of%20a%20great%20ego%20and%20an%20even%20greater%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6ed3eff1a0e299a3497fa9e4775da8740e474e7%2F231_33_2881_1729%2F2881.jpg>
 A young visitor views the ‘interactive timeline’, which shows a range of clips 
from Ronaldo’s career. On screen is one of the 31-year-old celebrating 
Portugal’s Euro 2016 triumph. Photograph: Sachin Nakrani for the Guardian 
The range of Ronaldo photographs and paintings that adorn the walls of the 
museum, not to mention the cabinet filled with letters from adoring fans, 
further add to the sense Museu CR7 is essentially one large vanity project 
dedicated to a man who loves few things more than looking into a mirror. But 
having visited it on a day when people of varying ages and nationalities were 
in attendance, wandering around and taking photos, what ultimately stood out 
were the trophies. The number and range of them serve as a reminder that for 
all his preening, Ronaldo should be recognised as a supremely talented and 
successful footballer. Maybe not “Melhor Jogador Do Mundo” but undoubtedly 
worthy of being spoken of in those terms, in regards to this generation and 
those that have come before.

And nowhere more so than in Funchal. On the day I landed, the city had just 
beenhit by wild fires that left at least three people dead and made over a 
thousand homeless <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-37030217>. Scorched 
roof tops and burnt tress were visible in the valleys above, from where smoke 
had also rapidly descended, forcing roads to shut and scores of people – 
residents and holiday makers – to be evacuated. It was an upsetting time and 
funds were required as part of the rescue and recovery operation. One of the 
first people to put his hand in his pocket and pledge long-term support was 
Ronaldo – the poor boy from the Santo Antonio district who grew up to be a 
global superstar.

“Cristiano has never forgotten about where he came from, this is why he built 
the museum here and why he has looked after the people affected by the fires,” 
says Cecilia, a Funchal native and receptionist at the hotel I was staying at. 
“He is a hero to the whole of Madeira, and to the whole of Portugal.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35f42e859ef7284454d9746396bf6a0224795618%2F0_0_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20museum%3A%20a%20reminder%20of%20a%20great%20ego%20and%20an%20even%20greater%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20museum%3A%20a%20reminder%20of%20a%20great%20ego%20and%20an%20even%20greater%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-museum-museu-cr7-portgual-real-madrid-manchester-united%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35f42e859ef7284454d9746396bf6a0224795618%2F0_0_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Some of the fan mail that is on display at Museu CR7. Photograph: Sachin 
Nakrani for the Guardian  