
The agency representing Cristiano Ronaldo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> has published details of the 
Real Madrid forward’s assets held overseas as evidence that he has paid all his 
taxes, with the former Manchester United player declaring an astonishing £191m 
in 2015.

Last week GestiFute, the company founded by Ronaldo’s and the United manager 
José Mourinho’s agent, Jorge Mendes,denied that its clients 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/dec/03/cristiano-ronaldo-jose-mourinho-gestifute-tax>
 are involved in any tax evasion after a media consortium reported that it had 
used tax havens in the British Virgin Islands to handle tens of millions of 
euros in earnings.

Spanish authorities have promised to look into the claims but on Thursday 
GestiFutepublished details 
<http://gestifute.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/DOCUMENTO-2-1.jpg> of 
Ronaldo’s declared assets and rights outside Spain which are worth more than 
€203m (£191m).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-191m-income%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4995d6032cff1fe9f87ad246c6a26ed2298fb09e%2F0_0_852_984%2F852.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%20reveals%20%C2%A3191m%20assets%20after%20tax%20evasion%20allegations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-191m-income%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%20reveals%20%C2%A3191m%20assets%20after%20tax%20evasion%20allegations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-191m-income%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4995d6032cff1fe9f87ad246c6a26ed2298fb09e%2F0_0_852_984%2F852.jpg>
 Cristiano Ronaldo’s tax return showed he earned £191m in 2015. Photograph: 
http://gestifute.com 
“Cristiano Ronaldo communicated to the Spanish Tax Agency on 30 March all the 
information about his assets, as can be shown in the attached documentation,” 
the statement read.

“This procedure is known as presentation of the model 720 and offers to the 
Spanish Tax Agency all the data regarding the assets of the player. This 
document confirms that Spain’s Tax Agency is knowledgeable of all of Cristiano 
Ronaldo’s assets and income. From now on the player will not make any further 
statement on this subject.

“As reported in recent days, the player has been aware of his tax obligations 
right away from the beginning of his professional career in all of the 
countries in which he has resided and has not and has never had any issue with 
the tax authorities of any of those countries.

“This communication, which was not required by law, constitutes irrefutable 
proof that Cristiano Ronaldo and his representatives are in good faith and 
cooperate with the authorities in a spirit of transparency and compliance with 
legality.”

José Enrique Fernández de Moya, Spanish state secretary of the treasury, said 
last week that they would take “inspections we consider appropriate” regarding 
the allegations. After playing in Real’s 2-2 draw with Borussia Dortmund on 
Wednesday Ronaldo himself was asked if he was fearful of any action over the 
allegations. “Do you think I’m worried? He who owes nothing fears nothing,” he 
replied.
 