
Clueing coincidence

It’s always a pleasure to see the same word or phrase clued in different ways 
in different papers – especially when it gives us an opportunity to test-drive
our new way of breaking down the clues featured here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/oct/06/crossword-blog-clarifying-without-scarifying>
.

So, with this Times clue 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/30a26c9646be285a014855c4f4a7013a/print_solution/3>
 …

17d Prominent feature in manor one’s rebuilt (5,4)

[anagram of “MANOR ONES”]

... for ROMAN NOSE fresh in the mind, it was doubly pleasurable to come across 
Dac <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/aug/12/blogpost>
’scompletely different approach 
<http://independent.co.uk/independent.co.uk/editorial/xword/c_081014.bin> ... 

25ac Distinguishing feature of country garden ultimately covered in bloom (5,4)

[country name + last letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jan/27/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-initial-letters>
 of “garden”,
both surrounded by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/19/cryptic-crosswords-for-beginners-containers>
 a flower (“bloom”)]

[OMAN + N, both inside ROSE]

... and also to note that the same kind of definition lends itself as well to 
an architectural kind of misdirection as it does to a horticultural.

Latter patter

In an excellent puzzle 
<http://independent.co.uk/independent.co.uk/editorial/xword/c_061014.bin>, the 
Independent’s puzzle editor Eimi donned his setter’s hat to construct a grid in 
which each of the across entries had a silent first letter, the supernumerary 
vowels including OESTROGEN, AISLE and OEDIPAL and the consonants TSUNAMI, 
GNARLY, KNOWLEDGE and …

28ac Some scaremongering about international banker (5)

[part of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/06/cryptic-crosswords-beginners-hidden-answers>
 “scaremongering”, spelled backwards]

… GNOME. When we refer to a declaration as “gnomic”, we may have in mind that 
it’s the kind of aphoristic utterance you might expect of a sententious gnome, 
but there are GNOMES and there are GNOMES.

The “gnomic” sense comes from the Greek γιγνώσκειν, and relates to knowing, 
this kind of GNOME being a maxim, proverb, or – if you’re a crossword setter in 
need of a particular sequence of consonants – an apophthegm.

In a separate etymological timeline, we have the cod-Latin GNOME, possibly 
coined by Paracelsus, for a mysterious underground creature with a hoard of 
gold. It’s this kind of GNOME that features in the phrase “the gnomes of 
Zürich”, first used by the Labour Party’s George Brown to convey a certain 
hostility toward the idea of Swiss financiers speculating against the pound. 
(For younger readers, this was a time when destabilising bankers were not 
routinely punished by being showered in cash.)

So while you might meet a gnomic gnome, that trait is not intrinsic. 

Just as the earth has its gnomes, so too do the other elements: the water has 
nymphs, fire has salamanders, and the air a being that provides our next 
challenge. Reader, how would you clue SYLPHS?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for DUMBSHOW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/sep/29/crossword-roundup-pantomime-from-highbrow-to-low#show-all>
. The very idea of a silent actor lends itself well to natty cryptic 
definitions, such as cgrishi’s “Yet it can speak volumes for the actor’s 
ability”, steveran’s “Where prompter action not required?” and Clueso’s “Can’t 
say at this stage?”

JollySwagman has a lucid definition and wins the audacity award for wordplay: 
“There are unspeakable acts such as mud-wrestling taking place at the British 
Women’s School of Tap-dancing!”


The runners-up are mrmgmg’s “How BDSM users start, kinky role-play with 
gagging throughout” and kerfufflepuff’s “Doctor Who’s on ‘mute’. What a 
charade”; the winner is the pleasingly learned acrostic of HipsterPriest’s “The 
first of devices used magnificently by Shakespeare (Hamlet’s own work)?”

Kudos to Hipster; please leave this fortnight’s entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.


Clue of the Fortnight 


If there’s one thing this corner of the Guardian likes more than a piece of 
current slang, more even than a lettered allusion, it’s seeing both of those 
together, as withPasquale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/02/crossword-blog-meet-setter-pasquale>
’sclue <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26379> ...

18d New style identification has revolutionised biblical city (7)

[“has” + city name spelled backwards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jul/05/cryptic-crossword-beginners-backwards-clues>
]

[HAS + backwards GATH]

… for HASHTAG. That’s the cross-brow appeal of cryptics, right there. 
#justsayin
 