
John Halpern – known to Guardian setters as the incorrigible Paul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
 – recently stood on the stage at the Royal Albert Hall in a pleasingly snazzy 
suit to talk to 4,000 people about the joy of crosswords. It was part of
TEDxAlbertopolis <http://tedxalbertopolis.com/>, a sister event to the brainy 
Technology, Entertainment, Design <http://www.ted.com/pages/about> series of 
talks known as TED, slogan "ideas worth spreading".

I caught up with Paul to hear how it went and to ask about his new book, 
Centenary of the Crossword 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780233003962>
.

Well hello again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
 Paul. So how does the brainy reputation of TED affect the way you structure a 
talk? Do you feel an urge to be more erudite than you normally would?

It would never occur to me to be erudite. Also, the structure of a TEDx talk 
is laid down by the organisers. My first draft was a schmaltzy chestnut-stuffed 
turkey, until the fantastic TEDTalks geniuses got hold of it. The editing 
process is long and thorough.

Yikes. You insist that we're all secret wordplay lovers. What outlets do you 
think that love has for non-solvers?

Most people don't have access to the fun we have – simply because no one's 
pointed it out before. Once we spot the rude word in CHARDONNAY, our perception 
of wine is never the same again. And most people named Melissa probably 
wouldn't know that it's an anagram of AIMLESS. Or that "Among apostles, I'm one 
(5)" has hidden within it a certain SIMON.

To have everyone look at the words on road signs, maps and so on, and to see 
wordplay in everything around us is such a joy – and I want everyone to have 
that. When we are having fun with them, words become friendly and accessible. 
Crucially, reading and conversations become more fun.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIA7Zz8W_Loc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIA7Zz8W_Loc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIA7Zz8W_Loc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IA7Zz8W_Loc>

In the talk, you also discuss your recent crossword tour 
<http://www.crosswordcentenary.com>. There's an image of solving as a solitary 
discipline, but you've witnessed a lot of co-solving and even co-setting. How 
does the experience differ when it's a group activity?

It's a riot. Adults become kids again, and connect with one another. Ask me to 
explain why this happens, and I'm clueless. But, just being the connector who 
can cause friendships to occur – and like-minded types to meet – is a privilege.

I enjoyed your message that it's OK to fail. Does that mean that you think 
it's OK to leave a puzzle unfinished, or do you prefer the idea of every solver 
of your puzzle cracking every clue?

Thank you! I'm an utter failure at solving. More often than not, I don't 
complete a puzzle. We have a very human trait that tends to consider ourselves 
inadequate if this happens. Not so. It's also the setter's responsibility to 
get us over the line. If someone hasn't completed one of mine, it's me who must 
try harder!

We also tend to back down after failure. The voices in our head trick us into 
confirming our stupidity. But everyone fails first time. Personally, I usually 
fail on the sixth and seventh times too. It's worth persevering, for that 
eighth time, when you succeed and a new world of adventure becomes possible.

So fail, and smile. Learn from it, and don't let anyone tell you – including 
yourself – that it's not possible. It is. Ask yourself what you want in life, 
and what you want to create for others, and then keep failing until your dreams 
come true. Failure means nothing about your inability. It just means you 
haven't succeeded – yet.

I'll remember that the next time I'm staring at the Listener trying to find 
the hidden message. And you cheekily claim that the crossword is a British 
invention, despite the fact that the Liverpudlian who created the first puzzle 
did so in the US, for the New York World newspaper. Do you, as a solver, enjoy 
the American form of puzzle?

Cheeky question! And Americans think they invented the pizza!

I was surprised how much fun the New York Times 
<http://wordplay.blogs.nytimes.com/> is, but I found solving it impossible, 
with all those tiddly abbreviations unfamiliar to Brits. Just because they are 
unfamiliar to me doesn't make the puzzle a bad one, though. It was also a joy 
to see that lovers of the NYT crossword enjoy groan-inducing forced punnery – 
as do I.

Now, we've each written a book about crosswords, both pegged to the centenary 
in December.Mine 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846148415>
 is from a solver's perspective andyours 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780233003962>
 could only have been written by a setter. How did you decide what to include 
and what to leave out?

Yes, I must read yours! I'm sure it'll be a hoot. I wanted to answer the 
questions I most often get asked by solvers, such as: "How do you set a 
puzzle?", "What's going on in your head?" and "Are you nuts?"

All good questions, and addressed with aplomb. Finally, how did you pick the 
puzzles for inclusion in your book?

Some setters were asked to provide one of which they were most proud, others 
because they were typical of a crossword mindset at the time and some simply 
because I liked them.

• Many thanks to Paul for dropping by. Do you know of other talks and events 
which are approaching along with the crossword's centenary? Let us know!
 