
The news in clues

We learned when we spoke to Gaff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/feb/10/puzzles> 
that whenever there's a big event, it's worth seeing whether there's a special 
themed puzzle inthe Financial Times <http://www.ft.com/life-arts/crossword>. So 
it was withthe Commonwealth Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/commonwealthgames2014>, and last Wednesday's 
crossword 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/a989cf76-07c1-11e4-8e62-00144feab7de.pdf>
. Look away if you haven't solved the thematic clues, which had such pleasing 
definitions as "Batty one" for TABLE TENNIS and ...

9ac Wine old solvers knocked back with bully (6)

17ac Repeating pursuit for example (7)

10/19ac Note bird is protected by legislation, not Crown (4,5)

... for HOCKEY, CYCLING and LAWN BOWLS. And if you have already done the 
puzzle, wasn't that a cheering hidden extra in the bottom row?

Latter patter

A lovely construction in the Times 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/30a26c9646be285a0146ed21c6ed0049/print_solution/3>
 ...

5d Funny stuff for some all right -- not wholly for amusement outside (2-5)

... taking us to IN-JOKES via IN JEST, "in jest" being precisely what the 
unhyphenated "in joke" used to mean. The "in" bit,Brewer's 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780550107640>
 tells us, "originally had the sense of 'fashionable'" rather than the 
"insider" sense that works just as well now. "Originally" seems to have been 
the sixties, and "in" was often countercultural: the network of underground 
references seemingly linked as if by some occult hand, communicated to 
long-hairs and undergraduates by, a 1968 Listener piece tells us, those 
including the "progressive" BBC radio programme Top Gear:

Peel's linking comments are liberally sprinkled with in-references to 
musicians and to long-playing records destined, one suspects, for infinitesimal 
sales.

In-jokes themselves can also give us new words, with tantalisingly 
undocumented etymology. One such is the subject of our next clueing challenge, 
described by Oxford as follows:

Origin lost: (in 1645) referred to as an Oxford term; possibly originating in 
some university joke, or as a parody of some Latin term of the schools

Yes, reader: how would you clue CONUNDRUM?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for SPAM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/jul/14/crossword-roundup-polly-spam-monty-python#show-all>
. A plethora of Pams took cameos, of which my favourites were phitonelly's 
"Throwaway lines initially spoken by Ms Ayres" and MaleficOpus's "Ferris's 
wheels becoming a circulating nuisance".

The audacity award goes to ID2155366 for the "(Sp.) am" device underpinning 
"Soy rendered meat" and the least pleasing surfaces were surely Truth101's 
"Unwelcome news: Dad's into sado-masochism" and thebrasselephant's "Viagra 
promises metal encased pink meat".

Moving along, the runners-up are HipsterPriest's sparse "Unloved circular 
food?" and steveran's stark "Origin: South America - Contents: Pig's head"; the 
winner is Middlebro's endlessly delightful "Spicy Ham -- not cold or hot". 
Kudos to Middlebro - please leave this fortnight's entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the fortnight

An in-clue puzzle from Boatman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26314> ...

29d Could be 01/12, 02/03, 03/10, 04/11! (4)

... asking us to take a D from December, an A from March and so on, for DATE. 
Steady on!
 