
The news in clues

It may be that there are Lib Dems who believe that their party would have 
retained a scintilla more soul under the leadership of the business secretary, 
butArachne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/02/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-arachne>
 wantsto remind us <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26273> ... 

5d Cable screwed Post Office over, which may humour some deluded people (7)

... via a clue for PLACEBO that the so-called tough medicine can sometimes 
make the patient sicker.The puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26273> also contains a 
description at one across of Grant Shapps that, once read, will never leave 
your mind.

Meanwhile in the Independent, Dada – known locally as Paul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
 – has SENTENCED at 25 across, and since that is a fair description ...

19ac 25 publicist the most bluff – or dickhead? (3,8)

...of MAX CLIFFORD, adds a few more choice words. The question mark is there, 
I suspect, less because Dada fears that Clifford will regain his control of 
public life and more as a courtesy to ximeneans.

In the same paper, Nestor ...

16ac Ex-PM's policies with Murdoch, say, breaking British strike (8)

... evokes the Peacean line connecting Hillsborough to Wapping via Orgreave as 
well as offering a description of Thatcherism which turns out to be a clue for 
BLAIRISM.

Latter patter

Firefly's clue in a Telegraph Toughie 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=23050> - and this 
is a good thing – comes across like a summary from a health-and-safety dossier 
on a mangled espresso machine ...

1d Stone in arabica (out of Central America) damaged coffee-maker (7)

... in its clue for BARISTA. That word, like its near homophone "barrister", 
comes ultimately from Latin's "barra": the barrier separating customer from 
cash-and-coffee in one sense and law students from the part of the hall for 
mootings in the other.

I would have expected the use in English of BARISTA to have started with the 
hep espresso craze of the 1960s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2014/may/05/london-coffee-shops-soho-1960s>
, but really it's an affectation of the 90s second wave of the caffeination of 
the UK, which has enriched our language with so many dozens of ways of 
describing the same basic beverage.

New coffee vocabulary can appear at any moment: one I predict we'll be seeing 
more of in the next few years is a Spanish word. The drink in question can be 
easily bought in Scandinavia and is starting to appear in the more 
free-thinking independent cafes of the UK: get ready to add CORTADO (formerly 
known as a PICCOLO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/digital-journalism-scheme-blog/2014/feb/13/guardian-digital-journalism-trainee-cortados>
 in some quarters) to your idiolect.

Our clueing challenge concerns, though, an antipodean variant, let us never 
forget,brought to these shores by Peter Andre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2010/jan/28/flat-white-coffee-peter-andre>: 
reader, how would you clue FLAT WHITE?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for LITTLE VENICE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/may/20/crossword-roundup-lord-byron-peter-mister-hoskins#show-all>
. I enjoyed the way that geography became politics in thebrasselephant's 
"Mistakenly elect vile nit to represent the wets outside of Westminster" and 
ousgg's "I've intellect? Not likely – you'll find me in Westminster".

The implicit pun of steveran's "Bridge of size? Not here!" made me smile, as 
did Middlebro's lovely acrostic "Where first? London's Italianate terraces? 
Tree-lined embankments? Vegetarian eateries? Narrowboats in calm environment?"

The audacity award goes to harlobarlo for trying to make "eleven minus one" 
indicate LEVEN in "51 x (11-1) + 1 + 100 = basically a large number of 
narrowboats found here?"

The runners-up are yungylek's BBC-referencing "Not much to evince derelict 
area where Peel worked" and Clueso's chatty "District line ticket love? No. OK, 
sorry"; the winner is MaleficOpus's pointed "ITV clientèle lost here?"

Kudos to Opus – please leave this fortnight's entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the fortnight

Some misleading punctuation in a deliciously devious Times clue 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/30a26c9643bffced0145f5efa2e9014a/print_solution/3>
 ...

28ac Bodywork with bumper off finally exposed (8)

... for WHODUNIT. Dead good.
 