
The best way to watch Weird Al Yankovic's Word Crimes 
<http://youtu.be/8Gv0H-vPoDc> is to put Blurred Lines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/13/blurred-lines-most-controversial-song-decade>
 out of your mind completely and to imagine it as asui generis song about 
language peeves, albeit one withan apparent debt to Marvin Gaye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/31/robin-thicke-copyright-marvin-gaye-family-blurred-lines>
:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8Gv0H-vPoDc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8Gv0H-vPoDc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F8Gv0H-vPoDc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The song is irrepressible, if mistitled; admittedly, Familiar Arbitrary 
Linguistic Conventions To Which Some Choose Not To Adhere doesn't make for as 
good a soundalike title.

But does he mean it? Does the deathless Weird Al want us to unthinkingly 
follow Word Crimes' instructions – or is he inhabiting a character, much in the 
same way that his reworking of Lorde's Royals isn't based on a genuine
enthusiasm for foil <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w-0TEJMJOhk>?

If it's a character, it's a complex one: a blood-thirsty prescriptivist with a 
sideline in eugenics: "raised in a sewer … moron … you dumb mouth-breather … 
you write like a spastic", right up to the closing couplet:

Get out of the gene pool
Try your best to not drool

And you thought "grammar nazi" was not a term you should take literally. The 
infinitive here, though – split as blatantly and inevitably asRobin and Paula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/08/robin-thicke-album-paula-sells-530-copies-first-week>
 – is a hint that Weird Al isn't entirely in earnest. (Surely.)

No, the selective breeding and the "literally smack a crowbar upside your 
stupid head" are reflections of how high emotions can run – and the same goes 
in the crossword world, which has its own equivalent of prescriptivism. 
Actually, that should read "equivalents", and I have a question about that.

There are at least two varieties of prescriptivism in crosswording; do they 
overlap?

There's prescriptivism of wordplay: the setters and solvers who prefer that 
part of the clue to operate as a set of instructions which follow the rules of 
English grammar. For these, the "ximeneans", you would only be able to indicate 
M, R and P by the use of band names if there were bands called "Motör's Head", 
"Radio's Head" and "Portis'(s) Head". (Other setters, of course, are happy to 
use "Motörhead" to indicate an M, but therein lies the debate.)

And there's prescriptivism of definition, as seen frequently in the Crossword 
editor's column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/crossword-editor-update>: those 
who know thata koala bear is a marsupial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2010/may/04/crosswords-hugh-stephenson> 
and who would prefer for KOALA not to be clued as "Bear".

So do these points of view (and their antitheses) overlap? It's perfectly 
possible, of course, that there are dedicated ximeneans who are intensely 
relaxed about, say,"Peak of intensity (9)" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2008/jul/07/crossword-editor-update> 
for CRESCENDO.

Likewise, there might be those who bristle at the expression "Barbary apes" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2010/may/04/crosswords-hugh-stephenson> 
but don't mind any kind of wordplay that gets them towards the answer.

But it's not unreasonable to imagine that birds of a prescriptivist feather 
are to be found in the same place – and that they are more likely to be those 
who share Weird Al's preferences regarding grammar, spelling and so on, albeit 
in a more reasonable way.

What do you think?
 