
Our crosswords have come a long way since the very first one was published in 
the Manchester Guardian on Saturday 5 January 1929. They went online in 1999. 
Today they are being made available on mobile phones and tablets via anew 
Guardian crossword app <http://www.guardian.co.uk/mobile/android/crosswords>.

We have started with a free trial of an app for those of you with Android 
phones and tablets. (You need Android version 2.1 or later, see more technical 
specificationshere <http://www.guardian.co.uk/mobile/android-crosswords-faqs>). 
You will be able to get each new Quick crossword from Monday to Saturday and 
each new Cryptic crossword from Monday to Friday (though not, at this stage, 
the Saturday prize puzzles).

If you have an Android phone or tablet, you can download the app 
<https://market.android.com/details?id=com.guardian.crosswords> from Google 
Play. (The countries where this app is available are listed at ourFAQs 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/mobile/android-crosswords-faqs>) As well as the 
usual interactive tools that you get with puzzles on the website (check, cheat, 
solutions, etc.) the app lets you pinch, zoom or drag the grid to adjust the 
focus, while you can still browse the clue list. There is also, for the 
competitively inclined, a timer that tells you how long you have spent solving 
each puzzle, even if it takes a few attempts.

We shall be using the free trial period to iron out any unforeseen problems 
and to gauge demand. We may then decide to develop a version of the app for 
iPhone. During this period the Guardian mobile team would welcome your feedback 
on any problems you encounter and your suggestions for improvements. You can 
contact them from the app, or via theGuardian userhelp desk 
<mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk>. You can also follow @guardianmobile 
<https://twitter.com/#!/guardianmobile> on Twitter to get details of any 
updates. If you're having any trouble using the app you might find answers to 
your questions in our FAQs.

This free trial period will probably last about two months. After that, I 
fear, there will be a charge for using the app. But by then we hope that in 
your masses you will think that it is worth every penny asked of you. 
Meanwhile, enjoy!
 