
I suppose someone was always going to do it.

Consider Dr Ferdinand Maack, a 19th-century German eccentric who decided that 
chess was (a) insufficiently difficult and (b) insufficiently like warfare, so 
added a third dimension and devised "Raumschach", not unlike the 
tri-dimensional chess they play on the USS Enterprise.

And consider that the same Star Trek game was parodied in the cartoon 
Futurama, where you can see Professor Farnsworth and Leela playing 
three-dimensional Scrabble, and that back in the real world,many enthusiasts 
have patented efforts at a 3D word-based board game 
<http://www.bananagrammer.com/2010/03/three-dimensional-word-games-may-be-on.html>
.

It shouldn't come as too much of a surprise, then, to learn that our world 
contains3D crosswords <http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk>. Or that the man who 
devises them is registered blind - I mean, sure. Why not?

Eric Westbrook describes his puzzles as resembling blocks of flats. As you 
stand in one of the apartments, a word may be spelled out going away from you, 
to your side, or down through the space vertically below. They are surprisingly 
easy to get used to. But why does Eric - whose day job is teaching - do it?

Because he's as much of a visionary as Dr Maack. But why else? Well, his 
puzzles come in the form of a calendar which raises funds forthe RNIB Pears 
Centre 
<http://www.rnib.org.uk/livingwithsightloss/livinglearning/pearscentrehome/aboutpearscentre/Pages/about_pears_centre.aspx>
 in Coventry and Children in Need.
 A three-dimensional crossword by Eric Westbrook. 
Eric constructs each grid and fills it with words, then hands over the cluing 
to charitable setters including the Guardian'sArachne 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/02/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-arachne>
, Lavatch, Pasquale, and Rufus as well as Everyman. Araucaria haswritten an 
introduction to the 3D crossword website 
<http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk/foreword.htm> as well as clues, Enigmatist 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/13/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-enigmatist>
 has provided enigmatic support as well as clues and, Eric says, "we may have 
had the privilege of Taupi's last crossword - he sent the final revisions to 
his 2010 puzzle the night before he died."

So far so familiar, but what I want to ask is: what's it like being in the 
middle of an abstract three-dimensional grid fill? "It can be quite a tussle," 
says Eric. "There's no computer software to construct 3D puzzles. Being 
registered blind, pencil and paper are not very useful." So he assembles these 
blocks of flats in his head.

"Day after day, you get close to fitting all the words but you have impossible 
blanks that even the Urban Dictionary will not solve. If only, you say to 
youself, a group of dissolute youths in a downtown LA bar had said 'ZXYZZ' just 
once one afternoon. So then you just have to take down the 3D house brick by 
brick and build it up differently."

What makes these puzzles harder for setters, though, makes them easier for 
solvers: since the words cross each other in more ways than usual, you get more 
quickly to the point where you're working off knowing some of the letters in 
the answer.

Eric describes the following as "an impossible clue", written by Enigmatist and
Jane Teather <http://bestforpuzzles.com/people/t.html#Jane-Teather>...

Romans 2 – Venetians 1 (3,5,7,3,5,)

...but one that becomes much easier once you have some of those abundant 
checking letters (see the bottom of this post).

Embracing this topsy-turvy world, and being nosy, I ask if blindness helps the 
process of construction.

"In a slightly odd way, yes. It helps not to have distractions so that you can 
really focus and concentrate. It also encourages you to use your mind in 
imaginative ways. It's surprising what you can do if you really want to do it. 
There seems to be no end to what the brain can remember."

The building analogy applies here too. "I bet you could walk around your house 
blindfolded, no problem. You know it inside out. I walk around 
three-dimensional grids until I know them inside out and all the letters are in 
their places. It's not quick - but it's certainly easier than doing a school 
timetable."

Blind solvers are catered for with various alternatives to the physical 
calendar: for the 2010 crosswords, the clues were available in audio form, read 
by some Radio 4 presenters, as well as in size-adjustable word tables and 
screen-reader-friendly format. "But," adds Eric, "this is not good enough! 
Where do you put the answers? So we have launcheda £1,000 competition for 
someone to write a program 
<http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk/1000-it-challenge.html> that allows a totally 
blind solver comfortable access to our puzzles."
 A three-dimensional crossword by Eric Westbrook. 
Blind or sighted, solving the puzzles can feel like wandering around a real 
building or playing a multi-platform computer game. You can get pleasurably 
stuck in the basement, then help yourself up to another level using the 
elevator of a down clue. When you return to a mainstream two-dimensional 
crossword, that experience too has an abstract, giddying feel. From lines to 
flat surfaces to blocks and back again, the obvious question is: has Eric 
considered a fourth dimension? How about five?

"Yes and yes," says Eric. Of course. Eric describes his experiments in 
"polydimensional crosswords, which you don't see (how could you?) but you do 
experience the results. The 'grid' is formed of any number of inter-relating 
word lists. Relationships between checking letters are dealt with 
electronically."

"We assume a one-to-one correspondence between checking letters of crossing 
solutions. But what if they did not correspond one-to-one, but did so by some 
other pre-determined set of relationships? Then it all works. But not on paper."

My mind starts to imagine a line of cubes, where answers can be read across 
the corresponding position in each cube as well as away, across and down within 
each block. But why stop at a line of cubes? Why not a two-dimensional 
collection? Or a cube of cubes... and so on? Eric, you won't be surprised to 
hear, has been talking to the good people from CERN about how many dimensions 
are allowed by quantum mechanics.

For the moment, though, we have our simple 3D crosswords. If you're tempted, 
there are prizes for solving each of the puzzles inthe 2012 calendar 
<http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk/calendar_puzzle_2012.html>, and the first 
deadline approaches. And the checking letters for "Romans 2 – Venetians 1" are 
"T_E _L_N_ L_A_I_G _H_ B_I_D".
 