
Welcome to the third in a trilogy of D-day posts. We've looked at the mystery 
of why Overlord codewords appeared in the Telegraph puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/may/12/crossword-unsolved-mystery-d-day-puzzles-leonard-dawe>
 in the days before the landings and we've got to know, a little,the setter who 
gave the spies conniptions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/may/26/leonard-dawe-d-day-crosswords>
.

This time, we're meeting James Cary, a writer responsible for such things as 
The Casebook of Milton Jones, Miranda andBluestone 42 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/mar/10/another-view-bluestone-42-bomb-disposal>
. Why so? D-day was the day of publication of his novelCrossword Ends in 
Violence (5) 
<http://sitcomgeek.blogspot.co.uk/2014/06/the-endless-wormhole-of-world-war-two.html>
, a story which involves codewords, puzzles and, well, the Normandy landings. 
Crosswords in fiction, eh? Sounds likesomething this blog should know about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/may/03/crossword-blog-favourite-fiction>
 …

Hello, James. With the benefit of hindsight, it's tempting to see the 
real-life spooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/may/12/crossword-unsolved-mystery-d-day-puzzles-leonard-dawe>
 as having overreacted to Dawe's puzzles. But what could they have done other 
than investigate?

Absolutely. At first glance it's an odd and worrying coincidence. The 
codenames are quite specific and unusual words, so you can imagine the brief 
panic.

If you can't, I've imagined it for you in the opening chapters when a clue the 
day beforeD-day <https://www.theguardian.com/world/d-day> gives the solution 
OVERLORD. That would make you jump given the secrecy of the project.

When you stop and think about it, though, what's in a name? What could a Nazi 
agent in the UK hope to gain from sending codewords like OVERLORD or MULBERRY 
to German intelligence? If someone in America had secretly passed you the word 
"Manhattan", you wouldn't assume that this was a project to create a nuclear 
bomb.

Even so, it's an odd coincidence. Especially since the crossword setter lived 
with someone from the Admiralty. Or so I've read. Either way, you'd at least 
look into it. 

You'd have to. Your tale is a fictionalised version of events – and is not set 
entirely in 1944.

There's a modern-day investigator, John Fellowes. He is the grandson of Carl 
Bookman, the fictionalised setter. Bookman is the founder of The Bookman 
Bureau, a small crossword-setting agency which, by the time Fellowes is running 
it 60-odd years later, is rapidly going out of business.

When Fellowes is told that his grandfather may have actually been a Nazi spy, 
he is devastated and sets out to clear his forbear's name. Two investigators 
back in 1944, Thomason and Carter, are also trying to get to the bottom of 
things. They are probably my favourite characters.

You've also written Hut 33 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007r8hg>, the 
Bletchley-set sitcom. You clearly share this blog's affection for the 
codebreaking/solving crossover.

Yes, it's partly being a over-educated thirtysomething male who is slightly 
obsessed with the second world war. Part of the fascination is not just the 
history but wondering what people like me would have done in the war. I can't 
imagine the army would have thought it worthwhile to send a weedy, 
short-sighted wordsmith wheezing up a beach. That would have been a waste of 
uniform and training.

But in the second world war – perhaps like no other before – boffins, 
linguists and general smart-arses could be put to good use, thinking creatively 
and laterally as well as scientifically. And thinking doesn't get much more 
creative and scientific than the men and women who served at Bletchley Park 
during the war – and the Poles who gave them a head start. It is of course very 
pleasing that many of them shared a love of the crossword. In fact, they even 
used them to recruit. Isn't that wonderful? You couldn't make it up.

I completely agree. But the days where I've solved so quickly that I can fancy 
myself at Bletchley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/aug/25/crossword-blog-saving-the-world>
 are few. Now, the people in Crossword Ends In Violence are fans of other kinds 
of puzzle: chess and bridge as well as crosswords. To what degree do the 
mentalities for these different pursuits – which you clearly have affection for 
– overlap?

I suppose they all require a certain amount of abstract thinking, which is not 
something everyone can relate to. In fact, it's pretty unrelatable. It's no 
coincidence that in most newspapers, the chess and bridge puzzles are placed 
beside each other, often next to the cryptic or the general-knowledge crossword.

I think that was how they used to do it in the Sunday Telegraph, along with 
the rather joyous Elimination Puzzle – always a real treat on a Sunday evening 
with my parents. I probably get my love of word games and crosswords from them, 
and enjoyed how they loved learning new words, and looking them up in their 
complete Encyclopaedia Britannica (1970s edition) to find out more.

Learning to think this way was the perfect preparation for my job of comedy 
writer. Writing jokes, especially ones that rely on double meanings, is not 
very different from creating cryptic clues. The trick is creating double 
meanings that are easily solvable – and relatable! – so the audience gets the 
joke and laughs, rather than sitting back, wryly smiling.

I couldn't agree more. I think that the pleasure of realising that your 
thinking has been directed to entirely the wrong place is the same in great 
cryptics and great gags. One more thing:we're very interested here in fictional 
depictions of crosswording 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jul/12/top-10-crosswords-fiction-rubicon>
. Do you have any favourites – or unfavourites?

Wordplay – most commonly anagrams or words upside-down – comes up quite a lot 
in mysteries. In fact, I wrote a play,The God Particle 
<http://www.thegodparticleplay.com/>, where there's a bit of that. Despite 
using it in the play, and in this novel, when I see it done in fiction, my 
heart tends to sink. The main reason goes back to what I was saying earlier 
about this certain kind of abstract thinking.

An ITV murder mystery, say, is aimed not at crossword solvers but at everyone. 
So when a crossword or a clue is part of the story, the hero has to explain it 
in detail to those who find it hard to relate to. The result is much like 
having to explain a joke. The moment you do it, the joy and the magic are gone.

My favourite fictional depiction of this sort of thing, though, is undoubtedly 
the brilliant IT Crowd episode about Countdown champions 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-it-crowd/4od#3105976>: half an hour of 
joyous – but relatable – lunacy.

Many thanks to James for chatting and for adding Crossword Ends in Violence (5)
 
<http://sitcomgeek.blogspot.co.uk/2014/06/the-endless-wormhole-of-world-war-two.html>
 to our cryptic bookshelf.
 