
Duggie Anderson has been setting as Crucible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/crucible> for the Guardian since 2008. His 
canvas is broad – featuringStanley Gibbons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jun/18/crossword-roundup-two-monkeys>
 andJonathan Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/mar/11/1>, rainbows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/12/crossword-roundup>
 andnoughts and crosses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/feb/11/crossword-blog-cryptic-roundup>
,the Proms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/19/crossword-roundup>
 and1 Timothy 6:10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/31/crossword-roundup-should-themes-be-announced>
 – butDull and Boring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jul/02/crossword-roundup-alan-turing>
 he is not, and his humour is always intact. Anderson sets the Daily Mail's 
daily puzzle, and appears as Radian in the Independent and Redshank in the 
Financial Times. Among my favourites of his clues are "In which role Clegg 
should take a bow? (6,6)" for SECOND FIDDLE and "Time, say, covering 5 to 9 (it 
varies) (7)" for EVENING. So, let's Meet the Setter.


Where do you create your puzzles?

On an iMac in a small back room in a haze of St Bruno. We pipe smokers are a 
dying breed.

Although perhaps less so in the crosswording world. When did you get the 
crossword bug?

In my teens, from my dentist who did the Times crossword 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/> every day. Sadly, he was 
not easily persuaded to put down his drill for more than a few minutes or so to 
talk, but that appears to have been enough to get me going.

What's your favourite of your own clues or puzzles?

For a puzzle, probably the first that [Guardian puzzle editor] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/crossword-editor-update> Hugh 
published (and which led him to suggest my pseudonym),themed around the snooker 
world championships <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/prize/24379>. I was 
chuffed to squeeze in all the balls and several well-known players. And for a 
clue, from last July:

Cook has these, but can he keep them? (3,5)

My doubt was well founded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/dec/08/ashes-captains-alastair-cook-michael-clarke>
 as the winter Test series proved.

THE ASHES? Indeed they were. Which other setters do you admire?

All of them, but Arachne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/02/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-arachne>
,Anax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/nov/10/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-anax>
,Azed <https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/azed> and Dac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/aug/12/blogpost> 
stand out.

What makes a successful clue?

Brevity, wit and originality and a plausible surface.

What makes an unsuccessful clue?

Length, chestnuts or an implausible surface.

The down clue "Coulson in trouble over source of hacking? Good! (2,6)" made me 
laugh out loud. What happens in the moment when you see that a clue might be 
funny?

Is this mine? I don't remember it. Is the answer NO SLOUCH? There is certainly 
a sense of satisfaction, maybe even glee, when a good idea leaps out. I just 
wish it would happen more often. Then the worry starts: will the editor think 
the same?

NO SLOUCH was what I wrote in. How did you choose your pseudonyms?

Crucible came from that snooker-themed puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/prize/24379>. Radian is from R(a)D(i)AN 
derson and Redshank from R(e)D(sh)AN(k) derson. (If I get another gig, ROEDEAN 
and RODMAN may be the only options left – unless you know better!)

Well, my home town had a pub called The Redan. I was never sure why anyone 
chose that name ('a fortification of two parapets at a salient angle'). So that 
might be available. What are the tools of your trade?

Roget 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140515039>
, lists,Chambers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781473602250>
,Collins 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007365494>
 andCOD 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199601080>
,Crossword Compiler <http://www.crossword-compiler.com/crosswordFAQ.html>, 
several pipes, more lists – and Google of course.

How do you imagine a solver of your crosswords?

I've never really thought about this, since feedback is rare: I've only ever 
had two letters. I suppose I hope to educate, inform and entertain, but as long 
as they're not disappointed, I'll be happy. The comments at the Guardian and
Fifteen Squared <http://www.fifteensquared.net/> are indicators of approval or 
disapproval – but are they representative?

Almost certainly not. And what do you think goes through a solver's mind when 
she sees that it's a Crucible puzzle?

I just hope she thinks the next half hour will not be a waste of her time and 
may possibly be pleasantly diverting.

Do you remember the first clue you solved or wrote?

No, sorry. I remember little, hence all the lists.

Is cryptic setting art or craft?

Don't know – it's certainly hard work. I suppose it does involve craft, or 
rather, craftiness. Best to leave art to the artists, I think.

Are your choices of themes based on their cryptic potential or your enthusiasm 
for the subject matter?

Both. Usually one of two types: interconnected lights celebrating, say, an 
anniversary or event; and ones with common word elements; eg DNA or Pi. (One of 
these,a Genius at the end of last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/java/new/0,,-29195,00.html>, was 
depressingly poorly received – with some justification – so they don't all work 
out the way you think.) I try to compile one puzzle per year with musical clues 
and answers, usually based on two or three composers' anniversaries.

How do people respond if and when you tell them you're a crossword setter?

Blankly. What's the opposite of an ice-breaker?

A boat made of ice? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8SW30BqVrFo> So is a 
propensity to play games with words ever a nuisance to yourself or others?

Yes. Why is it that, although I notice this failing in others, I can't resist 
it myself?

What do you do for a living besides writing crosswords?

Nothing. I retired some years ago.

If you weren't a crossword setter, what would you be?

Idle.

What's the future for cryptic crosswords?

I haven't a clue. They seem in rude health just now. I've never seen any 
statistics about solvers. Do editors know how many people actually do their 
puzzles? Are there any discernible trends? What's the age/gender split? As I 
say, feedback is very scarce.

Funnily enough I commissioned a survey about this and you've reminded me: I 
must get around to sharing more of the results. Anything else you want to say?

I sometimes think of setters as failed writers reduced to spending forever 
shaping and reshaping five-to-twelve words, telling very short stories 
condensed into single sentences. In fact, when I read I see words before I see 
sentences: structure before meaning, the bricks before the wall. Could this be 
the reason I compile crosswords rather than do what I'd really like to do: just 
write?

I don't know, but I'm grateful for the crosswords and would love to read some 
'just writing' from Crucible as and when. Many thanks - through a cloud of pipe 
smoke - to Crucible.
 