
Crosswords about crosswords

Sometimes it's the themes closest to my heart which elude me until the end of 
the solve, even when they're sitting there, hiding in plain sight. While I 
enjoyedImogen's puzzle <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26307> 
and its clues such as ...

1d Mischievous type caught in UKIP's toils — I would leave (4)

and

2d Woman would go to pot here (4)

... tremendously, any obvious connection between PUCK and SHED – for example, 
that we have talked to bothPuck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/26/meet-the-setter-puck>
 andShed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/05/crossword-blog-meet-setter-shed>
 here – somehow failed to make itself known to me until I got to the final down 
clue ...

25d Socratic method so revolutionary for 1 of 8 here (4)

... which gives, via the question-and-answer method favoured by Socrates, QAOS 
(another Meet the Setter guest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/nov/29/crossword-blog-setter-qaos>
). WithRufus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/22/meet-the-setter-rufus>
,Philistine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jan/31/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-philistine>
,Enigmatist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/13/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-enigmatist>
,Tramp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/dec/01/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-tramp>
 andPaul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
 also present and correct, this was a collection of eight Guardian setters, all 
clued with reference to what theirnoms de guerre mean, with the exception of 
Qaos, whose pseudonym means... well, you tell me. (It could,it seems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/nov/29/crossword-blog-setter-qaos>
, have been spelled "Xaos".)

If you like to treat each day's Guardian puzzle as a challenge of pure 
wordplay, perhaps imagining timing yourself and comparing your result with 
others, you might be startled by a puzzle which you get the most out of only if 
you've encountered eight setters other than the one you're battling – and which 
can only be completed at 25 down if you're a regular on the cryptic page of the 
paper.

This would, though, be an idiosyncratic way of approaching the Guardian 
crossword. Some newspapers – the Telegraph and Times main puzzles, say – offer 
more of a constant concern; the Guardian has long been in the 
apples-and-oranges camp. You might find a grid that requires only words to be 
found in a concise dictionary, or you might encounter something likeAraucaria's 
1994 puzzle <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jan/25/features.weekend> 
which asked for Ruth First, Steve Biko, Chris Hani, Alan Paton, Helen Joseph 
Joe Slovo, Nelson Mandela, Walter Sisulu and Oliver Tambo.

Few would equate Guardian setters with those who brought democracy to South 
Africa, mind you; kudos to Imogen for downplaying the theme so effectively.

Latter patter

Another occasion for a themed puzzle 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/9c5d5c9c-f73f-11e3-8ed6-00144feabdc0.pdf>
 fromGaff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/feb/10/puzzles>:

21ac/15ac 1 down is to continue admitting free loft conversion provided (6,2,4)

10ac/7d/29ac 1 down is anguished with the piss-up I arranged (7,2,3,7)

Since these answers are BEREFT OF LIFE and PUSHING UP THE DAISIES, one down 
could only be EX-PARROT (clued as "Sketched polygon").

In 1969, when Mr Praline yelled at his petrified pet, the Pythons secured a 
place under the headword POLLY in the Oxford dictionary ...

1969     G. CHAPMAN et al. Monty Python's Flying Circus (1989) I. viii. 104
Hello Polly, Polly..Polly Parrot, wake up. Polly... Now that's what I call a 
dead parrot.

... which tells us that POLL has a longer and more illustrious history as a 
parrot pseudonym, having been used by Jonson, Defoe, a Bronte and, as late as 
the 1920s, Joyce:

Insects of the day spend their brief existence in reiterated coition, lured by 
the smell of the inferiorly pulchritudinous fumale possessing extendified 
pudendal nerve in dorsal region. Pretty Poll!(His yellow parrotbeak gabbles 
nasally)

The Pythons' chief contribution to the English language is of course a 
portmanteau which became a lyric and thereby a piece of hacker culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mind-your-language/2013/oct/07/mind-your-language-words>
.

In the early 1990s, two new senses of the word in question were recorded. One 
is military slang as noted by the Times in 1991 ...

A good trooper never 'gonks' (sleeps) when he is on 'stag' (sentry duty) even 
if he feels annoyed at his having been 'spammed' or 'jiffed' (given a 
particularly unpleasant task) by one of his superiors.

... the other originally denoted overrunning a fixed-size buffer with 
excessively large input data and went on to become the popular way of 
describing emails offering recreational drugs for the bedroom. It's also the 
subject of our next challenge. Reader, how would you clue SPAM?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for MAGENTA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/jul/01/crossword-cryptic-roundup-jeremy-paxman-cyan#show-all>
.

I enjoyed gleety's accurate "Iodism agent apparently has purple hue" and the 
CMYK reference in Neijygof's "Eccentric magnate, used to publish red-tops". The 
most evocative acrostic was HipsterPriest's short story "Headliners Metallica 
at Glastonbury: Eavis not thrilled and sees red" and Clueso gets the audacity 
award for the stretch in "A degree opens the door to a brighter future, say".

The runners-up are JollySwagman etymology-alluding "Spy casually concealed 
knowledge of battle" and cmiall's hexy "Mum informally a man? FFOOFF!"; the 
winner is yungylek's "At first, Murdoch allegedly enlisted someone to obtain 
secret information, which set a darker tone for his newspapers".

Kudos to 'Lek - please leave this fortnight's entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the Fortnight

In the Financial Times 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/7be06dda-f17f-11e3-9161-00144feabdc0.pdf>
, Mudd (who also sets for the Guardian asPaul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
), had some fun at this paper's expense:

4ac I'm back to run a feature in the Grauniad? (8)

The answer, of course, is MISPRINT. Incidentally, did you spot any misprints in
this piece 
<http://www.tehguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/jul/14/crossword-roundup-polly-spam-monty-python>
? Please click and then read on – and for enlightenment, then scroll to the 
bottom andclick here <http://pieces.stef.io/pieces/tehguardian>. And, well, 
that's all, folks!
 