
Crosswords about crosswords

Last time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/sep/30/crossword-roundup-where-do-you-start-solving>
, we hada clue <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26055> which 
alluded to a possible technique to bring about an easier solve; this time, 
another piece of self-referential imagery, this time fromQuixote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/02/crossword-blog-meet-setter-pasquale>
 in the Independent, eliciting the pleasurable frustration of a tricky solve ...

8ac Laborious patch in puzzle engenders feeling of being badly stuck in a 
corner? (14)

... which can sometimes elicit a sense of CLAUSTROPHOBIA. Very, as Commoner 
had it in a different puzzle ...

13d Perhaps ironic and self-referential leader crossing Old Street, on about 
communistuprising (10)

... POSTMODERN.

Culture clue

Talking of Commoners, the casts of Dac puzzles are always a tickling mix, last 
Wednesday's including Judi Dench, William Walton, Ted Heath, Che Guevara, 
Jean-Antoine Watteau, and from Sheffield via Allerdale:

13d Cumbrian town whence Common People? (11)

A treat to see Jarvis <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jarvis-cocker> - 
via COCKERMOUTH - appearing in a puzzle. Or, indeed, in a dictionary. If the 
victor of the 1995Britpop Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/11/oasis-blur-britpop-crown> were 
decided by citations in Oxford, it would be a different story: Damon Albarn has 
yet to grace its pages while Liam Gallagher appears once, and the prestige of 
appearing under a headword so frequently consulted as FUCK is not to be sniffed 
at:

We just fucked about and I just said, 'This is how we should record these 
days.'

But the real winner, as in real life, is Pulp, who pop up under two headwords. 
One is WHIZZ with the charmingly period detail "(music cassette inlay card)" 
which serves as a reminder that Pulp, quite rightly, forbade listeners to read 
their lyrics while listening to their recordings. The other is a word derived 
from SORT, which once had connotations of fate. The related adjective has had 
many senses, especially in slang.

To soldiers in the second world war, it meant "shot to pieces"; to 1980s 
cockneys, it was "agreeably settled" before moving through "self-assured" to 
"furnished with narcotics" ...

c. Brit. slang. Of a person: supplied with or under the influence of illicit 
drugs, particularly those associated with the U.K. club subculture [...]
 
1995   J. Cocker (song, perf. 'Pulp') (title)


... and you may by now have guessed the subject of our next challenge. Reader, 
how would you clue that word which is itself useful for indicating anagrams, 
SORTED?

Crossword news

Saturday saw an effort to solve a puzzle billed as The Hardest Crossword in 
the World, in Holborn. It formed part of the ongoing endeavours ofEric Westbrook
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/10/three-dimensional-cryptic-crosswords>
 to reinvent the crossword in multiple dimensions, this time as a 
three-dimensional spinning jigsaw of seven dials and an eighth dial 
accommodating four solutions that did not fit the main seven-dial grid.

While you get your head around that, I should also tell you that the puzzle 
was also a whodunnit, in which solvers had to negotiate Cluedo murder 
instruments in order to discover, first of all, what the mystery was – and then 
to solve it. Eric tells me:

The fastest solve came from the team of Jane Teather, Tony Roberts and Richard 
Grafen who not only defended their team title successfully but this time won 
the overall title of All England RNIB 3D Crossword Champions 2013. They did so 
in a time of 1hr 21 minutes smashing the previous best time of 1hr 39 minutes 
set by the partnership of Sue and Andy Wallace in 2011. World Champion Ray 
Parry-Morris won the Singles Section with a time of 1hr 37 minutes. This was 
equalled by email section winner Keith Williams who pipped George Heard of 
North Carolina University by eight minutes.

The mind behind this baroque masterpiece was that of one Sirius, with advice 
from Anax, Artix and Curmudgeon. I will post a link to the puzzle itself if and 
when possible.

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for SHIBBOLETH 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/sep/30/crossword-roundup-where-do-you-start-solving#show-all>
 and who knew there was so much potential for names of accommodation services, 
neatly summarised in JollySwagman's "His B&B hotel's in a mess. That's 
typical!"?

I enjoyed all the imagery involving the granting or denial of access, 
including wellywearer2's pithy "Say this and you're in" and Journeyman7's, 
which gets the audacity award both for the arcane reference and its length: "'
What colour is the boat house at Hereford?' It is, without question, 
colourless. The place does not exist. Good-bye. Gone. What remains will take a 
pound to sort out the right answer...",explained in eye-watering detail 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27489052>. 

My Edinburgh background endeared me more, not less, to benmoreassynt2's "Crazy 
Hibs let Heart of Midlothian start bashing heids - a way to identify enemies" 
and I was tickled by Truth101'scelebro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/oct/09/katie-price-settles-phone-hacking-claim>
–topical <http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/katie-price-peter-andre-he-2368905> "How 
to cross, say, Jordan".

The runners-up are Clueso's economical "A pronounced difference?" and gleety's 
erudite "I lob the balls badly; All out, like the Irish number three"; the 
winner is benmoreassynt2's smart "Hebrew way of sorting wheat from the chaff". 
Kudos to Ben – please leave this fortnight's entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the Week

A beautifully terse Times clue 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/ae09bd33401189dd01414a77b7ca0062/print_solution/3>
, in which at least three of the words don't do what you immediately assume ...

19d Under wraps by choice (6)

... actually SUPERB.
 