
Congratulations to James Hartley from Cumbria who is October's winner.

First a word of apology; October was my first month in charge and there were 
three glaring errors in the cryptic puzzles, which I regret. I think I now 
understand the 'system' that delivers our daily crossword gems and I hope there 
will be fewer errors in future.

Opinion seems to be evenly divided as to whether 'themed' puzzles are a good 
thing. Those against say that once you have cracked the theme, the rest becomes 
too easy. Those for say it adds another layer of interest and may - all being 
well - drive the setter to new levels of invention. On balance I am in favour, 
particularly as the existence of the theme allows the setter a new degree of 
freedom in the definition. I also like puzzles which are topical and was 
delighted when Brendan came up with two this month. His World Cup puzzle may 
have been set with clenched teeth (Brendan is a passionate Ireland supporter) 
but the puzzle pleased many solvers, not least because he managed to link the 
clues, the solutions and the grid. The Guardian uses 60 or so grids and number 
19 is constructed in such a way that there are four sets of darks in the shape 
of rugby posts. The Nobel prizes announced this month did not go unnoticed. To 
the delight of several solvers Doris Lessing - but this was quite by chance - 
appeared as a solution on the day it was announced she had won a prize. 
Serendipity indeed. But the subsequent puzzle which contained the names of nine 
Nobel peace laureates was deliberate and contained several superb '& lit' clues.

Themed puzzles, I discovered, was nothing new in the Guardian. I was at the 
British Library newspaper collection in Colindale, north London this month and 
I took the time to look up the first ever puzzle in the Guardian. It appeared 
on January 5 1929 and - setting a time-honoured tradition - had a preamble. 
Like most preambles it seemed intended both as a warning and an inducement to 
would-be solvers. But before we get to that I thought I would reproduce the 
editors' intentions in starting the puzzle. "We print today the first of the 
competitions which will now appear in each Saturday's issue: the one a 
Crossword Puzzle, the other a puzzle which poses a question to be answered. To 
each competition prizes are attached. Neither of the competitions announced 
today will present formidable difficulties. They are designed rather to afford 
the reader relaxation and amusement in an easy chair, a train or a tram, than 
to tax all the resources alike of his intelligence and of his library. Few 
competitions, Cowper alleged, but engender spite. It is hoped that so far from 
justifying the poet, these competitions will contribute to the peace and 
entertainment of the reader."

Well, indeed. I couldn't have chosen the words better myself. A manifesto for 
that and subsequent generations of crossword setters. And what more noble 
ambition is there than to contribute to the peace and entertainment of the 
reader? And so to the preamble of the first puzzle on January 5 1929: "Contains 
the names of several well-known politicians," it read. The first puzzles were 
based on the American style and were not 'cryptic'. They gave only a definition 
and readers had to work out for themselves the letter count. In this case the 
solution had seven letters, but the only way of 'knowing' you had the right 
answer was through the checked letters. But with the preamble, you had 
somewhere to begin.

And one across in the first ever Guardian puzzle? "One of our Elder Statesmen."

And the solution? BALFOUR.

Like I say, I couldn't have chosen better myself.

More, by the way, on learning to do crosswords. Peter Biddlecombe, who 
recently won the Times Crossword Competition in Cheltenham, is running a 
one-day 'how to' course. Our own Pasquale - Don Manley - is the guest speaker. 
The course takes place on January 19 2008, 10am-4pm at St Mary's Parish Hall, 
Princes Risborough and costs Â£25. Morning coffee, lunch, and afternoon tea are 
included. You will receive printed notes covering topics like clue types, and 
your own copy of each of the sample puzzles. Any profits go to the local church 
building project. Peter has been solving cryptic crosswords since 1976. He 
previously won the Times competition in 2000. For more information email Peter 
at crossword-course@biddlecombe.demon.co.uk
 