
After looking at some new research into "fluid intelligence" and cryptics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/sep/23/crossword-blog-super-solvers-born-made>
, we hada convivial and stimulating discussion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/sep/23/crossword-blog-super-solvers-born-made#start-of-comments>
 about solvers' backgrounds and the experience of solving and learning to do so.

So what have we learned? The research, by Kathryn Friedlander 
<http://www.buckingham.ac.uk/directory/dr-kathryn-friedlander/> and Philip Fine 
<http://www.buckingham.ac.uk/directory/fine-dr-philip/>, suggested that among 
regular cryptic solvers there are many with experience in numbery, science-ish 
fields. And among you, the unrigorously selected sample, there are more solvers 
identifying themselves withphysics 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27261373>/IT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10398152>/engineering 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27285211>/etc 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27266021> than is 
suggested by the tweedy, ode-citing, classics professor of crosswording legend.

That certainly makes sense: you can think of crosswords as an exercise in 
language, meaning and poetry – but you can also see cryptic clues as miniature 
programs, parsimonious pieces of code that can be parsed to find the unique 
solution. And that apparent distinction may or may not correspond to the 
different types of solving some of you describe – that is, whether you suggest 
to yourself an answer based on the definition and then use the wordplay to 
confirm, or whether the wordplay does the initial spadework.

I suspect, though, that the super-solvers in the research by Fine and 
Friedlander operate on a level above, where checking letters, definition and 
wordplay all perform a crypto-semiotic ballet in the time it takes the pencil 
to move across the grid. An importantcaveat from JollySwagman 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27397548>:

I'm not sure that all solvers solve in the same way – or even that any 
individual solves in the same way all the time.

Indeed. And we should remember that solving is the result of both a propensity 
and having a routine that enables you to peer at a grid – on which subject, a 
provocative theory suggested byOnSecondThoughts 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27427777> …

Maybe IT, law and banking are simply professions with lots of empty mind-space 
to use. The liberal arts crowd keep their creative minds busy with more useful 
tasks.

… which has an undoubted appeal, though I would add that (a) we need to 
remember the immense enthusiasm among actors for crosswords in their 
waiting-around time and (b) whatever could be a more useful task than solving a 
crossword?

Another impression given by our discussion is that polymaths (hello, 
thegirlfrommarz <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27265339> 
andgyford <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27260419>, inter 
alia) may have a distinct advantage since crosswords take all of human 
knowledge as their subject.

And another oft-assumed characteristic of the solver took a knock. In legend 
and in literature, the crossworder is a lone soldier, fighting one-on-one with 
the setter. In reality, though, the puzzle is as likely to be a group activity, 
inthe <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27260419> workplace 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27261373>, with 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27263522> parents 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27265339> or as 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27267009> a 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27453965> couple 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27283900>. As 
thegirlfrommarz says 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27265339>, co-solving is 
certainly preferable if you're a newcomer: you get over the initial bumps of 
cryptics more quickly if, rather than staring blankly at the baffling little 
sentences after each clue number, you approach a puzzle …

with an experienced solver who understands that eg "flower" often means 
"river", and that "doctor" can be MD, DR or even DD (thanks for that, Paul … ).

Beginners may be prone to worrying about what constitutes fair play: SpecialRX 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27259575> wonders …

I'm probably officially "cheating" because I have to use the txt-msg t9 thing 
on my phone to check my spelling.

… and a co-solving friend would be well advised to reassure the novice that in 
crosswords,there's no such thing as cheating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/08/crosswords-blog-ethics-commandments>
, unless you decide that there is. And even if you do, you're likely to employ 
a sliding scale of misdemeanours, the sliding happening as you get more 
confidence:williamsbach gives an example 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27263522> of how the rules 
change according to the type of puzzle. (It need hardly be added thatfilling 
the squares with dingbats 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27260754> does not 
constitute solving.)

Two final thoughts: gyford reminds us 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27260419> that you don't 
have to finish every clue in a puzzle to derive pleasure from it – as Guardian 
crossword editorHugh Stephenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/hughstephenson> points out in his book 
Secrets of the Setters 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781843544692>
, this is what makes cryptics more satisfying than, say,sudokus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/sudoku> – each clue can be 
seen as a dinky puzzle in itself. And many of you recorded admirably lengthy 
solving times, from hours to days to weeks;sailplan 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27368070> even gave an 
excursive analogy:

When we walk in the Lake District, we are regularly overtaken by fell runners 
who run to the top of three peaks before breakfast – and good luck to them. But 
they don't stop and smell the wild herbs; they don't ease their boots off and 
cool their feet in a tarn; and they don't reward themselves with a cup of laced 
coffee from the Thermos enjoying the silence and the spectacle.

Agreed. And thank you to everyone. We must do this again some time.
 