
All I can say is sorry. The service that you have been getting of late (and 
particularly in the last week of October) is unacceptable. At the risk of 
sounding like a Network Rail press officer trying to persuade you that the 
trains aren't running because there are "the wrong kind of leaves on the line", 
here (at least as far as I can understand it) is the problem.

The Guardian (both for the printed paper and the website) is in the middle of 
a much needed rebuilding and upgrading of all its computer systems and 
programs. Major snags are emerging in the area where newly installed software 
interacts with existing software still in operation. With the crosswords, the 
current problem relates to the timing systems, which control the uploading of 
material from the database to the crossword homepage where you can see it and 
click on the links to bring up the puzzles on your screens. If, for some 
reason, the timer decides not to work, things can only be put right manually.

The infuriating thing is that the puzzles, solutions, solution notes and all 
the other things you want are there correctly in the database. In fact, though 
this is no more than a palliative, you can get at them even when the homepage 
tells you that they are not available. If you use the archive search facility 
at the bottom right-hand corner of the crossword home page, you can find the 
latest crossword by searching for it by type and month. For example, to find 
this month's Genius crossword, search for Genius/Nov/2006.

On a related theme, several of you have said that it would be a comfort to 
have a crossword "chat room" on the site. I think so, too, and we shall have 
one eventually. But, in the present circumstances, for the moment I fear that I 
can only offer a second best. There is an existing crossword talkboard on the 
paper's main website. The route to it is a bit circuitous, but you would only 
have to go through it once, as you could then "bookmark" the page in your list 
of favourites and go there with just one click next time. The path runs as 
follows: go to http://www.theguardian.com and click on "Talk", which is in the 
top right-hand corner of the page. Then click in sequence on "Guardian 
Unlimited talk" and "Start talking". The page you should now have reached has a 
long vertical list of "Topics", where 19 down is "Crosswords". Click on that 
and you will currently find 20 "discussions" going on, some of them more adult 
than others. For example, "Today's crossword" may be one that you might like to 
read. (If you want to join in a discussion, you need to register at the "Start 
talking" stage by clicking on "New to talk?")

-----------------------------------------------------------------

Sadly, Bunthorne's last posthumous puzzle for the Guardian was published as a 
Saturday prize cryptic (No. 23,915) on November 4. It is typical Bunthorne, 
revealing all the threads and interests that ran through his clues and 
providing the clearest evidence that he was on top crossword setting form until 
the day he died. Two of his fellow setters, Dave Tilley and John Henderson, are 
having printed a selection of some of the best of his puzzles over the last 40 
years. It will be an A5 booklet with a colour cover, selling for £5 (plus 
postage and packing), with the money going to Bunthorne's favourite charity, 
M�decins Sans Fronti�res. I will happily pass on your email address to Dave and 
John, if you would like to reserve a copy.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

It has been pointed out that we have never had a formal deadline for the 
monthly Genius puzzle entries. I am surprised that we have managed to get away 
with such a glaring omission for so long. But, as from the November puzzle, we 
shall have one: midnight GMT (or UT, if you are French) on the Sunday before 
the first Monday of the (following) month. If that sounds over-complicated, it 
is because each month's Genius is (or should be) uploaded on the first Monday 
of the month, which can be as late as the 7th.

Also, the wording on the website of the deadline for submission of the weekly 
Saturday prize cryptic has had its ambiguity removed. Solutions (by mail or 
fax) need to reach Birmingham by the morning of the following Friday.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

Enigmatist's October Genius has easily set a new low for the number of correct 
solutions. Until last month he was the reigning champion with No 27 in 
September 2005, which had only 95 correct entries. But No 39 by Paul this 
September beat him, with (on a recount) only 88 correct entries. Paul's hold on 
the title could not have been briefer. Though 98 correctly filled grids came in 
for Enigmatist's October puzzle, only 53 them were accompanied by the correct 
pair of "identities". The light (or solution) at the end of the tunnel was 
LANTERN (which also happens to be a light), because it was to be found the end 
of BLACKWALL (Tunnel), which ran diagonally down the grid from the start of 2 
down to the start of 20 down. (We have accepted both BLACKWALL and BLACKWALL 
TUNNEL as the second identity.)

The first of the correct solutions to the October Genius was clocked in from 
Uxbridge, Middlesex at 13.21 BST on October 2. The full set of notes on the 
solutions will be available, as usual, by clicking on the link above the 
solution grid itself.

· Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian crossword editor.
 