
The news in clues

As if in response to last week’s party-political obituary in a Times puzzle 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/30a26c9646be285a014855c5ad6c013c/print_solution/3>
 ...

10ac Not entirely dead, UKIP shows a pulse (5) 

[some of the letters of “dead UKIP”]

... the weekend brought us Farage’s mob demonstrating more than a mere pulse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/28/mark-reckless-ukip-tory-decline-conservative-party>
: as throbbing as it is purple. Meanwhile, my thanks to the anonymous setter 
for choosing a device for ADUKI which makes its spelling unambiguous: for 
anaphylactic reasons, I consider myself to have an above-average lexicon of 
legumes, and the ADUKI (or ADZUKI or indeed ADSUKI) is assuredly an outlier 
round these parts.

Clueing coincidence

Same word, similar device. Hot on the heels of Falcon’s FT clue 
<http://im.ft-static.com/content/images/3a3df266-2f79-11e4-a79c-00144feabdc0.pdf>
 ...

16d Nervously cheer pilot in flying machine (10)

[anagram of “cheer pilot”]

... for HELICOPTER, came this Times clue 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/b6649b0546be286301487e03986400e4/print_solution/3>
 ...

13d Cheer pilot manoeuvring aircraft (10)

[anagram of “cheer pilot”]

... for the same word. These fortuities are to be welcomed, and the presence 
of a “pilot” in the letters of “helicopter” is too good to resist (and neither 
CHÈRE nor REECH is a satisfying way of using up the rest). That said, if you 
made me get into one of those crazy contraptions, I’d choose the Thunderer’s 
aviator over the pink ’un’s. That “nervously” makes me nervous.

Latter patter

A pleasingly misleading image of the telly in Brummie’s Guardian clue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26368> ...

22d Lowbrow entertainment — god, turn over! (5)

[name of a god + abbreviation for ‘turn over’]

... for PANTO. Dear old PANTOMIME has slipped a few notches on the brow in its 
time. Once a Roman telling of top mythological tales through gesture, it was a 
variant of commedia dell’arte and “a species of ballet of action” before it 
becamea paycheque for achondroplasiacs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/dec/21/what-really-thinking-pantomime-dwarf>
, as well as a way of describing thePepe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/18/joy-of-six-football-pantomime-villains>
s, Cowells and, indeed, the Farages of the world.

The form was already being used as a dismissive reference by the time Hamlet 
fulminated about ...

The ignorant, who for the Most parte are capable of nothing but dumbe shewes 
and noises

... which gives us the related term which is the topic of our next challenge. 
Reader, how would you clue DUMBSHOW?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for RUK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/sep/15/crossword-roundup-scottish-independence-cryptic-clues#show-all>
. Thebrasselephant had the most audacious definition in “Unchecked population 
in Reading Uxbridge and Keighley”; likewise HipsterPriest and schroduck raised 
smiles with “Starts reaching under kilt and finds ... Nope, no real Scotsmen 
here!” and “‘Are you alright?’ texted Blighty after beheading”.

And, related, steveran and Wifeandthreekids were deviously misleading in 
“Biscuit son dropped lands on edge” and “Game king is scot-free”.

This odd little three-letter string led some to wield the compound anagram: 
startlingly so in the case of Neijygof’s “Here’s tae us, wha’s like us? 
Specially no the Aussies ... wha else might be left behind after Thursday?” and 
JollySwagman’s “Can our dank isle somehow be abandoned by wild Caledionans - 
whatever next?”

The runners-up are gleety’s independence-inverting “Kurds partly up for a new 
independent state?” and robinjohnson’s impatient “Renfrew, Ullapool and 
Kilmarnock first to declare – who’s left?”; the winner is GoatyGoY’s apposite 
“What’s left when the crowd rejects the leader of country?”


Kudos to Goat, and I guess we’ll return to this next referendum. Please leave 
this fortnight’s entries and your pick of the broadsheet cryptics below.

We’d also be interested to continue the discussion started last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/sep/22/crossword-blog-an-end-to-flying-colours>
 about how best to describe how the featured clues work. We’re trying one of 
the suggested approaches in this post – how is it for you?


Clue of the Fortnight

The surface reading of this Telegraph clue 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=23742> ...

10d Mum, tipsy, fell missing last of steps (5-6)

[word for “tipsy” + word for “fell” without the last letter of “steps”]

... is so pantomime that it takes a while to see that this kind of “Mum” need 
not always be capitalised, and that the answer is TIGHT-LIPPED. It’s a keeper.
 