
When considering any serious quasi-editorial questions, I ask myself first: 
what wouldViz <https://www.theguardian.com/books/viz> do?
Viz Comic (@vizcomic) 
pic.twitter.com/IRN1j6qBaS <http://t.co/IRN1j6qBaS>
 <https://twitter.com/vizcomic/status/518656877094121473> October 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/vizcomic/status/518656877094121473> 
As always, “Britain’s 3rd (or possibly 4th) funniest magazine” has been there 
this week to offer counsel. Viz, like any other journal of record, has a 
cryptic crossword and any readers who have not attempted it can be reassured 
that it’s one of the country’s best.

The setter, Anus, follows all the conventions in making the “Craptic 
Crossword”, but with more constraints than you’ll find in a puzzle in a weekday 
broadsheet. The entries might include terminology gathered in sister publication
Roger’s Profanisaurus 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/roger-s-profanisaurus-das-krapital.html> and 
the wordplay has an additional obligation – that of being as prurient as the 
human mind allows, if not more so.

The result is a puzzle series as baroque in its syntax and semantics as any 
weekend barred challenge – and any reader who has mastered the cryptic and is 
in the mood for a stiffer challenge is directed forthwith toAzed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/azed>, the Listener 
<http://listenercrossword.com/>, the Inquisitor 
<http://www.fifteensquared.net/category/inquisitorindex/>, the Enigmatic 
Variations <http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/word_puzzles>, Mephisto 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/crosswords/specialist/>, Beelzebub 
<http://www.fifteensquared.net/category/beelzebub/> and to Viz’s Craptic 
Crossword <http://viz.co.uk/>. 

But what of those who have not yet made the leap from the quick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/quick> to the cryptic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic>? For these lucky souls 
– lucky because a world of wordplay awaits – even the humblest cryptic can be 
intimidating ... which brings us to the image above.

For the neophyte, a glance at the puzzle page can bring to mind the same 
bafflement, and the Cryptic Chess-Bridge Crossword may as well be a genuine 
puzzle – and how I wish it were. At the crossword blog, our mission is to 
prevent the curious from wondering, “What on earth are they on about?”

And so many sincere thanks for your thoughts on how best to deconstruct 
featured clues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/sep/22/crossword-blog-an-end-to-flying-colours>
, which I considered with the guiding hand of Viz on my shoulder.

Pasquale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/aug/02/crossword-blog-meet-setter-pasquale>
 is right, of course, that the incomparableAzed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/azed> has developed a notation, terse 
and precise, which hasweathered the decades 
<http://observer.theguardian.com/comment/story/0,6903,439507,00.html>. My 
feeling is that this is the perfect tool for a different job – viz, 
deconstructing the odd clue which has eluded a solver who is at ease furrowing 
through Chambers and keeping in mindadvanced solving techniques 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2010/sep/26/azed-giant-among-crosswords-2000>
.

Likewise, any approach that might benefit from a kind of key to explain what 
any “<”s and indeed “}”s are intended to mean is one that risks failing the 
Cryptic-Chess-Bridge Test.

Mojoseeker turned necessity to invention with a suggestion that we retain the 
old colour coding, but in image rather than alphanumeric format; here I worry 
that this might defy accessibility even more than the rainbow text.

So we’ll proceed for the moment with a combination of some of the other 
suggestions which drifts towards prose and away from notation. Here’s an 
example, usinga Rufus clue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26149> ...

23d Old court official — namely one standing over the Queen (6)

[Abbrev meaning “namely”] + [synonym for “one”] + [abbrev for “the Queen”]

VIZ + I + ER 


... which, with thanks again for the feedback, takes us back where we started 
– videlicet, viz.
 