
The sickest collection of argot, for my money, is Eric Partridge's Dictionary 
of Slang and Unconventional English 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780415619493>
, which first appeared in the 1930s. As David Crystal noted, the book ...

was well received at the time, though when librarians discovered that it had 
'those words' in it, many banned it from their shelves and it is still often 
available only on restricted loan.

Nowadays, even the starchiest librarian has no choice but to have "those 
words" on his or her shelves, unless he or she wishes to go through Chambers, 
Collins and Oxford with a scalpel, since the respectable dictionaries all carry 
the language from whichwives and servants 
<http://observer.theguardian.com/comment/story/0,6903,343895,00.html> were once 
protected.

Slang can still, though, furrow brows – even in the world of crosswords, where 
all of language is in principle available as part of the fun. Here's one across 
froma New York Times puzzle 
<http://www.nytimes.com/crosswords/game/2014/04/18/daily/?print> by newish 
setterJames Mulhern <http://www.xwordinfo.com/Crossword?date=4/18/2014&g=48&d=D>
:

1 Definitely, dawg!

Nine letters, and the entry is FO SHIZZLE. NYT puzzle blogger Deb Amlen notes 
that this is an inaugural appearance 
<http://wordplay.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/04/17/learn-to-teach/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0>
:

FO' SHIZZLE makes its debut today, even though, technically speaking, it is so 
last decade.

She's right, of course. The practice of replacing the end of a word with 
"izzle" goes back at least as far as UTFO's 1985 track Roxanne Roxanne ("the 
izzi is the grizzeat kizzangizzo") and perhaps to the Harlem Renaissance. But 
it is associated in most minds with one person: Snoop Dogg (or, as he styles 
it, "D-O-Double Gizzle") and the early 21st century.

From Snoop in 2004, OK; as one across in the NYT in 2014? There seem to be 
three broad areas of concern.

Charge one is staleness. Amy Reynaldo, fierce competitor in the American 
Crossword Puzzle Tournament <http://www.crosswordtournament.com/>, writes that 
FO SHIZZLE is"largely extinct" 
<http://www.crosswordfiend.com/blog/2014/04/17/friday-april-18-2014/>:

Is 50 years outdated better or worse than 10 years outdated? The former seems 
quaint while the latter just clangs against the ear.

And to prove her point, Amy goes on to enjoy the same puzzle's SQUIFFY for its 
unfamiliarity to American ears. This paper's crossword editor Hugh Stephenson
has recently discussed dated devices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2014/mar/04/1>, 
specifically those from the early 20th century or before. Older language has to 
justify itself against a different charge to FO SHIZZLE: that solvers may have 
never heard it in their lives. With the last-trend-but-one, the danger seems 
different: that just when a solver thinks an overused meme has finally gone, it 
pops up perkily in their puzzle.

Charge two is that a puzzle using FO SHIZZLE is awkwardly trying too hard. 
Jeff Chen 
<http://www.foster.washington.edu/alumni/Pages/JeffChen.aspx?from=heroimage>, a 
setter who maintains the blogxwordinfo <http://www.xwordinfo.com/FAQ>, has 
concerns <http://www.xwordinfo.com/Crossword?date=4/18/2014&g=48&d=D>:

I totally understand the effort to be more hip and cater to the younger 
generation, and if this had debuted even five years ago, I think I would have 
liked it better.

When, though, were the "izzle" catchphrases last hip? In 2003, Snoop was a 
thirtysomething businessman yelping "Now wait just one minizzle!" in a TV ad 
for AOL 9.0. It's difficult to imagine anything that approaches the unhipness 
of AOL 9.0.

Long-time readers might remember the kerfuffle around the NYT puzzle's use of 
WACK in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jan/12/crossword-blog-when-bad-means-good>
; there, as here, one wishes that setters could use any language without 
worrying that they might be seen to be effortfully aiming to impress.

"Any language", though? Charge three is that FO SHIZZLE takes us into the 
sharky waters of ethnic epithets.Solver Mark Fitzgerald worries that the entry 
<http://jimromenesko.com/2014/04/20/fo-shizzle/?fb_comment_id=fbc_809456139083854_7786701_810653608964107>
 ...

implies the entire phrase 'fo shizzle, my nizzle' or 'for sure, my (racially 
charged bad word).'

If it did, then we'd be looking at a clue which was fun if written by a black 
setter and otherwise alarming. But I'm not sure that the n-word is lurking 
inevitably in FO SHIZZLE.

Much of the appeal of the "izzle" switch is (or, rather, was) like that of Pig 
Latin: a silly way of mucking about with language, of saying one thing to mean 
another – the meat 'n' potatoes of crosswording. And a funner way of saying 
"yes" or "I agree" is always going to have a good chance of catching on, in 
this case as a discrete two-word phrase.

Whatever your take, the clue doesn't break the cardinal rule of crosswording: 
it's not unfair. In fact,as NYT puzzle editor tells media pundit Jim Romenesko 
<http://jimromenesko.com/2014/04/20/fo-shizzle/>, the clue strives for fairness:

It's true that it's dated language. But then so are HEP, RAD, EGAD, and other 
old-fashioned terms, which appear in crosswords all the time. The key is to 
clue things like these in similarly dated ways. For example, FO' SHIZZLE was 
clued as 'Definitely, dawg!', which is a contemporaneous way of saying 
approximately the same thing.

British setters don't tend to match the vintage of the language in the clue to 
each part of the answer. Do you think they should? And how do you feel about 
recently outdated phrases? Fair game, or – and this may be the most damning 
charge of all – just too annoying?
 