
Sadly, I was unable to make it to the Times National Crossword Championship on 
Saturday. Naturally,I did not contemplate anything approaching victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jul/18/times-crossword-championship>
, but would like to have felt the pressure of solving three puzzles in an 
intimidating setting and,the Times tells us 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/puzzles/crossword/article3899652.ece>, the 
setters of those puzzles "admitted they had made the puzzles deliberately 
difficult this year".

For my training, I reasoned that while I would never get a sniff of the heels 
of reigning champMark Goodliffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/oct/27/crossword-blog-need-for-speed>
, I might learn a thing or two from his technique – which he has gallantly 
recorded for the rest of us. At the site ofsubscription puzzle magazine the 
Magpie <http://www.piemag.com/about/>, there's a kind of black-box recording of 
Goodliffe's thinking <http://www.piemag.com/2013/01/23/marks-mind/> during his 
winning session last year.

Some of it is reassuring. Faced with this clue …

5ac My attempt to finish off Times Jumbo's beginning at home (2,5)

… my thinking was much the same as his, viz …

MY TRY? … J …? IN …? Nope – move on

... (although I suspect I would not, like Goodliffe, have enough time to spare 
in a championship tostart a casual solve of the real-life Times Jumbo while 
other competitors sweated on 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/puzzles/crossword/article3575332.ece>) – but in 
other cases …

2d Muses all told to support writer of clues grabbing shuteye on a floor? (9)

… it was, well, not:

The 'Muses all told' were NINE. Is there a floor that ends in –NINE? Oh, yes, 
MEZZANINE. ME + ZZ + A – it all fits though ZZ for 'shuteye' seems dubious. Bit 
of a lucky guess with NINE there

Yeah. To be more precise, my thinking certainly requires much more of a nudge 
from the checking letters – and where it does tend to have the same shape as 
Goodliffe's, it is much, much slower. I had also borne in mind some tips and 
tricks I have heard about, one of which was prompted bya recent clue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26055> by Puck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/26/meet-the-setter-puck>
 (who came eighth on Saturday):

12d From text I see you solve last of down clues to begin with – oddly 
decisive! (10)

This prompted me to remember 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/sep/30/crossword-roundup-where-do-you-start-solving>
 the theory that the clues in the bottom righthand corner might have been 
written last by the setter and so might yield more easily. However,Sunday Times 
crossword <https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/> editor Peter 
Biddlecombe got in touch with a note of caution:

It seems that only a minority of setters write the clues in the order they're 
printed. Azed apparently does this, but my guess is that if you asked the 
Guardian setters, about 85% would say that they didn't. That rather scuppers 
the "tired setter" theory.

Indeed, Azed <https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/azed> told the BBC in 2008 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00fh2bh> …

I always write the clues in the order in which they appear in the puzzle. I 
deliberately don't take what look to me the most interesting words and clue 
those first, and get left with a sump of rather drab four-letter words at the 
end. If you approach a clue saying "this is a drab word", you'll probably end 
up with a drab clue.

… but, happily, the puzzles in the Times championship are not set by Azed – a 
setter who, additionally, I doubt ever gets tired. Peter also mentioned that 
the "bottom righthand" theory may have been more effective in the days when 
Times puzzles often had "friendly" letters in the bottom and righthand edges. 
But the paper's current crossword editor Richard Browne tells me that his 
recollection is that his predecessorBrian Greer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/brendan> felt that he saw words such as 
ELEMENT, SEVERE and SCEPTRE hanging around there too often and asked setters 
not to fill those spaces with words against which it is easy to find 
crosschecking answers.

And if that weren't enough debunking of the theory, Goodliffe doesn't do it. 
Goodliffe won again at the weekend, by the way. It's his sixth successive 
victory, which is a new record. The Times'sTom Knowles 
<https://twitter.com/tkbeynon> asked him which clue had proved the most 
troublesome this year 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/puzzles/crossword/article3899652.ece?CMP=OTH-gnws-standard-2013_10_20>
.

7d English salesman's pitch is flipping bore! (8)

Goodliffe was "getting very tempted to fill in PARSONAGE and hand it in", 
before seeing that "pore" is a fair definition of PERFORATE and TAR OF REP a 
fair if elusive paraphrase of "salesman's pitch".

This six-long streak might not have been a record if 10-time winner John Sykes 
had not been persuaded to compete only in alternate years to give other solvers 
a chance while he was otherwise owning the championship in the 1970s and 80s. 
Goodliffe has been asked if he wants to do likewise but his feeling is that 
other solvers may not feel they have won unless they have beaten him – which is 
just as sporting in its way. Perhaps I'll get the chance to lose to him next 
year? And the Jumbo clue? The definition was a cunningly hidden "my", BY JINGO.
 