
Crystal Palace have completed the signing of Andros Townsend from Newcastle 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> for a club record 
fee of £13m after the manager Alan Pardew confirmed he has signed a new 
contract with the club.

In a busy 24 hours for the south London club, the France goalkeeper Steve 
Mandanda has also completed his move fromMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> for a fee of £1.4m (€2m) on a 
three-year contract.

Townsend has agreed a five-year contract at the club, and his transfer comes 
on the same dayDwight Gayle has moved in the opposite direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/newcastle-dwight-gayle-signs-ritchie>
.

“I’m extremely delighted,” the 24-year-old winger told Palace’s official club 
website. “I had chats with the manager and chairman [Steve Parish] before I 
signed and I’m pleased to be part of Crystal Palace’s future.

“By the sounds of things it’s going to be a bright one and I can’t wait to get 
started.”
Crystal Palace F.C. (@CPFC) 
BREAKING: #CPFC <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CPFC?src=hash> have completed the 
signing of@andros_townsend <https://twitter.com/andros_townsend> for £13m on a 
five year deal!#WelcomeAndros 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/WelcomeAndros?src=hash> 🔴🔵 
pic.twitter.com/lb759ljtkw <https://t.co/lb759ljtkw>
 <https://twitter.com/CPFC/status/748795894175195137> July 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/CPFC/status/748795894175195137> 
Pardew, meanwhile, revealed in an article for the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sport/football/article-3668537/England-need-man-team-identity-want-job-one-day-not-yet.html>
 that he has signed a new long-term contract at Selhurst Park, having 
previously agreed a three-and-a-half-year contractwhen he moved from Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/29/alan-pardew-newcastle-leave-crystal-palace>
 in January 2015. The 54-year-old has also been linked with the vacant England 
post but Pardew insisted he is focused on Palace for now.

“I have signed a new contract, we have new, ambitious American investors and 
with my chairman Steve Parish we all want to attack this division,” he wrote.

“I’ve been to the Euros, I am rested and feel galvanised and ready to push on 
from our FA Cup final appearance. That has made me hungry for more.

“I do hope the Football Association will want to talk and I have strong 
opinions on England, but I have been asked if I want theEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> job and I have given my answer. 
One day.”

Pardew added: “It might be that I am considered too inexperienced at 
international level so I am prepared to work for another nation to get that 
experience when the time is right, if that is what is required. But for now my 
time is atCrystal Palace <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace>.”

The signing of Townsend means this is the second successive summer Palace have 
broken their transfer record, having paid £10m for Yohan Cabaye 12 months ago. 
Mandanda, who is currently preparing for France’s Euro 2016 quarter-final 
against Iceland, is expected to compete with the Wales No1 Wayne Hennessey, 
while the club are also preparing to make a bid for Liverpool striker Christian 
Benteke.

“It’s fantastic that we’ve managed to get a player of Andros’s quality into 
the club,” Parish said. “He has played in the Premier League for a number of 
years and represented England on many (11) occasions and yet he’s still only 24 
years old.

“Andros is another exciting attacking talent that we have added to our ranks 
and I can’t wait to see him in a red and blue shirt in the very near future.”
 