
“You’re not stretching your face enough”, explains Crystal Pite 
<http://www.kiddpivot.org/company/>, patiently. She demonstrates with a 
lop-sided grimace that distorts her rather beautiful, open features into a kind 
of agitated question mark. It’s not the standard rehearsal note from a 
choreographer to their dancers, but the eight men and women in the studio mimic 
Pite’s expression as they dance, and an unsettling new energy comes into their 
bodies. You can feel a shift in the atmosphere of the room.


It’s this close attention to detail, this hunting down of the precise physical 
image, that gives Pite’s work its unusually poetic quality. It’s also key to 
her passion to communicate ideas, emotions and even stories through her 
choreography. From works like the epic, elementalPolaris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/02/see-the-music-hear-the-dance-sadlers-wells-thomas-ades-review>
 to The Statement – the study of conflict, which I’m watching her create for
Nederlands Dans Theater <http://www.ndt.nl/en/home.html> – Pite’s instinct is 
always to reach through the steps for some direct connection with her audience.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrragD1P34NA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrragD1P34NA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrragD1P34NA&media=>
Later, when the dancers have left the studio, Pite tells me that she always 
watches rehearsals with one eye on how the material will read to an audience. 
“I don’t necessarily want people to understand my exact intentions in a work 
but I do want them to feel that they’re inhabiting it. There’s a proverb, ‘if 
you talk to a man about himself, he will listen for hours’, and I think that’s 
key. If people feel represented onstage, they’re going to be leaning in.”

A large swath of the public might find it hard to imagine themselves being 
represented in dance – as an art form it’s still widely perceived as arcane, 
precious or incomprehensibly opaque. Yet the immediacy with which Pite is able 
to engage or provoke her audiences makes her, at 45, one of the most 
sought-after choreographers of her generation. Although working regularly with 
her own Vancouver-based company, Kidd Pivot, Pite now receives more commissions 
than she can handle, from companies like NDT (with whom she’s associate 
choreographer), the Paris Opera and theRoyal Ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/royal-ballet>.

Crystal Pite: the Canadian choreographer bringing a bold new mood to 
contemporary dance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/22/crystal-pite-interview-sadlers-wells>
 Pite cares about making contact with her audience but she doesn’t try to make 
things easy for them. She’s restlessly experimental – trying out text, digital 
imagery and different kinds of music to feed her dance language – and the 
territory she explores can be tough. InBetroffenheit 
<http://www.kiddpivot.org/works/betroffenheit/>, the work she will soon be 
bringing to London, Pite deals with extreme states of trauma, grief and 
addiction. And she takes as her starting point the unfathomable, real-life 
tragedy that was suffered by her co-creator, the actor and playwrightJonathon 
Young <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0949726/>, whose daughter, niece and nephew 
were killed in a fire during a family holiday in 2009.

 Betroffenheit (a German word which translates as “consternation”) is a term 
that Pite and Young have used to denote the psychic and emotional meltdown that 
can occur after a disaster. “We were interested in the traumatised state you go 
into after an extreme or violent event,” she says. “When your experience meets 
the limits of language, and you have to find other ways of expressing 
yourself.” Young’s own knowledge of this state meant that, “creatively the 
stakes felt very high for us both. We were trying to deal with this terrible 
personal loss but also zoning out, into the very question of human suffering.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcrystal-pite-girls-ballet-choreographer-prized-mavericks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff250266893bf03170a1e3f12d400d5f5681bbfc%2F0_87_1830_1098%2F1830.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crystal%20Pite%3A%20'In%20ballet%2C%20girls%20are%20less%20likely%20to%20be%20prized%20for%20being%20mavericks'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcrystal-pite-girls-ballet-choreographer-prized-mavericks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crystal%20Pite%3A%20%27In%20ballet%2C%20girls%20are%20less%20likely%20to%20be%20prized%20for%20being%20mavericks%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcrystal-pite-girls-ballet-choreographer-prized-mavericks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff250266893bf03170a1e3f12d400d5f5681bbfc%2F0_87_1830_1098%2F1830.jpg>
 Crystal Pite’s latest work, Betroffenheit, addresses ‘the very question of 
human suffering’ 
Pite says that much of her best work has been inspired by violence, or 
darkness of some kind. “Conflict is fascinating to me, the tension of opposing 
ideas and forces is like an engine when I’m making a work, it creates so much 
physical excitement and energy.” But she acknowledges that she’s drawn to 
conflict in dance because she doesn’t “do so well with it in real life”.

On first meeting, Pite comes across as a woman of unusual sweetness and 
consideration; she weighs her words carefully when she speaks, and during 
rehearsal she is unfailingly appreciative of her dancers. If her instinct is to 
avoid confrontation as an adult it may be because there was little of it in her 
childhood, most of which she spent in the Canadian city of Victoria. Having set 
her heart on a stage career, starting tap classes when she was barely more than 
a toddler, then taking up jazz, ballet, singing, music and drama, the young 
Pite suffered no significant opposition to her dreams: “I was very lucky, my 
teachers at school all encouraged me.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ38suCkaISI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ38suCkaISI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ38suCkaISI&media=>
But there is also a line of steel running through Pite’s mild demeanour. When 
she was little she thrived on beating off the competition when she entered – 
and won – various local dance competitions, and she demonstrated a precocious 
determination in her ambition to become a choreographer: creating her own first 
dance material when she was very small, and then, having joined British Ballet 
Columbia at 17, choreographing her first work two years later. Her creative 
ambitions were further honed when she spent five years dancing withWilliam 
Forsythe <http://www.williamforsythe.de/biography.html>’s Ballett Frankfurt. 
Although Pite didn’t make her own choreography during that period, like all of 
Forsythe’s dancers she was intricately involved in the creation of his 
material. “I learned so much from Bill during that time, about how to construct 
and deconstruct movement but also how to be bold. He had a kind of 
recklessness, which I’ve been cultivating ever since.”

Forsythe’s style was an influence from which Pite had to step away when she 
formed Kidd Pivot in 2002. Her own movement language is more classically 
burnished, and more theatrically explicit, than Forsythe’s, and it’s also more 
eclectic. These days she says her greatest influence is her dancers. “They have 
so many qualities that I can use. I can make a phrase on my own body and then 
watch them expand and pull it apart. It’s like they’ve put on a coat, and when 
they take it off, it’s been worn and stretched in different ways.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcrystal-pite-girls-ballet-choreographer-prized-mavericks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82d341a166acdb324aeef3104ad55be53a547ad1%2F0_73_2628_3283%2F2628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crystal%20Pite%3A%20'In%20ballet%2C%20girls%20are%20less%20likely%20to%20be%20prized%20for%20being%20mavericks'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcrystal-pite-girls-ballet-choreographer-prized-mavericks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crystal%20Pite%3A%20%27In%20ballet%2C%20girls%20are%20less%20likely%20to%20be%20prized%20for%20being%20mavericks%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcrystal-pite-girls-ballet-choreographer-prized-mavericks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82d341a166acdb324aeef3104ad55be53a547ad1%2F0_73_2628_3283%2F2628.jpg>
 Peter Chu and Anne Plamondon in A Picture of You Falling by Crystal Pite. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
When Pite creates work for a large ballet company like the Royal, it 
frustrates her that there’s never enough time to establish an intimate, 
creative relationship with her cast. Because she can’t create the kind of 
complexity she wants on individual dancers she compensates by choreographing 
with large numbers, so that the complexity is created out of the structure, the 
pattern and the flow. For her forthcoming piece for the Royal – a setting of 
the first movement of Gorecki’s 3rd symphony – she hopes to use around 40 
dancers.

It will be illuminating to see what kind of chemistry Pite creates with the 
Royal, but the significance of the commission also lies in the fact that it 
will be first work created by a female choreographer for that company in nearly 
two decades. Pite becomes wary when discussing the issue of her gender, saying 
that she would be “broken-hearted” to be told it had anything to do with her 
receiving the commission. Although she is aware that there are 
disproportionately few women at the top of the choreographic profession, 
especially in ballet, she is reluctant to see this as a conspiracy – a “giant 
thumb keeping women down”. She believes there are too many different and very 
specific issues at play: including the fact that boys who enter the profession 
are already predisposed to be pushy and successful.

“When you’re a young boy wanting to study ballet you’re already a kind of 
rebel, someone who is thinking outside the box, so you’re more likely to end up 
making work or running a company. Girls are less likely to be prized for being 
a maverick, they’re more likely to be encouraged to look and dance like 
everyone else – which means that a lot of the creative women will end up in 
contemporary dance.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF9MzKFFiwuU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF9MzKFFiwuU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF9MzKFFiwuU&media=>
 Pite has never felt disadvantaged herself by being a woman, although she 
acknowledges that becoming a mother five years ago has affected everything – 
her time, her stamina and her priorities. She’s been fortunate that her 
partner, Jay Gower Taylor, is also her set designer and travels with her when 
she’s working away from home, so they are able to take their son Niko with them 
and share the childcare. But once Niko is in school Pite will have to be more 
pragmatic about how she manages motherhood and work. She knows there will be 
sacrifices on both sides.

Childcare is a professional issue that many female choreographers want 
addressed. Yet it’s typical of Pite that she’s more interested in talking about 
how motherhood has enriched her as an artist. A work like Betroffenheit is 
searing territory for any parent to tackle, yet it’s the kind of brave, 
important piece that Pite wants to make. “There’s an amazing feeling of 
vulnerability that comes when you have a child, that makes you much more aware. 
Being a mother makes me want to work with bigger ideas. I don’t want to waste 
time.”

 * Betroffenheit is at Sadler’s Wells 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/crystal-pite-and-jonathon-young-betroffenheit/>
, London, on 31 May and 1 June
 