
A fracking boss has insisted drilling for gas is better than importing it as 
the government prepares to rule on two sites in Lancashire.

Francis Egan, the chief executive of Cuadrilla, the company behind the plans 
in Fylde, said the controversial process was the best solution for the UK’s 
fuel shortage.

He told Good Morning Britain: “The country needs gas. The country is running 
out of gas, and without some form of energy development, we’re going to end up 
importing all of our fuel from overseas, and we’ve seen that just last week 
with the ridiculous situation where Scotland is importing shale gas from 
America, which frankly is crazy.”

Addressing local concerns about traffic, Egan said that after an initial 
construction and drilling period the traffic would be “down to three or four 
trucks a week”.

Lancashire readers on the Cuadrilla fracking decision one month on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/07/lancashire-readers-on-the-cuadrilla-fracking-decision-one-month-on>
He said the impact of a producing site is “far less, frankly, than a windfarm”.

He added: “The fact is that this is a temporary development. There is traffic, 
obviously, you can’t do this without it, but we’re talking about 25 trucks a 
day at peak. That’s for a maximum of six weeks spread out over a two-year 
period.”

Lancashire county council turned down planning applications for fracking for 
shale gasat Preston New Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/29/fracking-application-cuadrilla-rejected-lancashire-county-council>
 andRoseacre Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/26/lancashire-county-council-rejects-cuadrilla-fracking-bid>
, even though its officials had recommended one of the schemes.

Cuadrilla appealed against the decision and it went to a public inquiry, which 
was heard earlier this year.

The communities secretary, Sajid Javid, is expected to make the final ruling 
on the schemes on Thursday.

When David Cameron was prime minister, he said the government was going “all 
out for shale” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jan/13/shale-gas-fracking-cameron-all-out>
 to boost the economy, jobs and energy security, and soon after she took over 
as PM, Theresa Maylaunched a consultation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/06/fracking-local-people-payments-theresa-may>
 that could result in homeowners receiving individual payments for fracking 
wells drilled nearby.

But the process – in which liquid is pumped deep underground at high pressure 
to fracture shale rock and release gas – remains highly controversial, with 
many protesters turning out for the public inquiry.

Opponents fear the process can cause earthquakes, pollute water, lead to 
damaging development in the countryside and hit house prices.

The process has been mired in controversy since it hit the headlines in 2011 
forcausing two minor earthquakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/nov/02/fracking-cause-lancashire-quakes>
 in Lancashire, prompting a temporary ban on fracking in the UK.

The ban was later lifted, with controls put in place to prevent tremors, but 
fracking continues to attract opposition.

With the government set to ratify the global Paris climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/21/paris-climate-agreement-poised-to-come-into-force>
 on cutting greenhouse gases before the end of the year, environmentalists 
argue that fracking for fossil fuels is not compatible with tackling climate 
change and the focus should be on renewables.
 