
Cyprus Avenue review – complex study of sectarian paranoia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/18/cyprus-avenue-review-peacock-abbey-dublin-abbey-royal-court>
What is the most shocking, subversive and violent play in London? Most 
theatregoers would cite Sarah Kane’sCleansed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/24/cleansed-review-katie-mitchell-sarah-kane-dorfman-national-theatre-london>
 at the National’s Dorfman. But David Ireland’s Cyprus Avenue, which has 
arrived at the Royal Court afteran earlier showing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/18/cyprus-avenue-review-peacock-abbey-dublin-abbey-royal-court>
 at the Abbey in Dublin, left me far more shaken and stirred.

It can’t match Kane’s catalogue of horrors, but what makes Ireland’s play so 
terrifying is that it takes fanaticism to its logical conclusion and laces 
lunacy with laughter. Ireland’s protagonist, Eric, is a Belfast loyalist 
convinced that the Protestant unionist cause is being destroyed by what he 
terms “the Fenians”. His dementia reaches such a pitch that he believes his 
five-week-old granddaughter to be Gerry Adams.

But that is only the starting point for a play that shows Eric agonising over 
his identity. What if a belief that he is ultimately Irish lies behind his 
deep-rooted sense of Britishness? It is even hinted that his misogynistic 
masculinity may conceal a latent homosexuality. The whole play, in fact, is 
about a man whose sense of self is so shaken that he has to confirm his 
prejudices by committing acts of appalling cruelty.

If Cyprus Avenue reminded me of anything, it was of Martin McDonagh’s The 
Lieutenant of Inishmore (2001) which showed an extremist Irish republican 
driven to a murderous frenzy by the loss of his beloved cat. Like McDonagh, 
Ireland uses the blackest of comedy to expose the absurdity of sectarian hatred.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fcyprus-avenue-david-ireland-belfast-play-royal-court-theatre-upstairs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a90bdf822d49c9a281dfbd937207e1d98017551%2F147_128_3269_1961%2F3269.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cyprus%20Avenue%3A%20the%20most%20shocking%20and%20relevant%20play%20in%20London%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fcyprus-avenue-david-ireland-belfast-play-royal-court-theatre-upstairs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cyprus%20Avenue%3A%20the%20most%20shocking%20and%20relevant%20play%20in%20London%20today&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fcyprus-avenue-david-ireland-belfast-play-royal-court-theatre-upstairs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a90bdf822d49c9a281dfbd937207e1d98017551%2F147_128_3269_1961%2F3269.jpg>
 Lunacy and laughter … Wunmi Mosaku and Stephen Rea in Cyprus Avenue. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
There is a wildly funny scene in Ireland’s play where a ruminative Eric, 
sitting on a suburban park bench, finds himself at the mercy of Slim, a 
balaclava-wearing paramilitary. Slim is apoplectic that Eric’s musings on the 
nature of Irishness have been overheard by a young boy. “He’s only 10,” 
thunders Slim, “and already he’s beginning to question the validity of loyalist 
cultural identity.” This perfectly hits the note of self-aggrandising 
phrase-making that afflicts all dogmas. It made me laugh even more than Slim’s 
revelation that he couldn’t carry out a particular murder because on Tuesdays 
he goes to anger management.

I admit I found the climactic violence hard to watch; I almost wish Ireland 
had left it implicit rather than physically stated. But this is an important 
production for many reasons. One is that Vicky Featherstone’s production 
contains a brilliant performance from Stephen Rea, whose seamed features and 
velvet voice convey the melancholia that lurks behind blind hatred. Another is 
that Cyprus Avenue, like all good plays, has a metaphorical resonance. I 
disagree strongly with a respected colleague who said the subject was chiefly 
of local interest. Ireland is writing about the danger of living in the past 
and using murderous violence as a means of re-enacting battles long ago. In a 
world where sectarian divisions remain as potent as ever, I’d have thought that 
was a point well worth making.
 