
It is half past midnight and I am at the Edinburgh festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/edinburghfestival> fringe, pretending to 
masturbate a cucumber in a variety of elaborate ways. Under ordinary 
circumstances, this would seem like a fairly remarkable state of affairs, but 
then you don’t know the day I’ve had. I’m into my 12th hour of an audience 
participation marathon. I’ve spent the afternoon and evening literally running 
from venue to venue at the world’s largest arts festival, taking part in as 
many shows as I can that require not just the presence of paying punters, but 
their active involvement. I have sung a Frank Sinatra song with a woman covered 
in blue paint. I have sat in a garden shed just off Lothian Street and read the 
Chilcot report aloud. I have played guitar for the first time in about 25 
years, on stage, alongside a rock musician I once interviewed.

I have had genuinely life-affirming experiences and I have felt mortified 
embarrassment on such a scale that, by comparison, pretending to elaborately 
masturbate a cucumber in a room full of people seems a mere bagatelle. This 
state of affairs is compounded by the fact that everybody else in the room is 
pretending to elaborately masturbate a cucumber as well, this being the climax 
– forgive me – of the Wank Bank Masterclass show, in which a charming and very 
funny gay Australian guy called Adam imparts the knowledge he accumulated while 
working, as he puts it, “giving on-call massages with happy endings to homos 
and business daddies” in New York City. Some of his techniques are apparently 
derived from ancient Taoist Tantric techniques. Others, I suspect, are of his 
own devising: “I call this one Rock Around the Cock.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6c972bbb703ea7b33f40b1677565545e6feb189%2F0_214_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dad%20jokes%2C%20Chilcot%20and%20pleasuring%20a%20cucumber%3A%20my%20day%20as%20an%20Edinburgh%20performer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dad%20jokes%2C%20Chilcot%20and%20pleasuring%20a%20cucumber%3A%20my%20day%20as%20an%20Edinburgh%20performer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6c972bbb703ea7b33f40b1677565545e6feb189%2F0_214_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘Wanker of the day’ … Alexis Petridis at the Wank Bank Masterclass. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
I am doing all this because audience participation is a big thing at 
Edinburgh: not just in what you might call its traditional form – in which a 
luckless soul is hauled out of the crowd by a comedian who proceeds to make fun 
of them, to widespread hilarity – but in more complex and intriguing ways. 
There is an increasing reliance on members of the audience not just to be the 
butt of a joke, but to use their characters or skills or personal history to 
actively contribute to the richness of the show. “A lot of the big fringe 
successes in recent years have had a certain degree of audience participation 
to them,” says Tom Searle of production company Show and Tell. “There has been 
a real buzz around immersive theatre. Big shows such asTrygve Wakenshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/18/mime-trygve-wakenshaw-interview-mr-bean-nautilus-london-international-festival>
, The Boy With Tape on His Face, Dr Brown, Adam Riches, they all used people 
from the audience in a certain manner, often leaving them with quite a lot of 
stuff to do, never making them the joke, making them the star for five minutes.
Nina Conti, who is now smashing it in the West End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/01/nina-conti-review-criterion-theatre>
, her show is very heavy on audience participation. Part of her ventriloquism 
act is getting people out of the crowd; she puts masks on them and talks for 
them, but the joke is never on them.”

One explanation for the rise might be to do with wider trends in popular 
culture. We live in a world where we expect virtually everything to be 
interactive to some degree, from the plethora of audience-voted talent and 
reality shows on TV to commenting on news stories online. Why should theatre 
and live comedy be any different? But Searle thinks there might be other 
reasons. “If someone can do it well and control an audience well, deal with the 
level of unpredictability involved, it garners a lot of credit and praise. If 
you are an audience member, you’re really rooting for that person on stage; it 
creates an enormous amount of goodwill for that person, which then reflects on 
the performer and the rest of the show. It has a very positive effect on a show 
for an audience. It is absolutely a way of winning an audience over.”

But my first appointment is with an artist who’s using audience participation 
not out of choice but necessity. Bron Batten has been performingSweet Child of 
Mine <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on#q=%22Sweet%20Child%20Of%20Mine%22>, 
whichher website <https://bronbatten.com/sweet-child-of-mine/> describes as “a 
mixture of theatre, dance standup and an awkward family function” for five 
years; it has won rave reviews and awards at the Melbourne and Adelaide fringe 
festivals. The point of Sweet Child of Mine is that Batten performs it with her 
elderly father: it explores their relationship, not least his incomprehension 
at her choice of career and some of her more outre performances. But just 
before she was due to leave for Edinburgh, her father fell ill. Instead of 
cancelling the show’s run at the Gilded Balloon, she is instead performing it 
with what she describes as “stand-in Edinburgh dads”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1354adfa80faf3726a7a3bc2c3394c3e1fd0a2a%2F0_238_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dad%20jokes%2C%20Chilcot%20and%20pleasuring%20a%20cucumber%3A%20my%20day%20as%20an%20Edinburgh%20performer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dad%20jokes%2C%20Chilcot%20and%20pleasuring%20a%20cucumber%3A%20my%20day%20as%20an%20Edinburgh%20performer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1354adfa80faf3726a7a3bc2c3394c3e1fd0a2a%2F0_238_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘The stuff of nightmares’ … Playing Bron Batten’s father in Sweet Child of 
Mine. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Backstage, she talks about this turn of events positively, describing how each 
stand-in dad can bring their own experiences of life and fatherhood to the 
piece. She is in an ebullient mood – yesterday’s show apparently went very well 
– but I confess I’m not listening properly. Batten sent me the script a couple 
of days ago, but I only gave it a cursory glance. Now I’m reading it closely 
with a sense of mounting horror. It is not that there are a lot of lines, and 
she is happy for me to read them off the page anyway. The monologues I have to 
deliver – one of them while Bron writhes around on stage in a puddle of blue 
paint – are fine, I can cope with them. It’s the other stuff I’m required to 
do. Possessed of a singing voice that can ruin everyone in earshot’s day, I 
discover that one section involves me and Batten singing Frank and Nancy 
Sinatra’s Somethin’ Stupid. Another requires me to stand on stage, alone, at a 
microphone and tell jokes. The jokes are scripted and they’re meant to be bad – 
dad jokes – but the microphone, the stage, the spotlight: it feels 
uncomfortably close to performing standup comedy, something I have no more 
desire to do than to repeatedly slam my head in a car door.

It turns out to be even worse than I thought. I get through the singing OK, 
but the dad jokes standup section could only be more like the stuff of 
nightmares if at the end of it I had been frogmarched off stage and back to my 
old school, naked from the waist down. The jokes are greeted with deathly 
silence by a small audience that, as it turns out, has the capacity to get even 
smaller: midway through, two people get up and leave. It’s not just that I’m 
completely mortified; I feel guilty. Batten, who is clearly a lovely, very 
talented woman, has come all the way from Melbourne to do this and I’m causing 
it to fail. I think about something Tom Searle said, about the unpredictability 
inherent in audience participation, how performers need to have a kind of 
selection process to ensure that they get the right audience members on stage: 
“If they get stage fright and can’t do it, they can completely ruin the show.” 
You can say that again.

Still, if nothing else, it gives me an insight into life at the sharp end of 
the Edinburgh festival – “You certainly got the full-on fringe experience 
there,” muses Batten – and a kind of boggling admiration for the resilience of 
the performers. Afterwards, I feel like spending the rest of the day locked in 
a darkened room, weeping softly to myself, but Bron seems remarkably unfazed: 
“You see? That wasn’t too traumatic, was it?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07497ea5ef78f1544a7dc51539756d24a9a6453d%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dad%20jokes%2C%20Chilcot%20and%20pleasuring%20a%20cucumber%3A%20my%20day%20as%20an%20Edinburgh%20performer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dad%20jokes%2C%20Chilcot%20and%20pleasuring%20a%20cucumber%3A%20my%20day%20as%20an%20Edinburgh%20performer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07497ea5ef78f1544a7dc51539756d24a9a6453d%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘I’m not nervous at all’ … Playing guitar in Putting the Band Back Together. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
I don’t have time to fill her in on exactly how traumatic it was. I’m required 
at a venue called Summerhall, where a show calledPutting the Band Back Together 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/putting-the-band-back-together> is 
playing. Based on the true story of Mark Lloyd – a friend of director Annie 
Rigby and lead actor Alex Elliott, who on learning he had inoperable cancer 
elected to reform the band he’d once played in – it comes with a twist: at each 
performance, the house band is made up of volunteers from the audience, who 
turn up an hour early and get a quick rehearsal before taking the stage.

“We had the idea that people might, if you gave them a bit of advance notice, 
turn up to the show with an instrument that has been in the loft for a bit, get 
on stage and do something that might be quite difficult for them to do by any 
other means. You know, it takes a real concerted effort to put a group 
together, or even say, ‘Right, I’m going to get a set together and play at an 
open mic event,’” says Ross Millard, the former guitarist of the Futureheads. 
Millard wrote and performs the songs in the show, and is charged with getting 
the daily intake of musicians up to speed. “I think it’s a device that shows 
the audience that we’re all a bit more than the sum of our parts,” he adds. 
“Bands are less about individuals, they’re about a collective sound, a 
collective chemistry.”

Edinburgh festival 2016: six shows you shouldn't miss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/15/edinburgh-festival-2016-tickets-shows-tank-maestro-mortal>
Unlike singing or telling jokes at a microphone, I can play guitar – a bit – 
but I still have a degree of trepidation about appearing in the show. I was 
never any good at it and, furthermore, I haven’t actually touched the thing for 
more than 20 years. When I realised I was infinitely better at writing about 
music than playing it, I stopped playing it altogether, there being few things 
in life more pathetic than a rock critic who clearly has musical aspirations of 
their own, their every word somehow flavoured with the bitter tang of thwarted 
ambition. But the rehearsal goes well: the songs are great, but rooted in chord 
structures basic enough for even my rudimentary abilities; Millard is endlessly 
patient and encouraging. The performance goes even better. The play is 
fantastic – funny, big-hearted, moving and truthful – and the shambolic band of 
rusty amateur musicians fits perfectly with its central theme, about returning 
to something you love that adult life has distracted you from. Midway through, 
I realise that I’m not nervous at all. As we play, the musicians occasionally 
smilingly catch each other’s eyes: we’re all clearly really enjoying ourselves.

Backstage afterwards, there is a really lovely, warm atmosphere, but Closer by 
Circa <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on#q=%22Closer%20by%20Circa%22> 
calls. The Australian circus company is one of this year’s big fringe hits; 
they are packing them in at the Udderbelly. It is an astonishing show that I 
watch rigid with terror. That is partly because some of it is genuinely 
terrifying – the Circa performers seem to specialise in the kind of routine 
that looks so dangerous you can only watch it safely through your fingers – and 
it is partly because I know I’m going to have to take part in it. There are few 
things that can make you more keenly aware of your own advanced, paunchy 
decrepitude than being in close proximity to people who are clearly as fit as a 
human being can be, and who can perform scarcely believable feats of strength 
and agility. There are performers up there taking the full weight of other 
human beings on their heads and shinbones; after years of sitting hunched over 
a computer, I can’t even stand straight.

As it turns out, it doesn’t matter. Or, at least, I think it doesn’t. When I’m 
called on stage along with several other audience members, everything happens 
so fast that I have no idea what is going on. Mostly, I just sit there while 
Circa do their incredible stuff around me. At one point, I have to dance with 
one of the female performers. “You’re going to twirl me round,” she says. “Now 
you’re going to dip me.” I realise she means the ballroom dancing move where 
one dancer reclines, draped over their partner’s arm. For a split second, I 
have a terrible premonition I’m going to drop her – her promising career was 
cut tragically short when a cack-handed journalist caused her to crack her 
skull etc – but then I realise that she can probably dip herself, without my 
support. I stagger back to my seat, to a round of applause.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8362f33d02540a7f9fa7515aec5b190a6a850b2d%2F0_133_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dad%20jokes%2C%20Chilcot%20and%20pleasuring%20a%20cucumber%3A%20my%20day%20as%20an%20Edinburgh%20performer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dad%20jokes%2C%20Chilcot%20and%20pleasuring%20a%20cucumber%3A%20my%20day%20as%20an%20Edinburgh%20performer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8362f33d02540a7f9fa7515aec5b190a6a850b2d%2F0_133_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘Unexpectedly compelling’ … Reading the Chilcot report in a shed. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Closer is pure entertainment. My next appointment is something else. The man 
behindIraq Out & Loud 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on#q=%22Iraq%20Out%20%26%20Loud%3A%20Reading%20the%20Chilcot%20Report%20in%20Full%22>
, Bob Slayer, describes it as “a ridiculous thing about a very serious 
subject”. In a shed he has erected in the centre of town, people are encouraged 
to read the Chilcot report of the Iraq inquiry aloud. Everyone does 15 minutes 
each, and it goes on 24 hours a day until all 12 volumes are done. Hence the 
shed: it is hard to find a 24-hour venue in Edinburgh. The readings are being 
filmed. Slayer, who cooked up the idea with comedian Boothby Graffoe, thought 
it might not work – there was a point, about six hours in, when they feared 
they were running out of potential readers – but it seems to have captured 
people’s imaginations. Plenty of famous comedians have turned up to read. 
People keep coming back and asking to read again.

I can see why. While it is clearly not designed to read out loud – the endless 
footnotes are a bit of a slog to get through – there is something unexpectedly 
compelling about the Chilcot report. The section I read is about the sexing-up 
of the dodgy dossier: arguments between officials about whether it should be 
journalistic and sensational, or technical, perhaps in order to blind people 
with science. When I come out, I tell Slayer that I think I got quite a juicy 
bit. “The amount of people who are coming out of the shed saying that,” he 
nods. “I thought the actual reading might be a bit of a drudge, but it all 
seems to be interesting.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4883604a2c2036a0b1e9bf5c18ced972a39d7818%2F0_231_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dad%20jokes%2C%20Chilcot%20and%20pleasuring%20a%20cucumber%3A%20my%20day%20as%20an%20Edinburgh%20performer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dad%20jokes%2C%20Chilcot%20and%20pleasuring%20a%20cucumber%3A%20my%20day%20as%20an%20Edinburgh%20performer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fdad-jokes-chilcot-pleasuring-cucumber-my-day-edinburgh-festival-performer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4883604a2c2036a0b1e9bf5c18ced972a39d7818%2F0_231_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘I think I’ve learned things’ … Walking to the next show. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Finally, I head over to Adam and his cucumbers at the Wank Bank Masterclass 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on#q=wank>: my day has been nothing if not 
varied. I think I’ve learned things: about how hard a gig Edinburgh can be; 
about the psychological and physical toughness of performers; about how much I 
enjoy playing music with other people; about the Chilcot report. And I’ve also 
learned that I am unexpectedly good at pretending to masturbate a cucumber in a 
variety of elaborate ways: so good, in fact, that I am named best in class, or 
to be more accurate, Wanker of the Day. Never let it be said that audience 
participation can’t be a voyage of self-discovery.
 