
The Army Corps of Engineers will not grant the permit for the Dakota Access 
pipeline <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dakota-access-pipeline> to drill 
under the Missouri river, the army announced on Sunday, handing a major victory 
to the Standing Rock Sioux tribe after a months-long campaign against the 
pipeline.

Assistant secretary for civil works Jo-Ellen Darcy announced the decision on 
Sunday, with the army saying it was based on “a need to explore alternate 
routes” for the crossing.

Dakota Access pipeline: the who, what and why of the Standing Rock protests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/north-dakota-access-oil-pipeline-protests-explainer>
“Although we have had continuing discussion and exchanges of new information 
with the Standing Rock Sioux and Dakota Access, it’s clear that there’s more 
work to do,” Darcy said ina statement 
<https://www.army.mil/article/179095/army_will_not_grant_easement_for_dakota_access_pipeline_crossing>
. “The best way to complete that work responsibly and expeditiously is to 
explore alternate routes for the pipeline crossing.”

The army corps will undertake an environmental impact statement and look for 
alternative routes, the tribe said in its own announcement.


“The Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and all of Indian Country will be forever 
grateful to the Obama administration for this historic decision,” tribal 
chairman Dave Archambault said in a statement.

While the news is a victory, Jan Hasselman, an attorney for the tribe, 
cautioned that the decision could be appealed.

“They [Energy Transfer Partners] can sue, and Trump can try to overturn,” 
Hasselman said. “But overturning it would be subject to close scrutiny by a 
reviewing court, and we will be watching the new administration closely.”

Standing Rock: authorities will retreat from bridge if protesters agree to 
terms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/dakota-access-pipeline-standing-rock-bridge-protest-agreement>
“We hope that Kelcey Warren, Governor [Jack] Dalrymple, and the incoming Trump 
administration respect this decision and understand the complex process that 
led us to this point,” Archambault said.

The announcement came just one day before the corps’ deadline for thousands of 
Native American and environmental activists – who call themselves water 
protectors – to leave the sprawling encampment on the banks of the river. For 
months, they have protested over their fears that the pipeline would 
contaminate their water source and destroy sacred sites, and over the weekend 
hundreds of military veterans arrived at the camps in a show of support for the 
movement.

As word spread in the main camp, protesters broke out in jubilant 
celebrations, and with nightfall a few fireworks burst above the tents and 
campfires.

“I just cried when I heard the news,” said Sylvia Picotte, a member of the 
Cheyenne River Sioux tribe who travelled to Standing Rock every weekend since 
August. “We have been stepped on for so long, all I could do was hope.”

Many gathered around the central fire to sing and cheer, while others marched 
through camp carrying mirrored shields above their head.

“It’s the silver water serpent coming from the air to beat the black snake,” 
said Jake Damon, a member of the Navajo Nation from Albuquerque, New Mexico, 
referring to a prophecy of a black snake that many have interpreted to mean the 
pipeline.

“This wouldn’t have been possible if it wasn’t for the unity of the tribes.”

Alice Brown Otter, a 13-year-old from the Standing Rock Sioux tribe, said that 
she was one of the Native youth who ran from Cannon Ball to Washington DC to 
draw attention to the protests. “A lot of people didn’t believe in us that we 
were going to change the world, us 13-year-olds and 15-year-olds,” she said.

But others voiced caution, noting the incoming Republican president and hints 
that the energy company will appeal the decision. “It’s a trick. It’s a lie. 
Until that drill is shut down it’s not over yet,” said Frank Archambault, a 
member of the Standing Rock Sioux tribe who moved his entire family to the 
encampments in August. “Everybody needs to stay in place.

“We’ve been lied to and deceived this whole time,” he said. “Why should this 
time be any different?”

“We know DAPL can appeal,” said Danny Grassrope, a member of the Lower Bruce 
Sioux tribe, using an acronym for the pipeline project. “This battle is won but 
the war isn’t over.”

Grassrope added that the tribes would not give up either: “We’re not done yet. 
This is just the beginning of something extraordinary.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-permit-denied-standing-rock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6528d2b648c76bf2ec2190f2672ba21636a9ac4f%2F0_131_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dakota%20Access%20pipeline%3A%20US%20denies%20key%20permit%2C%20a%20win%20for%20Standing%20Rock%20protesters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-permit-denied-standing-rock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dakota%20Access%20pipeline%3A%20US%20denies%20key%20permit%2C%20a%20win%20for%20Standing%20Rock%20protesters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fdakota-access-pipeline-permit-denied-standing-rock%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6528d2b648c76bf2ec2190f2672ba21636a9ac4f%2F0_131_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Alice Brown Otter. Photograph: Julia Carrie Wong 
Energy Transfer Partners, the company behind the 1,720-mile pipeline, has 
nearly completed the project. But the decision to move the pipeline’s path 
south from Bismarck,North Dakota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/north-dakota>, through a route less than a 
mile north of the Standing Rock Sioux reservation provoked protests and the 
army corps review that have so far thwarted it.

In April, members of the tribe established the first “spiritual camp” on the 
banks of the Missouri river. Members of hundreds of other indigenous tribes 
answered their call to join in the struggle, resulting in the largest gathering 
of Native American tribes in more than a century.

The victory at Standing Rock could mark a turning point | Bill McKibben
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/04/standing-rock-victory-turning-point>
The tribe’s decision to fight back against the powerful oil industry captured 
the attention of environmental activists and celebrities, as well. Thousands 
have travelled to the encampments, and over the weekend a contingent of 
veterans began arriving to serve as a “human shield” for the protesters, who 
have been subjected to rubber bullets, water cannons and teargas from local law 
enforcement.

On Sunday, Congresswoman Tulsi Gabbard joined the veterans at Standing Rock, 
where they planned to hold a prayer ceremony at the main encampment. “Unless we 
protect our water, there is no economy,” she said, arguing against what she 
called a “false narrative” that a rerouted pipeline is bad for the economy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnative-american-north-dakota-oil-pipeline-protesters-we-refuse-to-be-trumped-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Native%20American%20North%20Dakota%20oil%20pipeline%20protesters%3A%20'We%20refuse%20to%20be%20Trumped'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnative-american-north-dakota-oil-pipeline-protesters-we-refuse-to-be-trumped-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Native%20American%20North%20Dakota%20oil%20pipeline%20protesters%3A%20%27We%20refuse%20to%20be%20Trumped%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnative-american-north-dakota-oil-pipeline-protesters-we-refuse-to-be-trumped-video&media=>
Native American North Dakota oil pipeline protesters: ‘We refuse to be Trumped’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/14/native-american-north-dakota-oil-pipeline-protesters-we-refuse-to-be-trumped-video>
The US secretary of the interior, Sally Jewell, praised the army’s decision, 
saying it “underscores that tribal rights reserved in treaties and federal law, 
as well as nation-to-nation consultation with tribal leaders, are essential 
components” of discussions in infrastructure projects.


In a statement, Dalrymple said that the army’s decision did not resolve the 
pipeline question, and that it would prolong challenges for law enforcement 
officers in a standoff with protests. Craig Stevens, a spokesman for the Main 
Coalition, said the group of energy industry interests remains “hopeful that 
this is not the final word on the Dakota Access Pipeline”.

US attorney general Loretta Lynch said the Department of Justice would 
continue to monitor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/dakota-access-pipeline-justice-department-mediators-standing-rock>
and mediate between protests and police, who had fired rubber bullets and 
pepper spray in past clashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/dakota-access-pipeline-protest-arrests-standing-rock>
.



 