
Damon Hill has opened up on his battle with depression – but believes it is 
possible for a sportsperson to recover from the illness and achieve further 
success.

The 1996 Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> world 
champion saw a therapist as he battled with mental illness during and after his 
racing career. “I didn’t know why I should be feeling that when I apparently 
should be one of the happiest men alive,” he told BBC Radio 5 Live. “I’ve got 
four lovely children, I’ve got a beautiful wife and all the things that you’re 
supposed to be very grateful for.

Damon Hill explores his depression amid reflection on family tragedy | Richard 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/02/damon-hill-depression-graham-autobiography-formula-one>
“It is possible for people to have a blip and get a handle on it. I had a 
period in my career where I was very depressed about the way things were going. 
Sometimes you only need a few tips to put what you’re doing into some context – 
it’s very easy to feel responsible for so much as a sportsperson, for your team 
and your fans.”

The subject of mental health has been back on the sporting agenda in recent 
days after the world heavyweight boxing championTyson Fury admitted taking 
cocaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/04/tyson-fury-cocaine-live-anymore-boxing>
 as he attempts to cope with depression. On Thursday,Fury’s licence was 
suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/tyson-fury-licence-suspended-british-boxing>
 by the British Boxing Board of Control.

Hill acknowledged that boxing puts unusual pressures on a competitor and said: 
“It is absolutely ferocious. The spotlight really is on people in boxing in 
particular. A whole lot of pressure is upon that individual.

“You might say you don’t have to do it, you can choose not to do it, but 
sometimes it’s very difficult to turn around and say: ‘I don’t want to do 
this.’ So much is invested and contracts are signed. We have had any number of 
great sportspeople who have been coached from an early age – have they had a 
childhood, have they had a chance to decide whether this is something they 
really want to do for themselves? We have to be much more mindful of the 
pressures we put on people.

From Bruce Springsteen to Tyson Fury, men are opening up about depression
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/08/men-depression-opening-up-kid-cudi-springsteen-fury>
“There’s a lot of pressure on people to do it, a lot of media attention, that 
intense scrutiny is a contributing factor, I think, to people feeling uncertain 
about themselves and cracking in that kind of spotlight.”

The former Premier League striker Vincent Pericard has also revealed he 
suffered with depression while struggling to establish himself at Stoke City.

Pericard retired at the age of 29 and, in the five years since, he has 
campaigned to raise awareness of mental health issues.

Reflecting on his issues with depression, he told the Sun on Sunday: “For me, 
it was a low place to be. Some people have suicidal tendencies. It did cross my 
mind but I would never act on it. I was fortunate. But I couldn’t carry on.

“I was really struggling to settle in the area. I was transferred to a new 
team and a new set of fans and getting criticism because I wasn’t playing well. 
After training I would lock the door, close the windows and in the dark room 
think I was worthless and not going to make it.

“It got so bad I went to the manager [Tony Pulis] and said I needed a break 
and I couldn’t cope. I was in a vicious circle.”
 