
Fifty years ago, environmentalists and dam builders in the United States were 
locked in a bitter battle. Dam building had swept the nation in the 1940s and 
1950s, blocking and impounding some of the most important rivers of the 
American west. On the Snake river (where controversies about dams continue to 
this day), dam construction had led to amassive fish kill and decimated salmon 
and steelhead runs 
<http://earthjustice.org/features/what-you-need-to-know-about-dams-salmon>.

Frank Church, a senator from the state of Idaho, originally supported the 
dams. But having seen the environmental damage they created, hespoke out for 
rivers <http://www.foresthistory.org/Fellowships/Ewert.pdf>. He saw “a 
groundswell of public concern for the fate of these majestic streams, many of 
them threatened by dams which would forever destroy their beauty and ecology”. 
Church authored theWild and Scenic Rivers Act 
<https://www.rivers.gov/wsr-act.php>, which was passed in 1968. The Act now 
protects more than 12,000 miles of free-flowing rivers in the US.

For the past 60 years, large dams have had devastating impacts on people and 
the environment. They alter a river’s ecosystem from one that’s cold, flowing 
and connected, to one that’s warm, stagnant and fragmented – with devastating 
consequences for wildlife. Dams are one of the main reasons freshwater fish 
numbers are plummeting – the world haslost 80% of freshwater populations since 
1970 
<http://assets.worldwildlife.org/publications/964/files/original/lpr_living_planet_report_2016.pdf?1477582118&_ga=1.207007505.380885212.1483697842>
. In 2000, the World Commission on Dams found that dams were responsible for 
displacing between 40-80 million people. 
<http://www.unep.org/dams/WCD/report/WCD_DAMS%20report.pdf> 

Dams are one of the main reasons freshwater fish numbers are plummeting

The US is now leading the movement to decommission dams. Dam removal on the 
Elwha river in Washington state has been an enormous success. One year after 
the last dam was removed in 2014, more than4,000 Chinook spawners were counted 
<http://projects.seattletimes.com/2016/elwha/> above the former dam site – the 
first time Chinook had been seen there in more than 100 years. In New York 
State, the Mohawks recently became thefirst US tribe to remove a federal dam 
<http://www.newyorkupstate.com/northern-ny/2016/12/mohawks_become_first_tribe_to_take_down_a_federal_dam.html>
 when it took down the Hogansburg dam on the St Regis river, opening up 275 
miles of stream habitat to migratory fish.

Even though the US leads the world in dam decommissioning, it continues to 
export a flawed development model of dam construction, and the dam-building 
boom has continued around the world. Not surprisingly, this has led to a 
groundswell of public concern about protecting free-flowing rivers.

As part of a combined effort with local communities and other NGOs, we have 
won enormous victories in recent months, forcing governments to cancel or 
suspend many destructive projects.
 A bird flies past water spilling through the Glines Canyon dam on the Elwha 
river in 2011. After the last dam was removed from the river in 2014, fish 
populations flourished. Photograph: Ted S. Warren/AP 
In April, Brazil’s environmental agency, Ibama, suspended the licensing process
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/22/brazil-amazon-dam-project-suspended-indigenous-munduruku-sao-luiz-do-tapajos>
 for the São Luiz do Tapajós dam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/22/brazil-amazon-dam-project-suspended-indigenous-munduruku-sao-luiz-do-tapajos>
, which was expected to be the second largest hydroelectric dam in the country, 
after the controversial Belo Monte power plant. In July, the World Bank
suspended financial support for the Inga 3 dam 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/07/25/world-bank-group-suspends-financing-to-the-inga-3-basse-chute-technical-assistance-project>
 on the Congo river and in the following month Endesa Chile, the country’s 
largest power generator,dropped six hydroelectric projects 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-enersis-chile-hydro-idUSKCN1152UR>. The 
Chinese government has alsohalted plans to construct a series of dams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/joy-as-china-shelves-plans-to-dam-angry-river>
 on one of China’s last free-flowing rivers, the Nujiang. In October, the 
Peruvian government announced that several dams proposed for the Marañón river, 
a major tributary of the Amazon, areoff the table 
<http://proactivo.com.pe/grandes-hidroelectricas-en-las-selva-no-estan-en-agenda-del-gobierno/>
 during the current administration.

Related: Polluting the world's water – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2015/nov/13/polluting-the-worlds-water-in-pictures>

But after such dam projects are suspended or cancelled the rivers are, in 
general, not permanently protected. This leaves them at risk if a government 
decides to move forward with a dam in the future – giving credence to the 
famous quote that with the environment, victories are temporary but defeats are 
permanent.Water <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> protectors must 
always remain vigilant, monitoring new attempts to bring back destructive dams, 
but we now have a window of opportunity to gain protection for critical 
watersheds. It’s time to turn these victories into permanent protection for 
free-flowing rivers.

 In July, the World Bank suspended financial support for the Inga 3 dam 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/07/25/world-bank-group-suspends-financing-to-the-inga-3-basse-chute-technical-assistance-project>
 on the Congo river. Photograph: Per-Anders Pettersson/Getty Images 
We’re starting in Chile where Geute Conservation Sur <http://geute.cl/>, which 
defends ecosystems with high conservation value, is providing legal analysis to 
develop a new law for river protection in the country. AndRíos Libres 
<http://rioslibres.com/> (Free Rivers), a new coalition of young activists, is 
building public support for permanent legal river protection.

In Colombia, we’re working with Ríos Vivos 
<https://defensaterritorios.wordpress.com/> to build support for protection and 
with lawyers to develop new approaches to long-term protection of free-flowing 
rivers, such as the upper Magdalena river. Furthermore, in Peru we’re reviewing 
opportunities to ensure permanent protection of the Marañón to secure the 
health of the Amazon’s headwaters.

And we cannot stop there. Transboundary rivers – such as the Nujiang/Salween 
river which runs through China and Myanmar, and the Gongri/Manas river in 
Bhutan and India – offer critical opportunities for river protection. Saving 
these rivers requires transboundary cooperation and when this is done right, 
countries can avoid the strife we’ve seen in places such as China and Thailand 
where conflicts have arisen over development on the Lancang/Mekong river.

Related: Rajendra Singh: Clean flowing rivers must be a human right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/25/waterman-of-india-rajendra-singh-stockholm-water-prize>

In New Zealand, the government has recognised the Whanganui river by giving it 
the same constitutional rights as a person. This is a striking recognition that 
free-flowing rivers provide enormous benefits, from food security to water 
access, to biodiversity conservation.

It took decades of dam building – and the associated devastation of rivers – 
before people and their lawmakers in the US started protecting wild and 
free-flowing rivers. With the impacts of climate change starting to threaten 
livelihoods, it’s time to protect our free-flowing rivers the world over.

Kate Horner is executive director of International Rivers 
<http://www.internationalrivers.org/>.

A version of this article first appeared on internationalrivers.org 
<https://www.internationalrivers.org/> and has been republished with permission.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 