
Dance is having a moment that’s not about knuckle-headed judging on Strictly, 
star ballerinas or a cool new choreographer, but about the fascinatingly 
therapeutic uses to which the art form is increasingly being put. Dancers are 
being used in the training of doctors, helping themdevelop skills of empathy 
and communication 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/02/dance-shows-curers-how-to-heal>, 
but dance is also being utilised to engage more directly with the patients 
themselves.

A new film, Capturing Grace 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/2049872142/capturing-grace-when-parkinsons-and-dance-intersec>
, spotlights the work being done at theMark Morris Dance Center 
<http://markmorrisdancegroup.org> (MMDG) in Brooklyn. Dance for Parkinson’s 
Disease <http://danceforparkinsons.org/about-the-program> is a project that 
started in 2001 when Olie Westheimer, director of the Brooklyn Parkinson Group 
(BPG), approached Morris about the possibility of the centre leading a 
programme of serious, rigorous, dance classes for members of her group.

Westheimer knew how valuable the dancers’ expertise in balance, rhythm, 
control and sequencing might be to those with Parkinson’s disease. Learning to 
dance might allow them to push against the physical and creative limitations 
imposed by the disease. Two members of the Mark MorrisDance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance> Group, with a composer and pianist, 
began giving free monthly classes for the BPG. The sessions have since 
developed into an extensive programme.

The motor problems that affect people with Parkinson’s disease principally 
affect voluntary rather than instinctive movements. No one quite knows the 
science of it, but it seems that something about dancing to music – about 
imitating a teacher, about developing a muscle memory of dance sequences – 
seems to temporarily alleviate that problem.

It is not a cure, but while it’s happening it can feel like a liberation. 
Certainly, as Dave Iverson’s film traces Parkinson’s Dance participants, 
following them as they train towards a public performance, it shows them 
gaining confidence and a moving sense of physical freedom.

The success of this programme in transforming lives and expectations has been 
publicised by the MMDG wherever they appear, and there is now a network of 
affiliate programmes across the US and in nine countries around the world. In 
Britain it’s been picked up byEnglish National Ballet 
<http://www.ballet.org.uk/learning/dance-parkinsons/>, who’ve been running 
classes <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-16573752> at their 
Kensington base since 2012 as well as operating the scheme at centres in 
Oxford, Liverpool and elsewhere.

Dancers know about the power of their discipline to combine mind, body and 
emotion – to create a concentrated, of-the-moment experience – and that’s why 
dance has also become so useful in the treatment of patients withAlzheimer’s 
<http://www.alz.org> and other forms of dementia. Initiatives like the Centre 
of Excellence in Movement Dance and Dementia 
<http://www.southwestyorkshire.nhs.uk/quality-innovation/initiatives-projects/movement-dance-and-dementia/>
 orCircle Dance in Dementia <http://www.circledanceindementia.com> or the 
American Dance Therapy Association <http://www.adta.org/> work on the principle 
that, as individuals lose command of the world they have always known, dance 
sessions can build a temporary alternative of sound, movement and rhythm. Dance 
can also introduce a regular experience of physical intimacy and touch, often 
the things of which patients feel most bereft.

In societies far older than ours, dance was integrated into the daily fabric 
of people’s lives: in religious dances, war dances, fertility dances, 
child-birthing dancers, even dances that incorporated the rituals of trading. 
It is curious that, as we become increasingly hi-tech and ever more in thrall 
to Big Pharma in our handling of illness, we’re also learning to access and 
exploit the traditional ways.
 