
Red Bull’s Daniel Ricciardo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/daniel-ricciardo> has conclusively ruled out 
any move to replace Kimi Raikkonen at Ferrari in the near future after recent 
speculation that he could be switching to join his former team-mate Sebastian 
Vettel at the Scuderia. Ricciardo has confirmed he is signed to Red Bull until 
the end of the 2018 season and that he will be racing for the team next year, 
confident that under the new regulations in 2017 they will be able to challenge 
at the front.

F1 team bonus payments could be more equal, says Bernie Ecclestone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/27/f1-team-bonus-payments-bernie-ecclestone>
He had said earlier in the week: “I understand if they were to make a change 
I’m a driver on their list,” adding: “I’m aware they’d be interested, I don’t 
blame them.” Speaking before the Austrian Grand Prix, however, he was 
unequivocal about his intent. “I can confidently say that now I will [still be 
here in 2017],” he said.

“When I was asked in Canada I said the only reason I would look elsewhere 
would be to fight for a world title. It’s not appealing to jump ship for 
something that isn’t better, so, yeah, the red stuff’s hit the headlines, which 
I didn’t expect.

“I am with Red Bull for a couple of years beyond this one but even if I wasn’t 
I would only be interested if … Mercedes would be the only one who could say 
we’re definitely fighting for a world title. Obviously, atRed Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> we’re getting closer and that’s 
our aim next year but it’s the same with Ferrari or anyone else, there’s no 
guarantees.”

Raikkonen has yet to have his contract renewed for next year and the team are 
understood to be considering whether to extend it for a fourth consecutive 
season. Ricciardo had made it clear he was awareFerrari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> were interested but had denied any 
direct negotiations.

A move would have brought him back alongside Vettel, with whom he drove at Red 
Bull in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/02/red-bull-daniel-ricciardo-f1>, 
when Ricciardo secured three wins and outperformed hisfour-times world champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/27/sebastian-vettel-wins-f1-title-indian-gp>
 team-mate. Ricciardo is comfortably one of the brightest talents among the 
younger drivers on the grid and can be expected to have been a target for 
Ferrari. How the dynamic may have worked with Vettel, who has established 
himself as the number one in the team in pace over Raikkonen is questionable as 
he may not have enjoyed such an advantage over Ricciardo.

The Australian believed he would have relished rejoining the battle, however. 
“It’s like in a fighter’s record,” he said. “If they lose to someone, I think 
they always want to get that chance again, if they believe they can clear the 
record. I know Seb, I know he’s confident about himself, very driven, so if he 
could get a chance to clear his record I think he would accept it.”

Despite lacking pace to the field-leading Mercedes this year, he was confident 
the team would move forward under the next year’s new rules, toward challenging 
for the title. “Looking at what we’ve got, it looks like we should be another 
step closer,” he said. “Seeing what I see, if we’re able to win races this year 
then I see next year only being in one direction, whether it’s a fight for a 
title I think we should be very close.”

The Red Bull team principal, Christian Horner, also conformed that the Toro 
Rosso driver Carlos Sainz had his contract extended at the sister squad until 
2017, which has further reduced the potential options for Ferrari to fill 
Raikkonen’s seat next year. Of the current grid only Williams’s Valtteri Bottas 
and possibly Force India’s Sergio Pérez may be considered as the No2 drivers at 
the Scuderia.
 