
There is no mistaking how serious Daniel Ricciardo is when he says “it would 
suck” if he was forced out of Formula One, should Red Bull’s difficulties in 
finding an engine suppliercause the team to withdraw from the sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/18/red-bull-christian-horner-engine>
. Yet the Australian still displays his familiar beam when he speaks.

The grin reveals what is at the heart of this most likable of drivers – that 
regardless of the situation nothing is going to detract from the fundamental 
enjoyment he derives from being part of the sport. Pleasingly too, he never 
tries to hide it.

Despite Bernie Ecclestone’s insistence at the last round in Russia that Red 
Bull’s bid to find a competitive engine supplier had been sorted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/09/bernie-ecclestone-full-2016-f1-grid-red-bull-engine-russian-grand-prix>
, as F1 heads to Texas this weekend no further news nor confirmation of a deal 
has been forthcoming. Red Bull’s owner, Dietrich Mateschitz, has said he would 
make a decision about withdrawing from the sport by the end of this month.

Drivers should be more like Lewis Hamilton to sell F1, says US race promoter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/21/lewis-hamilton-f1-us-grand-prix-bobby-epstein>
Ricciardo, then, must cope with this uncertainty on top of what has been a 
difficult season, in which his car has struggled for pace and yielded only two 
podium places. But despite all this he has borne the trials admirably and, of 
course, with a smile.

“Ninety-nine per cent is just me being myself,” he says, before adding that 
equally, he knows what a privileged position he holds. “On a bad day, I’ll 
still have a conscious thing in my mind reminding me that what I think of as a 
bad day is still a very good day in probably 90% of the world’s population’s 
eyes.

“I’m still racing in Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>
. I’m still living my dream. The way I see it is if I can’t be happy doing this 
job, which is my dream job, then what’s going to make me happy in life? I will 
always find a way to find a positive from things.”

Which he had to do from the off after stepping up to the big hitters with Red 
Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull>. Having made his F1 debut for 
HRT at Silverstone in 2011, he spent two years with Toro Rosso before replacing 
his countryman Mark Webber at the team in 2014.

His promotion had surprised some but Ricciardo’s debut for Red Bull, a second 
place in Australia, silenced the doubters. It was some baptism for him, too, 
when his first podium finish waslost to disqualification after the race due to 
a fuel flow infringement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/16/daniel-ricciardo-stewards-decision-second-place-f1>
. As cruel a blow as any driver might encounter.

“I still look back on that weekend with a smile,” he says – with a smile. “In 
my eyes I did everything I could. To not crumble under the pressure of the home 
crowd and the first race with the big team. Just to perform well under such 
pressure was a big pat on the back for myself. And that was a big confidence 
booster for me knowing that I could live up to that level.”

It seems inconceivable that even he could have taken it so well at the time … 
“It hurt,” he admits. “But I got the taste of everything that day, it just made 
me want it even more. It lit the fire inside me and I just wanted to get back 
on the podium as soon as possible. That was my next target to make up for the 
disappointment and get that trophy back.”

Which he did with a stunning season. Three wins would follow in 2014 but what 
really caught the eye was how he put his team-mate, the then world champion, 
Sebastian Vettel, in the shade. The car, to be fair, did not suit Vettel but 
Ricciardo’s step up from the midfield was hugely successful and he was 
revelatory. His style was smoother than Vettel’s and he is bold on the brakes. 
In China he wassimply quicker  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/20/lewis-hamilton-chinese-grand-prix>
 and the senior partner was told to move over.

It is not just pace. His debut F1 win in Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/08/daniel-ricciardo-nico-rosberg-grand-prix-canada>
 involved a great move on Sergio Pérez through turn one, while, with thevictory 
in Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/27/hungarian-grand-prix-result>, 
where he chased down Lewis Hamilton to pass him exquisitely round the outside 
of turn two before passing Fernando Alonso for the lead with only two laps to 
go, it was clear that behind the grin here was a ruthless pedaller, fully 
committed. He was similarly uncompromising at the same race this year.

This, too, has been a conscious decision. “Pretty much all the drivers I get 
on with, at least to say ‘hi’ and have a conversation,” he says. “But when the 
helmet’s on, you don’t care who it is. You have no sympathy, someone blows an 
engine in front of you, if it means you gain a position, then you’re smiling.

“It came out last year, my aggressiveness on the track, the overtaking. It’s 
something I always knew I had in me but for whatever reason I couldn’t really 
get it out and last year was the turning point. It was time to really make a 
statement and it felt good doing it and I am happy being that racer.”

Clearly he is not afraid to show it. Something he believes other drivers on 
the grid could do more of themselves. “Whatever job you do, you have bad days 
but you know it could be a lot worse. I do see some guys who are probably a 
little bit, at times, ungrateful. I don’t want to be like that because it is a 
good life, I get paid to sit in race cars. I don’t want to be the one with the 
long face.”
 