
Borussia Dortmund’s Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang struck twice against Darmstadt 
98 on Sunday to become the only player inBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> history to score in 
the first seven matches of the season but a late Aytac Sulu goal spoiled his 
afternoon as the visitors rescued a 2-2 draw.

The Gabon international Aubameyang drilled in from close range in the 63rd 
minute to cancel out an early Marcel Heller goal for the visitors and quickly 
added another goal eight minutes later to take his season’s tally to nine. But 
a 90th-minute equaliser from Sulu after Dortmund failed to clear the ball in 
the box stunned the 80,000 crowd in the Signal Iduna Park with Dortmund having 
now failed to win their last two matches after kicking off the season with five 
victories on the trot.

The Ruhr valley club have 17 points, four points behind leaders Bayern Munich, 
who won on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/26/mainz-bayern-munich-bundesliga-match-report>
, and one ahead of third-placed Schalke 04. Bayern and Dortmund will meet in a 
mouthwatering derby next week where Aubameyang will be up againstBayern’s 
in-form striker Robert Lewandowski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/sep/23/video-bayern-munich-lewandowski-five-goals-nine-minutes-wolfsburg>
, who has netted seven goals in his last two matches and 10 in the league so 
far. Promoted Darmstadt rose to ninth on 10 points.

The Eintracht Frankfurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eintrachtfrankfurt> forward Alexander 
Meier scored his fourth goal of the season but it was not enough to beat Hertha 
Berlin, who snatched a late 1-1 draw. The result lifted Eintracht to 10th spot 
on nine points, two behind Hertha who dropped to sixth.

The 32-year-old Meier, last season’s Bundesliga top scorer, came back from 
injury two weeks ago, scoring a hat-trick in the win over Cologne after having 
knee surgery in April. His 22nd-minute close-range effort put the home team 
ahead with their first goal in three matches.

They came close to scoring another when Marc Stendera rattled the bar with a 
25-yard missile after Hertha had also hit the woodwork early in the game. 
Eintracht kept up the pressure in the second half and substitute Luc Castaignos 
should have done much better but fired wildly over the bar from close range 
after chasing down a deep cross.

They were punished for failing to convert their chances when Vladimir Darida 
benefited from a deflection near the box in the 82nd minute to charge through 
and slot past keeper Lukas Hradecky with Hertha’s first chance of the second 
half.
 