
Daniel Craig  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/danielcraig>will join David 
Oyelowo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/01/david-oyelowo-selma-martin-luther-king-benedict-cumberbatch-interview>
 on the small stage next fall as one of theatre’s great villains.


Craig, whose fourth James Bond film Spectre  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/spectre>opens worldwide next month, will star 
in an off-Broadway production of Othello as the scheming, handkerchief-planting 
Iago. Oyelowo, known for playing Martin Luther King Jr inSelma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/selma>, will play the title character in the 
New York Theater Workshop’s first Shakespeare production since 1990.


The New York Theatre Workshop <http://www.nytw.org/>, a small but prominent 
nonprofit, will stage the play in a 199-seat theatre during its limited run in 
fall 2016. Additional casting and further details will be announced at a later 
date.


Director Sam Gold 
<http://www.playbill.com/celebritybuzz/article/playbill-brief-encounter-with-sam-gold-director-of-seminar-and-look-back-in-187843>
, whowon the Tony award for best director this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/08/tony-2015-honours-go-to-fun-home-and-the-curious-incident-of-the-dog-in-the-night-time>
 for his work on the musicalFun Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/20/fun-home-review-childhood-trauma-revisited-with-songs-alison-bechdel>
, assembled the cast and offered it to the Workshop, where he made his 
directorial debut in 2007.


“This production is an opportunity for New York Theatre Workshop to do what it 
aspires to do – to foster the growth and accomplishment of the artists we 
believe in,” the company’s artistic director James C Nicola said in a 
statement. “When Sam Gold, a longstanding member of our NYTW Usual Suspects 
community, came to us with the beginning sketches of this production, with 
these two sublime actors, it seemed the perfect next step for us to take 
together. I’m eager to see what these original, creative artists come up with 
in response to Shakespeare’s enduring tragedy.”


Gold said that he had long wanted to direct a Shakespeare play, and picked 
Othello because of itsfocused and clear plot 
<http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/10/19/daniel-craig-and-david-oyelowo-to-star-together-in-off-broadway-othello/?smid=pl-share&_r=1>
.


“‘Othello, for me, is the Shakespeare that when I watch, I feel the most 
involved – I care the most about the people, and have the simplest connection 
on a gut level, so I wanted to start there. But I’ll do more of them,”the 
director told the New York Times 
<http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/10/19/daniel-craig-and-david-oyelowo-to-star-together-in-off-broadway-othello/?_r=0>
.


Although Craig and Oyelowo are now well-known for their film work, both 
performers are trained stage actors. Craig’sinterest in Othello 
<http://nypost.com/2015/09/17/daniel-craig-wants-to-play-someone-more-badass-than-bond/>
 was noted by the New York Post in September. Oyelowo’s previous roles include 
Henry VI for the Royal Shakespeare Company – he was the first black actor to 
play an English king in a major Shakespeare production.


Craig and Oyelowo also have the role of one of fiction’s greatest spies in 
common: Oyelowowill play James Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/13/david-oyelowo-first-black-actor-james-bond-trigger-mortis-audiobook>
 and other characters in the audiobook version of Trigger Mortis, written by 
Anthony Horowitz and commissioned by the Ian Fleming estate.

 