
There’s a famous bit in Blade Runner when the android, Roy, dies and says: 
“I’ve seen things you people wouldn’t believe.” I like to think that’s 
something I could say about my Silk Road journey. I was on parts of the Earth 
that felt like the moon.

The Silk Road was the first international trade route. Travellers exchanged 
ideas on scientific invention, religion, culture, music – everything, really. 
Globalisation has been the wellspring of most ideas.

There’s an old Georgian saying that wine should be good enough to make a 
pheasant cry.Wine is meant to have begun there. In Sighnaghi there’s a vineyard 
calledPheasant’s Tears <http://www.pheasantstears.com/index.php?id=19>, where 
we had a traditional feast of about 27 courses, with a speech between each one, 
and drank an incredible amount.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdavid-baddiel-on-the-silk-road%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7090288c701cf07abe7ef3813ce4404a6b34ced0%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Baddiel%20on%20the%20Silk%20Road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdavid-baddiel-on-the-silk-road%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Baddiel%20on%20the%20Silk%20Road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdavid-baddiel-on-the-silk-road%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7090288c701cf07abe7ef3813ce4404a6b34ced0%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A train container covered with a tarpaulin depicting the Silk Road. 
Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
We had to track down these enormous, human-sized dogs. Silk Road traders bred 
them for catching bears. They still exist in Georgia, but they’re really hard 
to find. We drove out into the mountains and eventually we found a farm that 
had one. It was terrifying.


I had to run away from dogs in China, too. We were trying to find the old 
Great Wall – what we think of as the Great Wall was rebuilt by Mao. The old one 
is very hard to find because it has fallen into disuse and was made of mud. We 
thought we’d found a bit of it but it was surrounded by wild dogs. There’s 
footage of me running away.

In Xi’an, I was grabbed by a middle-aged woman and pulled into her noodle shop.
 I thought I was being arrested, but she’d just thought, OK, he’s on TV 
somewhere so I’ll advertise my noodles. I had one of the best meals I’ve ever 
had. There are thousands of these places in Xi’an market.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdavid-baddiel-on-the-silk-road%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36c9a4bbd2ebb4977d0f1e70e0719a698dcb76bd%2F0_358_4870_2922%2F4870.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Baddiel%20on%20the%20Silk%20Road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdavid-baddiel-on-the-silk-road%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Baddiel%20on%20the%20Silk%20Road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdavid-baddiel-on-the-silk-road%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36c9a4bbd2ebb4977d0f1e70e0719a698dcb76bd%2F0_358_4870_2922%2F4870.jpg>
 Food stall in the Muslim quarter of Xi’an, China. Photograph: Alamy 
Kyrgyzstan is the only democracy in central Asia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/asia>. Everywhere else around there is 
still very Soviet. Bishkek, the capital city, is still very poor but it’s 
becoming a hip, exciting city. There are lots of really fabulous cafes.

In Uzbekistan, the whole crew apart from me fell really ill. Me and the fixer 
just kept filming. We dined with the one Jewish family left in Uzbekistan and 
they insisted on me drinking vodka. It was 50C, I was filming with a guy who 
had never done it before – and I was completely drunk. Then I had to go and 
wrestle in the main square of Bukhara...

Turns out I really like camel’s milk – who knew? The food in central Asia is 
not so great: it tends to be horse. Rabbit stew at an eagle hunter’s house in 
Kyrgyzstan was really nice, though. At first I felt bad because this thing was 
hopping around the desert one minute, then killed by an eagle. The hunter 
skinned it in front of me ... But then his wife cooked it and it was delicious.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdavid-baddiel-on-the-silk-road%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff36e536090af241135dade3442e4f7dcc7e78f9b%2F0_180_4368_2622%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Baddiel%20on%20the%20Silk%20Road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdavid-baddiel-on-the-silk-road%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Baddiel%20on%20the%20Silk%20Road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fdavid-baddiel-on-the-silk-road%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff36e536090af241135dade3442e4f7dcc7e78f9b%2F0_180_4368_2622%2F4368.jpg>
 Baddiel with a local boy in a nomad village in Kyrgyzstan. Photograph: 
Mielnikiewicz Justyna 
In Turkey, I had to harvest pigeon poo to try and make gunpowder. The eventual 
collapse of the Silk Road happened because the Ottoman took gunpowder from the 
Chinese and found this way of making it. It led, indirectly, to the fall of 
Constantinople.

There’s a shade of blue invented by the Chinese that you can see in Buddhist 
caves in western China. As you move west along the Silk Road, you see how it 
appeared on church walls. It’s amazing how you can trace the process. We were 
trying to find places where things that are very widespread in the world began.

I don’t think comedians are better travellers but they are communicators and 
storytellers. I think it was Victoria Wood who said: “I’m over 50 and that 
means I’m not legally allowed to do a comedy show any more. I have to do a 
travel show.” There is some truth in that, but I don’t care: I really enjoy it.

• David Baddiel on the Silk Road 
<http://www.discoveryuk.com/shows/david-baddiel-on-the-silk-road/> is on the 
Discovery Channel, Sundays at 9pm
 