
David Moyes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-moyes> has no 
intention of selling Lamine Koné if he can possibly help it and believes it 
would be impossible to sign as good a central defensive replacement for the 
£21m Everton are prepared to pay.

“Koné will stay,” said Sunderland’s manager before suggesting that, although 
he had vetoed Everton’s bid, it had not been turned down outright by his board.

“The offer’s been rejected by me, yes. I’ve had that offer for a while now and 
I could have invested the money two weeks ago but doing that is very difficult. 
Given the prices, it would be very difficult to replace Lamine. Unless we could 
get a suitable replacement, I would never do the deal.”

Sunderland’s high press leaves shaky defence exposed against Middlesbrough | 
Michael Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/21/sunderland-middlesbrough-aitor-karanka-david-moyes>
Koné was ordered by Moyes to stay away from the club after the Ivory Coast 
international ruled himself out of thehome defeat against Middlesbrough  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/21/sunderland-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
on Sunday with a self-diagnosed back complaint but he is due to return to the 
training ground on Wednesday for assessment by the club’s medical staff.

That department has been busy of late with a list of injuries to key players 
extended by the suspected broken elbow sustained by Vito Mannone, Moyes’s 
first‑choice goalkeeper, in training. Mannone was taken to hospital on Tuesday 
for X-rays.

Moyes, who on Wednesday will hope for his first win since succeeding Sam 
Allardyce, in the EFL Cup at home againstShrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> Town, said he had been 
realistic rather than defeatist to suggest Sunderland are virtually condemned 
to yet another relegation fight in the wake of the Middlesbrough defeat. The 
club’s debt currently forces them to shop in the bargain basement department.

“The club has just avoided relegation in each of the last four years or so,” 
the former Shrewsbury defender said. “I don’t want that to happen again, I want 
to get us up the league. But it can’t happen overnight. I can’t change it 
overnight.”

More immediately he hopes to avoid a slip‑up against Shrewsbury, a team he 
will treat warily after sufferingFA Cup defeat by the Shropshire side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/jan/06/match.sport9> as Everton 
manager in 2003. “It was probably one of the worst days I had as Everton 
manager and I had a few,” said a man working with a strictly limited budget 
under which, so far, he has added mainly squad players to an under-strength 
group that has lostYounès Kaboul to Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/18/younes-kaboul-watford-sunderland-transfer>
.

“I’ve got full faith in the owner [Ellis Short],” said Moyes, who is hoping to 
conclude deals with Rubin Kazan for the midfielder Yann M’Vila and Barnsley for 
the defender Alfie Mawson and desperately needs a new striker to complement 
Jermain Defoe. “But there’s no doubt that our budget is not at the level of 
many other clubs you see buying players at the moment.

“I’m confident we’ll get a few in before 1 September but the quality of the 
players thatSunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> can 
get at the moment is probably not what I’ve had in the Premier League. Not even 
close. You look at our competitors and what they’re spending and we’re having 
to deal differently.”

He illustrated his point by explaining Sunderland could not compete with 
Watford for Everton’s James McCarthy. “I don’t know if we’d have that kind of 
cash to spend on just one player,” he said. “I hope it won’t be the case in a 
couple of years’ time.”
 