
Ballet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> keeps one slippered foot in 
reality, the other in fantasy. An apparently stable world will spin off into a 
supernatural realm of spirits, fairies and enchanted swans. Few costume 
designers could encompass both registers as readily as David Walker, who has 
died aged 74, after suffering a stroke. His intricately coloured designs were 
grounded in an affectionate and encyclopedic sense of period, his sense of 
magic was delicately picturesque.

Born in Kolkata, he grew up in London and studied at the Central School of 
Arts and Crafts under Jeanetta Cochrane. After working as a cutter in the 
Glyndebourne wardrobe, he initially took jobs that involved the grittier end of 
theatrical innovation - first of all with the pioneering director Joan 
Littlewood, at the Liverpool Theatre Workshop and at the Theatre Royal in east 
London, and then at the Royal Court for Tony Richardson's 1961 production of 
The Changeling. He would later design costumes for Richardson's film The Charge 
of the Light Brigade (1968), starring Trevor Howard.

He soon began a fruitful partnership with the Czech-born set designer Henry 
Bardon. Both men studied with the designer Lila Di Nobili and were greatly 
influenced by her vein of wistful fantasy. This emerged in Frederick Ashton's 
ballet The Dream (1964) for the Royal Ballet, a delicate, Victorian vision of 
Shakespeare's play, viewed through a misty gauze. The designers referenced a 
celebrated pre-war Old Vic production and Romantic ballet's fairy scenes, 
twining Titania's headdress with leaves. When Bottom was turned into a donkey, 
he danced on point in black slippers that looked like hooves. Ashton then 
created a pas de deux for Bottom and the Fairy Queen, both on pointe.

Ashton's Cinderella (1947) is a lyrical ballet with a strong streak of panto. 
Bardon and Walker's 1965 redesign placed it among rococo woods and terraces. 
Richard Buckle found Walker's costumes for the dance of the seasons "ravishing 
... drifting wisps from high Empire no-waists, dusted with poppies and leaves". 
When Walker redesigned both sets and costumes in 1987, without Bardon, the 
effect was less magical, the costumes more fussy.

Critics resistant to Walker's pictorial charm called it chocolate-boxy. 
Working alone he created sets as well as costumes, drawing on his painterly 
finesse for layered backcloths that produced a three-dimensional shimmer. He 
was the sole designer for the Royal Ballet's 1977 Sleeping Beauty, in which he 
had the heroine fall asleep in the 17th century and waking in the 18th. Arlene 
Croce, in the New Yorker, praised designs "of an exceptional delicacy", 
especially a panorama depicting the prince's boat crossing the mouth of an 
ocean cave, "a lovely effect that is over too soon".

Mounting full-scale productions of ballet classics can be a logistical 
challenge, balancing practicalities with visual splendour. Colleagues admired 
Walker's pragmatism and ability to produce the effect of luxury on a tight 
budget. He was also popular among the wardrobe staff, happy to reconsider if a 
costume was hampering a dancer.

Walker was a walking repository of the visual arts from the mid-18th to 
mid-19th centuries. Attuned to ballet's Romantic repertory, he produced a 
softly moonlit Giselle (1971) and La Sylphide (1979) for the London Festival 
Ballet under Peter Schaufuss. He worked increasingly in the US, frequently with 
the choreographer Ben Stevenson. Their striking Swan Lake for Houston Ballet 
had Romantic swans in full white tutus, and dressed the prince's mother like 
Queen Victoria. Walker nudged the ball scene into nightmare, as the demonic 
Odile lifted her black veil to reveal a bird's beak.

Later in his career, Walker designed an Olivier award-winning Cinderella for 
English National Ballet (1996, also produced at Boston Ballet). In contrast to 
Ashton's version, the choreographer Michael Corder conceived it as a romance, 
overseen by a moon that glimmered from the front curtain and through each act. 
Corder remembers Walker as astute and initially reserved beneath a tonsure-like 
haircut, but gradually revealing a quirky humour. He was notably modest: Corder 
recalls that he refused to join the customary first-night curtain call for the 
creative team: "There was no way that I could drag him onstage."

Although dance was at the heart of his work, Walker also designed for opera 
and theatre. The V&A museum in London holds his sumptuously decorated costumes 
for Der Rosenkavalier (English National Opera, 1974), which demonstrate how he 
created 18th-century silhouettes without constricting singers in corsetry. The 
young heiress Sophie wears a white-on-white confection, a fantasy of floating 
layers, the surface trailed with floral trimmings and bows, pistachio leaves 
curling around the blooms.

Other opera designs included a scarlet La Traviata for San Francisco Opera, 
Carmen at New York's Metropolitan Opera, and Semele at the Royal Opera, its 
errant immortals dressed as if painted by Tiepolo. On screen, he won an Emmy 
award in 1971 for a television production of Hamlet starring Richard 
Chamberlain, and also dressed Katharine Hepburn in The Corn is Green (1979).

At the National Theatre he costumed Undiscovered Country (1979), Tom 
Stoppard's bittersweet version of Das Weite Land by the Austrian playwright 
Arthur Schnitzler, and Bernard Shaw's Man and Superman (1981), directed by 
Christopher Morahan.

In 1971 Walker had made his debut with the Royal Shakespeare Company with 
London Assurance, a Victorian comedy by Dion Boucicault starring Donald Sinden 
as Sir Harcourt Courtly, the laboriously upholstered suitor, and a young Judi 
Dench as Grace Harkaway. His cheeks rouged and his black wig extravagantly 
curled, Sinden gazed at himself in the mirror and mused: "Am I the thing?" When 
it came to period enchantment, David Walker was quite the thing.

â€¢ David Walker, stage designer, born 18 July 1934; died 27 December 2008
 