
Until this year’s Edinburgh fringe, where comedians grappled on stage with 
personal trauma as never before, scepticism was rife about the so-called “dead 
dad” show. Meat-and-potatoes comics used the phrase to cat-call standups who 
made self-consciously emotional shows with cathartic last acts, implying that 
these were cynical gestures to woo critics and highbrow fringe audiences. That 
performances with a narrative arc, about death and emotion, were in some way 
contrary to the spirit of pure standup.

Cariad Lloyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/07/cariad-lloyd-comedy-standup-solo-shows-edinburgh>
 acknowledges that tendency in the intro to her new podcast, entitledGriefcast 
<https://soundcloud.com/griefcast/>, in which comedians talk about death. “It’s 
not that easy to talk about death,” she says, “but it does help if you’ve 
chosen a career designed to hide your true feelings about anything emotional.” 
Is that a workable definition of standup comedy? I’m not sure. It’s certainly 
interesting thatLloyd, herself a terrific comic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/26/cariad-lloyd-review> and 
improviser, has chosen to conduct these chats only with her professional peers 
– Sara Pascoe and Adam Buxton (so far) among them. Her reasons aren’t fully 
explained, but she does now and then suggest that grief as experienced by 
comics (her father died when she was in her teens) is a particular thing. 
Comedians, she suggests, are by inclination avoiders, displacers, even 
trivialisers, uniquely ill-equipped to stare into the abyss that bereavement 
opens up.
 Listen to Sara Pascoe on Cariad Lloyd’s Griefcast 
Maybe there’s something in that; perhaps that’s why the supposed glut of “dead 
dad” shows (which was always greatly exaggerated) raised hackles among purist 
comics – who felt that grief was not a clown’s business. In fact, few of those 
shows addressed grief head-on. Considering the phenomenon, I remembered with a 
jolt that the show that (in my mind) always seems to best represent it, Des 
Bishop’s extraordinaryMy Dad Was Nearly James Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/02/des-bishop>, was created while 
Bishop’s dad was still alive. (He even came on stage for the curtain call.) 
Michael Bishop died between the show’s Edinburgh debut and its London transfer. 
Not only was it not about grief, but the show became a “dead dad” exemplar only 
by circumstance.

John-Luke Roberts at Edinburgh festival review – filial rage fires up 
grotesque tribute
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/25/john-luke-roberts-at-edinburgh-festival-review-filial-rage-fires-up-grotesque-tribute>
Russell Kane was another comic to parlay his dad’s demise into comedy – 
literally, in that the death of Kane Sr was the precondition for hisson’s 
standup career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/18/russell-kane-interview>. But 
Kane, too, discussed his dad’s (macho, narrow-minded) life on stage rather than 
his death. I can’t speak for two of the other standout examples: I didn’t see 
Mark Thomas’s Bravo Figaro or Jason (Hebburn) Cook’s Joy. Sean Hughes’s 2012 
offeringLife Becomes Noises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/aug/13/sean-hughes-edinburgh-comedy-review>
 was closer to what Lloyd is trying to achieve with Griefcast, in that it 
broached the death (rather than the life) of Hughes’s dad, if not the process 
of coping afterwards. So, too, to a degree,John-Luke Roberts’s absurdist 
bouffon take on the genre in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/25/john-luke-roberts-at-edinburgh-festival-review-filial-rage-fires-up-grotesque-tribute>
, which obliquely dramatised but only glancingly articulated Roberts’s 
conflicted feelings after his dad’s death.

Few comedy shows (or few I’ve seen) have grappled with grief to the degree 
that, say, On the Run’s beautiful theatre showSo It Goes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/11/edinburgh-festival-2014-review-so-it-goes-bereavement>
 did in 2014. Maybe Lloyd is right about comedians’ emotional avoidance. The 
best counter-argument may beJayde Adams <http://www.jaydeadams.co.uk/>, best 
newcomer nominee at Fringe 2016, and one of Lloyd’s four Griefcast interviewees 
so far. Although it isn’t revealed until the show’s final third, Adams’s 
current set addresses the death, five years ago, of her big sister. It’s not a 
show specifically about that bereavement but that information, and the tears 
than accompany it, cast a light on what’s gone before, as you realise that 
Adams’s extroversion, her voracious, bordering on aggressive, appetite for 
life, is profoundly informed by the loss of the sibling in whose shadow she 
spent her first quarter-century.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRanwwj6Z5PI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRanwwj6Z5PI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRanwwj6Z5PI&media=>
 Watch video of Jayde Adams 
Adams’s show, or sections of it, may be the closest I’ve seen comedy get to 
what Lloyd is trying to bottle on her podcast: a comic sensibility not 
flinching before death, and the related damage it leaves behind. I’m agnostic 
on the question of whether professional jokers experience death and grief 
differently from anyone else; I suspect the Griefcast series would be just as 
compelling (and it is compelling) were its interviewees not all comics. But I 
agree that all those “dead dad” shows, and comedy more widely, have something 
valuable to bring to the conversation about grief: an absence or rejection of 
piety; an impulse to be funny, the shock of which can clear the way for 
something new; and the reassurance that the sadness isn’t indomitable, that 
there’s still laughter in the world.

Three to see

Lolly Adefope
A week’s Soho run for the impressive multi-character comic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/16/lolly-adefope-edinburgh-festival-review-pleasance>
, with her sophomore show addressing the double-bind whereby she gets flak both 
for addressing race in her work, and for not addressing it.
• Soho theatre, London 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/lolly-adefope-lolly-2>, until 3 December. 
Box office: 020-7478 0100.

Jewish comedy festival
Four-day festival in north London featuring the Jewish comedian of the year 
award, a celebration of the “Borscht belt” standup of the 1950s, and 
performances from acts including fast-risers Desiree Burch and Dane Baptiste.
• JW3 <https://www.jw3.org.uk/comedy>, London, until 4 December. Box office: 
020-7433 8988.

John Kearns
The winner of the 2014 Edinburgh comedy award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/25/john-kearns-edinburgh-comedy-award-winner-interview>
 has kept a low profile since, live comedy-wise – although TV-watchers may have 
seen him in Top Coppers. Now, he pitches up at Battersea Arts Centre with a 
bespoke festive show, apparently drawing on recordings he’s made of his family 
Christmas dinners.
• Battersea Arts Centre 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/42649/whats_on/whats_on/shows/a_john_kearns_christmas>
, London, 6-10 December. Box office: 020-7223 2223.
 