
Walsall’s Dean Smith has been appointed as the new manager of Brentford, 
replacing thesacked Marinus Dijkhuizen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/28/brentford-sack-marinus-dijkhuizen-appoint-lee-carsley>
.

Smith signed a new 12-month rolling contract at the Bescot Stadium in October 
but has been tempted to Griffin Park with Brentford 11th in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>, four points behind the 
play-off spots.

The youth coach Lee Carsley was appointed until the end of the season in 
September but repeatedly insisted he was not interested in the job long term 
and Monday’s visit to Bolton will be his last game in charge.

Brentford’s co-director of Football, Rasmus Ankersen, said: “We believe Dean 
is exactly the authentic and strong leader we need to takeBrentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> forward and ultimately into 
the Premier League. We have been hugely impressed by Dean’s work at Walsall and 
especially how he has managed to turn a club with such a low budget into one 
pushing for promotion.

“It is a similar challenge to the one Brentford face. We can’t win by spending 
more money than our competitors so we have to identify competitive edges which 
will allow us to compete with clubs who enjoy much bigger budgets. In that 
respect Dean is a great fit to Brentford FC. The job is not just about being an 
experienced and intelligent football coach. More than anything, it is about 
being able to lead the staff and bring the best out of highly qualified experts 
as well as the players.”
Brentford FC (@BrentfordFC) 
BREAKING | #brentfordfc <https://twitter.com/hashtag/brentfordfc?src=hash> are 
delighted to announce that Dean Smith is confirmed as our new Head Coach
pic.twitter.com/unVNpc3z9q <https://t.co/unVNpc3z9q>
 <https://twitter.com/BrentfordFC/status/671353610865872901> November 30, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/BrentfordFC/status/671353610865872901> 
Smith had been the Walsall manager since replacing Chris Hutchings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/21/walsall-dean-smith-manager> 
in January 2011 and guided the club to safety in League One, despite being 
bottom and eight points adrift when he took over.

He took them to Wembley for the first time in the club’s history in March, 
losing theJohnstone’s Paint Trophy final 2-0 to Bristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/22/bristol-city-walsall-johnstones-paint-trophy-match-report>
, and currently has them fourth in League One.

“We are disappointed to lose Dean,” said the Walsall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall> chairman, Jeff Bonser. “He is 
the fourth longest serving manager in English football and would have been at 
the helm for five years in January. We categorically did not want him to leave 
this football club and did all we could to keep him at the helm.

“He has been fantastic for Walsall and, in turn, we have been fantastic for 
him. We gave him his opportunity in management and believed in him throughout 
his tenure.

“He helped keep us in League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> at the end of his 
first season and made gradual improvement throughout his time in charge; 
culminating in a first Wembley appearance earlier this year and an excellent 
start to the current campaign. We thank him, and Richard O’Kelly, for their 
hard work and efforts. However, we now have to look to the future.”
 