
From time to time the suggestion is made that our puzzles should have an 
"authorised" or "recommended" dictionary and that words should not be allowed 
as solutions if they cannot be found there. Linked to this is a rumbling 
undercurrent of complaint about increasingly being forced to google to find the 
answers to clues. In this spirit, a solver in Arizona complained last month 
that Gordius's puzzle No. 24,011 contained two solutions (VINOLENT and MERIMEE) 
that are not to be found in either the Concise OED or the Chambers 21st Century 
Dictionary.

It is true that VINOLENT does not regularly crop up in casual conversation, 
but it is firmly there in Chambers as "addicted to wine". (Clue: "With a drink 
problem one may lose direction and become offensive" VI(N)OLENT) Other things 
being equal, I would not want a word (eg vinolent) to appear as a solution in a 
Quick puzzle (or probably a Quiptic) that was not in the Concise OED or the 
Chambers 21st Century Dictionary. But the first of these, as its name 
indicates, has taken a quite restricted number of words from the Oxford 
database and the second has a particular editorial purpose, namely to 
illustrate modern English usage. For the Cryptic and Genius puzzles something 
wider is required for reference.

Setters tend to gravitate towards the Chambers Dictionary (now into its 10th 
edition). But I think that it would be too restrictive to tie oneself 
exclusively to any one dictionary. All standard dictionaries are only a 
selection from a larger menu and their editorial teams make surprisingly 
different choices and exclusions. As a rule, I believe that a word for a 
solution in a Cryptic puzzle should be found in one at least of these three 
dictionaries: Chambers, Collins and the Oxford Dictionary of English. But one 
should never say never. "iPod" has already slipped into a Guardian puzzle and I 
would probably not be bothered by "bovvered".

_____

MERIMEE raises a different issue. The clue was "Prosper in cheerful time of 
year, as they say". The solution was a homophone of "merry May" and is not to 
be found in any of the dictionaries on my desk except the old 1979 Collins. It 
is not in the most recent (2003) Collins, because that edition dropped people's 
names and Prosper Merim�e (1803-70) was the French writer, whose short novel 
"Carmen" was the basis for Bizet's opera. Some puzzles (for example in the 
Times) allow as solutions the names of sufficiently well-known dead persons, 
but draw the line at the living. This at least has the merit of being a clear 
rule, but it has the perverse result that Lennon, John is available, but 
McCartney, Paul is not. (Both, incidentally, are in the 1979 Collins and in the 
Oxford Dictionary of English, though Merim�e is only in the first.) But a rule 
that people may only appear in solutions if their names can be found in the old 
Collins or the new Oxford would produce silly exclusions: Gordon Brown, Simon 
Russell Beale, Greg Dyke and Alan Rusbridger, for example. I find myself driven 
to that refuge of the lazy mind: that each case must be decided on its merits!

_____

Araucaria's March puzzle seems to have gone down well with Genius fans, if the 
number of entries is anything to go by. The total of correct entries was far 
higher than expected, given the complicated "special instructions" for 
English/Italian transliteration that had to be followed in clues and solutions 
alike. There were 228 by the deadline. More surprising, given the fact that the 
print version of the barred grid appeared with no bars, was the large number of 
correct entries sent in on Day One - 16. The first clocked in at 11.34 from 
Munich. There were three entries even earlier in the day, but each contained an 
error. The most common mistake was with 38 across, when the answer was given as 
INTERMEDIARY where INTERMEDIARI was required by the convoluted rules.

There was no real indication that punters liked the experience of having a 
barred Genius instead of a standard grid, though one subscriber complained that 
she was irritated by it, since (to her) it did not feel like a Guardian 
crossword. However, unless it becomes clear that large numbers of people 
dislike barred puzzles, my view is that it would be good to ring the changes by 
having one every now and again. Unfortunately, with the present software, the 
two-stage process that you have to go through to get a barred grid onto your 
screens for downloading is clumsy, for which I can only apologise.

* Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian crossword editor. If you have any comments 
or queries, please send them tocrossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>
 