
Dejan Lovren has credited Jürgen Klopp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> with improving Liverpool’s 
defending, belief, workrate and even changing the players’ “opinion of 
football” as the defender seeks to maintain his own personal recovery against 
Bordeaux.

Before Thursday’s Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> tie, one from which 
Liverpool can qualify for the knockout phase with victory or a goalless draw 
against Willy Sagnol’s side, Klopp claimed to be unaware of what had altered at 
Anfield since he replaced Brendan Rodgers seven weeks ago. “I don’t know what’s 
different,” the Liverpool manager said. “I wasn’t here before.”

Jürgen Klopp: I wanted to be a doctor. I think I’ve still got ‘helper syndrome’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/25/jurgen-klopp-doctor-helper-syndrome-liverpool-borussia-dortmund>
But Lovren believes several crucial aspects of Liverpool’s performance have 
been enhanced by the German coach. The Croatia international refused to 
criticise Rodgers for past resultsor his own indifferent form 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/30/west-ham-liverpool-dejan-lovren-slaven-bilic>
 sincea £20m arrival from Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/15/dejan-lovren-i-never-expected-to-be-somebody>
 in the summer of 2014. He said: “I don’t want to talk about the past. It was 
not just the manager’s fault. It was us, the players, too. I want to forget it 
and just concentrate on the future.”

But he made the telling admission that it is easier to defend in Klopp’s team 
and with a manager who believes in his qualities. “I think it is much easier to 
defend now because we are working much harder than before,” said Lovren. “We 
are, I would say, playing like a team now with everyone feeling comfortable. 
There were a couple of changes when I first came to the club and so many 
players have gone now. It feels like two different teams.

“It is always easier when a manager has belief in your team and in yourself. 
It makes it much easier to play and gives you the confidence that, even if you 
make a mistake, afterwards he will talk to you and explain to you the wrong 
things and the good things.”

The 26-year-old said his confidence has been repaired since Klopp took over, 
although that has also stemmed from his performances in training andat 
Manchester City on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/21/manchester-city-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
. “It is a little bit of both,” said Lovren, when asked whether he or the 
manager was responsible. “Of course the manager has had a big influence on the 
team and on everyone.

“Every one of the players has changed their opinion of football. We are like 
he said we should be – we need to be living football and the job 24 hours a day 
and we will get payback for everything on the pitch.”

The Bordeaux match will be Lovren’s 50th appearance for Liverpool in all 
competitions and, having produced an assured displayin place of the injured 
Mamadou Sakho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/18/liverpool-dejan-lovren-mamadou-sakho>
 in the 4-1 defeat of City, he hopes to finally impose himself at Anfield.

“I would say it has been ups and downs but the most important thing is the 
present,” said the former Lyon defender. “I am feeling settled and happy in the 
club and I think the most important thing is we are playing well. I have been 
tested so many times in my life, even at other clubs, and this is just another 
school for me to learn at. When I am in bad situations I have great people 
around supporting me. I came here to be a standard player ofLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>, not to be on the bench. There 
is no more pressure on me now. I need to go step by step and my performances 
will speak for me.”
 