
Dele Alli believes that the competition for midfield places at Tottenham 
Hotspur can help them contend on all fronts this season, as he also lamented 
the lack of ruthlessness that underpinnedthe 2-1 Champions League loss to Monaco
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-monaco-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
 at Wembley on Wednesday.

Mauricio Pochettino furious at lack of Tottenham passion in Monaco defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-mauricio-pochettino-monaco-champions-league>
Mauricio Pochettino started him in central midfield, alongside Eric Dier, 
which meant no place for the summer signing Victor Wanyama, but he moved Alli 
to his more favoured No10 role for the second-half, after the introduction of 
Mousa Dembélé for his first football of the season.

Christian Eriksen had begun as the No10 – the position that he has designs 
upon – and then there was Moussa Sissoko, the£30m transfer deadline day purchase
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/tottenham-moussa-sissoko-everton-newcastle>
 from Newcastle United. Pochettino brought him on for Dier late on and he 
worked off the right.

With Tom Carroll, Josh Onomah and Harry Winks in reserve, it adds up to a 
strong set of options, which could be seen as something of a curse in terms of 
the difficulty of keeping everybody happy – when there is a clean bill of 
health, Pochettino will face difficult decisions each week.

“Nobody is taking any position for granted,” Alli said. “You need to have a 
big squad, it’s important when you’re in the Champions League, with the amount 
of games we’ve got.

“I’m happy to play anywhere in this team. It’s just a privilege to be a part 
of it and to be out there playing. When I was at MK Dons, I played all the 
games in centre midfield so it’s not like [the No8 role] is new to me.”

Dembélé’s return against Monaco was significant and welcome. He had missed 
Tottenham’s opening four Premier League games, as he completed his ban for
gouging Diego Costa’s eye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/06/tottenham-mousa-dembele-six-game-ban-diego-costa>
 in the match at Chelsea towards the end of last season and his arrival 
coincided with the team enjoying greater control.

“Mousa is a fantastic player, there’s no doubt about that,” Alli said. “We’re 
excited to have him back, but Victor has done really well since he’s come in 
and Eric, as well, in centre midfield. With the amount of games we’ve got 
coming up, it’s important to have a lot of depth in the squad and it’s good 
that Mousa can come back and fight for his place in the team.”

Tottenham fought hard on Wednesday, particularly after going 2-0 down after 31 
minutes, and they had 15 goal attempts to Monaco’s seven, but the most 
revealing detail was the one that said the visitors had scored with both their 
shots on target.

“We weren’t clinical enough,” Alli said. “We need to be a lot more clinical 
and finish off our chances. We need to make sure that we learn from our 
mistakes and start games quicker and brighter. The slow start killed us. We 
need to finish strongly, as well. We let ourselves down in the first half when 
we should have been better.

“We usually bounce back quite well from a defeat and we’ve got the next game 
now against Sunderland [on Sunday]. It’s important that we do pick ourselves up 
and learn from this. We’re definitely a confident side and we do expect to win 
games, no matter who is in front of us. We fancy ourselves against anyone.”
 