
Workers for the takeaway delivery firm Deliveroo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deliveroo> have staged a sixth day of 
protests over a new pay deal, saying concessions only apply to those who are 
willing to work in new areas.

Last week, the firm, which sends couriers to restaurants including Pizza 
Express and Wagamama, told workers in some parts ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> that it would be trialling a new pay 
structure. Instead of receiving £7 an hour and £1 for each delivery, under the 
new rules riders will receive a payment of £3.75 for each delivery.

Workers, who are self-employed and provide their own transport and insurance, 
said that they believed they would earn less under the changes and they were 
unhappy with the uncertainty it brought, whileLabour condemned the move as a 
return to Victorian Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/12/deliveroo-pay-scheme-a-return-to-victorian-britain-says-labour>
.


Following complaints, the firm said it would underpin the new deal with 
guarantees for the first month, and allow workers who did not want to take part 
in the trial to work in different parts of London.

The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy stepped in on 
Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/14/deliveroo-told-it-must-pay-workers-minimum-wage>
 to say that workers must be paid the “national living wage” of £7.20 an hour 
unless a court or HMRC rules they are self-employed.

Deliveroo’s co-founder and chief executive, William Shu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/11/deliveroo-investment-company-unicorn-status>
, told the BBC he was sorry that the protests, which began when workers in some 
parts of London were told they would move to the new payment structure, had 
escalated.

“I’m very sorry things have gone to this point. Our riders are the lifeblood 
of our business and without them we are nothing,” he told the Today programme.

He said the new pay plan was “in response to our riders’ number-one concern, 
which is flexibility … This was a choice for them. If the riders choose to be 
on a new scheme that’s great … If riders feel like it’s not for them, they can 
choose to work on the old scheme as well.”


Riders, however, said that to opt out they would have to move to a new 
delivery area, which could mean earning less money through the £1-a-delivery 
commission. Margaret Dewhurst from theIndependent Workers Union of Great Britain
 <https://iwgb.org.uk/> (IWGB), said: “Riders have spent time building up their 
patch. They’ve been learning their areas for two or three years. “Changing zone 
will mean moving somewhere central which they don’t know, so they will end up 
doing fewer deliveries.”

A rider picketing outside the firm’s recruitment office in north London on 
Monday said that moving riders to zones outside the trial would mean “those 
zones are flooded so you will get fewer hours”.

David Scott, Deliveroo’s operations manager for the UK and Ireland, said he 
was confident that the new system was better for riders and confirmed the trial 
would be going ahead from Wednesday. He said workers would be able to log in 
whenever they wished for work, and in peak hours could earn more than with the 
hourly rate.


“They can choose to stay on the old rate in a nearby zone,” he said. “These 
areas are very small and very local … We are going to be supporting them if 
they want to move. The business is growing very fast so we won’t add in any 
more people than are needed.”

Scott said workers were having to sign up to new terms and conditions for the 
trial partly to show that they knew what they were moving onto, and that he was 
keen to hear feedback from riders. “A fee structure that doesn’t work for our 
riders will not work for Deliveroo,” he said. “We have an open door policy 
here. I have invited riders to come in and see us.”

A sign at the door of the office saying that drivers could only visit by 
appointment was “very much out-of-date” he said.

Asked what would happen after the 90-day trial, Scott said: “If they are not 
comfortable with continuing with the trial we will address that when we come to 
it.”

Amir Ali, who has been striking since last week, said the concessions were not 
enough, but he expected a further offer. “Now the government has got involved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/14/deliveroo-told-it-must-pay-workers-minimum-wage>
 it’s on a different level,” he said.

Michael Boyle, a cyclist who works in central London, said that over lunchtime 
he had taken one order in four hours. “Under the new rules I would have earned 
just £3.75,” he said. “The flexibility is fantastic and I do still consider 
them a good employer, but this is such a drastic change … the company is 
outsourcing risk to us.”

The Green party leader, Natalie Bennett, said the government needed to do more 
to crack down on “dodgy employment practices”.


She said: “The new offer made by their employers still falls far below a 
living wage and fails to address the fact that riders’ employment contracts 
offer no security in the event of sickness or accidents.


“This strike highlights that while the ‘gig economy’ means cheaper and more 
convenient services for customers, it all too often relies on – and facilitates 
– the exploitation of workers.”

A fund for the striking workers had reached more than £8,000 
<https://www.crowdpac.co.uk/campaigns/47/the-deliveroostrike> on Monday 
afternoon.
 