
They serenaded him in Cádiz and Catalonia, but it wasn’t what he wanted. They 
sang about how they loved him, tens of thousands of them, but it wasn’t their 
love he was looking for, and when he departed to applause he didn’t clap back; 
instead, he looked at the floor, trying to shut them out. Love? They’re having 
a laugh. They were, anyway; this time, it was real at last. On Saturday night in
Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> Denis Cheryshev 
departed to a standing ovation and, unlike the Carranza and the Camp Nou, 
Mestalla meant it: an ovation offered for all the right reasons. Deserved, too. 
It was hard not to be happy for him.

Luis Suárez scores hat-trick in style as Barcelona thrash Celta Vigo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/14/luis-suarez-hat-trick-lionel-messi-barcelona-beat-celta-vigo-6-1>
For a player who’s started just three matches – one of which floats in some 
kind of weird limbo, a game that never took place even though it did – a lot 
has happened to Cheryshev this season. Without meaning to, he helped sink Rafa 
Benítez, even though it wasn’t really either of their faults;now he has helped 
save Gary Neville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/13/valencia-espanyol-la-liga-match-report>
, heading in the goal that secured a 2-1 victory over Espanyol, Valencia’s 
first win in 12 league games, their first in nine under the Englishman.
Neville’s Mark Robins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/11/sir-alex-ferguson-ten-small-moments>
, Jamie Carragher called him, prompting the man who is still the Valencia coach 
to reply: “Carragher always was a troublemaker.”


Persuaded to stay at Real Madrid against his initial inclination, Cheryshev 
started one game for them and scored too, in the Copa del Rey at Second 
Division B side Cádiz – only to find out later that he shouldn’t even have been 
on the pitch. A suspension held over from last season when on loan at 
Villarreal had the Cádiz fans in stitches,like they ever need an excuse for a 
giggle and a sing-song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/mar/27/europeanfootball.sport1>, and 
Madrid in trouble: no second leg and no second chances.Cádiz were awarded a 3-0 
win and a place in the next round 
<http://www.espnfc.com/spanish-primera-division/15/blog/post/2739340/real-madrid-embarrassed-by-copa-del-rey-explusion>
. Madrid were out.


Soon, so was Cheryshev. The winter window opened and, as he was not playing at 
the Bernabéu, he wanted to go back to Villarreal, where he had impressed so 
much last season. Madrid refused because they blamed Villarreal for everything 
that had happened. So then he wanted to go back to Sevilla, where he had been 
the year before and where his dad Dimitri – the former winger who, like Denis, 
made his international debut against the USA – is on the coaching staff. But 
they didn’t manage to free up a squad place in time. And so he ended up on 
deadline day at Valencia, where his first game, 48 hours later, was a cup 
semi-final at the Camp Nou. The man who had “knocked out” Madrid had the chance 
to knock out Barcelona too.


Instead, he was knocked out of the same competition for a second time, a 
crisis seemingly engulfing his new club; when he returned with his team-mates 
that night, fans were waiting for them, hurling abuse. It finished 7-0 and
Neville called it one of the “most painful” nights of his career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/04/gary-neville-valencia-job-barcelona-historic-humiliation>
; it can’t have been much better for Cheryshev, with the Camp Nou, rarely so 
animated, borrowing from Cádiz’s song-sheet to mockingly thank their accidental 
hero, slayer of Madrid: “Cheryshev, we love you!” It was happening again, 
another reminder. When he came on with half an hour to go, the cheer was bigger 
than any of those that had greeted the goals. He was handed a huge ovation by 
Barcelona’s fans.Valencia’s fans, by contrast, protested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/04/gary-neville-valencia-job-barcelona-historic-humiliation>
.


The last time they had gone ​​13 games without victory they suffered the only 
relegation in their history

Some in Spain criticised Neville for even playing him, declaring him 
insensitive and suggesting that he might sink his new signing. But Cheryshev 
was not going to hide. The kid who arrived in Spain aged five, joining the 
youth system at Sporting Gijón and then Burgos, where his father played, before 
heading to Madrid, admits: “When I was a kid I had doubts”. Bright, articulate, 
engaging, focused, these days he shows little sign of them. After the game, the 
TV rights holders asked for one of Valencia’s club captains to do the pitchside 
interview. They refused; so he did it. Just about the only player to have 
offered anything on the pitch, providing an assist for a Rodrigo goal that was 
disallowed, he played with dignity and spoke with it too. “It doesn’t worry 
me,” he said.


There were more important things to worry about. A virtual cup exit and a very 
real league crisis. “I would have sacked Neville already,” snapped former 
president Paco Roig this weekend. “I wear a watch but I wouldn’t become a 
watchmaker; he has played but he’ll never be a manager.” The current president 
is a different matter; the sporting director started looking for a replacement, 
but there was no desire from the owner Peter Lim or from Layhoon Chan to sack 
Neville. Yet the pressure had built. How could it not?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fdenis-cheryshev-feels-the-love-after-changing-the-mood-at-valencia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc03993f94100f5d9603e5eea66bef3a2feedd3e%2F0_219_4362_2618%2F4362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Denis%20Cheryshev%20feels%20the%20love%20after%20changing%20the%20mood%20at%20Valencia%20%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fdenis-cheryshev-feels-the-love-after-changing-the-mood-at-valencia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Denis%20Cheryshev%20feels%20the%20love%20after%20changing%20the%20mood%20at%20Valencia%20%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fdenis-cheryshev-feels-the-love-after-changing-the-mood-at-valencia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc03993f94100f5d9603e5eea66bef3a2feedd3e%2F0_219_4362_2618%2F4362.jpg>
 Phil and Gary Neville watch on during Valencia’s match against Espanyol. 
Photograph: Manuel Queimadelos Alonso/Getty Images 
This weekend the fans supported their team, the silence of Wednesday night’s 
semi-final second leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/10/valencia-barcelona-copa-del-rey-semi-final-second-leg>
 and the protests of the days before left behind. A campaign built, “Valencia 
always rises again” its slogan. “We need them,” said Neville, who has 
carefully, cleverly managed his message to the fans since arriving at Mestalla. 
Outside the ground, they welcomed the bus, cheering the players in. A banner 
implored them to do it “for the badge”. Another translated “You’ll never walk 
alone.” Yet the peace was naturally precarious.

Fail to win and it would equal their worst ever run in the league – and the 
last time they had gone 13 games without victory they had suffered the only 
relegation in their history. After that hammering at the Camp Nou,another 
defeat had followed against Betis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/07/gary-neville-valencia-defeat-betis>
, and more protests had followed too. Now they absolutely had to win. Their 
opponent was Espanyol; the only team with a league record as bad as Valencia’s 
in the time Neville had been in Spain, and one whose manager Constantin Galca 
had been rescued by his players – they intervened to prevent the club sacking 
him. This was huge, a relegation clash, even if Neville refused to recognise it 
as such. Valencia are 22 points worse off than they were at this stage last 
season.

Espanyol had lost eight in a row but took the lead with an Oscar Duarte header 
after 52 minutes. It was the tenth time in 10 league games under Neville that 
Valencia had found themselves 1-0 down, and the surprise was that it was only 
one. Diego Alves, back after nine months, was at fault then but saved his team 
again. An astonishing early save led to an even more astonishing miss from 
Mamadou Sylla, heading wide from a metre. Others followed and were almost as 
bad; chances forEspanyol <https://www.theguardian.com/football/espanyol> to 
make it 2-0 and, at 1-1, to go back in the lead; even chances to equalise at 
2-1 down.


Álvaro Negredo had come on and equalised, his deflected shot squirming in on 
70 minutes, and the game had become wild, frantic. Neville described it as 
“like a basketball match”; no control, no organisation, not much quality, but 
back and forth it went, Mestalla roaring them on. Marca’s headline ran a single 
word: “defibrillator.” Over on the touchline, Neville leapt up and down, at one 
point furiously spitting something that rhymes with “ducking punt”. Afterwards 
he described his players as being led by “passion and emotion”.


Six minutes after Negredo scored, Cheryshev headed in the second. “Don’t wait 
for the right moment; it doesn’t exist,” he tweeted recently, but it does and 
this was it. Mestalla erupted, the noise greater than it has been all season. 
Taken off, Cheryshev was received a standing ovation – a real one this time – 
and when the final whistle went five minutes after that Espanyol’s players 
collapsed to the floor, unable to believe what had happened. It was cruel on 
them, leaving them just one point off the relegation zone and Galca, as one 
headline put it, heading “from intensive care to the morgue”. Barcelona fans 
loved Cheryshev even more: he’d knocked Madrid out of the cup, now he might 
just have helped knock Espanyol out of the division.


More importantly, this time the right people loved him too. His goal was huge. 
“Mestalla and Cheryshev carry Valencia to victory,” one headline said. As 
Espanyol’s players hit the turf, Valencia’s players embraced. Neville turned 
and headed straight down the tunnel. “Relief is the word,” he said. “You saw 
the reaction.”


Simone Zaza completes Juventus’s rise, with a little help from Marco van 
Basten | Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/15/simone-zaza-juventus-napoli-marco-van-basten>
Neville admitted that Valencia had been fortunate, noting: “This shows that 
football is not about putting in the best performance; we didn’t play well but 
we got the result.” He also admitted that the critics had been “right” when 
they had attacked him and his team: “I would have been saying the same.” The 
luck Valencia lacked against Sporting Gijón, they had had here: a deflected 
goal, chances missed by the opposition, a win without playing at all well. 
Defensively, they had been dreadful again and there had been little 
organisation. There was, though, character. Communion too. “We’re with the 
manager to the death,” Cheryshev said. And they had got there, somehow.


“This is absolutely not a night for celebration,” Neville said, but it was. 
Valencia had won at last, for the first time since November, the first time at 
home since October, and this could prove a turning point. “We needed a result 
like this,” Negredo said; pessimism had started to take hold. Now, perhaps, the 
mindset will change. “I hope,” Neville added, “this will give us confidence.”


There are other, more tangible reasons for optimism too: available for the 
first time this season, Diego Alves not only gives Valencia a superb goalkeeper 
but the leadership they have been sorely lacking. The return to fitness of Paco 
Alcácer, while not decisive on Saturday, is important too. Negredo, wasteful 
against Sporting and Betis, has now scored two in two; Cheryshev gives them a 
dynamism they didn’t really have and Neville said he expects him to get better 
still, “after all he hasn’t played much”. And the relationship between fans and 
players was mended, even if that’s only because they want the same thing.


There was something else too. After the game, Neville announced that Pako 
Ayestarán is joining his coaching staff. The next day, a key figure at Valencia 
insisted that Neville’s future had “never” been in doubt, insisting that he had 
impressed everyone with his “diligence” and “professionalism”, and that even 
when things were going wrong no one had pointed the finger at him, “not even 
the fans”. But, this person admitted, Neville did need help, especially when it 
came to communication and his environment: “Gary is a great coach but if you 
can’t fully express your ideas to your players it’s hard.”


Not that Ayestarán is just a translator, far from it: astute, ambitious, 
analytical, some former players see him as the real reason for Rafa Benítez’s 
success at Valencia and at Liverpool. Current players are keen too: “We’re 
delighted he is joining us,” Negredo said. Ayestarán knows Valencia and Spanish 
football and it is laudable that Neville had the humility and honesty to 
recognise limitations and accept help; this was not a decision imposed upon 
him, although what it means in the long term remains to be seen.

In the short term, it may be one that makes a big difference. All the more so 
allied a Valencia victory at last; it is just one game, and not a very good one 
at that, but things look a little different now. Relegation is seven points 
away, for a start.

“This will give us a lift for sure,” Cheryshev said. “Things in football 
change quickly. One day you’re down, the next you’re up.”

Talking points 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fdenis-cheryshev-feels-the-love-after-changing-the-mood-at-valencia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2badfe9d2f83e96eb7b5776d2747cdacabbc3d6b%2F0_190_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Denis%20Cheryshev%20feels%20the%20love%20after%20changing%20the%20mood%20at%20Valencia%20%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fdenis-cheryshev-feels-the-love-after-changing-the-mood-at-valencia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Denis%20Cheryshev%20feels%20the%20love%20after%20changing%20the%20mood%20at%20Valencia%20%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fdenis-cheryshev-feels-the-love-after-changing-the-mood-at-valencia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2badfe9d2f83e96eb7b5776d2747cdacabbc3d6b%2F0_190_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
 Lionel Messi and Luis Suárez are about to produce one of the most famous 
penalties of all time Photograph: Quique Garcia/EPA 
• So what exactly do you say about Barcelona? “They make you fall in love,” 
ran the cover of El Mundo Deportivo. “The complete show,” said Sport. “A joy,” 
said Marca. “Messi directs a work of art,” said AS. Which is something, but 
still probably not enough. For quite a long time, Barcelona actually lived a 
little dangerously against a Celta side that was impressive, and looked like 
they might not win. But the opening two goals were superb, the first a 30-yard 
free kick from Lionel Messi (that should probably have been a 35-yard free 
kick), and the second a brilliant move between he and Luis Suárez that ended 
with the Uruguayan sticking the ball in the top corner on the bounce. And then 
... then, the last 15 minutes were absolutely outrageous. Genuinely, barely 
believable.

It finished 6-1, with a hat-trick for Suárez – he’s now on 39 goals in 34 
games this season – and one each for Messi, Neymar and Irvan Rakitic. But that 
doesn’t even begin to tell the story. Not properly, anyway. Santi Giménez 
described Messi as the conductor of an orchestra who sometimes leads a jazz 
band instead, improvising its way through games, inventing things you never 
imagined: Wilhem Furtwangler one moment, Thelonius monk the next (no, this 
column neither).

All six goals were fantastic, even though one of them, the fourth, was a 
penalty. Only it wasn’t, not really. In fact, strictly speaking, it probably 
goes down as a penalty miss from Leo Messi, another to add to the stats, albeit 
one that should carry a bloody great big asterix next to it. This was a penalty 
miss and an assist rolled into one. Messi ran up but instead of shooting, he 
did a variationon the Cruyff-Olsen penalty 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tJB2AUWPplY>, 34 years later. You know, the 
one that Thierry Henry and Robert Pires couldn’t do. Messi laid it off and 
Suárez ran in (from just inside the D) to score. Speaking of Cruyff, he 
delivered good news this weekend in his fight against cancer: “I feel like I am 
winning 2-0 at half time,” he said.

The penalty will be remembered for ever, replayed constantly. Not that Luis 
Enrique was calling it historic – “historic will be if we win trophies,” he 
said. There was something about the look on Suárez’s face as they celebrated 
that suggested that this might not have been pre-planned. He looked a little 
shocked, grinning wildly. As it turned out, it was something that had been 
planned ... just not with him. “It was meant for me,” Neymar admitted, “but 
‘fatty’ was closer to it.” He wasn’t annoyed. “Our friendship is more 
important. We love each other.” Everyone else loved them too.

• Well, not quite everyone. The best portrait of the way things are here, of 
just how rotten it is, may be the fact that, never mind Celta’s players and 
manager saying that they had no problem with it, the penalty became yet another 
controversy to shout about on the mass debate shows, with the usual suspects 
occupying the usual trenches with painful predictability – the exact opposite 
trenches they would have occupied if it had beenthem who had done it and not 
them.

• Dani Alves was angry when he got taken off, he admitted. A problem with the 
manager? “No,” he said. “I was angry with myself because I had a shit game.”


• “Ronaldo was ...” Zinedine Zidane started, struggling for words “... I don’t 
know if I can say this, but ...de puta madre. Sorry for the words.” De puta 
madreroughly means “bloody brilliant”, and he had been too. “It’s up to you lot 
to have your opinions, to say if he is good, bad, finished ... we saw that he’s 
fine,” Zidane added. What he was, more than anything else, was a bit more like 
the old Ronaldo, seen only very briefly over the last 18 months or so. Rather 
than the no.9 he had evolved into, against Athletic Bilbao he was back out on 
the left wing, running at people, cutting inside to shoot. “That’s what we 
wanted: he’s very good on the wing,” Zidane said. “And the first goal was 
exactly that.” Two goals took Ronaldo to 21 and top of the Pichichi chart, 
until Luis Suárez passed him again the following night.

• That’s three wins in a row now for Real Sociedad.


• Takashi Inui got a hat-trick ... of posts. But that didn’t stop the sirens 
that greet every goal wailing at Ipurua. Borja Bastón scored his 16th goal of 
the season to set Eibar on their way to a 2-0 win that put them back in sixth, 
occupying the last European place ahead of Athletic and Celta. Better still, it 
pretty much ended any fear of a second-half-of-the-season collapse like last 
year, when just two wins in 19 games saw them go down (only to be reinstated 
when Elche suffered an administrative relegation). They had lost three in a 
row, but victory over Levante means that they now have 36 points. That’s one 
more than they got in the whole of last season. “It’s very unlikely that weird 
things happen now,” coach José Luis Mendilíbar said.


• “It’s sad to have to say this, but we have to say that we’re happy that the 
other teams down the bottom didn’t win either,” said Levante manager Rubí. Rayo 
and Sporting drew a fun game in the rain on Friday, Espanyol were beaten by 
Valencia, Betis drew 2-2 with Deportivo, Granada lost 3-0 to la Real, and Las 
Palmas were beaten 2-0 by Sevilla, who have now won 11 in a row at the Pizjuán.


• Speaking of 11 in a row: that’s how long it is since Villarreal lost.


• Depor do like a draw: 14 of 24 have ended level.


• According to Spain’s premier soccer statistician Alexis Tamargo, it took 
Fernando Torres 2,713 minutes to go from 99 goals to 100 goal with Atlético 
Madrid and just two minutes to go from 100 to 101. Neatly, the clock on the 
scoreboard – up alongside the advert for the DIY store, the soft drink company, 
the car showroom and the brothel – showed 1.01 when he got his 101st to opening 
the scoring against Getafe at the Coliseum. There were 8,512 people there to 
see the game and in truth those that didn’t go didn’t miss much. Except 
frostbit on their feet. Atlético controlled the first half, only to lose 
control in the second, but even then Getafe rarely looked like scoring. It 
finished 1-0, keeping Atlético second.

Results: Sporting 2-2 Rayo, Real Madrid 4-2 Athletic, Villarreal 1-0 Málaga, 
Valencia 2-1 Espanyol, Deportivo 2-2 Betis, Real Sociedad 3-0 Granada, Sevilla 
2-0 Las Palmas, Eibar 2-0 Levante, Getafe 0-1 Atlético, Barcelona 6-1 Celta.

 