
Darkness had long since descended on Hartlepool and all the talk was of an 
unwanted replay when Darren Bent reminded everyone of what he used to do best. 
He may be a bit of a forgotten man atDerby County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/derbycounty> these days but Bent showed 
off unerring instincts as he swivelled before expertly volleying Abdoul 
Camara’s deflected cross beyond Trevor Carson to earn his side a fourth-round 
place.

That late, left-footed winner represented harsh luck on an impressive 
Hartlepool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> who, in Michael 
Woods and Lewis Hawkins, possessed two of the afternoon’s best individuals.

Two clubs once managed by Brian Clough kicked off with contrasting priorities. 
While Hartlepool are simply striving to stay in League Two, Derby’s desperation 
to win promotion to the Premier League meant Paul Clement made 10 changes from 
the side that lost at Middlesbrough last weekend.

The depth of the visiting squad was emphasised by Clement’s heavily rotated 
line-up including Bent, an England striker not so long ago. Great things were 
expected of Woods during his days as a youngster at Chelsea but the midfielder 
is now settled in Ronnie Moore’s midfield from where he swiftly began directing 
operations.

With Woods and Hawkins constantly stretching them, Clement’s Championship 
second-stringers laboured until the end the first half when Nick Blackman, 
making his Derby debut, very nearly scored three times.

After the break Camara’s 25-yard half-volley hit the bar before a Hartlepool 
counterattack concluded with Jake Gray volleying Woods’s cross beyond a 
helpless Jonathan Mitchell in quite fabulous fashion.

Clement replaced Craig Bryson with Jacob Butterfield and promptly watched the 
substitute lash a long-range equaliser past Carson with his first touch.

The scene was set for Bent to register the 200th goal of his club career.
 