
The last time Will Hughes played in a Championship semi-final play-off, back 
in 2014, he scored surely one of the best goals Derby County fans have ever 
seen. With the ball coming in low from the left, the then 19-year-old was 
tightly marked but running at full pelt towards the penalty spot he somehow 
managed to backheel the ball first-time into the far corner, past Brighton’s 
Tomasz Kuszczak. It wasan inch-perfect, impish piece of skill 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0pOGAgsmfZY> and showed just why Derby had 
reportedly been fighting off a £15m bid from Liverpool for their academy 
graduate, a move that would have made him the eighth most expensive teenager of 
all time.

Previewing the Football League play-offs: how the 12 clubs have fared in the 
past
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2016/may/11/football-league-play-offs-championship-league-one-two>
“I could play for the next 20 years and that will still be my best ever goal – 
I don’t think it’s going to get much better than that,” says Hughes two years 
on. “But my thoughts of those play-offs will always be ofthe subsequent final 
against QPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/24/derby-county-qpr-championship-play-off-final-match-report>
 at Wembley.”

It is another thing that is hard to forget for Derby players and fans, but for 
very different reasons. With Hughes pulling the strings in midfield, the Rams 
dominated the game, enjoying 68% possession, but Bobby Zamora struck in injury 
time with QPR’s first shot on target to take the London club to the Premier 
League. “I assumed we were going to go on and win, especially when they went 
down to 10 men,” Hughes adds. “Their players were waiting for us to score. I 
was on such a high, expecting to win. But to go from that to the lowest of the 
low – the dressing room afterwards was silent, speechless. After 48 games, it 
changed in five seconds. Football summed-up that day.”

Wembley and promotion is the aim this year, too, and first they must face Hull 
City on Saturday in the first leg of their semi-final. “We’ve got more of a 
drive to do it this time,” he says. “It was a freak.” For the most part, Hughes 
has not played his part this season, owing toan ACL knee injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/11/will-hughes-derby-county-six-months-out-surgery-anterior-cruciate-ligament>
 suffered on the opening day at Bolton. With nobody around himhe fell awkwardly 
<https://youtu.be/dATd8iVOEWM?t=47s> and spent eight months out of the game.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fwill-hughes-derby-county-interview-championship-play-off-hull-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbee7785eb61504b34f60d706465ea8ebbe526d7e%2F0_90_2688_1613%2F2688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Derby%E2%80%99s%20Will%20Hughes%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20bed-bound.%20I%20went%20from%20confusion%2C%20to%20anger%2C%20to%20paranoia%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fwill-hughes-derby-county-interview-championship-play-off-hull-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Derby%E2%80%99s%20Will%20Hughes%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20bed-bound.%20I%20went%20from%20confusion%2C%20to%20anger%2C%20to%20paranoia%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fwill-hughes-derby-county-interview-championship-play-off-hull-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbee7785eb61504b34f60d706465ea8ebbe526d7e%2F0_90_2688_1613%2F2688.jpg>
 Will Hughes damaged his ACL ligaments at Bolton in August and made his next 
appearance eight months later against the same opponents. Photograph: Andy 
Clarke/Rex Shutterstock 
“I knew straight away it was serious,” he says. “You never think it’s going to 
happen to you. I couldn’t walk for a good few weeksafter having surgery 
<https://twitter.com/wjhughes19/status/631064564889747456>. You’re pretty much 
bed-bound. I went from confusion, to anger. You start to think: ‘Am I ever 
going to get back to where I was?’ I was very paranoid.” Ever since his debut 
aged 16 in 2011 Hughes has oozed composure and confidence but it is obvious 
that his injury rocked him to the core, physically and mentally. It is the only 
part of the interview at Derby’s training ground when he does not make 
electric-blue eye contact; where suddenly he looks like a normal, shy 
21-year-old.

Hughes sought advice from those around him. His sisters, his mum – “she 
doesn’t know a great deal about football, but when I was down, she was always 
there” – and his housemate Josh Lelan, who plays for Northampton Town, were 
among those who pitched in. His team-mate George Thorne, who had a similar 
injury last year – and who will miss the play-offs after suffering a double leg 
break last weekend – was also on hand “to answer any questions I might have”.

Hughes is bright. He was privately educated just south of Derby at Repton 
school – alumni include Roald Dahl and Jeremy Clarkson – and despite leaving at 
16 when he signed scholarship forms with Derby, he got a tutor to complete his 
A levels in politics and business studies. When he was injured, he learned 
Spanish: “I wasn’t very good when Paul Clement [as manager] was here, so I had 
to talk to him in English, but it’s something I always wanted to do to broaden 
my horizons, and it will be very handy when I’m older, when I finish football.”

Shaun Barker: ‘The only thing that held my leg together was the skin’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/21/shaun-barker-derby-county-top-and-bottom-leg-held-together-by-skin>
But Hughes is far from finished, and if anybody needs an example as to how 
important his return is for Derby on his comeback – Shaun Barker’s testimonial 
in March – the striker Chris Martin fell to his knees as if to worship the 
midfielder as he came on.

Coming on as a substitute to make his first-team return in April against 
Bolton, Derby fans chanted his name the moment they spotted his distinctive 
ghost-white hair emerging from the bench. When Hughes’s name was read out, it 
was as though a goal had been scored. “It was nice to make my comeback in front 
of the home fans. The reception was worth it. That’s been the highlight of my 
year,” he says.

Hughes is back, and with recent injuries to Thorne, Bradley Johnson and Jeff 
Hendrick, his return to central midfield is timely for the manager, Darren 
Wassall, but may mean that he has to play in a holding role rather than as a 
more natural No10. Hughes is now a senior member of the squad – of last 
weekend’s starting XI, only Craig Bryson has been in the first team longer than 
him –and should Derby fail to gain promotion, one suspects there will be 
interested parties.

Crystal Palace’s chairman, Steve Parish, tweeted his admiration 
<https://twitter.com/CEO4TAG/status/727151334756069376?lang=en-gb> for a Hughes 
assist <https://youtu.be/AOdyCBO6M-I?t=1m12s> against Brighton this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/brighton-derby-county-championship-match-report>
, but he seems interested only in reaching the top flight with Derby. “I’m 
still young, I’ve still got a lot of time to play in the Premier League. But 
hopefully this year is our year.”
 