
It is clear from the many cries of pain that Enigmatist's September genius was 
the most difficult puzzle to date. The number of correct entries confirmed 
this, though we are not talking single figures, let alone the single correct 
entry reputedly submitted in 1929 for the first Listener puzzle.

In fact there were 95 correct entries, the first from Spain clocked in at 
19.46 BST on the day the puzzle was posted, with two more arriving before 
midnight that day. This compares with the previous lowest figure for a Genius 
puzzle of 141. The most heart-rending plaints were from those of you who wrote 
to say that you still could not get the theme even after seeing the answers.

So, by popular demand, at the end of this update you will find notes 
explaining the theme and how the clues worked. In addition, starting with the 
November genius puzzle, explanation notes will be uploaded with each solution. 
You will be able to read them by clicking in the appropriate place above the 
solution grid, as is already the case with each Saturday prize cryptic puzzle.

And, speaking of the Saturday prize puzzle, at the suggestion of a subscriber, 
the solution to each Saturday's puzzle will now be available online at 0001 GMT 
(or UT, if you object to Greenwich) on the following Saturday. So subscribers 
will have access to the answers more than 48 hours before the mere mortals who 
have to wait to get their Monday edition of the paper!

_____

The response to my question last month about themed puzzles was universally in 
their favour, with most respondents asking for even more. I have to say that 
this was not what I had expected, since the unsolicited snail mail that I get 
on the subject is (also universally) hostile to themed puzzles. What, I wonder, 
can be the explanation for such a complete division of view between 
computer-literate subscribers and the rest on such a basic question. On a 
related issue, though, there seems to be agreement between both camps: a 
dislike of too many puzzles with too many numbered cross-references between 
clues. I shall bear this in mind.

______

On October 18 Paul had the following clue: "Leaders in Brighton and Hove 
Albion alarm shambolic Palace (8)". The solution was ALHAMBRA, but that is 
beside the point. Paul was using his clue to predict correctly the result of 
the game that night in which Albion thrashed their arch-rivals Palace. He is, 
for some unexplained reason, an ardent Seagulls fan.

______

Some people may well think that it is an abuse of position to use this space 
to plug my own book. But what the hell! It is calledSecrets of the Setters 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/keywordSearch.do?frmSearchString=>
 and is out on November 10, published by Atlantic Books for Guardian Books. It 
will not be of the slightest interest to anyone who already enjoys doing 
cryptic crosswords since it is specifically written for those who would like to 
take the cryptic plunge, but find the whole idea a mystery and don't know where 
to begin.

My running theme is that, though ordinary civilians think that people who do 
cryptic crosswords must be brainy, in fact no particular intelligence as such 
is required: just a sceptical attitude of mind towards words.

So: it would make an ideal Christmas present and is available from all good 
booksellers or direct fromGuardian Books <http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk> 
(0870-836-0749), modestly priced at £12.99.

______

Genius No. 27 by Enigmatist (September)

Eight clues (associated with 10 grid entries) lead to thematic answers. Five 
are cryptic indications for and three are appropriately substituted by entries 
to be made in the grid. The clue numbers for the three entries to be 
substituted may provide an alternative way of discovering the theme.

The theme was Orwell's 1984. The five clues providing cryptic indications for 
what had to be entered in the grid (misleading letter counts resulting) were:
 16 ac: THOUGHT POLICE for FACULTY OF LAW
 26 ac: ROOM ONE 0 ONE for RAT-TRAP
 2 dn: DOUBLETHINK for REASSESS
 15 dn: NEWSPEAK for HEADLINE (news peak)
 20 dn: BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU for MAJOR OVERSIGHT

 The three clues indicating appropriate substitutes to be entered in the grid 
(misleading letter counts also resulting) were:
 19 ac: PEACE is WAR
 8 ac: FREEDOM is SLAVERY
 4 dn: IGNORANCE is STRENGTH
 The clue numbers for these three entries together are 1984.

Across
 7 Overeat O/V<ere>AT
 8 Freedom FR<dee>OM
 10 Disappear DI<sappe>AR(y)
 11 Ketch KETCH(up)
 15 Hashish HASH/1/SH
 16,14 Thought police THOUGH/PLOT(anag)/ICE
 18 Ample A<mp>LE
 20 Mild steel MILL(/D) + STEED(/L)
 22 Leave double def
 23 Jack Frost J/A<frocks>T
 25 Needier NEE<die>R
 26 Room One 0 One ROO<m>NE(y)
 Down
 1 Hoodoo HOOD/O/O
 2 Doublethink DOUBLE THIN K
 3 Seep See p.

 4 Ignorance ONE RACING (anag) 5 Task forces S<ask>ECT(rev)
 6 By the way double def
 8 Sprat SP + RAT
 9 Extol sEX TO Lady (hidden)
 13 Sui generis SIEGE RUINS (anag)
 15 Newspeak NEW + SPEAK
 16 File card FILE + CARD
 17 Leeboard L<bee>D
 19 War boW ARrow (hidden)
 20,12 Big Brother is Watching You BIGOTRY BASE WITCHING HOUR (anag)
 21 Let-ups diSPUTE Luddites (hidden rev)
 24 Fete fate (hom)

· Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor.
 