
The Guardian is working with Pulse Films on a short documentary about one of 
the paper's best loved setters:John Graham 
<http://theguardian.com/profile/araucaria>, who died last November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2013/nov/26/araucaria-john-graham>. 

The working title is, simply, Araucaria. When the director, Matt Houghton 
<http://www.itsmatthoughton.co.uk/>, discovered the puzzle in which Araucaria 
announced to Guardian solvers that he had cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2013/jan/11/crossword-araucaria-reveals-dying-cancer>
, he was, he tells me, immediately drawn to the story:

I was fascinated by the idea that over time, and solely through the black and 
white squares of a crossword, a solver could develop a relationship with a 
setter. I am not what you might call a crossword person but there was a human 
aspect to this very unusual way of letting his solvers know what was going on 
that I felt needed exploring. I went to Somersham to see John and after two 
minutes, I knew that I needed to make this film.

We've looked here before at how crosswords are portrayed on screen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/jul/12/top-10-crosswords-fiction-rubicon>
, and the challenges ofconveying an internal, quiet world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jun/06/crossword-blog-short-film-crosswords>
 in film. Matt says, teasingly, that ...

... boundaries and restrictions can so often prove to be the catalyst for new 
and unexpected approaches. This has very much been the case with Araucaria. I 
won't say too much but I will say that I am extremely excited about the 
approach that we're taking in making the film.

Finally, as David McKie reminded us last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2013/nov/27/david-mckie-araucaria-obituary-letter>
: "John's life ranged far wider than crosswords." Matt says:

When I started the project, I listened to John's brilliant Desert Island Discs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b012f7f3>. It is absolutely fascinating 
listening. After speaking to him, it was clear very quickly that the film 
should be something more than biographical. It's informed by his upbringing, 
his faith and his approach to writing crosswords but it is not an informational 
film. The way I like to look at it is that it is a portrait of a person at a 
very particular moment in his life.

If you're interested in taking part in the film, Pulse is looking for fans of 
Araucaria who are willing to be filmed while solving. The recording will be in 
the south of England some time between 16 and 19 August and you are invited to 
send an email to francesca.boyce@pulsefilms.co.uk 
<mailto:francesca.boyce@pulsefilms.co.uk> with a photograph of yourself and 
your name, location and availability.

 • Araucaria speaks! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2012/may/09/crossword-araucaria-video>
 • Crossword blog on Araucaria's announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jan/14/crossword-roundup-araucaria-announcement>
 • The A to Z of Araucaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/nov/27/crossword-blog-araucaria-john-graham>
 • That 'Lord Archer' clue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/08/celebrating-100-years-crossword>
 