
Diana Rigg <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/diana-rigg> is trying to 
cross the Fulham Road in London. Elegant from two-tone shoes to circular, 
tinted glasses, she is thwarted by the traffic. "Good timing," she says after I 
introduce myself. "You can help me get across." In the 60s, when she played 
Emma Peel in The Avengers, a catsuit-wearing Rigg would have vaulted across car 
bonnets, and if any male driver had remonstrated, she would have karate-chopped 
him in the throat and kicked him in the crown jewels. But not today.

"It's my damned tin knees," she says as we link arms and hobble across the 
street. She had an operation on one of them recently. I had heard that she 
damaged her knees with those lengthy tap-dancing routines in the 1987 West End 
production of Sondheim's Follies? "No, it's genetic. My brother, who is 80, has 
the same problem."

Not that the 75-year-old actor is unhappy with her lot."The older you get, I 
have to say, the funnier you find life," she says. "That's the only way to go. 
If you get serious about yourself as you get old, you are pathetic."

We settle in the garden of a French cafe. A few years ago Rigg would 
have sought out the garden to indulge her 20-a-day habit, but Dame Diana gave 
up smoking a couple of years ago, and today wants to catch the early spring 
rays and feed crumbs to the birds.

"I found myself talking aloud to the pigeons in the park the other day," she 
tells me. "The male pigeons were busily pursuing the female pigeons. I said: 
'You silly farts. Can't you see they're not interested?' And then I realised 
there were people listening to me." And what applies to birds, she reckons, 
applies to elderly men and women. "I think women of my age are still 
attractive." She removes her glasses and faces me down with brown eyes that 
have turned strong men – and, indeed, women – to jelly. "Men of my age aren't." 
Why? "They've got theircojones halfway to their knees," she says, giggling. 
"They have the same descent as tits."

Is there no remedy? "Truss," she cackles. That's going to make me a demon with 
the ladies, I reply bleakly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fz3JGVV6juPY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fz3JGVV6juPY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fz3JGVV6juPY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view the video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z3JGVV6juPY>

We are meeting because Rigg is soon to be seen in season four of Game of 
Thrones,reprising her performance as the irascible, be-wimpled Lady Olenna 
Tyrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/may/06/game-of-thrones-season-three-episode-six-the-climb>
, for which she received her sixth Emmy nomination last year. It is a role that 
confirms the myth of Rigg as austere, tough, difficult – not for nothing has 
she been nicknamed Queen of Thorns for this part.

That thorny thesis about Rigg was supported by her other recent leading role, 
that of Winifred Gillyflower, a born-again crackpot chemist in a Doctor Who 
episode called The Crimson Horror, written especially for her by Mark Gatiss. 
In that episode, her character had blinded her daughter (played by Rigg's 
real-life daughter Rachael Stirling) and was bent on killing all life on Earth 
using prehistoric venom from a red reptile secreted in her bosom. "Now Mr 
Sweet," she said before attempting to unleash Armageddon on Victorian Bradford, 
"let the whole world taste your lethal kiss!"

Both these roles supported the idea that Rigg is austere, abrasive, tough 
as old boots. "They always write about me that way ever since I made a bit 
of a ruckus about getting paid less than the cameraman on The Avengers. I'm 
portrayed as this tough broad, but I'm not."

Nor, though, is she a walkover. In 2002 she successfully sued the Daily Mail 
over a nasty hatchet job that suggested she was a retired recluse, bitter over 
the collapse of her second marriage to theatre producer Archibald Stirling 
after he'd had an affair with actor Joely Richardson. They photographed Rigg 
near her French home clutching a baguette and printed it with the caption: 
"Shopping for one." Retired? False. Recluse? False. True, after two marriages, 
Rigg has not had a live-in lover for many years, but that's not the same thing.

"I don't know how your Guardian readers are going to take this, but I've had 
a housekeeper for 24 years. So I'm well looked after. I'm a deeply spoiled 
woman. I make no apologies about it at all. I think they think: 'Oh, poor 
woman, she's living on her own.' Not a bit of it. My bed is turned down every 
night."

But it was the Mail's claim that she was embittered about her marriage breakup 
12 years earlier that stung most. "I had never said those words. I had sworn 
not to talk about my marriage breakup. But those words had a terrible effect on 
me. I read them, sobbing, thinking about my marriage." Would she consider 
remarrying? She doesn't answer the question directly, but says: "I'm very good 
at living with somebody. I think my ex-husband would accede to this because I 
tend to please. I come from a generation where, when my dad arrived and parked 
the car, [my mother] would rush upstairs and put some lipstick on, which I 
think is so charming. I'm wasted living by myself in a sense. But don't 
anybody, please, take that as an invitation to step forward."

Her daughter, she says with pride, isn't that kind of pleaser. "I remember 
a few years ago I caught myself asking her: 'Do you make his supper?' And she 
said: 'Certainly not!' And I was quite pleased. I hadn't handed that on to her. 
She'd evolved it herself."

So is she a feminist? "I've always said feminism is about equal pay – nothing 
else." This time last year, Rigg got much feminist opprobrium for telling the 
Radio Times that women "are more bitchy than men" and for daring other women to 
disagree. Today, she comes to praise, not bury, her gender. "We're extremely 
good at business, getting business done, prioritising, organising. Classic 
female qualities." She knows, too, that some men find powerful women 
threatening. She recalls her time as chancellor at Stirling University for a 
decade until 2008: "There was me, a woman principal and a woman director of 
the arts centre. An old prof was heard to say: 'What are we coming to?' It 
still exists."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fv4g3zvz8fgo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fv4g3zvz8fgo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fv4g3zvz8fgo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view the video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v4g3zvz8fgo>

But Rigg believes she has had a very fortunate career. I tell her that when 
I interviewed Honor Blackman, one of Rigg's predecessors as both fast-handed 
Avenger and Bond girl, she said her theatrical career had been hobbled because 
she was contracted to Rank films for two vital years at the beginning of her 
working life. "I didn't have that problem. Some weeks I'd spend four days on 
set of The Avengers and then head up to Stratford to be Regan to Olivier's 
Lear."

While Blackman bemoaned the fact that she was never taken seriously as 
a classical actor, Rigg became just that. Thanks, in particular, to four 
roles in which she excelled in the 90s – Medea, Mother Courage, Martha in 
Albee's Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? and Phèdre in Ted Hughes's adaptation – 
she burst through the catsuit constraints to become one of our leading 
tragediennes.

Was she ambitious? "I asked an old friend that the other day. And he said: 
'Ambitious? No. You were always grateful.'" She giggles. "I can't remember what 
I was like. You want to remember yourself in a rosier way, sort of romanticise 
things. But I did do some shit." Really? "Oh, yes. Short, sharp shit." Such as? 
"Oh, films." Name them? "Never!"

What is the worst thing anyone has ever said about her? "What that ugly 
Hungarian said." She means the review she got from New York magazine's John 
Simon when playing Eloise to Keith Michell's Abelard on Broadway in 1970. He 
described her in a nude scene as "built like a brick basilica with insufficient 
flying buttresses". "I felt sorry for the audiences who had to see my poor 
old buttresses," she says. Another actor, Sylvia Miles, whom Simon described as 
"one of New York's leading party girls and gate-crashers" tipped a plate of 
antipasto over the critic in a New York restaurant.

Rigg, instead, parlayed critical abuse into her 1983 book No Turn Unstoned: 
The Worst Ever Theatrical Reviews. In the early 90s she toured US campuses 
reading from the book. "At the same time as Margaret Thatcher was touring her 
memoirs at $250,000 a time." And her fee? "A fraction of that." What fraction? 
She affects not to hear, but says she now wants to reprise those readings to 
raise money for her favourite local theatres, such as the routinely acclaimed 
Finborough, where her daughter is currently starring in Terence Rattigan's 
Variation on a Theme.

We last saw Rigg on stage in 2011, in Pygmalion, playing Mrs Higgins opposite 
Rupert Everett, 37 years after she starred as Eliza Doolittle in the 1974 Albery
Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> production of Shaw's play. 
Mostly, she says, she would love to act again for the Royal Shakespeare 
Company, where, after graduating from Rada, she began her professional career 
in 1959. "I'm gagging to work," she says.

Beneath Rigg's presumed tough carapace is something substantial – an actor 
with even more to give in her eighth decade. "I don't want to retire," she 
says. "I never want to retire. What's the point of it?"

Game of Thrones returns Monday 7 April at 9pm on Sky Atlantic 



Game of Thrones season four trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/10/game-of-thrones-season-four-trailer-video>
 