
Tom Lehrer exploded in my unhappy 15-year-old head like the best firework 
display you ever imagined. I was at a convent in the 1960s and a friend 
returned from the US with a copy of Lehrer’s album That Was the Year That Was. 
It was the funniest thing in the world. His sophisticated irreverence was a joy 
– and his rhymes were blisteringly good. His musicianship wasn’t half bad 
either. He plays a charming waltz and sings: “I hold your hand in mine dear, I 
press it to my lips; I take a healthy bite from your dainty fingertips …” 
Economy and surprise are key to his technique. The more syrupy the tune, the 
crueller the imagery – a technique he takes from Gilbert and Sullivan.

At that stage, I was already singing odd songs at the piano. I could give you 
lots of Gilbert and Sullivan, a good deal of Eartha Kitt’s repertoire and a 
handful of Noël Coward songs. Tom Lehrer made me up my game.

I borrowed the album for half-term, and when my parents were out I recorded it 
on to our old Grundig tape recorder. In spite of the hiss and crackle, I sat 
patiently beside the piano, spooling it back, over and over, bar by bar, to 
learn the words and music.

I started with The Vatican Rag <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LFIkeXQI8nI> – 
naturally. Oh, the utter wonder of that song for a convent girl swamped in 
Catholicism! “Ave Maria! / Gee, it’s good to see ya!” Bliss. By the end of 
half-term, I had several songs off pat. I sang them to my parents as a parting 
gift before being returned to school. Their pale look of horror made me realise 
that this was a rich seam of material with which to torture them.

The next time my friend went to the US, she returned with the songbook. I 
discovered the joy ofSmut <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iaHDBL7dVgs>, and 
for a girl with a scatological sense of humour, this was a lifeline in a prissy 
age. Best of all,The Masochism Tango 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TytGOeiW0aE>, which to my mind is his finest 
song: “Bash in my brain / then make me scream with pain / And kiss me once 
again / And say we’ll never part.” His songs mocked the absurdities of the 
human condition in a way that had not been done in song before, and his 
politics were gloriously liberal.

I never imagined that I could do the same thing. I left the convent with an 
ability to curtsey, two rubbish A-levels and a large repertoire of slightly 
scandalous songs. I footled around for a year, wasted three years at 
university, footled around a bit more and then finally did what I’d wanted to 
do all along – go to drama school, where I entertained my classmates out of 
hours with my killer version of The Masochism Tango.

Then, when I was 30, I discovered I could write funny songs too. One of the 
first wasThe Herpes Tango <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JFm2hrzxn-4>. 
Homage, of course. But it still works and it’s still very funny. I sang it to 
my young pianist recently, and though the song was written when he was five, he 
pissed himself laughing.

I wrote to Lehrer once, after he’d kindly acknowledged my work in a letter to 
the man who published my songbook, but he didn’t reply. He doesn’t want to be 
bothered and I wouldn’t want to meet him, not any more – he comes across as a 
terrible curmudgeon. But thank you, Mr Lehrer – I owe you my career.

 * Dillie Keane performs at the Underbelly, George Square, Edinburgh, until 31 
August <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on#q=%22Dillie%20Keane%22>. Box 
office: 0131 226 0000.  