
There is a passage in one of Sir Alex Ferguson’s latest books that seems 
deliberately designed to chop West Ham down to size and no doubt, as intended, 
would have pricked a few egos in the way he does better than anyone. What, 
Ferguson wanted to know, was “the West Ham way” and why did the club persist in 
applying this label when in all his years at Manchester United he had never 
come against a team from Upton Park that he was afraid of. West Ham, he pointed 
out, had not won a trophy since 1980 and always seemed to be surviving, or 
lucky as hell, when they visited Old Trafford. So what was this West Ham way? 
“I hope,” Ferguson wrote, “that before I die someone can explain.”

Ferguson often confused his pen for a bayonet but there was an agenda with 
this one bearing in mind it was part of a long defence of Sam Allardyce, one of 
the managers who flock around his feet, and I suspect he probably knows, deep 
down, that West Ham, however much they labour the point sometimes, do have a 
tradition of playing football in a certain fashion.

They might not always put it into practice and, yes, there is an argument that 
everything the club must be experiencing right now because of the Dimitri Payet 
imbroglio – anger, frustration and the discomforting sense that happy times 
pass far too quickly – is a more accurate version of the West Ham way.

Yet it is not entirely a figment of our imaginations and that probably is why 
the past week has been so distressing for everyone connected with the club when 
Payet, the kind of footballer who made you quicken your walk to see them play, 
was the man who embodied everything they wanted from their team.

Instead, his legacy at West Ham turns out to be something entirely different 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/dimitri-payet-wants-to-leave-west-ham-united-slaven-bilic>
 and it all feels deeply unsatisfactory now he cannot even bring himself to go 
through the humdrum requirements of a Premier League match against Crystal 
Palace, no matter how much his club might have been depending on him, whatever 
the damage to his reputation and however many people were paying through the 
nose to be there.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Wantaway Dimitri Payet will not be sold by West Ham, insists Bilic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/12/wantaway-dimitri-payet-will-not-be-sold-by-west-ham-insists-bilic-video>
These are the kind of moments when the participants in other team sports must 
wonder what it is about football that makes it so hard for some to recognise 
the demarcation line between general professional decency and outrageous 
self-indulgence.

Nor can Payet’s stance be described as a one-off when, outside the Premier 
League, another story has been rumbling along that may not have had the same 
kind of exposure but still tells you what can happen when footballers are 
offered alternative employment, with a larger income, and somehow think it 
reasonable to declare themselves off-duty until the matter is resolved.

Related: Dimitri Payet tells Slaven Bilic he wants to leave West Ham for 
Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/dimitri-payet-wants-to-leave-west-ham-united-slaven-bilic>

At least Chris Martin has had the decency to make himself available again for 
Fulham, scoring a penalty in Saturday’s win against Barnsley,but there is not a 
lot more to be said in his favour 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/90247237> bearing in mind 
he missed their previous three games out of his desire to take a sledgehammer 
to his season-long loan arrangement from Derby County.

Martin had scored seven times in his 11 appearances before that impasse and 
everything, from the outside looking in, had been going swimmingly. The problem 
was that Steve McClaren took over at Derby in October, perplexed that the club 
had let one of their main strikers leave, and Martin was informed before 
Christmas that there was a new contract waiting for him, with a bumped-up 
salary, if he returned to Pride Park. Martin’s request for Fulham to provide 
him with the same kind of money, with the higher income to start immediately, 
was turned down and the player took the matter into his own hands, with no 
regard for those pesky details such as his contract with the London club having 
no recall clause.

It does not stop there, either, if you remember that Henri Lansbury is 
currently being excused from duty at Nottingham Forest because he is not in the 
right frame of mind when other clubs, notably Aston Villa and Derby again, have 
been trying to lure him away.

Does Lansbury realise that back in the day when Forest’s midfield was filled 
with players of authentic talent John Robertson somehow put himself in the 
frame of mind to play a European Cup semi-final just a few days after Hughie, 
the brother he worshipped,died because of a car crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/19/john-robertson-interview-brian-clough-nottingham-forest-european-cup>
 that also killed the player’s sister‑in‑law and left his eight-year-old niece, 
who had been in the back seat, with serious injuries?

Did it come into Martin’s thinking that Slavisa Jokanovic, the manager at 
Craven Cottage, might have a legitimate argument when the Serb pointed out 
Fulham were the oldest club in London and had far too much history and 
professional pride to become a train where footballers with multimillion‑pound 
contracts can jump on and off to their own desire?

Will Payet understand why many West Ham supporters are insisting that the huge 
shirt bearing his name at one end of their new stadium should be replaced by one
in honour of the late Dylan Tombides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/feb/28/dylan-tombides-foundation-west-ham-testicular-cancer>
 and the near‑miracle that enabled a boy of 18 to play for the club while his 
body was ravaged by cancer?

Related: West Ham forget troubles as Andy Carroll stars in win over Crystal 
Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/west-ham-united-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>

In all three cases, it is difficult to think any of these players see too far 
beyond themselves. Payet’s relationship with West Ham seems broken. Martin told 
Fulham at one point that he was injured, countered by Jokanovic saying the 
club’s medical staff had been unable to find anything that would rule him out, 
and when Forest went out of the FA Cup at Wigan Athletic last weekend Lansbury 
– the club captain, no less – turned up on Twitter after an afternoon on the 
driving range with his friends.

In Payet’s case, his mitigation that his family have not settled might be true 
but the ordeal of living in London did not seem to dissuade him from signing a 
new five-and-a-half-year contract with West Ham last February. He has been 
earning £125,000 a week ever since, the most lucrative deal the club has ever 
given any player, and it would be intriguing to see what happened if, say, 
Chelsea tried to take advantage of the situation between now and the end of the 
current transfer window. Hypothetical, perhaps, but I cannot help suspect 
Payet’s complaints might vanish in the same way that Luis Suárez once 
complained he had to get away from Liverpoolbecause of the paparazzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/31/luis-suarez-wants-leave-liverpool>
 and then nearly moved to Arsenal, and a much quieter city.

Payet also seems to forget that at the time he agreed that contract his 
declaration was that “the love affair continues” before the slow, methodical 
process where his public utterances and body language, from summer onwards, 
have increasingly made it clear he had a roving eye.

On that front, he is fully entitled to think he belongs in a more accomplished 
team when his last appearance, as a 58th-minute substitutein their FA Cup tie 
against Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/west-ham-united-manchester-city-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
, came at a time when the stadium was emptying and it was almost a surprise the 
opposition restricted themselves to a fifth goal. It is the manner he has gone 
about it that feels like an affront and the impression he leaves that the star 
player always gets his own way.

Payet received a £1m bonus in September and if West Ham truly want to be a big 
club, if they want to demonstrate they have serious ambitions and earn the 
approval of men such as Sir Alex Ferguson, they surely cannot bend on this one. 
Not yet, anyway – and not without taking back some form of control. It might 
cost them a fair bit of money, but this is the part these footballers do not 
understand – what price a club’s honour?

Isolating Costa will come at a price

Even those people who follow this sport and try their hardest not to be overly 
cynical must suspect that Diego Costa is another one trying to orchestrate his 
own transfer now there is a more lucrative offer elsewhere.

The difference in his case is that his absence from Chelsea’s game against 
Leicester Citywas a decision taken by Antonio Conte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/diego-costa-dropped-chelsea-row-china>
, rather than the player himself, but it must be startling for the Premier 
League leaders to discover Costa’s representatives have apparently been in 
China to explore what kind of mind-boggling figures are available in the 
country where Carlos Tevez has just become the world’s best-paid player, on 
£615,000 a week.

Related: Diego Costa dropped by Chelsea after row over huge offer from China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/diego-costa-dropped-chelsea-row-china>

Those suspicions inevitably harden when Costa’s explanation for missing three 
days of training is a back problem that has not been located by the club’s 
doctors and eventually led to his flare-up with Conte. “Go to China,” the 
Italian reputedly shouted. Yet where will that leave the team?

Costa’s importance can be gauged by the fact he has scored seven times in 
Chelsea’s last 10 away matches. He is the league’s joint top scorer, with 14 
goals, and has provided the decisive moment in their games against West Ham, 
Watford, Middlesbrough, West Brom and Crystal Palace – the equivalent of 10 
points.

The problem for Chelsea, as José Mourinho can testify, is that Costa is the 
kind of player who can rub up against everyone like sandpaper when he does not 
get his way. That, more than anything, is why the teams chasing Chelsea must be 
encouraged by the sudden breakdown in relations at Stamford Bridge and why 
Conte needs to handle his player with extreme care.

Messy business at Barcelona

Pere Gratacós, a long-standing Barcelona official, spoke to reporters after 
the draw for the quarter-finals of the Copa del Rey and, inevitably, was asked 
about Lionel Messi. “Leo is one of the most important people in the team, but 
it’s not just about him,” Gratacós said. “He would not be as good without 
Iniesta, Neymar and company - but Messi is the best.”

Within a few hours Barcelona had issued a statement saying Gratacós, a 
director who had previously coached the club’s B side, had been removed from 
his position for the heinous crime of “expressing a personal opinion publicly 
not in line with that of the club”.

Was Messi consulted? All that can really said is that the past week has shown 
it is not a very pleasant experience sometimes looking inside the football 
bubble.
 