
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
says Tony Abbott is responsible for the review of the Coalition’s Direct Action 
policy because it was built into the work program when he was prime minister.


The prime minister on Tuesday attempted to hose down a breakout within 
Coalition ranks triggered by the government releasing theterms of reference for 
the Direct Action review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/direct-action-review-coalition-leaves-carbon-trading-option-open>
 on Monday.

The minister for energy and the environment, Josh Frydenberg, has flagged that 
the review, to run throughout 2017, willconsider the merits of an emissions 
intensity trading scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/malcolm-turnbull-direct-action-carbon-trading-climate-change>
 for the electricity sector.

While that course of action has been recommended by some climate groups, by 
the energy industry and by Csiro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/australias-energy-transmission-industry-calls-for-carbon-trading>
, and by the Climate Change Authority, the preliminary signal sent various 
Coalition backbenchers to the barricades and prompted the defence industry 
minister, Christopher Pyne, to declare that the Coalition was not in favour of 
carbon pricing.

The South Australian Liberal senator Cory Bernardi has declared carbon trading 
“economic suicide”.

The chair of the Coalition’s backbench committee on energy and the 
environment, Craig Kelly, said on Monday that carbon trading was not government 
policy, although he said on Tuesday he might consider an emissions intensity 
scheme for electricity if it lowered power prices.

While some in the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> clearly want to revive 
the toxic carbon “tax” debate prosecuted by Abbott in the lead-up to the 2013 
election, Turnbull told reporters in Sydney on Tuesday he had never supported a 
carbon tax.

Australia's energy transmission industry calls for carbon trading
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/australias-energy-transmission-industry-calls-for-carbon-trading>
An emissions intensity scheme is not a carbon tax but a form of carbon trading 
known as a baseline and credit scheme. Baseline and credit schemes would force 
electricity generators with sufficient emissions intensity to breach the 
baseline to buy credits to offset their excess emissions.

As to thelooming review of Direct Action, the prime minister said this had 
been part of the Coalition’s policy since 2010, which made it a legacy item of 
business from the Abbott years.

“The review of the climate policy which will be undertaken next year has been 
part of the Coalition’s policy for many years, long before I was prime 
minister,” Turnbull said on Tuesday. “This is absolutely part of our policy. 
It’s part of the policy we took to the election in 2013 and 2016 and, indeed, 
we took to the election in 2010. This is business as usual.”

The renewed outbreak of infighting came as Australia’s electricity and gas 
transmission industrycalled on the Turnbull government to implement a form of 
carbon trading in the national electricity market by 2022 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/australias-energy-transmission-industry-calls-for-carbon-trading>
 and review the scope for economy-wide carbon pricing by 2027.

While Abbott once characterised carbon pricing as a wrecking ball through the 
Australian economy, the new report, backed by Csiro, says adopting an emissions 
intensity scheme is the least costly way of reducing emissions and could 
actually save customers $200 a year by 2030.
 