
The Turnbull government has left open the option of reinstating a form of 
carbon trading in the electricity sector, allowing its looming review of the 
Direct Action climate policy to consider policy mechanisms to reduce emissions 
on a “sector-by-sector basis”.


The government has also put the emissions reduction fund and its safeguard 
mechanism on the table for the review, which will be conducted internally 
within the federal Department of Environment andEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy>, and report at the end of 2017.

Many experts argue the existing framework of Direct Action could be converted 
to a baseline and credit scheme with a few tweaks. A baseline and credit scheme 
is a form of carbon trading.

Australia needs two emissions trading schemes, Climate Change Authority says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/australia-needs-two-emissions-trading-schemes-climate-change-authority-says>
The terms of reference for the review will be outlined on Monday by the 
minister for environment and energy, Josh Frydenberg. A preliminary report of 
the Finkel review into energy security and Australia’s climate commitments will 
also be handed to the prime minister and the premiers at a Coag meeting early 
this month.

The Direct Action review is a key test of the Turnbull government’s bona fides 
on climate change, as the current policy has beenwidely criticised as 
inadequate to the task of allowing Australia to meet its international 
emissions reduction targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/03/climate-change-australia-falling-behind-rest-of-world-on-emissions-cuts-says-report>
 under the Paris climate change agreement.

Business, energy and environment groups have also repeatedly called on the 
government to stow the toxic climate politics and provide policy certainty in 
order to allow the long-term investments necessary in low emissions and 
renewable energy sources to ensure the national electricity market, and 
emissions-intensive sectors of the economy, can manage an orderly transition to 
a carbon-constrained future.

But if the government attempts to use the review to create a more ambitious 
climate policy, or to reopen the carbon pricing debate, that will almost 
certainly trigger significant internal divisions withinCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> ranks, with 
conservatives and Nationals already engaged in preliminary positioning on the 
issue.

A recent decision by the government to ratify the Paris climate agreement 
triggered a contained breakout on the Coalition backbench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/11/josh-frydenberg-insists-paris-climate-deal-lives-on-despite-mps-claims>
, with some arguing the election of Donald Trump to the presidency of the 
United States meant global climate action was, as they termed it, “cactus”.

The Direct Action review, while carefully worded, is potentially wide ranging 
in scope, allowing consideration of the potential role of international carbon 
credits in meeting Australia’s emissions reduction targets – a practice Tony 
Abbott comprehensively ruled out as prime minister.

The review also allows consideration of a post-2030 emissions reduction goal 
for Australia.

Opening up the sector-by-sector conversation would potentially allow the 
government to contemplate an emissions intensity trading system for the 
electricity sector, which some stakeholders think the Finkel review may 
recommend to the government.

The South Australian government has been championing an emissions intensity 
trading scheme through the energy ministers council to drive an orderly 
transition in the electricity sector from coal to lower-emissions power sources.

The lights go out in SA and Turnbull flicks the switch to peak stupid | Lenore 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/01/the-lights-go-out-in-sa-and-turnbull-flicks-the-switch-to-peak-stupid>
An emissions intensity scheme for electricity would favour gas as a 
transitional fuel, and Frydenberg has beenlaying the groundwork 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/19/secret-gas-contracts-hurting-competition-josh-frydenberg-says>
 for months on policies that would allow more gas exploration.

The Direct Action review requires an assessment of the impact of climate 
policies on “jobs, investment, trade competitiveness, households and regional 
Australia.”

It also implicitly references a brawl the Turnbull government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/29/jay-weatherill-accuses-barnaby-joyce-of-pushing-anti-windfarm-agenda-over-blackouts>
 has been indulging with state governments over theirstate-based renewable 
energy targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/04/renewable-energy-get-your-story-straight-act-tells-coalition>
, by requiring an examination of the “integration of climate change and energy 
policy, including the impact of state-based policies on achieving an effective 
national approach”.

State governments argue they have stepped into the breach with ambitious RETs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/the-price-of-change-battle-over-queenslands-energy-mix-rages-on>
 because the commonwealth made such a hash of renewables policy during the 
period of the Abbott government, putting a question mark over the federal RET 
which triggered an investment drought in the sector.

The states also point out that their RETs are doing a lot of the heavy policy 
lifting to help Australia meet its Paris targets.

The review also requires an examination of international developments in 
climate change policy, which is code for an assessment of what is happening on 
global climate action in the event theUS pulls out of the Paris climate 
agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-looking-at-quickest-way-to-quit-paris-climate-agreement-says-report>
.

The price of change: battle over Queensland's energy mix rages on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/the-price-of-change-battle-over-queenslands-energy-mix-rages-on>
The Turnbull government has already indicated that it intends to stay the 
course with the Paris agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/11/josh-frydenberg-insists-paris-climate-deal-lives-on-despite-mps-claims>
, and it has argued it would take the US four years to withdraw from the deal 
under the terms of ratification.

Frydenberg said in a statement the government would consult with business and 
the community throughout the 12-month Direct Action review process.

“Australia’s approach to climate policy is to meet our international emissions 
reduction commitments while at the same time maintaining energy security and 
affordability,” the minister said.

“The government is committed to adopting a non-ideological approach to 
emissions reduction to ensure we secure the lowest cost of abatement.”
 