
Recent British Theatre Consortium research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/04/british-theatre-original-writing-two-thirds-productions-budget-cuts>
 found that 2013 marked the first time that more new work was staged in UK 
theatres than revivals and classics. One of the lesser reported aspects of the 
research was the finding that 36 long-running shows, representing 2% of all 
performances, accounted for 45% of the total number of seats sold.

Creativity and culture not open to all, review finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/feb/17/creativity-and-culture-not-open-to-all-review-finds>
It’s clear that for many people a trip to the theatre means a trip to the West 
End. Last year, research by Purple Seven – the company whose directors include
Clive Humby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/10/tesco-sell-financial-footing-blinkbox-dobbies-dunnhumby>
 who invented the Tesco Clubcard – showed that new theatregoers, or those 
attending a production for the first time in three years, were far more likely 
to visit a West End theatre than a subsidised one.


Purple Seven’s report showed that nearly 42% of the total spend in the 
commercial sector in 2012 and 2013 came from new theatregoers, while at Arts 
Council-funded theatres60% of spending came from just 9.5% of households 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/apr/07/want-to-save-your-local-theatre-buy-a-ticket-for-a-friend>
. That’s even more concerning if you read those figures in conjunction with the
Warwick Commission report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/17/arts-and-culture-systematically-removed-from-uk-education-system>
, which found that the wealthiest, best educated and least ethnically diverse 
8% of the population are its most culturally active segment. It’s not an 
argument against subsidy or for wall-to-wallWickeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/sep/05/theatre1> across the 
country, simply that if you are going to give away free tickets or make offers 
they need to be better targeted and based on better data.


If a customer stops visiting your venue, it doesn’t mean that they have 
stopped visiting the arts

If a customer stops visiting your venue, it doesn’t mean that they have 
stopped visiting the arts. If they are new to your venue it doesn’t mean that 
they are actually a “first-time” arts attender. But that’s often how theatres 
will categorise them for data purposes. Purple Seven discovered that less than 
three-quarters of people described by venues as “new” arts attenders actually 
were new.

So what can venues do? They are already collaborating with each other far more 
often and with a greater than ever spirit of generosity, but although there are 
some difficulties in terms of data protection it’s clear that theatres and arts 
centres are going to have to work together far more to share their findings if 
they are going to understand the audience and its behaviour better. And that 
means all the audience not their own audiences.

Humby, of course is famed for the supermarket loyalty card, and that could be 
one route that theatres might go down in order to try and understand their 
audiences better. But what would perhaps be far more useful for venues and 
different art-forms would be a disloyalty card in which those who regularly 
bought tickets for one venue or for one particular art form would receive 
benefits if they tried a show at another venue entirely – or instead of always 
booking for a musical opted for new writing or performance art.

It’s not my idea, but that of a King’s College student, Lauren Holden, who as 
part of last year’s excellentKing’s Cultural Challenge 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/cultural/culturalinstitute/showcase/current/ctrl/kcc2.aspx>
 came up with adisloyalty app 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/cultural/newsrecords/150429-Interview-Lauren-Holden.aspx>
. It squashes the long outmoded idea that theatres and venues are in 
competition with each other for the same audience. In fact, it could be a way 
to grow audiences, possibly across the commercial and subsidised sector, the 
big subsidised houses and smaller venues, for the benefit of all.
 