
When I heard that Caitlyn Jenner debuted her new name, her upcoming Vanity 
Fair cover and a new Twitter account, I went online to welcome her. Then I 
noticed a trend on my Twitter feed: people – including feminists, people of 
color, queers and transgender folk – commenting on how beautiful she looks. 
While I welcome all the positive affirmation of Caitlyn Jenner’s gender 
identity, it’s important to not forget how the forces of economic privilege and 
beauty standards affect most trans women. And, though all women are subject to 
conventional beauty standards, the ability and even necessity to adhere to them 
is rife with even more tension for trans women.

Jenner’s womanhood and the beauty for which she went through many trials to 
gain certainly shape the person that she is, but it’s vital to ask ourselves 
whether our acceptance and celebration of her humanity is partially predicated 
on that beauty. If we accept her in part because she fits into our 
understanding of the gender binary, then we’re celebrating not just her 
transition but her economic privilege and her allegiance to a beauty standard 
that, for non-trans, cisgender women, may mean being more desired or liked, but 
for trans women is often an insurmountable barrier to being considered women at 
all.

The way in which socially progressive, cisgender people – who are otherwise 
critical of conventional beauty standards and economic privilege – give 
themselves permission to talk about trans women in aesthetic terms reveals a 
certain truth that sometimes feels insurmountable to trans people: affirming 
trans women’s attractiveness also often affirms our sometimes-limited 
understanding of the gender binary.

Especially when so many trans women’s appearances are disparaged – Jenner has 
hardly been spared these insults – there’s a certain positive aspect to seeing 
the beauty of another trans woman celebrated. But, at the same time, the 
financial resources and medical procedures that enabled Jenner’s beauty are 
inaccessible to the vast majority of trans women, who remain one of the poorest 
demographic groups in the country even as so many of us are in need of 
expensive medical services to feel comfortable in our bodies.

In Jenner’s case, there’s little doubt that she desires to be complimented for 
her attractiveness, and it’s hard to fault people for giving her that. But 
there’s a fine line between complimenting Jenner and considering her beauty a 
condition of her womanhood, and that line does not escape other trans women. As 
my friend Lilith Gütler wrote on Facebook: “I’m sorry, it’s hard to be ‘proud’ 
of someone who has had the financial means to achieve unrealistic goals for 
girls like us”. She then explained how painful it is to see someone spend as 
much money as Jenner did to look good, while Gütler has been unable to put 
together enough funds for the sexual reassignment surgery of which she’s dreamt 
for many years. Her understanding of the economic conditions required to 
transition with such aplomb were echoed by a number of other trans women on my 
social media feeds, eventhose who celebrate her visibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/01/caitlyn-jenner-vanity-fair-cover-life-affirming>
: we all know too well how difficult and expensive it is to be a certain kind 
of pretty.

Jenner was just as much of a woman a month ago during her Diane Sawyer 
interview in a blue button-down as she is today in a white corset: her 
womanhood is not and has never been defined by what she looks like outside, but 
how she feels inside – which is true of all trans women. So sure, we can 
notice, and even praise, the elegance of her cheekbones or her resemblance to 
Jessica Lange. But let’s also notice how we may be thinking of her as “more” of 
a woman because she presents herself now according to conventional standards of 
beauty – and thinking of her as more of a woman because she’s more 
conventionally feminine on the outside excludes the many trans women who don’t 
have the money to make themselves look like she does.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fcaitlyn-jenner-vanity-fair-cover-trans-people-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433259487677%2FKP_258097_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caitlyn%20Jenner%20cover%20a%20%E2%80%98pivotal%20moment%20for%20trans%20people%E2%80%99%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fcaitlyn-jenner-vanity-fair-cover-trans-people-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caitlyn%20Jenner%20cover%20a%20%E2%80%98pivotal%20moment%20for%20trans%20people%E2%80%99%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Fcaitlyn-jenner-vanity-fair-cover-trans-people-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433259487677%2FKP_258097_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Caitlyn Jenner cover a ‘pivotal moment for trans people’ - video  