
What’s that you say? Another social media furore surrounding the election? 
Well, of course. This time, it’s New Balance trainer fansunhappy that comments 
from the company 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/37948946/new-balance-trainer-wearers-bin-and-burn-their-shoes-over-trump>
 seemed to show support for president-elect Donald Trump.


New Balance’s head of public affairs, Matthew LeBretton, told the Wall Street 
Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/new-balance-faces-social-media-backlash-after-welcoming-trump-1478823102>
 a day after the election: “The Obama administration turned a deaf ear to us, 
and, frankly, with president-elect Trump, we feel things are going to move in 
the right direction.” Dude, read the room. Or at least, read the room of the 
millennial, ethnically diverse, liberal-leaning sneaker fans who have seen the 
company’s circa-2010 revival from running purists’ choice to Hackney 
stomping-ground staple.

The masses have been taking to Twitter to swear off the brand for life, 
torching their trainers, as if in a PE version of The Wicker Man. But will this 
upset throw New Balance off balance?

I ask the company to clarify its statement. LeBretton’s comments, a spokesman 
tells the Guardian, were “correct only in the context of the topic of trade, 
and nothing else”. That is to say: no, New Balance does not support Trump. In 
fact, the company reassures me that it “does not tolerate bigotry or hate in 
any form” and is “a values-driven organisation and culture that believes in 
humanity, integrity, community and mutual respect for people around the world”. 
Which doesn’t sound very Trumpian.
kiemzi (@kiemzi) 
@MMArtinitus <https://twitter.com/MMArtinitus> @tabgirl 
<https://twitter.com/tabgirl> @SoleCollector <https://twitter.com/SoleCollector>
@newbalance <https://twitter.com/newbalance> pic.twitter.com/RqATjNBalu 
<https://t.co/RqATjNBalu>
 <https://twitter.com/kiemzi/status/796548076336881664> November 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/kiemzi/status/796548076336881664> 
The topic of trade under discussion is the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/tpp-or-not-tpp-whats-the-trans-pacific-partnership-and-should-we-support-it>
 (TPP), a potential free-trade deal that would lower tariffs on imports to the 
US from certain countries, and which New Balance has long opposed. This is 
because New Balance produces many of its shoes in the US. Competitors, such as 
Nike, are largely import companies. Accordingly, Nike is a vigorous supporter 
of TPP.

New Balance does make things in other countries, too (including Asian 
countries, which would fall under TPP), but is proud of its five factories 
based in New England, where it has been making shoes since 1906. (The company 
also has a presence in a tiny Cumbrian town where20% of output is sold to the 
UK and Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/13/rihanna-trainers-cumbria-shoemaking-new-balance-flimby>
.)

“It was blown entirely out of proportion,” John Kim, editorial director of the 
industry websiteSneaker News <http://sneakernews.com/>, tells me in an email. 
“The timing and wording of that quote definitely sucked, but to call New 
Balance a Trump supporter was a reach. “New Balance’s stance on TPP has been 
clear from the get-go. They were not shy about their stance whenPresident Obama 
visited the Nike headquarters 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=6&ved=0ahUKEwiRw6C3oarQAhXrKsAKHS5GBGkQFggyMAU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.wsj.com%2Farticles%2Fnike-offers-to-bring-10-000-jobs-to-u-s-under-pacific-trade-deal-1431089594&usg=AFQjCNFizDaqHCcKogrZ4qlfthAhdLSvEA&sig2=9jIixt-3E9jyyrmnq9B4kQ>
 last May.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdoes-new-balance-really-support-trump-trainers-trade-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cc89e76fc2b880518de3f9c5f50bd5fdc2ebe06%2F0_60_2243_3576%2F2243.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20New%20Balance%20really%20support%20Trump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdoes-new-balance-really-support-trump-trainers-trade-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20New%20Balance%20really%20support%20Trump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdoes-new-balance-really-support-trump-trainers-trade-plans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6cc89e76fc2b880518de3f9c5f50bd5fdc2ebe06%2F0_60_2243_3576%2F2243.jpg>
 Rihanna strides out in New Balance trainers in New York, January 2014. 
Photograph: MediaPunch/Rex/Shutterstock 
Indeed, apart from a brief episode in which it seemed New Balance would stem 
its opposition to TPP in return for alucrative contract supplying the military 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/04/22/475311897/shoemaker-new-balance-challenges-obama-on-trans-pacific-partnership>
, the company has long been in consumers’ good books. It’s a family-friendly 
brand, and it has been nice to watch its rising success. Take-up by celebrity 
fans,such as Rihanna 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=7&ved=0ahUKEwisy97JoarQAhXIJcAKHaJZAsgQFghBMAY&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.instyle.com%2Fnews%2Frihannas-latest-footwear-obsession-80-new-balance-sneakers-you-can-shop-now&usg=AFQjCNGdWGkLXMlhO68O_h5KkG-Qe8KIFQ&sig2=sSJOi1I3BBKfq2MiKFGJow&bvm=bv.138493631,d.d24>
, and an increased focus on lifestyle shoes has boosted New Balance’s 
reputation. Trumpgate is unlikely to damage that, Kim says.

“Miscommunication like this can definitely affect sales because a good portion 
of NB’s annual revenue comes from the average consumer. Those types are not 
unconditional supporters and therefore can easily switch to another one. But 
[New Balance was] quick with the damage control.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdoes-new-balance-really-support-trump-trainers-trade-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc5b46eb2f8988d6f11c6a687a2f2c6d5eaa812a%2F3_99_2373_3377%2F2373.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20New%20Balance%20really%20support%20Trump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdoes-new-balance-really-support-trump-trainers-trade-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20New%20Balance%20really%20support%20Trump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdoes-new-balance-really-support-trump-trainers-trade-plans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc5b46eb2f8988d6f11c6a687a2f2c6d5eaa812a%2F3_99_2373_3377%2F2373.jpg>
 Vanity Fair’s Derek Blasberg in New Balances at the Gucci Cruise show, Dia Art 
Foundation, New York, June 2015. Photograph: Rasmus/BFA.com/Rex/Shutterstock 
Liberal die-hard sneakerheads, too, are unlikely to be put off long-term 
because, as Kim says, “New Balance’s rep is generally positive because of their 
manufacturing practices. It’s hard to see that the quote would have any 
negative effect on the buying habits of this specific demographic.”

New Balance isn’t the first brush a label has had with politics, not even this 
election cycle. Supreme, among others,came out for Hillary Clinton 
<http://www.vogue.com/13500657/fashion-designers-endorse-hillary-clinton-campaign-marc-jacobs-ralph-lauren/>
. And who can forget David Cameron forever banging on abouthis love of Converse 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/3650188/Can-anyone-explain-David-Camerons-trainers.html>
?

Now, it looks as though things might have come good for New Balance, which, 
again,does not support Trump, as it becomes unlikely TPP will pass Congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/12/tpp-trade-deal-congress-obama>
 before the end of Obama’s term. All the company has to worry about now?The 
rise of Vans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/24/how-vans-became-the-new-stan-smith-trainers>
.
 