
Everyone loves a “star is born” story; the classic 42nd Street 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/42nd_Street_(musical)> scenario in which chorus 
girl Peggy Sawyer is told “you’re going out there a youngster, but you’ve got 
to come back a star”. It actually happened toCatherine Zeta-Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/28/catherine-zeta-jones-interview-ageism-hollywood-big-bosses-dads-army>
 when she was an understudy in a 1984 revival of 42nd Street at Drury Lane.

What many audiences like much less is turning up at a theatre having purchased 
tickets to see a star, and discovering that they are getting an understudy 
instead. That’s happened a few times lately, most notably whenNatasha J Barnes 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/opinion/2016/mark-shenton-how-did-sheridan-smiths-understudy-fare-in-funny-girl/>
 stood in forSheridan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/12/sheridan-smith-pulls-out-funny-girl-month-stress-exhaustion-west-end>
 in Funny Girl, and when Ria Jones covered forGlenn Close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/05/sunset-boulevard-review-imperious-glenn-close-gives-show-new-lease-of-life>
 during a brief run of Sunset Boulevard. By many accounts, both were terrific.As
Edward Bennett observed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2008/dec/10/rsc-shakespeare-hamlet-david-tennant-understudy>
 about his much praised stint replacing David Tennant as Hamlet for the RSC, 
such experiences don’t always lead to better job offers. Bennett was out of 
work for a period after Hamlet, and it took the RSC several years to invite him 
back. He was a hit as Benedick inMuch Ado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/16/loves-labours-lost-loves-labours-won-sense>
, a role he will be reprising when it goesout on tour 
<https://www.cft.org.uk/whats-on/event/much-ado-about-nothing> from Chichester 
later this month.

Character building: when understudies steal the show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/30/understudies-steal-show-sunset-boulevard-funny-girl>
When David Tennant pulled out of Hamlet, and was replaced by Bennett, the RSC 
offered those who had booked the opportunity to swap tickets for another 
production, recognising that many – particularly family – audiences hadn’t 
bought them because they wanted to see Hamlet but to see Dr Who. When a 
production is being sold on a star name –Kit Harrington as Doctor Faustus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/26/doctor-faustus-review-kit-harington-duke-of-yorks-theatre-game-of-thrones>
 orBenedict Cumberbatch as Hamlet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/25/hamlet-barbican-review-benedict-cumberbatch-imprisoned-prince>
 – then it is obvious that they are the draw. It seems to me no different from 
buying a washing machine. You choose the brand you want, and if that’s not what 
is delivered then you would either demand it be swapped or that you get your 
money back.


But with many commercial productions, it’s not so clear-cut. Very few people, 
except possibly the principals’ mums, are buying a ticket to see a long-running 
West End show because of whose names are in the programme. They want to seeLes 
Misérables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/05/les-miserables-musicals-we-love-victor-hugo>
 orThe Phantom of the Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/19/phantom-of-the-opera-musicals-we-love>
, and they make the perfectly reasonable assumption that the show will have 
been cast to the highest possible standard. And mostly they are.


I have nothing but admiration for these jobbing actors in long-running shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/jan/09/theatre3>, tirelessly giving it 
their all night in and night out for very little financial reward. They love 
what they do and they know that, while it might be another night at work for 
them, it is always a special occasion for the audience in the house that 
particular evening. Most of the audience won’t even notice that an understudy 
is on. On any one night in the West End, there will be numerous understudies on 
stage, because actors in long-running productions quite rightly have holidays 
as part of their contracts, and nobody can help it if they get ill. For the 
understudies themselves, who are often likely to have smaller roles in the 
production the rest of the time – it’s a chance to step up from out of the 
chorus to play a main role and test themselves.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Funderstudies-cameron-mackintosh-west-end%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07ced52534310b392f8e61cfc27c05f088626a91%2F0_180_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don't%20underestimate%20the%20understudies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Funderstudies-cameron-mackintosh-west-end%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%27t%20underestimate%20the%20understudies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Funderstudies-cameron-mackintosh-west-end%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07ced52534310b392f8e61cfc27c05f088626a91%2F0_180_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Cameron Mackintosh’s company have issued new guidance to understudies about 
their use of social media. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Go on social media and you will find many of these West End performers 
tirelessly talking about the shows they are in and keeping them in the public 
consciousness. As far as I’m aware, no management has ever complained about 
that and asked actors to stop tweeting about a show, but Cameron Mackintosh Ltd 
has recently issued newguidance about the use of social media 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/cameron-mackintosh-understudies-twitter/>
. Performers in the company’s shows cannot use it to distribute show-related 
information without management consent. This means that if you are 
understudying a principal role and know that the principal will be on holiday 
next week, you can’t immediately tell your Twitter followers, because it is 
deemed too commercially sensitive.


Actors in long-running and touring productions do a great deal of unpaid work 
marketing their shows on social media. To suggest that understudies telling 
their followers when they will be performing a lead role will damage the 
commercial viability of a show is absurd in the vast majority of cases.


Of course casting information can be sensitive, but while audiences may indeed 
be justified in asking for a refund if they book to see Glenn Close and find 
that somebody else is performing, it’s unlikely that anybody is going to say 
that Gran’s birthday was ruined becauseÉponine 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89ponine> was on holiday and was being 
played by an understudy. By tweeting about it, that understudy may actually 
sell a few more tickets. Rather than being draconian, Mackintosh should be 
grateful – and have more faith in the talents of his casts.

 