
The booing of Mike Pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video>
, vice-president-elect, at a performance ofHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> last week elicited a response I 
had expected in myself, but hoped might take a little longer to surface, which 
is sympathy for the overdog.

It’s a bourgeois tic, I know – the dislike of public rudeness over what is, 
clearly, the greater offence of Pence’s voting record. But I found it 
impossible not to cringe at what happened at the theatre, in the same way that, 
years ago, I cringed when someone in the audience on BBC’s Question Time was 
monstrously rude to Tony Blair. (I don’t mean vigorously cross-questioned him 
or spoke truth to power; I mean they were petulantly rude, in the manner of a 
sixth-former newly aware of his powers.)

Pence, unlike his philistine boss, was at least going to see Hamilton. Maybe 
something of it would rub off on him, I said to a friend, who scoffed. The 
vice-president-elect, who in his home state of Indiana has tried to restrict 
abortion, enable discrimination against LGBT people and give gun owners the 
right to keep firearms in their vehicles on school property, is not an obvious 
candidate for a liberal epiphany. “Do you think,” said my friend, “he’s going 
to seeHamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> and suddenly say, 
hey, gay people are terrific, somebody tell Satan he can’t have them after all!”

And yet there was something about the booing I didn’t like. It’s not a 
question of respect for high office, that very American reflex that always 
makes Brits sneer at joint press conferences, when the US press corps stands up 
for its leader and the Brits stay stubbornly seated. And it’s not that I object 
to jeering per se. During the campaign, I thought if I saw Donald Trump in the 
street it would give me tremendous satisfaction to yell something rude at him.

A columnist in the Washington Post cried hypocrisy. There was, he wrote, 
nothing more delusional than “a crowd of wealthy, out-of-touch Manhattan 
liberals (who can afford $849 tickets to Hamilton)” booing Pence and lecturing 
him on diversity. But this wasn’t right either; the constituency of the crowd 
was neither here nor there and one got the feeling that this particular 
columnist, a former speechwriter for George W Bush, had uttered the phrase 
“out-of-touch Manhattan liberals” before.

I suppose it seemed to me like a tactical error – one that, while cathartic 
for the booers, was likely to entrench Pence further in his reactionary views. 
As we all strain to look outside our bubbles, isn’t it better forMike Pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence> to see Hamilton than Cats?

Father knows best

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmike-pence-hamilton-audience-booing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febf312d0a7d52f2e0f42b9cc7db3604b349cdc50%2F0_82_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don%E2%80%99t%20boo%20Mike%20Pence%20%E2%80%93%20at%20least%20he%20went%20to%20Hamilton%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmike-pence-hamilton-audience-booing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%E2%80%99t%20boo%20Mike%20Pence%20%E2%80%93%20at%20least%20he%20went%20to%20Hamilton%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmike-pence-hamilton-audience-booing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febf312d0a7d52f2e0f42b9cc7db3604b349cdc50%2F0_82_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
 ‘“Where’s your son?” I asked. “He’s fine,” said my male friend, without 
looking around.’ Photograph: Attila Kisbenedek/EPA 
Dads are different from mums, I was reminded this week, when I met up with a 
male friend and his son at the park. He and I stood chatting while the kids ran 
around, but my mind was a quarter in it. Mainly I was watching to see if my 
kids tripped, climbed under the fence, touched a pigeon, or zoomed out of my 
vision for more than half a second.

“Where’s your son?” I asked. “He’s fine,” he said, without looking around.

This seems a healthier attitude to me, one that I see dads at the park espouse 
all the time, a less grabby and jittery approach than the mums’. Also, less 
talkative. I know language acquisition depends on jabbering at your kids 
non-stop, but I sometimes hear myself – “Are you putting that in the cup?! Wow! 
You are! You’re putting it in the cup!” – and want to die. At the baby gym this 
week, the sound of 12 mothers all feverishly narrating their toddlers’ every 
move sounded like the enactment of a biblical curse.

The politics of playtime 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmike-pence-hamilton-audience-booing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0255323ad7e77224b630cc6b7a545917006b72b1%2F0_332_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don%E2%80%99t%20boo%20Mike%20Pence%20%E2%80%93%20at%20least%20he%20went%20to%20Hamilton%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmike-pence-hamilton-audience-booing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%E2%80%99t%20boo%20Mike%20Pence%20%E2%80%93%20at%20least%20he%20went%20to%20Hamilton%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fmike-pence-hamilton-audience-booing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0255323ad7e77224b630cc6b7a545917006b72b1%2F0_332_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
 Toddler etiquette: ‘I may teach mine to boo and call it a day.’ Photograph: 
Thomas Barwick/Getty Images 
And the baroque etiquette when one toddler bumps into another! A kid called 
Mason barrelled into one of my daughters and they both fell over. “Say sorry, 
Mason,” said his mother. Mason looked blank. “She’s fine, don’t worry,” I said, 
but we still had to stand there for five minutes while Mason, who is 18 months 
old, was badgered and cajoled and ultimately exempted from saying sorry because 
he shows no sign of being able to speak. I may teach my two to boo and call it 
a day.
 