
Computers have inevitably changed the world of crosswords. Software for 
cruciverbalists is now widely available on the market and, let's face it, makes 
the job both of compiling and solving puzzles much easier.

For the compiler, the laborious first part of the task is filling a given 
solution grid with acceptable answers. Using the same basic format as a 
computer's spellchecker, programs will now, at the press of a button, fill any 
grid you care to offer them. Alternatively, if the compiler has filled most of 
the grid the old way by brain and eye, the program can greatly speed the final 
difficult part of the process by offering up alternatives for the remaining 
bits.

The limitation of these programs lies precisely in the fact that, like 
spellcheckers, they rely on the thesaurus they have stored in. So, if that is 
limited, then so will be the range of words used as solutions. Thus, neither 
"Blair Babes", nor "Sir Roger de Coverley", nor "nom de plume", nor anything 
else a bit unusual, is likely to turn up in puzzles compiled in this way.

These programs, because of the way they are written, also tend to throw up the 
same pattern of words again and again. Many also use American spellings. 
However, they represent a huge saving in time and money to publishers of 
standard quick crosswords and downmarket puzzles books.

There was even a persistent rumour put about by the compilers involved, though 
eventually denied by their crossword editor, that another London broadsheet was 
intending to cut costs by filling its daily cryptic crossword by computer with 
words already stored in its database and simply inviting its compilers to 
submit individual words and clues for them.

There is no doubt that such a system could be made to work and would save 
money. It is even possible that the solvers of the paper's puzzles, which carry 
no nom de guerre, would not notice that anything had changed - at least for a 
while. But I find it hard to believe that within a short time the result would 
not be a more banal output. I am happy to say that even the idea of such a 
thing would not be given room at the Guardian.

For those interested in computerised crosswords, though, the market leader in 
the UK seems to be Anthony Lewis. I say this not on the basis of information 
about his or anyone else's sales figures, but because many of those who send in 
puzzles to me on spec, hoping to become Guardian compilers, are clearly using 
his programs: he upgrades regularly and his layouts have characteristics that I 
have come to recognise.

A number of our regular compilers also use his software or some other as an 
aide, not least because the formats can be saved and then sent in as an email 
attachment. The Lewis program is available atcrossword-compiler.com 
<http://www.crossword-compiler.com>.

While in the business of giving the game away, I should point out that 
crossword-compiler.com <http://www.crossword-compiler.com> can obviously be 
used in reverse ascrossword-solver.com <http://www.crossword-solver.com>. If 
you are stuck on a final corner of a puzzle, all you have to do is to fill the 
grid with the letters you already have and the program will make you offers for 
the missing solutions, until you find one that fits.

Alternatively, the Lewis program and others on the market offer a facility for 
finding words that fit a pattern - for example, Z??DO? (6). Provided always, of 
course, that the thesaurus in the system has the word you are looking for.

Whether you, the solver, use such a shortcut to complete a puzzle is your 
choice. It is a free world and, after the initial investment in the software, 
cheaper than ringing the daily helplines that all papers now so considerately 
provide at 60p a minute.

But, without wishing to seem purist or sound pious, I can't see the point of 
using such artificial aids in what is a recreational activity. For Bill 
Shankly, football may have been more important than life and death, but I still 
think of a crossword as just a crossword. To my mind, using a computer to find 
the missing answers is like cheating at patience, or going for a walk and 
taking a taxi for half the distance.

But maybe I am just revealing a failure to understand the nature of real 
addiction, which makes it impossible to wait until the morrow for the answer.

Â·  Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor.
 