
Merry Christmas! And again: Merry Christmas! And again: Merry Christmas! I’m 
going to keep this up until everyone realises these days in which we now find 
ourselves are not the dead and dreary affairs they seem but are still actually
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. Merry 
Christmas! Got the message yet? No? In that case: Merry Christmas!

One of the greatest and most toxic tricks capitalism has played is to convince 
us that Christmas begins around October and finishes on 25 December. It means 
that singing carols and pulling crackers can seem odd things to do in January, 
a month which, in the corporate calendar, is all about joining a gym, embarking 
on spurious detox regimes and returning to workplace drudgery. But it’s high 
time we fought back by remembering that these days remain ripe for revelry.

We dedicated a year to self-improvement: here’s what it taught us | Carl 
Cederström and André Spicer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/02/self-improvement-optimization>
Christian traditions in the west tend to have Christmas ending on 5 or 6 
January, with the arrival of the magi, the “wise men”, at the nativity scene. 
And you can keep the decorations up for longer if you so wish: the tree and 
crib in some churches remain in place untilthe feast of Candlemas 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Candlemas> in February.

Corporations are keen for us to forget this and move on to the next thing, all 
the better to flog us stuff. I thought the line about Easter eggs in the shops 
at Christmas was a joke until I visitedmy local M&S 
<https://twitter.com/EntsPeter/status/814561029841620993> the other day. Making 
the Christmas spirit last as late as possible therefore feels like a response 
of gentle rebellion.

But how to accomplish it? There are little things we can all do. Rather than 
ask colleagues at the office how their Christmas went, you can ask them how 
their Christmas is going. You can keep sending Christmas cards. You can keep 
giving Christmas presents. You can continue to wear all the festive clothes, 
play all the pointless games, wear all the stupid hats and consume all the 
decadent food and drink, generally keeping up all the stuff you’ve been doing 
for the past few weeks.

Be lazy. Eat dirty. Gold top, not skimmed. And if you can bear the risk of 
getting slapped in the mouth, wish Merry Christmas to random passersby – you 
know, like you usually let yourself do only on 25 December.

Then there’s the stuff that takes a bit more organisation but will be 
massively worth it. It’s surely time, for example, to revive the tradition of 
thetwelfth night party 
<https://blog.library.si.edu/2013/01/twelfth-night-traditions-a-cake-a-bean-and-a-king/#.WGkxH_mLTIU>
: you might get to be king or queen for the night, sit on a throne and get 
given a paper crown, a sceptre and, “if possible, full regalia”. Beats doing 
unspeakable things with acai berries and mung beans. You could even convert at 
the end of the week to the Orthodox church and have awhole other Christmas Day 
on 7 January 
<https://www.timeanddate.com/holidays/common/orthodox-christmas-day>.

There will be some to whom all this will sound irksome in the extreme. They 
will have had their senses filled with forced jollity since the hazy days of 
autumn. They will be desperate for the icy bath, the austere decor, the dour, 
the monochrome, the no-nonsense, the shearing of frills, the shredding and 
chipping of the domestic evergreen. I sympathise with them to quite a degree. 
Yet their quarrel should be not with Christmas, but with the forces of 
commerce, for they have done their best to obliterate another special time of 
year: Advent.

New Year's resolutions: Why setting career goals is a waste of time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2017/jan/01/new-years-resolutions-why-setting-career-goals-is-a-waste-of-time>
What has traditionally been a season of quiet and reflection has become a 
month of gaudy, chintzy, Mammon-worshipping mayhem. Get Advent right and 
Christmas finds its proper place; we’d have been celebrating it for a little 
over a week, which would hardly be overkill.

So we can sit around in grey spirits in grey rooms and wait for the first 
celebrity death of the year to confirm that 2016 wasn’t as exceptional as we 
hoped it was. Or we can keep trying to do this season-of-goodwill thing and 
make the most of the opportunities it brings to add colour and flavour and joy 
to the lives of ourselves and our friends in these early January days.

So here it is: Merry Christmas. Everybody’s having fun. Yes we blimmin’ well 
still are.
 