
Donald Trump has tossed around the term “clean coal” in his murky plan to 
boost jobs in the fossil fuel industry for months now. Most recently ina video 
<https://www.greatagain.gov/news/message-president-elect-donald-j-trump.html> 
in which the president-elect vowed to “cancel job killing restrictions on the 
production of shale energy and clean coal, creating many millions of 
high-paying jobs” during his first 100 days in the office.

What Trump meant by “clean coal” is unclear. Coal is a dirty fuel with a 
declining fortune. With production falling, at least half a dozen coal mining 
companies havefiled for bankruptcy 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-coal-bankruptcy-idUSKCN0XC2KQ> within 
the past two years. Technical advances in fracking have increased the 
production of natural gas and driven down prices, making it cheaper than coal 
and a more attractive source of energy for power generation. How Trump plans to 
beat that economic reality to promote the production of both coal and natural 
gas is puzzling.

While the term feels like an oxymoron, it’s used more often within the energy 
industry to refer to an expensive technology called carbon capture and storage 
(CCS) that once promised to keep coal power a dominant source of electricity 
for decades to come. Efforts to make clean coal technology affordable in the US 
have so farfailed despite hundreds of millions of dollars 
<https://thinkprogress.org/futuregen-dead-again-obama-pulls-plug-on-nevergen-clean-coal-project-674558dd83a3#.96g0yfrhr>
 in government and private funding. But public and private funding continue to 
pour in as proponents believe the technology will play an important role in 
many countries that have pledged to cut emissions and abide by the Paris 
climate agreement that went into effect last month.

Putting a price on carbon to force businesses to cut emissions will help to 
create a market for CCS, energy experts say. But how will Trump make it work if 
he is bent on relaxing regulations?

Can our need for a carbon-free future override our fears of nuclear energy?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/12/carbon-free-plants-nuclear-energy-future-power-state-sources>
CCS refers to a family of technologies that catches as much as 90% of the 
carbon dioxide emissions from burning fossil fuels, preventing them from 
escaping into the atmosphere and contributing to global warming. The captured 
emissions are then either stored underground or used toboost oil production 
<http://neori.org/resources-on-co2-eor/how-co2-eor-works/> by pumping it 
underground to pry loose the sticky oil from the rocks. On a much smaller 
scale, carbon dioxide has been used to make a variety of products, including 
paint, plastic and fuels such as diesel.

Energy experts at organizations such as the International Energy Agency 
<http://hub.globalccsinstitute.com/sites/default/files/publications/201158/global-status-ccs-2016-summary-report.pdf>
 and theUnited Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/syr/AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf> 
believe CCS is an essential tool in the battle against global warming because 
fossil fuels remain major sources of emissions. The technology can capture 
carbon dioxide released while making products such as steel, cement and 
chemicals.

A pricey technology

The cost of testing and building CCS projects remains high after more than a 
decade of significant investments. One of the most notable flops, called 
FutureGen, was a $1.7bn public-private project that began in 2003. FutureGen 
was killed twice, by both the Bush and Obama administrations, after it 
ballooned into an expensive undertaking thatfaced lawsuits 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/clean-coal-power-plant-killed-again/>
 and couldn’t line up the money necessary to complete it in Illinois. By its 
second demise, the government had spent about $116.5m of the $1.1bn 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/clean-coal-power-plant-killed-again/>
 it committed in 2010.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftrump-supports-clean-coal-but-does-it-really-have-a-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0861e9e6a3592434abb6edc6ba1107a7a47b64c1%2F0_0_3456_5184%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20supports%20'clean%20coal'%20%E2%80%93%20but%20does%20it%20really%20have%20a%20future%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftrump-supports-clean-coal-but-does-it-really-have-a-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20supports%20%27clean%20coal%27%20%E2%80%93%20but%20does%20it%20really%20have%20a%20future%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Ftrump-supports-clean-coal-but-does-it-really-have-a-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0861e9e6a3592434abb6edc6ba1107a7a47b64c1%2F0_0_3456_5184%2F3456.jpg>
 NRG and its partners are about to bring online the $1bn Petra Nova project It 
captures carbon dioxide at a coal power plant to prevent it from getting into 
the atmosphere and contribute to global warming. Photograph: NRG Energy 
Yet, public funding for its research hasn’t stopped. The US Department of 
Energy has invested more than $4.8bn in CCS development and testing since 2009. 
Last week, it announced a$44m grants to 16 CCS projects 
<http://energy.gov/under-secretary-science-and-energy/articles/energy-department-announces-more-44-million-co2-storage>
 from California to Georgia.

Currently, there are 38 large-scale CCS projects underway around the world, 
including three in the US, though pilot and demonstration efforts and other CCS 
initiatives number in the hundreds globally, the Global CCS Institute noted in 
its2016 report 
<https://www.globalccsinstitute.com/Downloads/global-status-ccs-2016-summary-report%20(1).pdf>
.

The three ongoing industrial-size CCS projects in the US are the Illinois 
Industrial Carbon Capture and Storage Project; the Kemper project in 
Mississippi, which is something of a poster-child fordelays and cost overruns 
<http://www.politico.com/agenda/story/2015/05/billion-dollar-kemper-clean-coal-energy-project-000015>
; and the$1bn Petra Nova project 
<http://www.nrg.com/generation/projects/petra-nova/>, a 50-50 joint venture of 
NRG Energy and JX Nippon Oil & Gas Exploration Corp, Japan’s largest oil 
producer.

Petra Nova is scheduled to come online by the end of the year. It will capture 
carbon dioxide from a retrofitted, not newly built, coal-fired power plant 
southwest of Houston. NRG plans to pipe the captured carbon dioxide to an oil 
field 80 miles away to help its boost production. Petra Nova’s funding includes
a grant of $190m 
<https://www.cslforum.org/cslf/sites/default/files/documents/tokyo2016/KennedyTsubatani-PetraNovaCCSProject-Workshop-Session2-Tokyo1016.pdf>
from the energy department, $300m from JX Nippon, $300m from NRG and $250m in 
loans from a pair or Japanese banks.

While NRG is able to complete the project, it doesn’t plan to build another 
unless one of two things happen: oil prices rise to create demand for carbon 
dioxide, or carbon capture prices fall.

The hydropower paradox: is this energy as clean as it seems?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/06/hydropower-hydroelectricity-methane-clean-climate-change-study>
“The model that we put together was extremely financially viable at $100 oil,” 
said David Knox, a NRG spokesman. Currently, oil prices hover around $50 per 
barrel.

In the meantime, power plant owners and other businesses that rely on fossil 
fuels will likely face a continual pressure to cut their emissions and figure 
out how to dispose of them. As a result, NRG and Canada’s Oil Sands Innovations 
Alliance (COSIA) are sponsoring a $20m competition to find new use for carbon 
dioxide. They’ve selected 27 semi-finalist teams from six countries, including 
18 teams from the US. The teams have proposed to convert carbon dioxide into 
products as varied as concrete, biofuels, toothpaste, fish food and fertilizer. 
The money will be divvied up among several winners.

The benefit of political pressure

NRG’s partnership with other firms in Petra Nova and the competition reflects 
the growing interest in CCS by the oil and gas sector. Ten of the world’s 
biggest oil companies, mostly European companies such asTotal, BP and Shell, 
earlier this month pledged 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-oil-climatechange-idUSKBN12Z158> to invest 
$1bn to develop climate-friendly technologies, including a large chunk for CCS.

Critics called the pledge minuscule. Some environmental groups oppose CCS 
altogether because they believe backing the technology signals support for 
fossil fuels.

Private investments alone may not be enough to make CCS a good tool to fight 
climate change. One of the best ways to create a market for CCS, according to 
more than80% of economists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jan/04/consensus-of-economists-cut-carbon-pollution>
 with climate expertise, is to enact a broad reaching carbon policy that forces 
businesses to pay for their emissions. But the Trump administration and
Republican-led Congress 
<http://voxeu.org/article/sordid-history-congressional-acceptance-and-rejection-cap-and-trade-implications-climate-policy>
 won’t likely favor enacting this type of regulation.

“Carbon capture can’t compete in today’s environment where there’s no penalty 
for releasing CO2 emissions into the atmosphere, because it’s always cheaper to 
release emissions than to try and clean up them up,” says Howard J. Herzog, 
senior research engineer at the MITEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Initiative at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Legislation is pending in Congress to increase CCS tax subsidies. Tax credits 
likely won’t sufficiently lower the cost of building a new coal plant, but it 
could encourage the use of CCS for existing power plants and industrial 
processes, says David Hawkins, director of the Climate Program at the Natural 
Resources Defense Council.

CCS could gain greater support outside of the US as countries move to meet the 
emission reduction targets of the Paris agreement, proponents of the technology 
believe.

China could be a big market for CCS because it depends heavily on coal for 
energy and has expressed an interest in using carbon capture to meet its Paris 
targets, says Matt Gray, senior utilities & power analyst for the nonprofit 
financial think tank Carbon Tracker, in a new report. The country’s political 
system also makes it easier for CCS to take off.

“And the Chinese government is suited to implementing a CCS strategy because 
it’s very top down,” he says.
 