
Doncaster Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/doncaster> have 
insisted their kit design campaign was “fair and above board” after the 
competition for supporters to create their 2016-17 away shirt was won by the 
One Direction singer Louis Tomlinson.

Rovers asked their fans to send in their ideas, with the top five designs 
being put in an online poll. In the away shirt category, Tomlinson’s black 
design received 33.7% of the votes. But the club attracted criticism when it 
was revealed who was behind the design.

As Doncaster launched the kit in Thailand, the club released a statement 
<http://www.doncasterroversfc.co.uk/news/article/club-statement-3043537.aspx> 
saying: “The process for receiving kit designs, shortlisting and the public 
voting for our kit design competition followed strict legal guidance to ensure 
that the club adhered to competition law and that all processes were fair.

“We are aware that the result of the competition has attracted some mixed 
feedback, but we can assure our fans that the voting process for the 2016/17 
shirt designs was all fair and above board.”

After hearing he had won the kit competition, Tomlinson tweeted: “Soooooo me 
and my Grandad Len won the competition of designing the new Donny away shirt. 
Pretty sick”.
Louis Tomlinson (@Louis_Tomlinson) 
Soooooo me and my Grandad Len won the competition of designing the new Donny 
away shirt. Pretty sick 😎
 <https://twitter.com/Louis_Tomlinson/status/717132259644600324> April 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Louis_Tomlinson/status/717132259644600324> 
The 24-year-old has regularly been involved with events at the Keepmoat 
Stadium in the past, in 2013 signing a non-contract deal in aid of Bluebell 
Wood Children’s Hospice which led to him playing in a reserve team game the 
following year, while he and businessman John Ryan came close to buying the 
club in 2014 before the deal fell through.

As part of the competition, Tomlinson has won flights to Thailand to see the 
first stage of the kit manufacturing.
 