
Dong Energy is planning to create the world’s largest offshore wind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/windpower> maintenance hub in Grimsby, 
creating at least 200 jobs.

The Danish company said the hub would be up and running from March 2018, 
initially serving three east coast windfarms. Westermost Rough is already 
operational, while Race Bank andHornsea Project One are under construction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/03/worlds-largest-offshore-windfarm-to-be-built-off-yorkshire-coast>
. The three wind farms together are expected to generate enough electricity to 
power 1.5m homes.

The new facility at Grimsby’s Royal Dock will include a marine and helicopter 
centre capable for around-the-clock service to offshore farms. It will be 
served by two new hi-tech ships which can carry a 60-strong maintenance crew 
and remain at sea for long periods.

Brent Cheshire, Dong’s UK chairman, said the investment, worth about £10m, was 
a vote of confidence in the UK industry and would make windfarm maintenance 
more efficient.

“This new operational hub in Grimsby will be a game-changing industry first, 
raising the bar for the way we serve offshore wind farms,” Dong said. “It will 
generate direct and indirect job opportunities in the Humber region, as well as 
opportunities for the local supply chain,.

“It represents a massive vote of confidence to the UK offshore wind industry 
and confirms our commitment to the Humber region, where by 2019 we expect to 
have invested around £6bn.”

Cheshire said Britain’s decision to leave the EU had no impact on Dong’s 
investment plans in the UK.

“The Brexit vote doesn’t really affect us at all and we have currently 
committed to 2020. We see no real threat to offshore wind from the nuclear 
story. Offshore wind has a real part to play in terms of government policy and 
the signals are that it is very much part of the strategy.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fdong-energy-windfarm-maintenance-hub-grimsby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F707de50debe366b2bb7f9db2c8dbc33580872a55%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dong%20Energy%20plans%20world's%20largest%20windfarm%20repair%20hub%20at%20Grimsby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fdong-energy-windfarm-maintenance-hub-grimsby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dong%20Energy%20plans%20world%27s%20largest%20windfarm%20repair%20hub%20at%20Grimsby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fdong-energy-windfarm-maintenance-hub-grimsby%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F707de50debe366b2bb7f9db2c8dbc33580872a55%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.png>
 An impression of one of the new ships, designed by Rolls-Royce. Photograph: 
Dong 
Dong, which is based in Copenhagen and employs more than 600 people in 
Britain, said the new hub would create about 200 jobs. The Grimsby facility 
will have the capacity to support other east coast windfarms planned by Dong.

It will sit alongside the existing Westermost Rough maintenance centre, with 
the extra land to be leased from Associated British Ports.

The two ships have been designed by Rolls-Royce and will be supplied by the 
Norwegian shipping company Østensjø Rederi. The first ship will be delivered in 
late 2017.

Dong floated on the stock market in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/09/windfarm-owner-dong-energy-floats-for-10bn>
 but the Danish government remains its biggest shareholder, owning just over 
half of the shares.
 