
On a sodden, cold and otherwise underpowered afternoon at the Emirates Stadium 
Olivier Giroud <https://www.theguardian.com/football/olivier-giroud> provided 
an unforgettable moment of illumination. The Frenchman has found himself down 
the pecking order in recent months, demoted to second choice as collateral 
damage to Alexis Sánchez’s reinvention as a spiky central striker. One thing 
does seem certain, though. Whatever direction Giroud’s strangely divisive 
five-year Arsenal career takes from here, however the club’s hotly-contested 
modern history ends up remembering him, he is unlikely to have a better moment, 
in isolation, than the opening goal here. Olivier, old boy, we’ll always have 
Palace.

What are we calling it then? A Henrikh? A studs-up, reach-back semi-scorpion? 
Perhaps the greatest no-look donkey-kick breakaway volley you’re likely to see 
outside the pixelated world of early 1990s arcade machines? Certainly Henrikh 
Mkhitaryan does seem have been on to something with his discovery of the 
sole-of-the-boot, reach-around volley.

A celebration of scorpion kicks, from Zico to Zlatan Ibrahimovic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/scorpion-kick-henrik-mkhitaryan-olivier-giroud-goals>
Giroud’s version, the opener in this 2-0 defeat of a disappointing Crystal 
Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/arsenal-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
, was even better. The build-up was wonderfully slick. Lucas Pérez won the ball 
and slipped it to Héctor Bellerín. Giroud’s back-heel found Granit Xhaka, who 
passed to Alex Iwobi. He did exactly the right thing at exactly the right 
speed, driving forward and zipping an instant pass to Sánchez. Sánchez paused, 
looked up and floated a cross just behind Giroud as he rumbled into the box.

Hmmm. What to do now? Hang on. In a moment of extreme, imaginative spatial 
awareness Giroud stretched his left foot up behind his shoulder and sent the 
ball arcing off his studs past his own left ear and over Wayne Hennessey. With 
an added gloss the ball even had the presence of mind to clang in off the 
underside of the crossbar, thereby adding a 20% premium on goal of the season 
scores, a principle known as Yeboah’s Law.

Giroud, charming as ever, laughed afterwards and said his finish was lucky, 
that he was off balance and just made something up in the moment. It was 
certainly a fluke in the sense that nobody could realistically hope to do it 
again.

As the ball crossed the line there was an odd moment of hush around the 
Emirates, the air seeming to disappear out of the stadium then rush back in 
with a gulp at the pure audacity of a moment that had little in common with the 
angsty bustle that made up most of the opening 45 minutes.

Or indeed little in common with the recent trajectory of Giroud’s Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> career. The absence from recent 
starting XIs is a consequence in part of his own late return from the Euro 2016 
final. But Giroud remains an oddly divisive figure, a cumbersome No9 who can 
look both immobile and also razor sharp, blunt and brilliantly bullish, at 
times all within the same attack.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonkey-scorpion-olivier-giroud-volley-arsenal-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53ace35dd83a09d4b6b0c4da65f4f06dce3d7081%2F133_110_2249_1457%2F2249.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donkey%20or%20scorpion%3F%20Olivier%20Giroud%E2%80%99s%20volley%20defies%20classification%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonkey-scorpion-olivier-giroud-volley-arsenal-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donkey%20or%20scorpion%3F%20Olivier%20Giroud%E2%80%99s%20volley%20defies%20classification%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonkey-scorpion-olivier-giroud-volley-arsenal-crystal-palace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53ace35dd83a09d4b6b0c4da65f4f06dce3d7081%2F133_110_2249_1457%2F2249.jpg>
 Arsenal’s Olivier Giroud scores his stunning goal. Photograph: Adam Davy/PA 
His start here was just his second in the league this season. Arsenal have 
looked sharper and more direct in his absence. But he still has sixPremier 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> goals in his last 
four starts, albeit across seven months since the end of last season. Indeed, 
his goalscoring record is good throughout his entire time at Arsenal, even if 
the impression remains of a fine plan B dressed up in the ill-fitting tinsel of 
a first choice A-lister. The transition from Robin van Persie, a glistening, 
pedigree, title-winning striker replaced by a hopeful workhorse seemed to sum 
up, for some, the frustrations of the late austerity years.

Giroud scores at a similar rate to the man he replaced. But critics will say 
he just doesn’t seem to do so at the right time, or against the right teams, or 
with the right degree of match-sealing elan. Shortly before his goal here he 
missed an absolute sitter, failing to connect in front of goal as Nacho Monreal 
flashed a volleyed cross though the six-yard box. The ball was skimming and 
slick on the surface. But being in place to prod those in is pretty much the 
job, not the one-off worldie back-flick stuff. In one sense even that wondrous 
opening goal was simply a large, quite slow man falling over to brilliant 
effect, a moment of pub-football art.

Olivier Giroud’s brilliant back-heel helps Arsenal sink Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/arsenal-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
Giroud’s own reaction was lovely, pure joy but also laughter. In the seats the 
home fans also giggled and danced and hugged rather than just punching the air 
and acting as though this was anything other than an isolated moment of extreme 
skill, plus an indication of the basic fun, the occasional silliness of sport.

Arsenal scored again on 56 minutes, this time through a well-placed header 
from Iwobi. Giroud’s moment aside Iwobi was their best player and most 
significant presence. Given a chance to play at No10 in Mesut Özil’s absence 
through illness, Iwobi had a fine game. Socks half-rolled down, not exactly 
quick but persistent, not exactly powerful but tenacious, he was careful with 
the ball, and always looking to drive forward and inflict pain on the Palace 
defence.

Arsène Wenger was generous in his praise afterwards. Seasons rarely turn on 
fine moments, and Arsenal’s fans will take just as much heart form Iwobi’s 
craft as they will from a goal that will live long in the memory.
 