
British border officials were drafted in to work with their French 
counterparts at Dover to ease huge queues of ferry-bound holidaymakers after 
many faced delays of up to 16 hours as roads to the port came to a standstill 
at the weekend.

The delays, which forced some motorists to spend the night in their cars, were 
expected to last into Monday, police said, and have been caused by the “vast 
volume of holiday traffic”, and heightened security at the border following 
increased checks by French authorities in the wake of recent terror attacks.

Kent police said on Sunday morning travellers could expect delays of 10 hours 
on the A20, with about 12 miles of traffic queueing back to junction 11 of the 
M20. Those travelling to the port were urged to take food and water supplies. 
Delays of more than an hour persisted on Sunday evening.

UK holidaymakers heading off for a summer break spent up to 16 hours in 20C 
heat in traffic jams on the A2, A20 and M20 on Saturday. Police used 
helicopters and motorcyclists to distribute 11,000 bottles of water to those 
stranded in traffic, though those caught up in the chaos complained about a 
lack of water and toilet facilities.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fweather%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fthousands-wait-in-queues-at-dover-border-patrol-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thousands%20wait%20in%20queues%20at%20Dover%20border%20patrol%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fweather%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fthousands-wait-in-queues-at-dover-border-patrol-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thousands%20wait%20in%20queues%20at%20Dover%20border%20patrol%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fweather%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fthousands-wait-in-queues-at-dover-border-patrol-video&media=>
Thousands wait in queues at Dover border patrol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/video/2016/jul/23/thousands-wait-in-queues-at-dover-border-patrol-video>
Congestion showed signs of easing early on Sunday, but the Port of Dover 
warned of waiting times of two-and-a-half hours from Roundhill Tunnels at 
Folkestone, about eight miles away. Once in the port, motorists faced a further 
120 minutes to reach the French border checks.

After complaints that just one French officer was available to check in 
coaches on Friday night into Saturday, port authorities said six booths - four 
for cars, one for coaches, and one for freight traffic – were staffed overnight 
into Sunday.


P&O Ferries sought to reassure motorists who had already missed their allotted 
ferry, tweeting: “Rest assured, if you are stuck in the queues at Border 
Control in Dover we will put you on our next available sailing at no extra 
cost.” 
<https://twitter.com/POferriesupdate/status/757136554519330816?lang=en-gb>


Port of Dover Travel tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/PoD_travelnews/status/757133945792303104?lang=en-gb> that 
the estimated waiting time to get to the port on the A20 from Roundhill Tunnels 
was five and a half hours on Sunday morning, and one hour from Whitfield on the 
A2.




Among those stuck in traffic was Tanya Cudworth, 50, who has multiple 
sclerosis. She was travelling to Germany for potentially life-changing 
treatment on Monday.

Cudworth, from Derby, who had raised £5,000 for stem cell treatment at a 
Frankfurt clinic, set off from Tunbridge Wells with partner Steve Deene, 53, at 
8.30am on Saturday, and finally made it on to a ferry 20 hours later at 4.20am 
on Sunday. She described the experience stuck on the A20 as “absolutely 
horrendous”.

“During the day it was so hot and there was nowhere near enough water and at 
night it was pitch black so you didn’t know what was going on around you. You 
couldn’t sleep because you had to keep moving forward,” she told the Press 
Association.

“We didn’t get any water until 3am and I saw women with babies, young families 
and people with pets with no water. It’s shocking that more wasn’t done to get 
it to people. The authorities weren’t anywhere to be seen.”

At one point, the couple turned off the A20 to try to find a hotel but 
everywhere was booked and they had to return to the queue.
Dover map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/dover-zip/giv-12515aOcbG6X0QeZx/>
The Sikh relief organisation Khalsa Aid, which supplies aid to refugees in 
makeshift camps, found itself helping motorists. The organisation was given a 
blue light escort to distribute 5,800 bottles of water and cereal bars to those 
stranded.

Aid worker Ravi Singh organised the drop after seeing images of the traffic on 
social media. He told Sky News the organisation normally works in the refugee 
camps where there is no water. He said: “And this is Britain, and I think the 
government should really have prepared for this, especially on a day like this, 
on a hot day, to provide some sort of reassurance if this happens there is a 
plan B.”

Some were determined to make the most of it, as Twitter user Hannah Brisley 
discovered when she was treated to an impromptu performance by a choir to whom 
she had given food.

She tweeted: 
hannah brisley (@HannahBrisley) 
After stopping to throw food down for those caught in the chaos,we find out 
they are a singing group!#dovertraffic 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/dovertraffic?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/fwHtgnYPMV 
<https://t.co/fwHtgnYPMV>
 <https://twitter.com/HannahBrisley/status/756952584896872448> July 23, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/HannahBrisley/status/756952584896872448> 
Ollie Burridge, travelling with family to Barcelona from South Wales, told the 
BBC they had been stuck in traffic for 16 hours on the A20 waiting to board 
their ferry. “Everyone got out of their cars,” he said. While some played 
around with a football on the closed London-bound carriageway, he and his 
family got out bats and balls, and “played a spot of tennis over the central 
reservation”.


Their holiday plans were severely disrupted as they had lost their hotel night 
in Dijon, and would “have to try and drive that little bit further to Avignon 
to get to Barcelona on Monday”, he said.

 The Home Office acted as the severity of the disruption became clear late on 
Saturday. Questions have been raised about staffing levels by the French border 
police to deal with the huge number of people travelling.


Port of Dover authorities claimed French border control booths at Dover had 
been “seriously understaffed” overnight. It claimed at one point coaches were 
forced to wait 40 minutes so that all passengers could be checked in as only 
one French official was available.

Xavier Czerwinski, the deputy secretary of the Pas-de-Calais prefecture, told 
journalists “the maximum number of staff have been deployed” to deal with the 
influx of holidaymakers.


“It’s an exceptional situation because it’s the weekend where the British 
leave for the continent ... and there’s the situation inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the state of emergency that 
has been extended in France,” he said.

He added that border agents were required to “check all vehicles rigorously”. 
Another factor, he said, was that the ferry companies could only deal with so 
many customers at any one time.

In addition to the Home Office sending in UK border staff, Kent police will be 
“proactively managing” traffic in a bid to reduce delays that have clogged 
roads during the busiest weekend of the summer break.


A government spokeswoman said: “We recognise the security pressures that 
French law enforcement organisations are under at Dover and we have agreed the 
UK Border Force will assist the PAF (French border police) with border checks 
to remove the backlog.

“We understand that there has been extraordinary disruption in the Dover area 
today [Saturday] but safety is paramount. Measures are also being taken on the 
approach to the port where Kent police will be proactively managing traffic to 
speed up the process.”

Cross-Channel ferries were forced to leave port half empty to meet sailing 
times. Motorists trapped in the queues for most of Saturday complained of lack 
of information about when the disruption might end.


Among them, Joerg Walther and his family, who live in Lincoln, described the 
situation as unprecedented. “Police and service vehicles were driving up and 
down the westbound carriageway,” the IT worker, 50, travelling with his family 
to his home town of Giessen, near Frankfurt, told the Press Association. “Also 
no food other than from a kind local.”

After 14 hours they had travelled about 10 miles before they speeded up, only 
then to be greeted with a sign warning of a further two-hour wait when they 
reached the border.


He said it had taken an ambulance almost an hour to reach an elderly man who 
became distressed on an nearby coach.


Are the Dover delays revenge for Brexit – or bad news for Theresa May? | Mary 
Dejevsky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/25/dover-delays-brexit-theresa-may-traffic-jams>
Police advised people to stay in their cars, despite temperatures peaking at 
20.2C (68.36F), though many got out to wait by their vehicles. Children played 
football to entertain themselves, while others played music and danced on the 
gridlocked roads. Footage from the blocked M20 shows young families dancing to 
a steel drummer accompanied by a tambourine player. In another video a man was 
playing his banjo while waiting by his stationary trailer.


The Conservative MP for Dover, Charlie Elphicke, who was himself stuck in 
traffic for about two hours on Friday, said there had been a lack of forward 
planning that led to “poor transport management”. He called for the government 
to apologise for the “traffic nightmare”.


The shadow home secretary, Andy Burnham, accused the government of being 
“caught ill-prepared once again” and said the prime minister should have 
expected heightened security checks inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>.


Many travellers vented their frustration on Twitter. Motorist Alison Dillon 
tweeted: “Update on journey; still not there 20 hours queuing. My niece walked 
to find food & fainted in petrol station. Disgrace.” 
<https://twitter.com/Alidilly/status/756999648989118469>

It was not just holidaymakers affected by the congestion. Road transport 
lawyers SBC Lawyers said clients could lose millions, 
<https://twitter.com/sbctransportlaw/status/756989805725089792?lang=en-gb>
tweeting: “Dover traffic chaos + summer heat =£millions loss of perishable 
goods bound for EU”.

 UK port authorities have said they have no authority over French operations, 
but said they had raised the staffing issues with the government last week.

A spokewoman for the Highways Agency said: “We also expect that next weekend 
will be busy, but not as busy as this weekend.”
 