
Talk about leaving it late. Rafael Benítez’s increasingly agitated body 
language told its own story as stoppage time began withNorwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/norwichcity> leading 3-2 and poised to 
collect three points but Alex Neil’s world was about to be turned upside down.

Gareth Southgate: the nice guy with the guts to shake up England | Louise 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/gareth-southgate-england-caretaker-manager-sam-allardyce>
When, six added minutes later, the referee finally blew his whistle, last-gasp 
goals from Yoan Gouffran and Dwight Gayle – who registered a hat-trick – had 
sheared through mounting despair on Tyneside to leave Newcastle third, a point 
behind Norwich and three in arrears of the leaders, Huddersfield Town.

“I’m really proud of my players,” said Benítez. “We deserved to win but had 
bad luck and it was incredible to go 3-1 down at one point. I’m really pleased 
we got our good luck back at the end. This kind of result can be very important 
for team spirit. It can be very important for our future.”

Neil needed several gulps of water before speaking. “It was bizarre,” he said. 
“I’m frustrated, disappointed, there’s so many emotions.”

Who could have imagined that? Initially the night had been all about a cagey 
counterattacking visiting gameplan and Gayle’s struggles to score. Newcastle’s 
No9 finally succeeded by turning in Matt Ritchie’s cross from close range after 
he had missed three presentable openings.

Norwich were seeking a sixth straight win but it seemed they had no answers to 
either Jonjo’s Shelvey’s central midfield vision and incision or Newcastle’s 
crossing ability, with DeAndre Yedlin and Ritchie creating havoc down the right.

Karl Darlow had been a virtual bystander until Graham Dorrans equalised from 
the penalty spot after Gouffran fouled Robbie Brady. Suitably galvanised, 
Dorrans began reminding everyone that Shelvey was not the only player on the 
pitch capable of hitting devastating long passes and, almost imperceptibly, 
Newcastle were on the back foot. When they failed to clear Jacob Murphy’s 
cross, Cameron Jerome was allowed to come inside, switch feet and direct a 
fabulous curling shot into the top corner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fnewcastle-united-norwich-city-championship-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9af070e75842de6294ff1ca8f5318fdfc99a836%2F0_0_3232_1939%2F3232.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dwight%20Gayle%20scores%20hat-trick%20as%20Newcastle%20stun%20Norwich%20with%20stoppage-time%20double&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fnewcastle-united-norwich-city-championship-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dwight%20Gayle%20scores%20hat-trick%20as%20Newcastle%20stun%20Norwich%20with%20stoppage-time%20double&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fnewcastle-united-norwich-city-championship-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9af070e75842de6294ff1ca8f5318fdfc99a836%2F0_0_3232_1939%2F3232.jpg>
 Dwight Gayle fires home the winning goal for Newcastle United during stoppage 
time. Photograph: Ed Sykes/Reuters 
Benítez’s discomfort grew as Murphy’s long-range shot took a hefty deflection 
off Jamaal Lascelles and flew beyond a wrong-footed Darlow.

Neil’s turn to swear came as Gayle controlled Shelvey’s through ball adroitly 
before his shot beat Michael McGovern. The Scot’s language deteriorated further 
as Gouffran and Gayle ripped up the night’s narrative, the former heading in 
Yedlin’s cross and the latter turning and shooting low past Norwich’s 
distraught goalkeeper.
 