 The Earl of Ilchester appeared before the Guildford County Bench yesterday on 
an adjourned summons charging him with furious motoring on 12 July. Sergeant 
Jarrett said the car travelled over a measured distance of 176 yards at a rate 
of more than 13 miles an hour. Cross-examined, witnesses said defendant's 
chauffeur tried to rush the police. Defendant did not give his name when asked, 
but the chauffeur subsequently wrote the defendant's address and gave it as 
Islington instead of Kensington. Lord Ilchester said he cautioned his driver to 
go slowly from Ripley to Guildford because of police traps, and he was not 
proceeding more than six miles an hour when he was stopped. He gave his name to 
the sergeant, but refused his chauffeur's because he thought the owner should 
take the responsibility.
In answer to Jarrett, Lord Ilchester denied that when he was returning in the 
evening through Ripley he took off his goggles and made grimaces at the 
sergeant (loud laughter). Miss Roche, who was on the car, deposed that they 
were travelling well under the 12 miles an hour. She and Lord Ilchester gave 
their names immediately they stopped, and no attempt was made to rush the 
police. Mr Acland Hood, who appeared for the defendant, contended that 176 
yards was not a fair distance for making a speed trial, especially where there 
was a slight dip in the road.

The chairman, Sir William Chance, said the Bench had no doubt that the driver 
was exceeding 12 miles and there would be the usual fine of £3. Without saying 
Lord Ilchester tried to rush the police, they still thought he endeavoured to 
get away, and for that he would also be fined £3.
 