
An energy company has been given the green light to explore for shale gas in 
the East Midlands, the first step towards the site being potentially fracked in 
the future.

Nottinghamshire council approved iGas’s planning application to vertically and 
horizontally drill two wells at Misson in north Nottinghamshire, by a vote of 
seven to four.

The decision is another boost for the fledgling shale gas industry, marking 
the UK’s third site to be approved for exploration this year.

Friends of the Earth last month successfully delayed the council’s decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/05/anti-fracking-groups-protest-as-council-mulls-over-shale-gas-drilling>
 by arguing that approval would be an illegal act because the drilling is next 
to a protected nature site.
Fracking explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=4d42b98e-1b9d-4f95-b256-e12acfd39f21>
But planning officials, who said the application should be approved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/27/igas-bid-to-drill-shale-wells-in-nottinghamshire-should-get-green-light>
, told councillors on Tuesday that a covenant relating to the Site of Special 
Scientific Interest was not material to the planning process.

Anti-fracking campaigners held a demonstration outside county hall where the 
application was considered, and environmentalists criticised the approval.

Chris Crean, Friends of the Earth’s West Midlands campaigner, said: “This is a 
very disappointing decision from the county council. This proposal failed to 
comply with many requirements and should have been refused for the negative 
impacts it would have on the local environment, including the protected 
wildlife site, the Misson training area Site of Special Scientific Interest 
(SSSI).

“Just a couple of weeks after the Paris climate change agreement came into 
force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
, pursuing extreme methods to get more fossil fuels out of the ground like this 
is completely wrong.”

Unlike fracking sites approved in Lancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-fracking-given-go-ahead-as-lancashire-council-rejection-is-overturned>
 andYorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/23/north-yorkshire-council-backs-first-uk-fracking-tests-for-five-years>
 earlier this year, iGas will need to make a further planning application if it 
wants to employ hydraulic fracturing – fracking – to recover shale gas at the 
former cold war missile base.

Stephen Bowler, CEO of iGas, said: “I am pleased that the committee has made 
this positive determination following the recommendation by the planning 
officer. It has been a long process and everyone has been extremely thorough.”

He added: “We are at a critical juncture in the future of our energy mix and 
supply, as we move away from coal towards lower carbon energy sources. We rely 
significantly on gas in the UK, not just for electricity, but also in heating 
eight out of 10 homes and as a raw material in the manufacture of many everyday 
products, including plastics and clothing.”

The industry body, UKOOG, also welcomed the decision, saying it showed there 
was “positive momentum” in efforts to explore the UK’s shale gas potential.

Greenpeace UK campaigner Hannah Martin said: “It is a deep shame the council 
has decided to give fracking firm iGas the go-ahead to drill in 
Nottinghamshire. This is despite considerable local opposition and Labour and 
Lib Dem national parties backing a fracking ban.

John Wilkinson, chairman of the Planning and Licensing Committee at 
Nottinghamshire County Council said: “Ultimately, the committee concluded that 
the applicant was able to effectively demonstrate how they could address the 
planning issues within the County Council’s jurisdiction, such as traffic, 
noise and access, opening hours, the impact on residential areas and wildlife, 
flooding, heritage and archaeology.”

A decision by the government on whether to allow four shale gas wells to be 
drilled at a second site in Lancashire, at Roseacre Wood on the Fylde, is 
expected before the year is out. Approval hinges on whether Cuadrilla, the 
company hoping to frack the site, is able to address traffic concerns.
 