
Eden Hazard <https://www.theguardian.com/football/eden-hazard> has pledged his 
future to Chelsea despite suggestions that Paris St Germain still hope to lure 
the Belgium international back to Ligue 1.

The forward, whose nine goals this season have established him as Chelsea's 
leading scorer,has been in scintillating form over recent weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/17/eden-hazard-chelsea-jose-mourinho>
 as the Londoners have put together a six-game winning streak in all 
competitions. PSG's interest was mooted in France earlier this month, but 
Hazard has stressed he has no intention of leaving Stamford Bridge mid-season 
and neither does he envisage departing in the summer.

"In every transfer window for the last four years people have been saying I'm 
going here or there," Hazard,a £32m signing from Lille whose contract in London 
runs to 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jun/04/eden-hazard-chelsea-first-team>
, told the French television show, Téléfoot. "It was already like that when I 
was at Lille. Paris keep cropping up in the rumours, because they're a club 
with money, a big club. But I'm at Chelsea, I play all the time, and I like it 
here.

"There's no chance of seeing me leave in this mid-winter window. Even in the 
summer, I don't have any desire to leave. I'm doing well here. I think this is 
the best place for my game to develop and progress." His words echo those of 
José Mourinho, who had indicated earlier this month that the player's value had 
soared while atChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, with the 
club intent upon retaining one of their most consistently impressive performers.

The London club do hope to lure another talent from French football this week, 
with talks progressing withSt Etienne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stetienne> over their highly regarded 
teenage defender Kurt Zouma. Chelsea hope a deal can be struck at around £11m 
for the 19-year-old this week – a player who has attracted interest from 
Manchester United, Monaco and Arsenal in the past – though the centre-half may 
remain at his current club until the end of the season.
 