
Plastic waste covers our oceans and landfill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/20/from-oil-use-to-ocean-pollution-five-facts-about-the-plastics-industry>
. The past 70 years of plastic waste have resulted in pollution so ubiquitous 
scientists say it’s a marker of a new geological epoch, themanmade Anthropocene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/07/human-impact-has-pushed-earth-into-the-anthropocene-scientists-say>
.

Plastic cutlery is a contributor to this enormous problem – estimates suggest 
<http://www.reuseit.com/facts-and-myths/learn-more-disposable-lunch-facts-items-carried-in-work-and-school-lunches.htm>
 the US alone uses 40bn plastic utensils a year – but the founder of Indian 
cutlery companyBakeys <http://www.bakeys.com/> thinks he might have a solution. 
Cutlery you can eat.

The vegan friendly spoons are made from rice, wheat and sorghum, an ancient 
grain originally from Africa. Sorghum was chosen as a primary ingredient for 
its tough quality (it doesn’t go soggy in liquids) and because it is suitable 
for cultivation in semi-arid areas.

The cutlery comes in three flavours – savoury (salt and cumin), sweet (sugar) 
and plain. “It tastes like a cracker, a dry cracker because we don’t put any 
fat in it. It can complement any food. The taste of the food gets into the 
spoon,” says company founder Narayana Peesapaty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fedible-cutlery-company-eat-plastic-pollution-oceans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bfdcf55bb0d2a771167bfc30f64faaebf5cea16%2F10_13_698_419%2F698.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edible%20cutlery%20company%20wants%20us%20to%20eat%20our%20way%20out%20of%20plastic%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fedible-cutlery-company-eat-plastic-pollution-oceans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edible%20cutlery%20company%20wants%20us%20to%20eat%20our%20way%20out%20of%20plastic%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fedible-cutlery-company-eat-plastic-pollution-oceans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bfdcf55bb0d2a771167bfc30f64faaebf5cea16%2F10_13_698_419%2F698.jpg>
 Photograph: Bakeys 
Bakeys’ crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1240116767/edible-cutlery-the-future-of-eco-friendly-utensils>
 had a goal of $20,000 (£14,000) but has already raised 12 times that. A 
parallel campaign on Indian platformKetto <https://www.ketto.org/bakeys> has 
exceeded its 100,000 rupee (£1,050) goal 24 times over. Peesapaty says he has 
had emails pouring in from around the world. “It is so simple and it is this 
simplicity that has caught the attention of most people,” he says.

With a background in forest management, Peesapaty previously worked at the 
International Water Management Institute’s crop research centre and says he 
wanted to use a raw material that won’t put much pressure on water resources.

BYO cutlery: why we should all carry our own knives and forks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/nov/11/byo-cutlery-carry-own-knife-fork-chopsticks>
Even if the spoons are dumped after use, they decompose in a few days, 
according to the company. Bakeys says this makes its product more 
environmentally friendly than biodegradable plastic utensils made from corn 
plastic, which need to be subjected to high heat in specialised composting 
facilities to break down.

The spoons are packaged in paper bags and shipped using styrofoam to prevent 
breakage. Peesapaty acknowledges this is the least sustainable part of the 
operation and is looking for alternatives.

Although the edible cutlery has only just found a following – a recent Facebook
 video with Peesapaty 
<https://www.facebook.com/thebetterindia/videos/10154010837019594/> has had 
more than 5m views – Bakeys has been making spoons at its factory in Hyderabad, 
India, since 2011, where it employs nine women. It sells 1.5m spoons per year 
to catering companies serving food at weddings and other events, but Peesapaty 
hopes take-up among food vendors will grow.

There are challenges. While Peesapaty hopes to expand Bakeys’ offering to 
edible chopsticks and forks, edible knives are out as moisture blunts them. The 
biggest hurdle is probably cost. Bakeys can sell an edible spoon for 2 rupees 
(2p), cheaper than the wooden equivalent but twice the price of a plastic spoon.

Peesapaty’s goal is to get the cost of a spoon down to 1.5 or 1 rupees. He 
hopes to do this by sourcing crops directly from farmers and building an 
economy of scale by adding new production lines with the investment raised 
online.
 