
MORNING SHOWS

Us/Them

10am, Summerhall <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/us-them> (until 28 
August)

This remarkable piece of theatre – playful, surprisingly and painfully funny 
as well as moving – presents the Beslan terror siege of 2004 from the point of 
view of two unnamed children who were there. It makes you question the way such 
events are usually presented and the way myths are constructed. Most 
extraordinary is that this show was made with family audiences and the 
over-nines in mind.Lyn Gardner
Read the full five-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/07/us-them-edinburgh-festival-review-summerhall-beslan-seige>

From Judy Garland to Evel Knievel: 15 sure-fire Edinburgh festival hits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/jul/26/edinburgh-festival-hits>
Eurohouse

10.05am, Summerhall <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/eurohouse> (until 
26 August)

There is a moment in this collaboration between Bertrand Lesca, who is French, 
and the Greek Nasi Voutsas, when they get the audience to hold hands in a 
circle. At the performance I saw, that involved quite a lot of physical 
contortions. It’s a metaphor forthe EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/what-is-the-european-union> 
in this wonderfully playful, intimate and ultimately moving show, which 
constantly pits idealism against self-interest and pragmatism.LG
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/22/eurohouse-review-summerhall-edinburgh-fringe>

Tank

10.30am, Pleasance Dome <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/tank> (until 20 
August)

Tackling that difficult second show with real confidence, Breach Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/16/what-is-it-about-warwick-edinburgh-festival-walrus-theatre-breach-barrel-organ>
 – who debuted last year withThe Beanfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/13/the-beanfield-edinburgh-festival-space-on-the-mile-stonehenge-new-age-travellers-review-1985>
 – offer an engaging deadpan satire on John Lilly’s 1960s research programme, 
which remains best known for its use of LSD on captive dolphins and becauseone 
of the researchers, Margaret Lovatt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/08/the-dolphin-who-loved-me>, 
lived for a period in close proximity with one of the males. This is likely to 
be the only time you will ever attend a show that features verbatim 
contributions from a dolphin.LG
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/11/tank-review-dolphin-experiment-lsd-breach-theatre>

Bridget Christie

11am, Stand Comedy Club 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/bridget-christie-mortal> (until 29 
August)

Death and mortality were the intended subjects of Bridget Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/29/bridget-christie-what-makes-me-laugh>
’s new set: a swerve away from the overtly political material that’s made her a 
must-see in recent years on the fringe.But then the EU referendum happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/04/brexit-and-the-edinburgh-fringe-selfishly-it-was-a-bit-of-a-godsend>
 and her show, she told interviewers, “just didn’t seem that interesting to me 
any more”. The hastily put-together hour that’s replaced it, which takes Brexit 
as its subject, is far more than an adequate substitute: it’s a hilarious, 
bumbling, impotent, furious tirade against what Britain is becoming.BL
Read the full five-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/11/bridget-christie-five-star-review-edinburgh-furious-brexit>

Equations for a Moving Body


11am, Northern Stage at Summerhall 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/equations-for-a-moving-body> (until 27 
August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff74e80433063c9f613e360325e578aa020599993%2F0_144_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff74e80433063c9f613e360325e578aa020599993%2F0_144_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
 Questing intelligence … Equations for a Moving Body. Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
for the Guardian 
How do we make our own milestones in life? It’s a question considered by 
Hannah Nicklin in this engaging performance-cum-lecture, inspired by her 
decision to take part in an Ironman triathlon before she turned 30. On one hand 
it’s an account of her personal journey, but it’s also a metaphor for life 
itself: the way you lose people along the way, and how the heart is a muscle 
that requires exercising. It’s a tad long, but it’s full of questing 
intelligence, fascinating facts and wry humour as Nicklin considers what drives 
her – and us – on.LG

World Without Us

11.30am, Summerhall <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/world-without-us> 
(until 28 August)

One of the great things about the Belgian company Ontroerend Goed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/07/ontroerend-goed-theatre-audience>
 is that every piece they make is different. They’ve always dared to take risks 
– some of which pay off and some of which definitely don’t. That’s just as it 
should be, and in this latest piece they take the risk of trying to get us to 
contemplate the unimaginable: a world in which every human has vanished.LG
Read the full three-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/07/world-without-us-edinburgh-festival-review-ontroerend-goed>

Once …

11.30am, Assembly George Square  <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/once>
(until 29 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F632ea10369c45036127340c0197b702ab195ad11%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F632ea10369c45036127340c0197b702ab195ad11%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A fairytale for adults … Once by Derevo. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the 
Guardian 
Love makes fools of everyone in this clowning show from the Russian company 
Derevo <http://www.derevo.org/>, who swept the board with awards when it was 
seen in Edinburgh in 1998. Even Cupid gets it wrong in this fantastical tale: a 
ragged old man falls in love with a beautiful waitress in what is effectively a
Harlequin and Columbine <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harlequinade> story. 
It’s cute as hell, and often quite kitsch, but it would be a frozen heart that 
didn’t respond to the sweet openness and pain of this fairytale for adults – or 
admire the skill with which it is executed.LG

Fabric


11.55am, Underbelly Cowgate <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/fabric> 
(until 28 August)

Nancy Sullivan is completely engaging and utterly heart-breaking as Leah who 
grew up dreaming of marriage and who thought she had found her prince in Ben. 
Abi Zakarian’s script for this one-woman piece is beautifully observed and 
funny too. What initially seems to be a whip-smart contemporary version of an 
Alan Bennett Talking Head turns into something far darker as romance gives way 
to reality and Leah’s life is stained in many different ways. Clever set and 
sound design, too, in a show that brings dirty little male secrets out into the 
light.LG

Josie Long and Martin Williams: Investigations

12pm, Stand Comedy Club 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/josie-long-and-martin-williams-investigations>
 (until 28 August)

Comedy on the fringe can take many forms: wrestling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/19/the-wrestling-at-edinburgh-festival-review-pleasance-grand-max-and-ivan>
, therapy,fine dining 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/shows/edinburgh_fringe_2012/s/20066/simon_munnerys_la_concepta>
. So why not investigative journalism? The well-loved DIY standup Josie Long 
teams up with Guardian writerWilliams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martin-williams> on a show that fuses 
comedy with politics, exposing truth, and muck-raking beneath and beyond the 
news headlines. Based on a version I saw in London last year, it will be 
informative, outspoken, amusing and unlike anything else.BL

Binari

12pm, Assembly Hall <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/binari> (until 29 
August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bfffa8134338662ab4aafc7536d82f8a2c6158f%2F127_1011_7161_4295%2F7161.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bfffa8134338662ab4aafc7536d82f8a2c6158f%2F127_1011_7161_4295%2F7161.jpg>
 Unexpected charmer … Binari Photograph: - 
When a traditional dance form is uprooted from its local culture it runs the 
risk of losing its integrity or its life. But Binari, an unexpected charmer of 
a show that’s based on the songs and dances of Korean funeral rites, makes the 
journey to the western stage with real grace. On paper it sounds forbiddingly 
austere, its narrative essentially the rite of passage by which the soul of a 
dead woman is released into the afterlife. Yet Binari is choreographed with 
such a satisfying fusion of dance, music and imagery that the work feels 
anything but remote.JM
Read the full three-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/18/binari-at-edinburgh-festival-review-assembly-hall-korean-funeral-rites>

AFTERNOON

Lemons Lemons Lemons Lemons Lemons


12.10pm, Roundabout @ Summerhall 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/lemons-lemons-lemons-lemons-lemons> 
(until 28 August)

Last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/15/lemons-lemons-lemons-lemons-lemons-review-edinburgh-festival-southside-walrus-theatre>
, playwright Sam Steiner’s debut show was in the hottest room on the fringe, 
but it (and the audience) will have room to breathe now that it is staged in 
Paines Plough’sRoundabout <http://www.roundaboutpp.com/> tent. This smartly 
conceived, pared-back love story imagines a world in which everyone is only 
allowed an allocation of 140 words a day. The effects on life, and in 
particular relationships, are explored in a really neat show about being forced 
to say less but mean more.LG


Edinburgh festival 2016: 21 unmissable shows for kids and their families
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/jul/22/edinburgh-festival-2016-21-unmissable-shows-for-kids-and-their-families>
Last Dream (on Earth)


1.25pm, Assembly Hall 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/last-dream-on-earth> (until 28 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4879bfc828afc42afbf6bb070a0cda8c9ca64bc2%2F0_171_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4879bfc828afc42afbf6bb070a0cda8c9ca64bc2%2F0_171_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 An achingly beautiful meditation … Last Dream (on Earth). Photograph: Tommy 
Ga-Ken Wan 
Part of the excellent Made in Scotland <http://www.madeinscotlandshowcase.com/>
 programme, Kai Fischer’s piece created with theNational Theatre of Scotland 
<https://www.nationaltheatrescotland.com/content/> is quality stuff, a 
headphones show and sound installation that offers an often achingly beautiful 
meditation on risk and travel in search of a better – or another – life. It 
weaves stories of space exploration with accounts of those who risk their lives 
on leaky boats to make the perilous journey between Africa and Europe. Last 
Dream (on Earth) may feature live music but it’s not a piece with bells and 
whistles – rather, it takes audiences on a quietly rewarding journey of their 
own.LG


Austentatious


1.30pm, Underbelly, George Square 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/austentatious-an-improvised-jane-austen-novel>
 (until 21 August)

When I reviewed Austentatious: An Improvised Jane Austen Novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/14/austentatious-edinburgh-festival-review>
 a few years back, I was happy to help spread the word about a very funny 
long-form improv show making hay with the conventions of Regency-era period 
drama. I didn’t know then that Austentatious would also become a production 
line for eminent solo comics: in the years since, musical actRachel Parris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/16/rachel-parris-edinburgh-2013-review>
 and multimedia innovatorJoseph Morpurgo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/13/desert-island-discs-kirsty-young-joseph-morpurgo-soothing-sounds-for-baby-invisible-dot>
 have joined co-starCariad Lloyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/07/cariad-lloyd-comedy-standup-solo-shows-edinburgh>
 as acclaimed performers in their own right. (Other cast members are going solo 
this year, too.) Meanwhile, Austentatious goes strong, and promises a skilled 
and highly enjoyable hour of off-the-cuff, gowns-and-ballrooms comedy.BL


Love, Lies and Taxidermy

1.35pm, Roundabout at Summerhall 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/love-lies-and-taxidermy> (until 28 
August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81920f52f863072b2124162223b6a45ddd393721%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81920f52f863072b2124162223b6a45ddd393721%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Bringing people together … Love Lies and Taxidermy. Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
for the Guardian 
Why isn’t life more like the movies? Maybe sometimes, against all the odds, it 
can be. So it proves for the unhappily named Valentine, son of a Polish 
taxidermist, and Ashley, daughter of Mr Tutti-Frutti, a debt-ridden ice-cream 
salesman in a town where it’s too cold to eat ice-cream. Alan Harris spins a 
piece of very funny popular theatre about the need for dreams, seizing the 
initiative when all seems lost and bringing people together.LG
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/08/love-lies-and-taxidermy-edinburgh-festival-review-stupidly-lovely-romcom-wins-against-the-odds>

Letters to Windsor House

1.35pm, Summerhall 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/letters-to-windsor-house> (until 28 
August)

London’s housing crisis and its effects upon relationships is explored with 
beady-eyed sharpness and a large dollop of humour in the latest from Sh!tTheatre
 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>. It’s deceptively rackety stuff, 
but it gets to the heart of a situation in which the social cleansing of 
London’s poor is taking place almost without comment, and people’s lives are 
becoming dominated by the need to find somewhere affordable to live.LG

Goggles

2pm, Pleasance Courtyard <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/goggles> 
(until 29 August)

Edinburgh is full of young companies making fluffy, whimsical theatre, and at 
first sight This Egg’s two-hander about love, friendship and breaking free 
seems to be just one more. But there are hidden depths in a hugely enjoyable 
story in which the performers also play two goldfish, and where the metaphor 
for escaping the fish bowl of a suffocating relationship is handled with humour 
and a lightness of touch. Lots of fun.LG

One Hundred Homes

2.05pm, Summerhall <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/one-hundred-homes> 
(until 28 August)

You go into a shed in the Summerhall courtyard and are offered tea and 
biscuits. Then Yinka Kuitenbrouwer delves into her archive, and tells you about 
her encounters with some of the 100-plus people she has visited in the places 
where they live, and asked what home means to them. It’s as simple as that. But 
it’s quietly heartwarming and thoughtful too, as it makes unexpected 
connections, raises questions about expectation and privilege, knocks back 
assumptions and probes whether home is a place or a state of mind. Just lovely.
LG

Giants

3.15pm, Pleasance Courtyard <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/giants> 
(until 28 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabb29e67b2e87972ffb3ff82cc2e554eebfc7f91%2F0_4324_4912_2947%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabb29e67b2e87972ffb3ff82cc2e554eebfc7f91%2F0_4324_4912_2947%2F4912.jpg>
 Engaging … Giants 
Born two days apart, apparently, and – if their show is to be believed – boon 
companions in infancy, Barney Fishwick and Will Hislop (son of Ian) now debut 
in Edinburgh with their double-act Giants. Former Oxford Revue presidents, 
there’s a sense here of a duo still working out their USP, in a show that 
brings nothing blazingly new or distinctive to the sketch world. But they’re 
engaging and watchable hosts, whose charm offsets the weaker sketches, and who 
have enough strong alternatives (including the one where Fishwick amusingly 
misplaces his cup of coffee) to make this maiden set worth a visit.BL

Smother

3.20, Zoo Southside <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/smother> (until 27 
August)

Hip-hop has progressed a long way beyond its old macho image, but still it’s a 
surprise to encounter a dance work like Smother, which places a story of gay 
love and gay relationships at its heart … While Smother has the dramatic 
texture of a play, it is unequivocally a dance piece: and with performers of 
terrific strength and personality, it takes hip-hop into thrillingly new 
terrain.JM
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/18/smother-edinburgh-festival-review-street-dance-gay-romance>

Lucy, Lucy and Lucy Barfield


3.30pm, Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/lucy-lucy-and-lucy-barfield> (until 29 
August)

I love the fringe because it throws up small, thoughtful, moving and 
unassuming shows such as this one in whichLucy Grace sets out in search of Lucy 
Barfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/01/lion-witch-lucy-lucy-and-lucy-barfield-edinburgh-festival-cs-lewis>
, the girl to whom CS Lewis dedicated The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe. A 
piece about growing up and discovering that you are locked out of Narnia 
forever – and about trying to make a future when the magic is lost – it may not 
be very sophisticated but it has an unaffected grace (in more ways than one) as 
it unravels the mystery.LG

Bilal Zafar: Cakes


3.40pm, Just the Tonic at the Mash House 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/bilal-zafar-cakes> (until 28 August)

Bilal Zafar won the prestigious New Act of the Year award 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/news/2016/01/31/24073/bilal_zafar_is_top_of_the_bill> 
earlier this year, after which you might expect he’d hit Edinburgh eager to 
show off his acclaimed standup chops. Instead, he makes his debut with a gentle 
PowerPoint show, telling the story – illustrated by screengrabs from Twitter – 
of how a fake identity he adopted online attracted the ire of the far right. 
The show’s charms arrive in a fairly low key: the Islamophobic e-kerfuffle he 
kicks up is a minor one, and there are no great surprises in the revelation 
that Twitter is permanently manned by idiots. But Zafar’s wry circumspection is 
well-judged, and the material cribbed from his online persecutors duly delivers 
some big laughs.BL

The Interference

3.45pm, C Chambers <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/interference> (until 
16 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F494b98d7d7ef5d504616845470559e433029d250%2F0_193_1407_844%2F1407.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F494b98d7d7ef5d504616845470559e433029d250%2F0_193_1407_844%2F1407.jpg>
 Gripping … The Interference. Photograph: Brittney Rivera 
In American football, an interference is when one player obstructs another 
using his body. InLynda Radley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/18/lynda-radley-futureproof-edinburgh-festival>
’s play it takes on many meanings when Karen is raped by one of the campus’s 
brightest sports stars, Smith. Will the police take her seriously? How will the 
university deal with the matter? Everyone has got an opinion on the internet, 
and soon Karen finds that it’s Smith who is being cast as the victim. There’s a 
questing intelligence to a gripping drama that doesn’t shirk the complexities 
of the case and cleverly uses a fragmented style to reflect the noisiness of a 
connected media and online world where all the chatter interferes with justice.
LG

Ada/Ava

4pm, Underbelly Potterrow 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/ada-ava-by-manual-cinema> (until 29 
August)

If you love the work of Paper Cinema you will also fall for this macabre 
little charmer by the Chicago companyManual Cinema <http://manualcinema.com/>, 
who hand-craft a movie in front of your eyes using puppetry, live music and 
action. It’s got a real black-and-white, silent-film retro appeal as it tells 
the story of an elderly woman learning to cope alone when her identical twin 
unexpectedly dies. Full of loving detail, skill and ingenuity, the show takes 
grief very seriously as it plays with mirror images to clever effect.LG

Radio Active

4.20pm, Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/radio-active> (until 28 August)

Inspired by the staging of old Hancock’s Half Hour 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-32189443> scripts on the Fringe 
last year, Angus Deayton is now doing the same withRadio Active 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00c7zvk/episodes/guide>, his 
commercial-broadcasting spoof, co-written with the late Geoffrey Perkins, that 
ran for seven years in the 1980s on Radio 4. It’s a jolly hour of media 
mickey-takery, albeit one that seems tame 30 years on and may indeed have 
seemed fairly tame in the first place.Brian Logan
Read the full three-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/06/radio-active-at-edinburgh-festival-review-angus-deayton-radio-4>

Goose: Hydroberserker

4.30pm, Assembly George Square Gardens 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/goose-hydroberserker> (until 28 August)

Adam Drake is like a piece of stretched elastic throughout this kinetic solo 
sketch show, all strained sinews and nervous tension as he tries to fathom the 
mystery of his missing sweetheart, Belle … Among the quickfire sketches that 
interrupt Drake’s story, there’s a neat gag about dining in the dark and a 
droll routine at the expense of his feminist credentials. And there’s a killer 
finale to a niftily constructed, frenetical hour.BL
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/17/goose-hydroberserker-edinburgh-festival-review>

Infinity Pool: A Modern Retelling of Madame Bovary

4.35pm, Bedlam 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/infinity-pool-a-modern-retelling-of-madame-bovary>
 (until 29 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0e751315e50aafb503cb67e4e642514dfd5e7e7%2F0_198_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0e751315e50aafb503cb67e4e642514dfd5e7e7%2F0_198_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Deliciously quirky … Infinity Pool: A Modern Retelling of Madame Bovary. 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Here’s something completely different and deliciously quirky. Bea Roberts, who 
wrote the terrificAnd Then Come the Nightjars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/08/and-then-come-the-nightjars-review-touching-tale-of-love-and-loss-on-the-farm>
, reimagines Madame Bovary for the 21st century without actors but with 
considerable help from two screens, a TV monitor, an overhead projector and a 
sound deck. Our heroine is no French provincial housewife but an admin 
assistant in a Plymouth plumbers with a ruinous Asos habit and a marriage long 
gone stale. Imagine Bridget Jones meets The Office meets 19th-century realist 
fiction. Even with technical difficulties at the performance I saw, this 
original show proved painfully funny and oddly moving.LG

Katy Brand: I Was a Teenage Christian

4.45pm, Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/katy-brand-i-was-a-teenage-christian> 
(until 29 August)

Katy Brand has a fine story to tell of her youthful obsession with revivalist 
Christianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/04/katy-brand-teenage-christian-comedy-interview>
. In the telling, it lacks dramatic shape or climax. But what it loses in 
artfulness, it gains in honesty: Brand feels the cringe and does it anyway, 
parading her teenage egotism and delusion to diverting, if not uproarious, 
comic effect. It’s an entertaining account of a teenager’s search for herself 
and of the impulses that drive some of us into religion’s comforting embrace.BL
Read the full three-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/07/katy-brand-at-edinburgh-festival-review-teenage-christian>

Edinburgh festival 2016: what to see and where to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/jun/08/edinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go>
How (Not) to Live in Suburbia

4.50pm, Summerhall 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/how-not-to-live-in-suburbia> (until 28 
August)

Annie Siddons turns personal disaster into art with witty, engaging satire 
that sends up both herself and the inhabitants of Twickenham as she succumbs to 
fiscal failure and professional paralysis in the leafy suburbs. Of course it’s 
not really about suburbia but about a corrosive, creeping loneliness and 
depression. It’s dark, but it’s also playful and inventive with a lovely Jane 
Austen-style leave-taking spoof and a brilliant scene in which she is evicted 
from the book club for making everyone else feel stupid.LG

Dancer

5pm, Dance Base <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/dancer> (until 28 
August)

An exquisite two-hander created by Gary Gardiner and Ian Johnston with the late
Adrian Howells <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/24/adrian-howells>. 
Howells’ mantra that “it’s all allowed” underpins a simple but moving piece in 
which the learning disabled Johnston tells us about who is and isn’t allowed to 
dance, and in the process offers up his sharpest moves. It celebrates the sheer 
joy of losing yourself on the dance floor and challenges preconceptions and 
expectations.LG

Barrowland Ballet: Whiteout

5pm, Zoo Southside <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/whiteout> (until 27 
August)

Natasha Gilmore has a warm, witty and poetic eye for the nuances of ordinary 
life. In her previous fringe hit, Carmel, she assembled a vividly assorted cast 
(ranging from an 18-month-old baby to an 82-year-old dancer) to explore the 
dynamics of family life. InWhiteout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/01/whiteout-barrowlands-ballet-review>
 she uses her own marriage to a West African as the springboard to probe the 
possibilities and the problems of falling in love in a multi-racial society. 
Set to a soundtrack by Luke Sutherland, Gilmore’s work promises a rich 
choreographic mix, layered with her acute observation of everyday human 
behaviour.Judith Mackrell

Daphne’s Second Show

5.45pm, Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/daphne-s-second-show> (until 28 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcb0b5dc26b8241aa09c037d91c2489f9b105fee%2F0_2336_4912_3905%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcb0b5dc26b8241aa09c037d91c2489f9b105fee%2F0_2336_4912_3905%2F4912.jpg>
 Uneven charm … Daphne. Photograph: Matt Crockett 
They were the buzziest new sketch troupe in the run-up to last year’s fringe, 
and Daphne (Phil Wang, George Fouracres and Jason Forbes) duly delivered with 
theirseductively off-beam debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/09/daphne-edinburgh-festival-review-pleasance-phil-wang-jason-forbes-george-fouracres>
. Peter Pan, Henry V and the American slave trade featured in the sketches; 
arch self-consciousness attended every punchline. And yet, here was a trio that 
didn’t quite work like other sketch troupes. Their unevenness was part of their 
considerable charm. Might the intervening year have planed down Daphne’s jagged 
edges, or will their second fringe outing build on their first?BL

Rose Matafeo


5.45pm, Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/rose-matafeo-is-finally-dead> (until 28 
August)

Twenty-four-year-old New Zealander Rose Matafeo was nominated for best 
newcomer at the MelbourneComedy <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> 
festival, and within moments of her appearance onstage, you can see why. She’s 
a whirlwind of comic energy, with a confidence and ability you seldom see in 
rookie standups. In her first fringe outing, ostensibly themed around her own 
funeral, she doesn’t quite sustain that steamroller force: she’s out of breath 
for much of its second half. But this is still a stellar debut: silly, 
charismatic, and packed with great gags about mortality, clothes shopping and 
the Jamaican dancehall king Sean Paul.BL 

EVENING

Kiri Pritchard-McLean: Hysterical Woman

6pm, Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/kiri-pritchard-mclean-hysterical-woman> 
(until 29 August)

In this bold solo debut, Kiri Pritchard-McLean – director of sketch troupe 
Gein’s Family Giftshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/09/edinburgh-festival-2014-review-geins-family-giftshop>
 – explains how women seldom get to appear alongside other women in comedy 
clubs, and how all-female bills get called “Paralympic nights”. She talks about 
how she has internalised that thinking; how she’s scared of ever not being 
funny and letting down all womankind. Credit to her for making a show that’s 
raucous and good-humoured without stinting on the protest.BL
Read the full three-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/06/kiri-pritchard-mclean-hysterical-woman-edinburgh-festival-pleasance-courtyard>

Brennan Reece

6pm, Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/brennan-reece-everglow> (until 28 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63b03733ce4e5375dcbc4960b5c5bf57346fae68%2F0_514_3695_2216%2F3695.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63b03733ce4e5375dcbc4960b5c5bf57346fae68%2F0_514_3695_2216%2F3695.jpg>
 Impressive … Brennan Reece. Photograph: Duncan Elliott 
You probably won’t know him as the 2015 English Comedian of the Year 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/review/2015/07/14/22822/english_comedian_of_the_year_2015_final>
 – chances are you won’t even know the award exists – but such is the pedigree 
of young Brennan Reece, now making his fringe debut. You can see what must have 
impressed the judges: good jokes, an idiosyncratic personality and a poetic 
regional voice with stories to tell of an unglamorous Lancashire hinterland. 
Reece brings a bit of it with him to Edinburgh, recreating his parents’ front 
room in the Pleasance Bunker. It’s a lovely introduction to a comic exploring 
the transition from childhood to adulthood, frankly addressing the pitfalls 
he’s pitched into – and celebrating his own hard-won refusal to fit in.BL

Scorch

6.05pm, Roundabout at Summerhall <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/scorch>
 (until 28 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F341faa231bccecd4a0244f8762ea50b89af5dab2%2F0_326_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F341faa231bccecd4a0244f8762ea50b89af5dab2%2F0_326_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Utterly mesmerising … Amy McAllister in Scorch. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for 
the Guardian 
Produced by the fine Northern Irish company Prime Cut 
<http://www.primecutproductions.co.uk/>, Stacey Gregg’s play is clearly 
inspired by the case ofJustine McNally 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/feminism/2015/12/dark-truth-behind-convictions-gender-fraud>
, who was convicted of “gender fraud” after starting a sexual relationship with 
a teenage girl who believed her to be a boy. The in-the-round space works 
beautifully as Kes sits before us and talks as if we are at a meeting of an 
LGBTQ group. Amy McAllister is utterly mesmerising, with confusion and hurt 
etched across her face as Kes comes to terms with lost love.LG
Read the full three-star review  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/09/scorch-at-edinburgh-festival-review-prime-cut-stacey-gregg>

E15

6.30pm, Northern Stage at Summerhall 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/e15> (until 27 August)

Loud, raucous and angry, but also deceptively disciplined and focused, Lung 
theatre company <http://%20https//www.facebook.com/lungtheatre/>’s 
verbatim-style piece tells the story of theFocus E15 campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/31/march-for-homes-focus-e15-mums-london-homelessness-priced-out-area>
, started by a group of mums – many of them teenagers – who in 2013 were issued 
with eviction notices from the mother-and-baby unit of a hostel for vulnerable 
young people. The show’s real joy here is in watching these women – played by a 
brilliant young cast – discover their ability to speak out.LG
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/05/e15-edinburgh-festival-2016-review-newham-protest-focus-e15-campaign>

Rachel Parris: Best Laid Plans

6.50pm, Pleasance Dome 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/rachel-parris-best-laid-plans> (until 28 
August)

Best Laid Plans is about the grown-up Parris expected to be when she was six – 
house, car, husband, kids – and how real life has refused to play ball. At the 
show’s tender heart, though, is an account of Parris’s recent breakup, which 
pitched her for the first time into depression. She’s endearingly frank and 
funny about the experience, even if the sometime jauntiness of her Samaritans 
correspondence sits uneasily with the air of emotional candour. But it’s all 
beautifully crafted and performed.BL
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/11/rachel-parris-review-comedian-best-laid-plans-depression>

Zoë Coombs Marr: Trigger Warning

6.50pm, Underbelly 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/zoe-coombs-marr-trigger-warning> (until 
28 August)

Zoë Coombs Marr made a splash last year with her first show, Dave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/10/zoe-coombs-marr-edinburgh-festival-review>
, playing an old-school, sexist standup floundering against self-hate and a 
changing world. Impressive though it was, its satire wasn’t especially close to 
the bone. I prefer the follow-up, whichwon the Barry award 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/entertainment/comedy-festival/zoe-coombs-marr-wins-barry-award-for-most-outstanding-show-at-melbourne-international-comedy-festival/news-story/0c9040a5dc190e1d6f1693d70c8a5d20>
 at Melbourne’s comedy festival. Here, Coombs Marr maintains the burlesque on 
chauvinism, but adds a timely mickey-take ofDoctor Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/21/doctor-brown-comedy-interview>
-style silent clowning, as Dave tries and fails to reinvent himself for a 2016 
crowd.BL
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/09/zoe-coombs-marr-at-edinburgh-festival-review-underbelly-cowgate>

Mr Swallow: Houdini

7pm, Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/mr-swallow-houdini> (until 28 August) 

Overlooked for an Edinburgh Comedy award nomination two years ago, when his 
spoof Dracula musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/07/edinburgh-festival-2014-review-mr-swallow-the-musical>
 first sunk its fangs into the world, Nick Mohammed surely won’t be so unlucky 
this time around. Of the shows eligible, Mr Swallow’s Houdini is the most 
giddily enjoyable I’ve seen, a faux-musical about the life of the great 
escapologist, again ring-led by Mohammed’s camp, chatterbox alter ego, and 
featuring extraordinary feats of escape alongside the blithering, 
convention-shredding comedy.BL
Read the full five-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/16/mr-swallow-houdini-edinburgh-festival-review-nick-mohammed>

Heads Up

7.05pm, Summerhall <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/heads-up> (until 28 
August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdfdfe46c2bd579af9f946448d534c13f71cb871%2F0_107_3543_2238%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdfdfe46c2bd579af9f946448d534c13f71cb871%2F0_107_3543_2238%2F3543.jpg>
 This is the news from the end of the world … Kieran Hurley in Heads Up. 
Photograph: Niall Walker 
Kieran Hurley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jul/17/best-performance-chris-goode>’s 
new solo show is a quiet hurricane blowing through the city. It is an anxious 
whisper that becomes a shout; a moment of silence that turns into the 
high-pitched whine of catastrophe. Sitting behind a desk, unassumingly dressed 
in a suit like someone regretfully delivering bad news, Hurley tells of the end 
of the world through the stories of four people whose lives are disconnected.LG
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/05/heads-up-review-summerhall-edinburgh-kieran-hurley>

Natalia Osipova and Guests

7.30pm, Festival theatre <http://www.eif.co.uk/2016/osipova#.V6yxpzYrKUk> 
(until 14 August)

Natalia Osipova and Sergei Polunin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/08/natalia-osipova-and-sergei-polunin-interview>
 reveal new facets of their talent in thistriple bill of contemporary dance 
works 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/01/natalia-osipova-review-sergei-polunin-sadlers-wells-premiere>
. They are dark, trashy and funny in Arthur Pita’s Run Mary Run, a story of 
doomed young love set to music by the 1960s girl group the Shangri–Las; while 
in Russell Maliphant’s Silent Echo they re-invent the logic of the classical 
pas de deux in a dance of fluid sensuality. Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui’s airborne 
trio Qutb sees Osipova’s exceptional suppleness and strength pitted against two 
other men; the evening is a fascinating instance of ballet dancers who are 
willing to perform outside the box.JM

Sofie Hagen: Shimmer Shatter

7.50pm, Liquid Room Annexe 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/sofie-hagen-shimmer-shatter> (until 28 
August)

The Danish standup Sofie Hagen won the best newcomer award at last year’s 
fringe withBubblewrap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/13/sofie-hagen-comedy-standup-review-soho-theatre-london>
, a show addressing her teenage self-harm. It was also about her Westlife 
obsession, which usefully anchored the riskier material in extracts from her 
adolescent boyband fan-fiction that couldn’t fail to amuse. Her follow-up, 
Shimmer Shatter, lacks those bulletproof set pieces. But if the laughs are less 
raucous, Hagen confirms her skill at combining confessional intimacy with some 
laser-guided gags.BL
Read the full three-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/08/sofie-hagen-edinburgh-festival-review-shimmer-shatter>

Measure for Measure

8pm, Lyceum <http://www.eif.co.uk/2016/measure#.V7QOB5grLIU> (until 20 August)

Declan Donnellan and Nick Ormerod’s stagings of classic texts for their 
company Cheek by Jowl often have a spare aesthetic and piercing clarity. So it 
proves with this punchy version of Shakespeare’s morality play that is played 
in Russian and relocated to contemporary Russia, presented as a brutal place of 
secrets and lies where the power of the state reaches into personal lives with 
devastating consequences.LG

Nish Kumar: Actions Speak Louder Than Words, Unless You Shout the Words Real 
Loud


8pm Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/nish-kumar-actions-speak-louder-than-words-unless-you-shout-the-words-real-loud>
 (until 28 August)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fnish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nish%20Kumar%3A%20What%20can%20a%20satirist%20do%20with%20our%20post-truth%20politics%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fnish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nish%20Kumar%3A%20What%20can%20a%20satirist%20do%20with%20our%20post-truth%20politics%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fnish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video&media=>
Nish Kumar: What can a satirist do with our post-truth politics? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/jul/15/nish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video>
The night after the Brexit vote, 10 years into a distinguished standup career, 
Nish Kumar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/09/nish-kumar-could-this-be-the-year-for-the-shockingly-inoffensive-standup>
 was playing the Comedy Store, and received his first racist heckle. “Go 
home!,” shouted the heckler, to a comic born and raised in the UK. Kumar has 
featured prominently in pre-festival articles about Brexit and comedy, and 
chances are high he’ll address the changed climate and racism revival in his 
new show. Thoughtful discussion of front-line culture and politics (leavened by 
his keen eye for the ridiculous) is what we’ve come to expect from Kumar, after 
a breakout 2015 show about leftwing culture and humour that saw the Croydon man 
nominated for an Edinburgh Comedy award.BL

Nazeem Hussain – Legally Brown


8pm, Assembly George Square 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/nazeem-hussain-legally-brown> (until 28 
August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91eabae0c65e3e7b661a9174a4c79a2915f89214%2F0_148_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91eabae0c65e3e7b661a9174a4c79a2915f89214%2F0_148_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Cartoonish but smart … Nazeem Hussain. Photograph: Jonny Weeks for the Guardian
On his last visit to the fringe, Nazeem Hussain was the perkier half of the 
Aussie double actFear of a Brown Planet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/theatreblog/2011/aug/10/fear-brown-planet-fast-show>
. It’s not hard seeming perky, mind you, when your sidekick is the stern – and 
superb –Aamer Rahman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/04/aamer-rahman-reverse-racism-comedy-tour>
. Now both are making waves with their solo standup, and in Hussain’s case, 
with the televised sketch show Legally Brown. This stage version,which played 
in London last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/26/nazeem-hussain-soho-theatre-fear-of-a-brown-planet-comedy-review>
, offers an upbeat, cartoonish – but smart – take on interracial 
misunderstandings, everyday discrimination, and being a brown man in a white 
man’s country.BL

Nina Conti

8pm, Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/nina-conti-in-your-face> (until 29 
August)

On her West End run this spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/01/nina-conti-review-criterion-theatre>
, ventriloquist Nina Conti largely dispensed with what you might consider to be 
the voice-thrower’s most essential prop: her doll. OK, so Monkey does feature 
in her new show, In Your Face – now at the fringe in a condensed version. But 
in this set, it’s usually the audience that Conti voices. They come onstage, 
Conti straps them into an animated mask, and – as their rubbery lips flap up 
and down – improvises them crazy stuff to say. It’s a surpassingly curious 
spectacle, a real plate-spinning feat from Conti and – in the lucky-dip 
environment of the fringe – a reliably entertaining hour.BL

Lucy McCormick: Triple Threat

8.10pm, Underbelly 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/lucy-mccormick-triple-threat> (until 28 
August)

She can sing, act and dance – but the real threat of this show created by 
Getinthebackofthevan <http://www.getinthebackofthevan.com/>’s McCormick is that 
you will no longer be able to think about the New Testament without associating 
the Three Wise Men with Christina Aguilera’s Dirty – or Doubting Thomas with 
anal fingering. Listen, this irreverent, provocative and vastly enjoyable show 
is definitely not for everyone. Or for anyone who is easily offended, doesn’t 
like live art and has never thought that the body of Christ needs reclaiming by 
a woman. This is a sly, funny piece that knows exactly what its doing and 
boasts an unholy trinity of brilliantly skilled performers.LG

(I Could Go on Singing) Over the Rainbow

8.15pm, Summerhall 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/i-could-go-on-singing-over-the-rainbow> 
(until 28 August)

If you are looking for human contact amid the noise of the fringe, then FK 
Alexander’s Autopsy award-winning show may well fit the bill – although it 
makes quite a racket, as it features the Glasgow noise bandOkishima Island 
Tourist Association <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d8pokXQaDwE>. The premise 
is simple: FK Alexander serenades one audience member at a time to Judy 
Garland’s final recording of Somewhere Over the Rainbow. It’s a gift for the 
person receiving, but there is also much more here about endurance and the way 
we demand a piece of our female icons.LG

Sam Simmons

8.15pm, Underbelly Potterrow 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/sam-simmons-not-a-people-person> (until 
28 August)

“The best comedian in the world,” the Age newspaper in Australia has taken to 
calling Sam Simmons. It’s no idle boast: in 2015 he did, after all, become only 
the second comic ever to win Melbourne’s Barry award and theEdinburgh comedy 
award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/29/sam-simmons-wins-edinburgh-comedy-award-2015-sofie-hagen>
 in the same year. Now the love-him-or-feel-confused Aussie who calls himself 
“the coriander of comedy” is back with the follow-up, Not a People Person. 
Reportedly lighter on confessional material than last year’s hit, it should see 
Simmons return to the outright cod-surrealist madcappery – with added rage – 
with which he made his name.BL

Spencer Jones Presents the Herbert in Eggy Bagel

8.50pm, Heroes @ the Hive 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/spencer-jones-presents-the-herbert-in-eggy-bagel>
 (until 28 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22bb693f805b7a8ec5a2e8e02c57fccc5a47dd3b%2F0_622_5792_3475%2F5792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22bb693f805b7a8ec5a2e8e02c57fccc5a47dd3b%2F0_622_5792_3475%2F5792.jpg>
 Dorkily disarming clown show … Spencer Jones as the Herbert 
An out-of-nowhere hit at last year’s fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/28/spencer-jones-at-edinburgh-festival-review-something-delightful>
, Spencer Jones’s alter ego the Herbert disarmed audiences with his gormless, 
goofily attired prop-comedy. Litter-picking tools mouthed off and squeegee mops 
sang soul music in this dorky clown show about a misfit’s struggle to hold down 
a proper job. No such difficulties for Jones, who’s been in demand ever since – 
witness his prominent role in Ben Elton’s Shakespeare sitcomUpstart Crow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/10/upstart-crow-review-ben-elton-comedy-shakespeare>
. But – while he’s been warning in interviews that the Herbert may soon be put 
out to grass – Jones brings the character back in two shows on this year’s 
fringe:last year’s hit revisited 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/spencer-jones-is-the-herbert-in-proper-job>
, and a new offering entitled Eggy Bagel.BL

Burnistoun Live at the Fringe

9pm, Gilded Balloon Teviot 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/burnistoun-live-at-the-fringe> (until 14 
August)

There’s no doubt that Burnistoun Live – visiting the fringe after a successful 
tour – is primarily for fans of the TV show. Some characters (Connell’s 
bedroom-bound internet star Jolly Boy John, say) barely make sense out of 
context. But I still found plenty to enjoy in the duo’s brusque humour, which 
couldn’t be more Glaswegian if “Clyde-built” came stamped on every punchline.BL
Read the full three-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/10/burnistoun-live-review-edinburgh-festival>

Michelle Wolf: So Brave

9.30pm, Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/michelle-wolf-so-brave> (until 28 August)

You could call Michelle Wolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/02/michelle-wolf-daily-show-comedian-edinburgh>
 brave for opening her first gigs outside the US with material on failed 
presidential hopefulBen Carson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ben-carson>
. But Wolf hates that nowadays everyone gets called brave or beautiful. This 
kind of blandifying trope comes under sustained comic attack in So Brave, in 
which the new Daily Show correspondent announces herself as a supremely 
confident new voice at the Edinburgh fringe.BL
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/07/michelle-wolf-at-edinburgh-festival-review>

Kieran Hodgson: Maestro

9.30pm, Voodoo Rooms 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/kieran-hodgson-maestro> (until 28 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3521128c2bba7f429ca2515d6fb4b51223c935f%2F90_958_5097_3058%2F5097.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3521128c2bba7f429ca2515d6fb4b51223c935f%2F90_958_5097_3058%2F5097.jpg>
 Mad about Mahler … Kieran Hodgson. Photograph: Alecsandra Raluca Dragoi for 
the Guardian 
“I listen to [Mahler’s] music every day and dream of writing a show about him,”
Kieran Hodgson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/12/kieran-hodgson-lance-armstrong-comedy-interview>
 told an interviewer last year. Well, it’s the fringe, where dreams come true – 
and lo, last year’s Edinburgh Comedy award nominee returns with a new show 
addressing his love of the Austrian composer. It’s the latest in a series of 
rites-of-passage autobiographical shows by the unassuming Hodgson, after 2014’s 
French Exchange, andlast year’s all-conquering Lance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/20/kieran-hodgson-lance-edinburgh-festival-review-comedy-lance-armstrong>
, a terrific and tricksy story about his teenage cycling obsession. Maestro is 
billed as “a story about trying to find love when you’re the kind of loser who 
writes classical music instead of playing football,” and it’s on the Free 
Fringe.BL

Goodbear

9.30pm, Bedlam <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/goodbear> (until 28 
August)

A highlight of last year’s comedy lineup was the sketch troupe Minor Delays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/17/minor-delays-edinburgh-festival-review-comedy-gilded-balloon>
, whose stripped-back style made ample space for their tart burlesques on 
(usually) bourgeois life. This year, one third of that trio, Joe Barnes, 
doubles up with Henry Perryment in another excellent – if not quite so 
eye-catching – sketch hour. The conceit finds Barnes and Parryment presenting 
“a selection of characters and occurrences from around the world on a single 
day in 2016”. In practice, that plays out much like any other sketch show, save 
that, when this twosome are good – Perryment deploying his acting chops; 
winsome Barnes flirting with the audience – it can be very funny indeed.BL

30 Cecil Street

9.30pm, Forest Fringe 
<http://www.forestfringe.co.uk/festivals/2011-festivals/edinburgh-festival-2011/core-artists/dan-canham-30-cecil-street/>
 (until 27 August)

Part of a double bill with Paper Cinema’s enchanting DIY movie NightFlyer 
<http://www.louboutinsale.me.uk/#thepapercinema.com>, this show from Dan Canham 
raises the ghosts at a derelict Limerick theatre. Using sound, music, movement 
and gaffer tape – as if at the scene of an accident – Canham brings the past 
alive. The walls themselves seem to leak memories of past glories, one last 
time before the place finally falls silent. It’s a spine-tingling performance, 
laced with ideas about the ephemeral nature of theatre and its place in the 
community.LG

Richard Gadd

9.45pm, Banshee Labyrinth 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/richard-gadd-monkey-see-monkey-do> 
(until 28 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0eaac1c461fee96d1dbebecb1d53e269aa417c8c%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0eaac1c461fee96d1dbebecb1d53e269aa417c8c%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Open-vein confession … Richard Gadd’s Monkey See Monkey Do. Photograph: Murdo 
MacLeod for the Guardian 
In his earliest shows, full of sex, violence and debasement, there was a sense 
that a less cartoonish Gadd might be evading detection beneath the surface 
schlock. Well, now he makes his appearance – but only after spending his whole 
show on a treadmill, fleeing his demons and the horror of intimate 
self-exposure on stage at the Edinburgh fringe. The backbone here is Gadd’s 
crazed inner monologue while out running – a strategy he’s adopted to keep 
anxiety at bay. Not for the first time at this year’s fringe, this is a show 
that by the end offers open-vein emotional engagement over laughs, as we bear 
witness to Gadd’s illness and healing.BL
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/12/richard-gadd-review-banshee-labyrinth-edinburgh>

Phil Nichol

9.45pm, Assembly Checkpoint 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/phil-nichol-twenty> (until 28 August)

When Phil Nichol won the Edinburgh comedy award 10 years ago, it already felt 
like a long service tribute to one of the great festival tyros: a man who 
regularly brings multiple shows to Edinburgh, spanning theatre, comedy, musical 
Proclaimers impersonations and explosive in-yer-face mayhem. (It helped, of 
course, that award-winnerThe Naked Racist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/aug/25/comedy.edinburgh2006> was a 
great show too.) A decade on, Nichol’s still coming, and this year celebrates 
20 years’ of solo comedy shows on the fringe. We’re promised a compilation of 
the Canadian’s greatest hits, which should be a treat, as he’s got plenty to 
choose from.BL

LATE NIGHT

Chris Gethard: Career Suicide

10pm, Pleasance Dome 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/chris-gethard-career-suicide> (until 29 
August)

Even by the standards of today’s mental-health-conscious comedy, Gethard’s 
show is intimate and explicit. Sometimes, when Gethard is detailing his OCD 
thought processes, or how medication affected his ability to ejaculate, you may 
want to run screaming to the nearestSpencer Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/28/spencer-jones-at-edinburgh-festival-review-something-delightful>
 gig. But Gethard’s openness and frankness are affecting, and he has built a 
comedy set around them with considerable skill and good humour.BL
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/10/chris-gethard-at-edinburgh-festival-review-frank-and-funny-tales-of-depression>

Oliver Reed: Wild Thing

10pm, Gilded Balloon 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/oliver-reed-wild-thing> (until 29 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d539624350e0c857c4a9d8e805216dd28d88a88%2F0_136_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d539624350e0c857c4a9d8e805216dd28d88a88%2F0_136_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Hell-raising … Rob Crouch in Oliver Reed: Wild Thing. Photograph: Murdo 
Macleod for the Guardian 
The one-person show about a celebrity is the stuff of the Edinburgh fringe but 
Rob Crouch’s account of the life of hell-raiser Reed – star of Women in Love, 
Oliver! and many far more forgettable British movies – is genuinely intelligent 
and thoughtful as it considers the pitfalls of fame and the dangers of falling 
for your own myth. Crouch is just phenomenal as Reed, a swaggering, 
fist-swinging mess of a man trapped in the crowd-pleasing image of his own 
making and so doomed to endlessly repeat himself.LG

Mouse: The Persistence of an Unlikely Thought

10pm, Traverse 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/mouse-the-persistence-of-an-unlikely-thought>
 (until 28 August)

Daniel Kitson does Sliding Doors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/may/03/gwyneth-paltrow-five-best-moments>
? Even if his shows didn’t sell out in minutes, that’d be a hot ticket. In this 
new solo play, Kitson portrays William, a lonely writer cooped up in his 
“warehouse” office, 12 years into creating a story about a woman and a 
communicative rodent. Kitson interrupts the action to narrate, in flashback, 
the events that led William to this point. It’s a story about friendships and 
their absence, and about the tiny moments on which a life hinges.BL
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/08/mouse-the-persistence-of-an-unlikely-thought-review-daniel-kitson>

Norris & Parker: See You at the Gallows

10.45pm, Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/norris-parker-see-you-at-the-gallows> 
(until 28 August)

Katie Norris and Sinead Parker tread a twisted path in See You at the Gallows 
<https://www.pleasance.co.uk/event/norris-parker-see-you-gallows#overview>, a 
show that takes the desperate, the deluded and the psychopathic for its 
subjects. But there’s nothing sombre about it. It’s flamboyantly silly – shades 
ofWe Are Klang <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/We_Are_Klang>, one-third of whom 
(Steve Hall) directs – and there’s a pleasing looseness to how the show flits 
between theatrical styles. But there’s a bedrock of fine, funny writing and 
skilful comic performance.BL
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/18/norris-and-parker-see-you-at-the-gallows-edinburgh-review>

The Travelling Sisters

10.45pm, Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/travelling-sisters> (until 28 August)

You can let your hair down late at night on the fringe, right? Suspend normal 
standards. Go with the flow. That’ll help if you see The Travelling Sisters, an 
off-beat Aussie trio with several characters, numbers and odd interludes to 
share with you. Whether they’re playing self-peeling potatoes, movement-theatre 
maestros or a chanteuse constructed from all three of their bodies, Laura 
Trenerry, Lucy Fox and Ell Sachs pitch everything they do right at the 
audience. Occasionally, we get dragooned into the impish action. Chances are 
you’ll laugh, or at the very least be delightfully bemused.BL

Fin Taylor

11.15pm, Gilded Balloon at the Counting House 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/fin-taylor-whitey-mcwhiteface> (until 28 
August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31fd90e149b0da8b6bac8a07739a1c21ff10d84d%2F0_48_650_390%2F650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31fd90e149b0da8b6bac8a07739a1c21ff10d84d%2F0_48_650_390%2F650.jpg>
 Taking aim at white privilege … Fin Taylor. Photograph: Steve Ullathorne 
OK, so he uses the word “white” to mean “white middle-class”. And yes, in the 
playful ardour of his arguments, his logic isn’t always unimpeachably pure. But 
there’s no gainsaying the force of (white) standup Fin Taylor’s late-night 
hour, which takes aim – tongue only slightly in cheek – at white privilege. 
Racism can’t be fixed until white people acknowledge their identity and its 
advantages, he contends – offering his mainly pale-skinned audience a head 
start with routines about gentrification, cultural appropriation and, er, 
bestiality. It’s gleefully provocative, occasionally insightful and packed with 
good, loud jokes.BL

TIMES VARY

Showstopper! The Improvised Musical

Pleasance Courtyard 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/showstopper-the-improvised-musical> 
(until 28 August)

These performers are really talented and clever, and they have an Olivier 
award to prove it. Taking suggestions from the audience for scenarios and for 
musical theatre styles, they think on their feet and with their vocal chords to 
create original material, paying homage to and sending up some of the great 
musicals with a wicked wit. It’s more enjoyable if you have sufficient 
knowledge of the musical form to recognise the cribs, but even if you don’t, 
you will admire the comic ingenuity.LG

The Red Shed

Traverse <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/mark-thomas-the-red-shed> 
(until 28 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a061ba17551f71125b48bece8f054128d64da93%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a061ba17551f71125b48bece8f054128d64da93%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Funny, raw, angry … The Red Shed. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
The Red Shed <http://www.theredshed.org.uk/> is Wakefield’s Labour club. Mark 
Thomas has been going there since he was a student at nearby Bretton Hall. This 
show is Thomas’s love letter to the Shed and to half a century of Labour 
activism, embracing the legacies of theminers’ strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/guardianwitness-blog/2015/mar/05/miners-strike-30-years-on-i-fought-not-just-for-my-pit-but-for-the-community>
and the dangers of mis-remembering – or not remembering at all. This is a 
storytelling show at its simplest: funny, raw and angry.LG
Read the full four-star review for The Red Shed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/08/red-shed-edinburgh-festival-review-mark-thomas-labour>

The Glass Menagerie

King’s theatre <http://www.eif.co.uk/2016/glassmenagerie#.V6iDzzYrKUl> (until 
21 August)

Long before he was one of the masterminds of Harry Potter and the Cursed Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/26/harry-potter-cursed-child-review-palace-theatre-london>
, John Tiffany directed Tennessee Williams’s 1944 play for theAmerican 
Repertory theatre at Harvard 
<http://americanrepertorytheater.org/?gclid=CNT2l7Cpsc4CFQWfGwodlhsDyw>. He has 
now revived that production with its original star, Cherry Jones, who is a 
legend on Broadway but little-known in Britain. The triumph of this production 
is Jones’s performance as Amanda, the former southern belle who dreams of 
finding a suitor for the socially gauche Laura.MB
Read the full four-star review for The Glass Menagerie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/08/the-glass-menagerie-at-edinburgh-festival-review-tennessee-williams-john-tiffany>

Alan Cumming Sings Sappy Songs!

The Hub <http://www.eif.co.uk/2016/cumming#.V6iHDjYrKUl> (until 27 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F336c30aae15c983f40faed46bbed7073032ac62c%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F336c30aae15c983f40faed46bbed7073032ac62c%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Making mischief … Alan Cumming Sings Sappy Songs! Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
for the Guardian 
Old-style Talk of the Town <http://www.hippodromecasino.com/history/>-type 
cabaret is very much in vogue, and Cumming burns bright with a mixture of old 
and new torch songs that range from Noël Coward to Katy Perry. It’s a little 
bit filthy, a little bit gossipy and a little bit louche but Cumming is always 
heartfelt in a show which feels surprisingly intimate and which is often 
emotionally self-revealing. Worth it alone for his version of Rufus 
Wainwright’s Dinner at Eight.LG
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/07/alan-cumming-sings-sappy-songs-review-edinburgh-festival>

Greater Belfast

Traverse <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/greater-belfast> (until 28 
August)

The musician and theatre-maker Matt Regan <http://www.reganmatt.com/>, alias 
Little King, hasn’tlived in Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/mar/15/praise-of-belfast-glenn-patterson-northern-ireland>
 for five years but he can still smell the sea and feel the salty wind on his 
face. He makes us think that we have felt and smelled it too. There are moments 
of exquisite beauty in this indefinable and utterly distinctive show that makes 
a mockery of all the old boundary-defining labels such as “gig”, “theatre” and 
“spoken word”.LG
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/06/greater-belfast-at-edinburgh-festival-review-matt-regan-traverse>

Diary of a Madman

Traverse <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/diary-of-a-madman-1> (until 28 
August)

In Nikolai Gogol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/17/nikolai-gogol-collected-tales-review>
’s short story Diary of a Madman, Poprishchin is a lowly Russian civil servant 
driven mad by his lack of status and his confusion at a changing world. In Al 
Smith’s play, he has become Pop Sheeran, whose family trade is painting the
Forth Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/05/forth-bridge-named-as-scotlands-sixth-world-heritage-site>
. This production is well worth seeing, though, for Liam Brennan’s tender 
performance as Pop, a tragic clown out of time and out of a job.LG


Read the full three-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/06/diary-of-a-madman-edinburgh-festival-review-gogol-traverse>

James Acaster: Reset

Pleasance Courtyard <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/james-acaster-reset>
 (until 28 August)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef91ddf31c0c686e757f1178cd6a3f884881c9ac%2F0_44_3730_2239%2F3730.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20the%20shows%20we%20recommend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fedinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef91ddf31c0c686e757f1178cd6a3f884881c9ac%2F0_44_3730_2239%2F3730.jpg>
 Exquisite writing … James Acaster. Photograph: Graham Flack 
At the best of the jokes in James Acaster’s new show, you can only sit back 
and marvel: the trajectory of his line of thought contrives to be both obvious 
and mind-blowing; the “how does he do it?” factor is high. Added to the 
exquisite writing and beady performance that we expect is some satirical bite, 
with a routine about Britain’s colonial plunder and a gag proposing peppermint 
tea as a metaphor for Brexit.BL
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/09/james-acaster-at-edinburgh-festival-review-gags-pleasance-courtyard>

My Eyes Went Dark


Traverse <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/my-eyes-went-dark> (until 28 
August)

Revenge is already an emerging theme at this year’s festival, and Matthew 
Wilkinson’s taut, brilliantly acted two-hander fits the bill, telling the story 
of a Russian architect who refuses to believe that the plane crash that killed 
his family was an accident. It’s the kind of meaty, tense drama that plays out 
so well in the theatre, which becomes an arena in which to raise issues of 
justice and forgiveness, and to question how we continue living in the face of 
unbearable grief. A compassionate contemporary play with the spare, emotional 
clout of a Greek tragedy.LG

The View from Castle Rock

artSpace@StMarks <https://tickets.edfringe.com/venues/artspace-stmarks> (until 
29 August)

The Laidlaws were just some of the estimated one million people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2008/nov/25/centre-study-scottish-diaspora-controversy>
 who, during the 19th century, tried to escape the grinding poverty of their 
lives in their native Scotland by sailing across the water to make a life in 
the new world. Their trail has been pieced together by the Canadian writerAlice 
Munro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/06/alice-munro-interview-nobel-prize-short-story-literature>
, who has then added a dollop of imagination to her stories about the lives of 
her ancestors. This adaptation by Linda McLean, staged by Marilyn Imrie for the 
company Stellar Quines, honours the graceful economy of Munro’s prose.LG
Read the full four-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/14/the-view-from-castle-rock-review-alice-munro-st-mark-art-space-edinburgh-festival>

In Fidelity

Traverse <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/in-fidelity> (until 28 August)

Rob Drummond gets two members of the audience up on stage with him and tries 
to persuade them to fall in love with each other, in a light-touch show that 
looks at Darwinian theory and asks whether we are genetically programmed to 
cheat … Drummond isn’t just putting the truth and our personal morals on trial, 
he is putting live theatre itself in the dock. Inevitably that won’t always 
work. But I reckon you should pay your money and take your chances. Because 
whatever happens it won’t be a dull evening.LG
Read the full three-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/22/in-fidelity-review-traverse-edinburgh-festival-fringe-rob-drummond>

Raw

Edinburgh International Conference Centre 
<http://www.eif.co.uk/2016/raw#.V7cbzxMrJn4> (on 27 and 28 August)

The Belgian dance-theatre company Kabinet K have a special magic when it comes 
to working with children, eliciting performances of rare naturalism and 
liveliness from kids as young as seven. In Raw they portray a world lived on 
the margins of society where children depend on their wits and their energy to 
survive. While the stage may look like a desolate wasteland of rubble, junk and 
dripping water, the cast of seven children and two adults transform it into 
their own colourful and ritualised playground, in this touching, clever and 
beautifully constructed show.JM
 