
Edin Dzeko atoned for a glaring first-half miss with a goal in each half in 
Roma’s resounding 5-0 win over Palermo, with Seydou Keita and Mohamed Salah – 
providing his own acrobatic brace – propelling the capital club above Inter 
Milan into fourth place.

The exiled Roma captain Francesco Totti watched from the stands as the 
Giallorossi enjoyed an emphatic Serie A victory without him. The 39-year-old 
striker has barely featured this season and found himself cut from the squad 
completely after publicly criticising the head coach, Luciano Spalletti, and 
Roma more than provedthey can cope without their talisman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/28/roma-francesco-totti-leaves-club-serie-a-italy>
.

Silvio Berlusconi claims Milan’s Mario Balotelli ‘has taken too much sun’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/silvio-berlusconi-mario-balotelli-claims-taken-too-much-sun>
Third-placed Fiorentina maintained their pursuit of the title as a late flurry 
of goals downed 10-manAtalanta 3-2 in Bergamo. The first of five strikes 
arrived in the 67th minute when Mati Fernández gave the Tuscans the upper hand, 
with Barcelona loanee Cristian Tello firingFiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> two goals clear nine minutes 
from time.

Atalanta <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> refused to roll over 
and halved the deficit through their young defender Andrea Conti, who would 
later be dismissed in stoppage time. The substitute Nikola Kalinic then grabbed 
what proved to be Fiorentina’s winner and Mauricio Pinilla wrapped up the 
scoring with Atalanta’s second at the death.

Sassuolo relaunched their bid for Europa League football by edging out Empoli, 
also by a 3-2 scoreline. Domenico Berardi’s first-half strike and two from 
Grégoire Defrel were enough to negate the effect of Piotr Zielinski’s goal for
Empoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/empoli> and a late Massimo 
Maccarone penalty.

Both sides had a player sent off, with Simone Missiroli walking for Sassuolo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sassuolo> and Lorenzo Tonelli seeing red 
for Empoli before half-time.

Genoa pulled clear of the drop zone with an overdue 2-1 win over Udinese at 
the Marassi. Ali Adnan opened the scoring for the Bianconeri but Genoa 
responded with an Alessio Cerci penalty and Diego Laxalt’s goal. The veteran 
striker Antonio Di Natale could have snatched a point forUdinese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/udinese> in stoppage time but Mattia 
Perin saved his penalty.

Elsewhere, López missed a late spot-kick for Torino as relegation-threatened 
Carpi ground out a goalless draw in Turin and there was a stalemate between 
Frosinone and Lazio at Stadio Matusa.
 