
The two things that nearly everyone agrees on are he is dashingly swoonsome 
and that is irrelevant. Beyond that there is constant debate about the 
usefulness of a high-scoring striker who will attempt to deliver a decisive 
performance at the Emirates on Wednesday. We are talking – before anyone 
launches into another dissertation on Olivier Giroud – about Edinson Cavani.

It is easy to forget that Cavani opened the scoring when Arsenal and Paris 
Saint-Germaindrew 1-1 at Parc des Princes in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/psg-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
. Because what really sticks in the mind from that game are the four clear 
chances that the striker managed to miss. After netting with a smart header in 
the first minute he lapsed into a bathetic farce, once firing wide after 
rounding the goalkeeper, twice shooting straight at David Ospina when clean 
through and another time killing the ball immaculately on his chest six yards 
from goal before falling backwards as if he had trodden on a rollerskate.

Arsenal need to show we can win against a big team, says Arsène Wenger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/arsenal-big-team-arsene-wenger-psg-champions-league-group-a>
That all amounted to an unnecessary reminder that despite an admirable work 
ethic and a prolific strike rate Cavani retains a goofy streak, one that has a 
tendency to surface in big games. He has happy memories of two previous visits 
to London, which both saw PSG eliminate Chelsea, but he may also have 
flashbacks tothe first of those, in March 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/11/chelsea-psg-champions-league-match-report>
, when he ran around Thibaut Courtois at Stamford Bridge before missing the 
target.

Cavani goes into the Arsenal game under pressure to avoid another ill-timed 
off day. Not merely because his misses in Paris are among the reasons why his 
team will probably need to win at the Emirates to finish top of the group, but 
because PSG invested serious hopes in him last summer, when they made him their 
first-choice striker rather than splashing out on a replacement for Zlatan 
Ibrahimovic. Cavani had waited three years for that opportunity. Before this 
season he had spent most of the time since his arrival from Napoli in 2013 as a 
reasonably effective but frequently frustrated wide man, contributing goals at 
a decent rate but mainly servingIbrahimovic, PSG’s centre-lord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/13/zlatan-ibrahimovic-leave-psg>.

No one has ever doubted Cavani’s endeavour or the fact that he can be wickedly 
sharp at times – but consistently lethal in big games? Trusting in that seemed 
a risk for a club that has set a first-ever place in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> semi-finals as a minimum 
target for this season. The misses against Arsenal made that faith seem almost 
reckless.

For a player prone to losses of confidence the forecast was dark. So his 
display in his next league match was strong and uplifting, as he scored four in 
45 minutes in the 6-0 victory at Caen. His form since then has been bright. He 
has struck nine goals in his last 10 matches, although amid that run there was 
also the preposterous flubbing of on open goal from three yards against 
Marseille in what is always one of the biggest matches of PSG’s domestic 
season. That game ended 0-0, highlighting the dependency on Cavani: when he 
misfires, PSG are often blunt.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Farsenal-will-finish-the-job-against-psg-says-arsene-wenger-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arsenal%20will%20'finish%20the%20job'%20against%20PSG%2C%20says%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Farsenal-will-finish-the-job-against-psg-says-arsene-wenger-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arsenal%20will%20%27finish%20the%20job%27%20against%20PSG%2C%20says%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Farsenal-will-finish-the-job-against-psg-says-arsene-wenger-video&media=>
Arsenal will ‘finish the job’ against PSG, says Arsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/22/arsenal-will-finish-the-job-against-psg-says-arsene-wenger-video>
. 
That is not exactly Cavani’s fault. Midfielders should have scored more 
regardless of Cavani, and Blaise Matuidi and Ángel Di María have been 
particularly substandard this season. But it also true that Cavani’s role 
places even more onus on him to score than there was on Ibrahimovic. The Swede 
scored abundantly but was more than a scorer. He also foraged deep and brought 
others into play. Cavani, faster and more inclined to dart behind defenders, is 
intended more as a specialist marksman. If PSG fail to supply him, or if he is 
in hapless mode, they struggle to penetrate.

Neither of the two attackers whom PSG bought in the summer, Hatem Ben Arfa and 
Jesé, are strikers per se, and Unai Emery has not given either of them much 
action in any position, anyway. The only alternative to Cavani, then, is 
Jean-Kévin Augustin, a 19-year-old who has shown huge promise off the bench but 
does not look ready for full-time centre-forward duty just yet. To win atArsenal
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>, then, PSG are most likely 
going to need Cavani to settle the argument.
 