


Assembly <http://www.assemblyfestival.com>

Russian clowns Derevo are back in town with the whimsical love story Once 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G6Glm_zCPfw>. Fringe favourite Gavin Robertson 
<http://www.gavinrobertson.com/>, always a clever thegatre-maker, returns with 
a new piece, Escape from the Planet of the Day That Time Forgot.Attrape Moi 
<https://www.assemblyfestival.com/event/244/> is a contemporary circus show 
from Quebec, and the Australian company Casus, who did the fabKnee Deep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/aug/14/knee-deep-edinburgh-festival-assembly-george-square>
, are back with a new piece, Driftwood. Plastic Boom are a new circus company 
and proteges of the brilliant Gandini Juggling so there should be no dropped 
balls inWater on Mars <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZcdHCcwVGcs>. If you 
like cabaret, then the Marie Antoinette-inspired Torte e Mort sounds like a 
winner; the same goes forLady Rizo: Multiplied 
<https://www.assemblyfestival.com/event/329/>. Also under the cabaret section 
comesPeter and Bambi Heaven: The Magic Inside 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lfh8GPCrjGk> which has tickled the fancy of 
Australian audiences in a big way. Clean Break offer a double bill of new 
voices with House and Amongst the Reeds. The headphones showLast Dream (on 
Earth) <https://www.assemblyfestival.com/event/330/> comes with rave reviews 
and is part of the Made in Scotland Showcase – always a good sign – as isCora 
Bissett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/aug/27/cora-bissett-roadkill-edinburgh-interview>
 and David Greig’s Glasgow Girls. A Streetcar Named Desire is staged by the 
Tumanishvili Film Actors Theatre, who have delivered in the past.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F918107a4f63605ee808ed09c7e509b65e9bdec15%2F0_126_4360_3151%2F4360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F918107a4f63605ee808ed09c7e509b65e9bdec15%2F0_126_4360_3151%2F4360.jpg>
 Knee Deep by Casus at the Edinburgh fringe in 2012. Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
for the Guardian 
International festival <http://www.eif.co.uk/> 

After a lacklustre few years, the theatre programme in the international 
festival perked up in 2015. Things look promising this year too with John 
Tiffany’s Tony-nominated revival of The Glass Menagerie getting its European 
premiere andThomas Ostermeier’s Richard III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/06/thomas-ostermeier-richard-iii-language-german-shakespeare>
 likely to give some people the hump. The two shows that really make my mouth 
water are the new one from the fabulous The TEAM,Anything That Gives Off Light 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ikXq8ZdZwW8>, which explores the pursuit of 
happiness, and the newest creation from the fabulously talentedJames Thierrée 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/24/james-thierree-chaplin-tabac-rouge-clown-sadlers-wells>
, The Toad Knew. Add to thatAlan Cumming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/01/alan-cumming-baftas-the-good-wife-men-in-suits>
 in cabaret, Vanishing Point in action with The Destroyed Room and some of the 
team from the Strange Undoing of Prudencia Hart behind Karine Polwart’s Wind 
Resistance, and this is a pretty enticing goodie bag.


Forest Fringe <http://www.forestfringe.co.uk/> 

The full programme isn’t announced yet, but the fringe game-changers are back 
in their 10th year with another artist-led programme for audiences who are 
simply asked to pay what they can. TheOut of the Blue 
<http://www.outoftheblue.org.uk/> Drill Hall of Leith Walk will be playing host 
to some top-flight artists includingAction Hero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/sep/30/arts-head-gemma-paintin-action-hero>
, Jo Bannon, Rosana Cade, Dan Canham,Richard DeDomenici 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/19/richard-dedomenici-death-social-housing-camden-peoples-theatre-art-matrix-redux>
,Brian Lobel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/oct/03/art-cancer-discussion-brian-lobel>
,Deborah Pearson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/13/deborah-pearson-made-visible-yard-theatre>
,Greg Wohead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/25/comeback-special-elvis-impersonation-greg-wohead-king>
 and more.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c5d63b0f24276e1d5a6732429171da64882dc01%2F137_0_3823_2294%2F3823.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c5d63b0f24276e1d5a6732429171da64882dc01%2F137_0_3823_2294%2F3823.jpg>
 Vanishing Point’s The Destroyed Room. Photograph: Mihaela Bodlovic 
Gilded Balloon <http://gildedballoon.co.uk/> 

Look out for Sweet Child of Mine <https://youtu.be/1nQwutuVEyI>, in which 
theatre-maker Bron Batten and her parents are on stage together discussing art 
and what she does for a living. It comes trailing awards from Australian 
festivals. There is a new one from Henry Naylor:Angel 
<http://www.gildedballoon.co.uk/tickets/performances.php?eventId=14:1205> tells 
the story of the female sniper who shot 100 jihadis. Mule is based on the story 
of twoyoung women imprisoned in Peru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/14/british-woman-in-peru-prison-for-drug-smuggling-to-be-released>
 for carrying drugs. Homelessness is explored inOne Day Moko 
<http://gildedballoon.co.uk/tickets/performances.php?eventId=14:1248>, inspired 
by real encounters with those living on the streets. Spoken word magicians 
Tongue Fu are behind Animal (Are You a Proper Person), a show about learning to 
live with yourself, and The Fabulous Punch and Judy Show is billed as an 
X-rated assault on modern masculinity.


Pleasance <https://www.pleasance.co.uk/> 

Breach Theatre gave us The Beanfield last year and they are back with Tank, 
which is about what happens when you inject a dolphin with LSD,which apparently 
was popular with scientists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/08/the-dolphin-who-loved-me> 
in the 1960s.Krapp 39 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/nov/28/krapp-39-michael-laurence-review>
 is inspired by Beckett and has had success in New York, as has the 
film-noirish thrillerHamlet in Bed 
<https://www.pleasance.co.uk/event/hamlet-bed#overview>. Dublin Oldschool comes 
with plaudits from its native Ireland. Mask company Familie Floz return with
Teatro Delusio <https://www.pleasance.co.uk/event/teatro-delusio#overview>. 
Fringe old-timers Red Shift adapt Dickens in A Tale of Two Cities: Blood for 
Blood, and newcomers Bucket Club follow up the delightful Lorraine and Alan 
with Fossils, a tale of monsters, facts and fictions. Not Too Tame had a hit 
with the pub-based show,Early Doors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/01/edinburgh-festival-2014-review-early-doors>
, which returns for another run this year as well as Electric Eden, a new 
party-theatre show inspired by rave culture.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F882f21e74b36345e6441152baf2899c74d010c4c%2F0_72_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F882f21e74b36345e6441152baf2899c74d010c4c%2F0_72_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Madly enjoyable … Figs in Wigs. Photograph: Manuel Vason 
Among other highlights, a Mexican woman’s fight for justice is explored in 
Bucket List <https://www.pleasance.co.uk/event/bucket-list-0#overview>, from 
the multi-talented Theatre Ad Infinitum. Theatre’s exits and entrances are the 
substance of the madly enjoyableFigs in Wigs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7CHiO2iXxDU> show, Often Onstage. Rising 
playwright Phoebe Éclair-Powell, who wroteWink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/18/wink-review-theatre-503-london-phoebe-eclair-powell>
, considers love and lies in Epic Love and Pop Songs, and she’s got a show at 
Underbelly too, Torch, which entwines songs from Patti Smith, Viv Albertine and 
more with stories of female experience. Brad Birch rewrites Ibsen’s Enemy of 
the People inEn Folkefiende 
<https://www.pleasance.co.uk/event/en-folkefiende#overview>, and after last 
year’sWeekend Rockstars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/28/weekend-rockstars-underbelly-edinburgh-festival-review-middle-child>
, Hull’s Middle Child are back with Ten Storey Love Song about the residents of 
a Middlesbrough tower block. Also back with a new one are DugOut withSwansong 
<https://www.pleasance.co.uk/event/swansong#overview>, a piece about myths, 
lies and being a legend in your own lunch hour. The Marked, from Theatre 
Temoin, looks at real-life stories of homeless people.

Summerhall <http://www.summerhall.co.uk/> 

If you were to stick a pin in the Summerhall programme you would be almost 
certain to come up with a show that would surprise and delight in equal 
measure. Check out the curated programmes from Paines Plough and Northern 
Stage. The former includes the return ofEvery Brilliant Thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/08/edinburgh-festival-2014-every-brilliant-thing-review-depression>
, alongside Luke Norris’s new comedy about manning up, Growth; Alan Harris’s 
Love, Lies and Taxidermy; and the off-Broadway song cycleGhost Quartet 
<http://davemalloy.com/ghost.html>. Katie Bonna’s All the Things I Lied About 
<http://festival16.summerhall.co.uk/event/all-the-things-i-lied-about/> should 
be fun too. The Northern Stage programme includesRash Dash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/22/rashdash-ugly-sisters-feminist-theatre>
’s examination of masculinity, Two Man Show; Unfolding Theatre’sPutting the 
Band Back Together <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uFnBcwjtqBQ>, about 
revisiting lost dreams; Hannah Nicklin’s Equations for a Moving Body; and Third 
Angel’s 600 People, looking at our place in the cosmos.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ee6a59ae3326b1ab19ee95d03a705700ce95fdc%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ee6a59ae3326b1ab19ee95d03a705700ce95fdc%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Jonny Donahoe, centre, in Every Brilliant Thing 
If you enjoyed On the Run’s So it Goes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/11/edinburgh-festival-2014-review-so-it-goes-bereavement>
, check out their latest, Tell Me Anything. The housing crisis get the Sh!t 
Theatre treatment inLetters to Windsor House 
<http://festival16.summerhall.co.uk/event/letters-to-windsor-house/>. Kieran 
Hurley’s Beats was terrific so I’ve got sky-high hopes for Heads Up about three 
people facing up to disaster. I’ve already seen a version of FK Alexander’s I 
Could Go on Singing, and it’s remarkable: uplifting and gruelling in equal 
measure. Inspector Sands are back in Edinburgh withThe Lounge 
<http://festival16.summerhall.co.uk/event/the-lounge/>, set in a care home off 
the A1, and Ontroerend Goed are contemplating the end of humanity in World 
Without Us.


Jeremy Weller’s Grassmarket Project created some memorable shows 20 years ago, 
and he’s back with a new true life tale,Doubting Thomas 
<http://festival16.summerhall.co.uk/event/doubting-thomas/>, about a man with a 
violent past.Annie Siddons <http://anniesiddons.co.uk/>’s tale of loneliness in 
Twickenham, How (Not) to Live in Suburbia, has already won fans.It Folds 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/culture/stage/it-folds-review-rich-theatrical-pickings-tiger-dublin-fringe-1.2345692>
 is an award-winning Irish piece combining the talents of Brokentalkers and the 
Junk Ensemble. Brilliant puppeteers Blind Summit and Hijinx collaborate onMeet 
Fred <http://www.walesartsreview.org/interview-meet-fred/> which explores what 
happens when Fred loses his “puppetry living allowance”. Us/ Them revisits the
Beslan siege 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/01/beslan-school-massacre-ten-years>
;Jenna Watt <http://www.jennawatt.co.uk/>’s Faslane talks to those working at 
the Trident site and those protesting there; and the stories we tell to 
ourselves in the violet hour, are explored in Francesca Millican-Slater’s 
Stories to Tell in the Middle of the Night.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6299805159f502ad745325f3991e0f71c56b21e5%2F0_52_3895_2336%2F3895.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6299805159f502ad745325f3991e0f71c56b21e5%2F0_52_3895_2336%2F3895.jpg>
 Robert Boulter, Ruth Gemmell, Scarlett Brookes and Mimi Ndiweni in Revolt. She 
Said. Revolt Again at the Courtyard theatre in Stratford in 2014. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Traverse <http://www.traverse.co.uk/> 

Daniel Kitson <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/daniel-kitson>’s Mouse: The 
Persistence of an Unlikely Thought is going to be the show that sells out in a 
twinkling, and there is tried and tested work in the RSC production ofAlice 
Birch’s Revolt. She Said. Revolt Again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/22/alice-birch-playwright-interview-we-want-you-to-watch>
, as well as Matthew Wilkinson’sMy Eyes Went Dark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/01/my-eyes-went-dark-review-matthew-wilkinson-finborough-cal-macaninch-thusitha-jayasundera>
, previously seen at London’s Finborough. If you loved Rob Drummond’sBullet 
Catch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/aug/05/bullet-catch-edinburgh-festival-review>
 as much as I did, you won’t want to miss In Fidelity which combines live 
onstage dating with evolutionary theory. Al Smith’s Diary of a Madman 
reimagines Gogol’s classic in contemporary Glasgow, continuing the Gate’s 
relationship with the Traverse.Mark Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mark-thomas> is back with a new play, The 
Red Shed, about the Wakefield wooden shed that doubles as the Labour Club.
Daffodils <https://vimeo.com/167364430> is billed as a heartbreaker hailing 
from New Zealand; and there’s new work too from Julia Taudevin,Panti Bliss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/07/dublin-drag-queen-panti-bliss-bar-hiv-aids-tests>
, Adura Onashile and rising talent Ross Dunsmore, whose first full length play, 
Milk, is the Traverse’s headline show.

Underbelly <http://www.underbellyedinburgh.co.uk/> 

Underbelly’s Circus Hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/28/edinburgh-fringe-festival-circus-underbelly>
 on the Meadows is back, featuring among other things a new show, The Carny 
Dream, from the wonderfulCamille O’Sullivan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/camille-o-sullivan>. There’s also young UK 
circus company Silver Lining with Throwback; a dance theatre piece, Imbalance, 
from Joli Vyaan and Jonathan Lunn; and new Australian company Here and Now, 
whose Perhaps Hope looks for beauty in a polluted world.


I really like the look of Manual Cinema’s Ada/Ava <https://vimeo.com/68065233>
, which uses overhead projectors and hundreds of shadow puppets to tell a story 
of loss and loneliness. Other Underbelly shows of interest includeTriple Threat 
<http://www.underbellyedinburgh.co.uk/whats-on/lucy-mccormick-triple-threat> 
from Lucy McCormick (one half of Getinthebackofthevan); Blush, written by
Charlotte Josephine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/feb/26/bitch-boxer-bottleneck-review> 
who wrote Bitch Boxer, which tells candid stories of revenge porn; Smoking 
Apple’s tale of the fishing industry, In Our Hands; Gagglebabble’s Wonderman, 
which gives Roald Dahl’s twisted short stories the gig-theatre treatment; and 
Lucy Skilbeck’s previously seen and very rewarding Joan. If you are looking for 
cabaret thenGrumble: Sex Clown Saves the World 
<http://www.underbellyedinburgh.co.uk/whats-on/grumble-sex-clown-saves-the-world>
 sounds promising.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16c2c5adaa43b4260cc981f344ad97603f37aa35%2F0_154_5496_3297%2F5496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edinburgh%20festival%202016%3A%20what%20to%20see%20and%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fedinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16c2c5adaa43b4260cc981f344ad97603f37aa35%2F0_154_5496_3297%2F5496.jpg>
 Ada/Ava by Manual Cinema 
Zoo venues <http://www.zoofestival.co.uk/> 

Zoo venues are always worth a look, particularly if you are interested in 
physical theatre and dance. It’s where I’ve often had my first glimpse of young 
companies fromIdle Motion <http://idlemotion.co.uk/> to Little Soldier 
<http://littlesoldierproductions.co.uk/> and where artists such as Verity 
Standen first got wider attention.Footprint’s Daniel 
<http://www.zoofestival.co.uk/whats-on/theatre?zid=508> is inspired by the 
story of an 18 year old found guilty of having 50,000 indecent images of 
children, which made waves at the National student drama festival. The Ludens 
Ensemble’s Macbeth: Without Words draws on silent film techniques; andThe Blind 
Date Project <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9vrfwdXH_m8> is improvised every 
night. Look out too forStoneCrabs’ Luna Park 
<http://www.zoofestival.co.uk/whats-on/theatre?zid=493>, set in the Coney 
Island amusement park during the Great Depression; and Scorched, a new piece 
from former Total Theatre award winners Open Sky. Natalie Reckert’s solo circus 
show,Image – Selfie with Eggs 
<http://www.nataliereckert.com/soloprogramm/en_soloprogramm.html>, looks great, 
testing the limits of endurance without cracking.

 