
Edward Albee, who has died aged 88, has been described as both the first 
modern American playwright and the last great American playwright after Eugene 
O’Neill, Tennessee Williams andArthur Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/feb/12/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
. In reality he was probably neither, although he was undoubtedly a substantial 
talent, who burst on to a stagnant American theatrical scene with The Zoo Story 
in 1959 and followed it up three years later with that major masterpiece of 
marital disharmony, Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?

Although Albee was to continue writing all his life, and had minor success 
with plays such as the Pinteresque A Delicate Balance (1966) and All Over 
(1971), it was not until 1991 that he had a late creative blooming and another 
theatrical hit with Three Tall Women. Like much of Albee’s best work, Three 
Tall Women was strongly autobiographical, drawing on his privileged but 
loveless childhood and memories of his mother, Frances, a domineering, 
Junoesque beauty who preferred horses to people, and almost anyone to her 
adopted son.

He was born in Washington, to Louise Harvey, and immediately given up for 
adoption. Aged 18 days, he was handed into the care of Reed and Frances Albee, 
of Larchmont, New York. Reed was the wealthy, womanising son of the vaudeville 
theatre-owner and manager Edward Franklin Albee, and Frances (nee Cotter), 
better known as Frankie, was his third wife. It was rumoured that she had 
married Reed for his money. A childhood friend of Albee’s was subsequently to 
remark: “It’s lucky he was adopted. He would not get much talent from those 
two.”

Edward Albee, Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? playwright, dies aged 88
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/16/edward-albee-dies-playwright-whos-afraid-virginia-woolf>
A dreamy child with a penchant for drawing and music, the young Edward may not 
have wanted for material wealth, but grew up an observant outsider in his own 
home, ignored by his monosyllabic father and reviled by his mother. “My mother 
and I disliked and mistrusted each other,” said Albee in an interview many 
years later, recalling that she would frequently tell him: “Just you wait until 
you are 18, and I’ll have you out of here so fast that it’ll make your head 
spin.”

In fact Albee was 20 before he left home, after an argument. Apart from a 
chance encounter, he never saw his father again, and he had no further contact 
with his mother for 20 years, although she was regularly to appear in different 
guises in his plays: as Mommy in The American Dream (1961), Martha in Who’s 
Afraid of Virginia Woolf?, Agnes in A Delicate Balance and, most famously, as 
Three Tall Women, written shortly after her death in a creative act that Albee 
likened to an “exorcism”. Mother and son may never have reached rapprochement, 
let alone anything approaching love, but Frankie was as much a muse for Albee 
as she was a monster.

Albee spent the next 10 years living in and around Greenwich Village, 
bolstered by the $25 a week interest payments from a trust fund he had 
inherited from his grandmother, and occasional work as a telegram boy for 
Western Union. The ordinary people he met while tramping the city, their 
desperation and loneliness, became the inspiration for The Zoo Story. But he 
was also moving in artistic circles. By 1952 he was living with, and in the 
shadow of, the talented young composer William Flanagan.

After the success of The Zoo Story, the myth grew up that it was Albee’s very 
first play, apart from a three-act sex farce written when he was 12 and 
destroyed by his mother. In reality, between 1949 and 1959, he served an 
intense apprenticeship, writing at least nine plays as well as short stories 
and poems. The Zoo Story, about two men sitting on a bench in Central Park, was 
started a month before his 30th birthday as, Albee was later to claim, a 
birthday present to himself. He was immediately aware that, for the first time, 
he had written something “worthwhile”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fedward-albee-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee64b4f6d953c339c46a2d64c2493d49351c8fc9%2F0_234_2622_1574%2F2622.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edward%20Albee%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fedward-albee-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edward%20Albee%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fedward-albee-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee64b4f6d953c339c46a2d64c2493d49351c8fc9%2F0_234_2622_1574%2F2622.jpg>
 Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor in the film of Who’s Afraid of Virginia 
Woolf?, directed by Mike Nichols in 1966 Photograph: Allstar/Warner Bros 
New York theatre producers took longer to persuade, and The Zoo Story received 
its world premiere in a German translation at the Schiller theatre in Berlin on 
28 September 1959. It was part of a double bill that includedSamuel Beckett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1989/dec/27/poetry.beckettat100>’s Krapp’s 
Last Tape. It was not until January 1960 that the play had its US premiere, at 
the Provincetown Playhouse in Greenwich Village. As was to be the case with 
almost all of Albee’s subsequent work, the reviews were mixed, but the positive 
ones were enthusiastic enough to turn him from an unknown into a hot young 
playwright who was being mentioned in the same breath as Beckett andIonesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ionesco>. America had its first avant-garde 
playwright in the European mode.

The playwright John Guare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jan/05/john-guare-interview> was to 
subsequently write of “the debt that every American playwright writing after 
1960 owes to Edward Albee”. The British playwrightTom Stoppard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stoppard>, whose early work was strongly 
absurdist, has said that it was seeing The Zoo Story that made him determined 
to become a playwright. But the Beckettian undertones of The Zoo Story, the 
Ionesco-influenced The American Dream, and A Delicate Balance, with its 
Pinter-like dialogue and sense of menace, left many wondering whether Albee was 
anything more than a clever imitator hitching a ride on the coattails of the 
latest theatrical fashion.

The tendency to imitate was apparent even in his later work. Reviewing The 
Play About the Baby, which premiered at the Almeida in 1998, Michael Billington 
in the Guardian suggested that Albee was self-referring and cannibalising his 
own work. “The play is more a treasure trove for Albee scholars and biographers 
than something of universal concern.”

In his 20s, Albee had taken up again and then dropped his childhood hobby of 
drawing and painting. He was later to remark: “I realised I felt nothing beyond 
a certain curiosity, and I was making imitations that looked, to my eye, every 
bit as good as the originals.” This question of authenticity was always to 
raise itself in critical assessments of Albee’s plays. Although his defenders 
hailed him as a distinctive theatrical voice and great experimenter who refused 
to be pigeonholed, his detractors claimed that he remained derivative in form 
and content. Yet if there was any play that countered that latter view, it was 
Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? It also provided Albee with his only major 
commercial success, and gave the lie to the notion that he was incapable of 
writing a full-length play.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fedward-albee-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a526019813e04270643c1bf85f78acbabe44854%2F0_230_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edward%20Albee%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fedward-albee-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edward%20Albee%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fedward-albee-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a526019813e04270643c1bf85f78acbabe44854%2F0_230_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The playwright in 1961. Photograph: Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
The title came from a piece of graffiti that Albee had spotted in a Greenwich 
Village bar some years previously. Set on the campus of a small American 
college, it has middle-aged Martha, the daughter of the dean, who is married to 
George, the assistant professor of history, arriving back home after a party. 
In tow are the new young biology teacher, Nick, and his wife, Honey. What 
follows is a bilious and drunken few hours in which Martha and George indulge 
in game playing and fantasy, wounding both their guests and each other. Martha 
reveals a son that the pair have invented, a revelation that George tops by 
“killing” the imagined boy off. This imaginary or absent son was to become a 
recurring figure in Albee’s work.

His friend Mel Gussow 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/05/01/arts/mel-gussow-critic-dies-at-71-a-champion-of-playwrights.html>
, the critic, said that, although Albee was to write many more plays, “Virginia 
Woolf was the cornerstone of his career: one play feeds all. In it, we can see 
strands reaching back to The Zoo Story (the act of confession, death as the 
final relief) and The American Dream (the household as microcosm) and forward 
to A Delicate Balance (the meaning of friendship and loyalty) and Three Tall 
Women (the price of parenting, the tricks of memory).”

Although it was a commercial success and in 1966 made into a film directed by 
Mike Nichols <https://www.theguardian.com/global/2014/nov/20/mike-nichols> and 
starringRichard Burton <http://www.richardburton.com/> and Elizabeth Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/23/elizabeth-taylor-obituary> as 
George and Martha, Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? had by no means wholly 
ecstatic reviews. A lack of critical appreciation of his work was something 
that Albee learned to accept. “I have been both over-praised and under-praised. 
I assume by the time I finish writing – and I plan to go on writing until I’m 
90 or gaga – it will equal itself out.” He almost managed it: Me, Myself and I, 
another play drawing on mother and son relationships, was produced in 2008, 
when he was 80.

But at one point it seemed unlikely that Albee would be writing plays in his 
later years. After Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?, his career went into 
serious decline and for the next 20 years his ability to write was affected by 
his love affair with alcohol, which had begun while he was still a child and 
would be asked to mix cocktails for his parents.
 Deborah Kerr in Seascape, 1975 
Tiny Alice, premiered on Broadway in 1964 with John Gielgud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/may/22/news.obituaries> and Irene Worth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/mar/12/guardianobituaries>, was greeted 
with such incomprehension that Albee found himself forced to hold a press 
conference to explain its meaning. Even the author could not satisfactorily 
explain the bizarre story of a lay brother who is sent by a superior to the 
house of a wealthy woman and is enmeshed in a scenario of sexual hysteria, 
religious ecstasy and martyrdom.

A Delicate Balance, described by Kenneth Tynan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/critic/feature/0,,567652,00.html> as “an 
exquisite fandango of despair”, saw Albee return to the familiar territory of 
his adoptive parents’ life style. A beautiful play about “what happens when we 
turn our backs upon ourselves”, it was a success and won Albee the Pulitzer 
prize he had been unjustly denied for Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?

Although Albee continued to write plays and have them produced, most notably 
the death-watch drama All Over and his second Pulitzer-winner, Seascape (1975), 
a play in which two lizards intrude upon a marriage, his reputation was in free 
fall. Seascape ran for just two months. The disaster of The Man Who Had No 
Arms, about a man who sprouts a limb and achieves celebrity, only to see it 
wither as his arm atrophies, which closed on Broadway after just 16 
performances in 1983, suggested that it was all over for Albee too.

His strength as a playwright was that he continued to experiment with form and 
content all his life

He did not need to write plays. Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? had made him a 
wealthy man, and he was renowned as a discerning collector of 20th-century art. 
For the next 10 years, the focus of his life shifted from writing plays to 
teaching and encouraging younger playwrights. He was a committed and generous 
teacher.

After his father’s death in 1961, Albee had resumed some contact with his 
mother, but the relationship remained difficult, not least because of Frankie’s 
refusal to acknowledge her son’s homosexuality or his long-term partner, the 
painter and sculptorJonathan Thomas 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/05/06/arts/design/jonathan-thomas-artist-dies-at-59.html>
, who did much to help Albee overcome his dependency on alcohol, and who 
predeceased him. Her death in 1989 spawned Three Tall Women, a poignant and 
entirely fictionalised arm’s-length look at Frankie as a 92-year-old, by now 
bed-ridden and incontinent, who is also glimpsed aged 52 and 26. In 1994 it was 
awarded a Pulitzer prize.

There was another unexpected and late career gift in The Goat, or Who is 
Sylvia?, seen in New York in 2002 andat the Almeida in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/feb/04/theatre3> and in the West End in 
2004, about a successful architect in an apparently happy marriage who falls in 
love with a goat and has passionate sex with it. The London production boasted 
a brilliant central performance fromJonathan Pryce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/jonathan-pryce> and an early stage 
appearance from a youngEddie Redmayne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/eddie-redmayne> as his gay teenage son, in a 
savagely funny and dark examination of the limits of tolerance and the monsters 
that lurk beneath the exterior of modern middle-class everyday life. It was 
every bit as powerful and harrowing as Albee’s masterpiece.

If his upbringing ensured that intimacy remained a problem for Albee all his 
life, with even some of his closest friends referring to him as “mysterious” or 
“unknowable”, in his best work he was always present and always painfully 
revealing of his lost childhood and the barren, unhappy lives of his parents 
and their friends, and the best and worst that lurks in all of us.

His strength as a playwright was that he continued to experiment with form and 
content all his life. A lazier, less passionate playwright might have contented 
himself with rewriting Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? in different ways, or 
just quit when the critical reception got rough. Albee may never have been able 
to summon the emotional openness to match Williams’s honesty, grotesque comedy 
and lyricism, nor the political commitment to match Miller’s 
state-of-the-nation acuteness, but he was no also-ran. Rather he was one of the 
triumvirate who changed and shaped postwar American playwriting. The Zoo Story, 
A Delicate Balance and Who’s Afraid Of Virginia Woolf? will never want for 
production; they dissect our desire to hide behind illusion with a devastating 
and unflinching accuracy.

• Edward Albee <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/albee>, playwright, born 12 
March 1928; died 16 September 2016
 