
The Football League has announced fines totalling £60,000 for 12 clubs who 
contravened rules over fielding their strongest teams in this season’s
Checkatrade Trophy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/johnstones-paint-trophy>.

The revamped EFL Trophy is a complete and utter failure – and here’s why | 
John Ashdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/08/efl-trophy-football-league-failure>
Luton and Portsmouth were fined £15,000 apiece for three separate offences, 
with Bradford, Blackpool, Bristol Rovers, MK Dons, Millwall, Charlton, 
Peterborough,Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited>, Southend and Fleetwood 
all fined £3,000 each.

A statement from the EFL read 
<http://www.efl.com/news/article/2016/efl-checkatrade-trophy-update-3419509.aspx>
: “All of the offences punished were due to a failure to meet competition rule 
7.3 of fielding a full-strength team in and during all matches. The EFL did 
take into account a number of mitigating factors and also considered 
transgressions that were not within the spirit of the rules.

“The full-strength policy for the season 2016-17 competition was five of the 
starting line-up must have started the previous or following game (a reduction 
from six in season 2015-16) or five of the starting 11 who have made the most 
starting appearances in League and domestic cup competitions fixtures during 
the current season.

“Invited category 1 clubs were asked to follow a different set of criteria, 
with 6 of the starting 11 required to be under-21 as of June 30, 2016. None of 
the invited clubs failed to comply.”

EFL talks over potential expansion stall due to disagreements with FA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/fa-efl-talks-potential-expansion-stall>
The competition – which was relaunched this season to include under-23 academy 
sides from Premier League and Championship clubs in a re-formatted Football 
League Trophy – has provoked an angry reaction from supporters and calls for a 
boycott of the games. Last week’s round of matches saw two-thirds of fixtures 
recordaverage attendances of less than 1,000 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/checkatrade-trophy-crowds-fail-attract-1000>
, while Portsmouth’s game against Bristol Rovers drew the worst post-war 
attendance at Fratton Park.

Luton responded to the fine with a statement of their own 
<http://www.lutontown.co.uk/news/article/2016-17/luton-town-checkatrade-trophy-efl-3419548.aspx>
, admitting they are “dismayed” by the EFL’s decision.

“We entered those teams with our eyes wide open and we accept that we would be 
fined for doing so,” said chief executive Gary Sweet. “While we don’t feel we 
should be paying ‘fees’ to get our youngsters experience, we view that as an 
investment in their development. We are staggered, however, that we have been 
fined the maximum amount for our first offence, which was winning away from 
home at a club from the division above with half-a-dozen first-team regulars in 
their team.

“We played nine graduates of our academy in that game at Gillingham, and seven 
against a West Brom side containing four players, two of whom who were 
internationals and had been transferred for several million pounds, and still 
beat both.

“We believe our team selection has added value to a competition that was dying 
last season and is now – with low three-figure attendances at many matches so 
far – well and truly on its last legs.

“We had the second highest attendance in our one home game against a fellow 
senior EFL club, which we believe was only because we were playing our 
youngsters.

“We acknowledge our breach of the competition rules, but does our ‘offence’ 
make a mockery of the competition any more than a club substituting their 
first-choice goalkeeper after just a couple of minutes of the game to ensure 
they met the five-player starting rule.

“Which is more in keeping with the spirit of the game? Which supports the 
competition’s ethos of promoting young talent more?

“That is clearly disingenuous and by fining us this amount the EFL is 
effectively saying that promoting young talent is only acceptable if they’re 
with an EPPP1 club, and they are depriving their own member clubs’ young 
players access to first-team football.”
 