
The Preston North End <https://www.theguardian.com/football/preston> striker 
Simon Makienok scored a hat-trick to knock Premier League sideBournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> out of the EFL Cup 3-2 after 
extra time at the Vitality Stadium.

Makienok had given Simon Grayson’s Championship strugglers the lead after just 
10 minutes, beating Adam Federici at his near post.Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> were level eight minutes 
into the second half when Lewis Grabban scored from the penalty spot after Ben 
Pringle was judged to have handled Max Gradel’s free-kick. Dan Gosling then 
nudged Eddie Howe’s team ahead after 76 minutes when he scored from close range.

However Preston fought back to equalise with five minutes left when Makienok, 
who is on loan from Palermo after spending last season with Charlton, glanced 
in a header from Chris Humphrey’s cross. The Denmark international then won the 
game for the visitors after 111 minutes when he stabbed the ball over Federici.

Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> had Tyler Blackett sent 
off but went on to eliminateBrighton & Hove Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brightonfootball> with a 2-1 win at the 
Amex Stadium. Jaap Stam’s side took the lead on 32 minutes through a 
close-range volley from the Republic of Ireland international Stephen Quinn, 
but had Blackett, who joined them from Manchester United last month, dismissed 
just before half-time for a late challenge on Sébastien Pocognoli .

Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading>, though, found 
themselves 2-0 up early in the second half when the midfielder John Swift, who 
signed in the summer from Chelsea, scored his second goal in three days, on 54 
minutes. Brighton reduced the deficit through Tomer Hemed with five minutes 
left, but could not conjure an equaliser to force extra-time.

Newcastle United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> 
avenged last Saturday’s Championship home defeat againstWolverhampton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolves> with a 2-0 win against them in 
the re-run at St James’ Park. The Magpies – beaten 2-0 by Walter Zenga’s side 
at the weekend – took the lead in the 29th minute through Matt Ritchie’s deft 
finish and the midfielder set up the second two minutes later for Yoan Gouffran 
to spectacularly volley home.

At Elland Road Leeds United  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited>
 defeatedBlackburn Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackburn> 1-0 
with a late goal from Chris Wood, who bundled the ball in on 85 minutes.
 