
Week Two ended with the team that was relegated at the end of last season top 
of the table. It also ended with the team that just celebrated its first title 
in 34 years bottom; with the team that presented their beautiful new striker in 
their beautiful new stadium in front of 10,000 supporters goalless again; and 
with the team that returned to the Champions League this week, a fifth Spanish 
club whistling Zadok the Priest, getting whistled by their own supporters. It 
ended with 80,000 fans chanting the name of a new hero being shown the door; 
with the treble winners getting rescued by a thumping finish from a man who had 
gone so long without scoring that he admitted he didn’t know what to do next; 
and with the man who couldn’t score scoring again and the men who couldn’t stop 
scoring not scoring again.

Confused? It was that kind of week. So let’s explain. Week Two was the week in 
which Málaga, the only team toremain unbeaten against Barcelona last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/14/manuel-pellegrini-manchester-city-javi-gracia-barcelona>
, extended their run without conceding a goal against them to 254 minutes 
until, with nerves frayed and fans fretting, with Málaga midfielder Juankar 
almost scoring from inside his half – and yes, that really is his name and yes 
that really is how you say it –Thomas Vermaelen smacked in a 72nd-minute winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/29/barcelona-malaga-la-liga-match-report>
. “I didn’t celebrate because I am not used to scoring and I didn’t know what 
to do,” he said, so he just smiled a bit.

It was also the week in which Real Madrid, the team they said couldn’t score, 
and whose manager turned to 14th century fables to denounce the 
damned-if-you-do, damned-if-you-don’t inevitability of criticism,hammered Betis 
5-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/29/real-madrid-real-betis-la-liga-match-report>
; in which Gareth Bale scored his fastest ever goal after just 94 seconds and 
belted in another after 89 minutes, James Rodríguez got two superb strikes of 
his own, and Karim Benzema trumped them with a simple finish to a lovely move, 
but after which Marcelo responded “the penalty save” from Keylor Navas when he 
was asked which he liked the best. The same Navas whose name fans chanted and 
who knows that on Monday, the final day of the transfer window in Spain, the 
day that has kind of swallowed up the actual football, he could yet be on his 
way. This, after all, everyone declares is D-day. D for De Gea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Feibar-joint-leaders-of-la-liga-despite-being-relegated-last-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e098d15b777d04d020fa1955750a03b2f28d4e7%2F0_36_3116_2554%2F3116.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eibar%2C%20joint-leaders%20of%20La%20Liga%20despite%20being%20relegated%20last%20season%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Feibar-joint-leaders-of-la-liga-despite-being-relegated-last-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eibar%2C%20joint-leaders%20of%20La%20Liga%20despite%20being%20relegated%20last%20season%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Feibar-joint-leaders-of-la-liga-despite-being-relegated-last-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e098d15b777d04d020fa1955750a03b2f28d4e7%2F0_36_3116_2554%2F3116.jpg>
 James Rodríguez scored two beauties in Real Madrid’s win over Betis. 
Photograph: Oscar de Marcos/Demotix/Corbis 
There was more, just not really in Las Palmas, where first division football 
returned 13 years later, not to the old Estadio Insular but to the Gran 
Canaria, where there were cars parked behind the goal and a bus parked in front 
of it, Levante time-wasting from the first minute; or in Getafe, where Granada 
won 2-1 with one penalty and one dreadful mistake from Vicente Guaita; or in 
San Sebastián, where Asier Illaramendi returned for la Real but there were no 
goals. Valencia drew 1-1 with Deportivo for whom Lucas Pérez scored a beauty, 
prompting whistles from Mestalla three days after they qualified for the 
Champions League, Nuno noting: “It’s my job to turn them into applause.” And 
Super Cup winners Athletic Bilbao were beaten again, dropping to the bottom.

Down at the other end of the country, Fernando Llorente returned from Italy, 
made his debut for Sevilla at the recently renovated and very red Sanchez 
Pizjuán, a star signing that completes a hugely impressive squad – “one of the 
strongest in Spain,” said opposition manager Diego Simeone –but still lost 3-0 
to Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/30/atletico-madrid-sevilla-match-report>
. Amidst the din and the excitement there were goals from Koke, Gabi and 
Jackson Martínez, the first two dedicated to the departing Raúl García, who is 
joining Athletic, and impressive displays from the extraordinary Antoine 
Griezmann and from Torres. That’s Óliver Torres. The result left Sevilla with a 
single point and no goals; it also left Atlético with two wins from two.

There’s something about Atlético this season: they have spent more than €100m 
(their net spend is closer to €40m), Luciano Vietto has not even played yet, 
and as Gabi said: “We have more versatility this season.” They also have what 
they always had. For much of the second half Atlético resisted as Sevilla 
poured forward, the noise rising, the tension too, but they did so in that 
Atlético way that makes you think they’re actually quite enjoying it, and they 
could have killed the game on the break before they did, Gabi’s fortunate 
second coming in the 75th minute, Jackson curling the third in the 84th.

Besides, winning there is always impressive. As one of the slogans painted 
into the stand rightly put it: the Pizjuán “doesn’t gift points.” This is only 
the second time Sevilla have been defeated at homein over a year and almost 40 
games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/13/sevilla-feel-the-noise-barcelona-la-liga-unbeaten-record>
, the other beinga 3-2 loss to Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/04/real-madrid-sevilla-barcelona-la-liga-title-race>
. “Cholo took the Pizjuán which is like crossing into North Korea at the 38th 
parallel and taking Kim Jong-un’s lunch off him,” wrote Juanma Trueba and 
others were equally impressed by Atlético. “Fearful,” Marca called them. “This 
Atlético are serious,” said AS. “It was hard,” admitted Llorente, his vest 
havingpresumably shrunk in the wash 
<https://twitter.com/casadelfutbol/status/638117557552046080>. Either that or 
he was wearing a bra.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Feibar-joint-leaders-of-la-liga-despite-being-relegated-last-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd600a7d7c80f1100bf9f2dfa2c1823145f8a7a51%2F0_199_2797_1679%2F2797.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eibar%2C%20joint-leaders%20of%20La%20Liga%20despite%20being%20relegated%20last%20season%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Feibar-joint-leaders-of-la-liga-despite-being-relegated-last-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eibar%2C%20joint-leaders%20of%20La%20Liga%20despite%20being%20relegated%20last%20season%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F31%2Feibar-joint-leaders-of-la-liga-despite-being-relegated-last-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd600a7d7c80f1100bf9f2dfa2c1823145f8a7a51%2F0_199_2797_1679%2F2797.jpg>
 Jackson Martínez celebrates with Atlético Madrid team-mates and coach Diego 
Simeone. Photograph: Marcelo Del Pozo/Reuters 
So Llorente did not score and nor did Torres, but Roberto Soldado did. And 
here’s the thing, the bit where it gets odd again. Week Two ended with Roberto 
Soldado top scorer, doubling in two games his total from the whole of last 
season and adding two assists as well; it didn’t end with Leo Messi or 
Cristiano Ronaldo top of the goalscoring charts. In fact, it didn’t even end 
with themin the goalscoring charts. For the first time since they both played 
in Spain, the men who have shared the last six Pichichis went two consecutive 
weeks without a goal. Instead, the players level with Soldado are Villarreal 
team-mate Cédric Bakambu, plus James Rodríguez and Gareth Bale, Nolito and 
Adrián González.

Nolito plays for Celta de Vigo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/03/celta-vigo-nolito-jonny-castro-luis-suarez-lionel-messi-barcelona-la-liga>
, who beat Rayo Vallecano 3-0, the first two his. Adrián plays for Eibar. 
Together, their teams are joint top of the league: two games, two wins, five 
goals scored, one goal against.

You may remember Adrián from Celta, Nastic, Getafe, Racing, Rayo or Elche; you 
may remember Eibar from last season.They were the team that went down on the 
final day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/25/eibar-relegation-la-liga-sid-lowe>
, whose “devastated” manager Gaizka Garitano walked away because he had been 
unable to keep them up, and whose fans could barely believe what they were 
watching. But they are also the team that were reinstated after Adrián’s former 
club Elche, who finished 13th, were relegated fortheir financial problems 
<http://www.espnfc.com/blog/espn-fc-united-blog/68/post/2544414/elche-relegated-to-segunda-celebrate-last-minute-survival>
, leaving Eibar to take their place. Now Eibar are top.

Eibar won 3-1 at Granada last week and this week they beat Athletic Bilbao 2-0 
at home. Adrián scored in both – he already has as many goals as in any other 
season in his career. He headed the second after Saúl Berjón had given Eibar 
the lead. A derby victory and the leadership. “We should not be carried away 
with excitement,” declared El Diario Vasco, sounding quite a lot like they were 
getting carried away with excitement. “But it is hard to contain yourself when 
they overcome opponents with the efficiency and decisiveness with which they 
beat Athletic … a team that recently hammered Barcelona. We were worried that 
the opening day was a mirage, but [not] now.” The headline declared:Eibar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eibar> are not a “one-day flower”.

Now, a bit of advice from Mr Wolf would not go amiss here, as they recognised. 
Eibar began last season with a derby win too,defeating Real Sociedad at Ipurua 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/aug/25/eibar-la-liga-fairytale-introduction>
 and by Christmas they were seventh, safety seemed assured. But then this 
happened: D, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, D, L, W, L, L, L, L, L, L, D, W. Eibar’s 
last 20 games in the first division included just two wins, two draws, and 16 
losses in 20, eight points from a possible 60, and one of those two wins came 
on the final day against Córdoba – a team that had already been relegated a 
week before and had been made to travel to the match by bus, 797 kilometres 
away, as a punishment for being so awful and no longer seeming to care.

We were worried that the opening day was a mirage, but not now
El Diario Vasco 
The risk of a repeat remains. Yet this hope never goes away entirely and this 
is also a different Eibar team now, even if the limitations remain at a ground 
that had just over 5,000 on Sunday in a town of 27,000. The new coach José Luis 
Mendilíbar is the man who was in charge in 2005, the closest they had ever been 
to the first division until Garitano took them up two years ago. The early 
signs are that they will press high, as Mendilibar’s teams tend to do, and that 
they may be a little more daring, more attacking, more of a mix of qualities – 
like going to work “in overalls and a bow tie”, as one paper put it – aided by 
their new signings. All 14 of them.

Maybe they can survive, and that of course is the real target. As for this, 
this is a moment to enjoy, time to take a pair of scissors to the paper, the 
league table a cut- and-keep souvenir. “Today is a great day for everyone,” 
declared Jon Errasti on Sunday. It was a sad one too. Errasti is one of the 
club captains and the only player from Eibar but the win against Athletic was 
his last, a match he watched from the stand. On Monday morning he officially 
announced that he’s going, heading to Italy having played for Eibar in the 
Second Division B, Spain’s regionalised, 80-team, four-division third tier, in 
the Second Division A, and the First Division, “a model and a gentleman”, as 
the club put it.

“Had we gone down, I would not have left,” Errasti says. “I would have stayed 
and helped out.” But Eibar didn’t go down, even though they went down. Now look 
at them. “When he came we were going through difficult times,” said president 
Alex Aranzábal. “Jon arrived in the Second Division B; he leaves with us 
leaders of the league.”

Week Two results: Villarreal 3-1 Espanyol, Real Sociedad 0-0 Sporting Gijón, 
Barcelona 1-0 Málaga, Celta 3-0 Rayo, Madrid 5-0 Betis, Eibar 2-0 Athletic, 
Sevilla 0-3 Atlético, Valencia 1-1 Deportivo, Las Palmas 0-0 Levante, Getafe 
1-2 Granada.
 