
Der Gang zu den Fans, going over to the terraces to thank your supporters 
after the final whistle has become a non-negotiable duty forBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> players, second only 
to the mandatory wearing of shin pads. You have to do it when you win. You have 
to do it when you draw. You have to do it if your own supporters have just 
spent 90 minutes booing you and you’ve lost 5-1. (Because if you don’t, they’ll 
block the team bus outside the stadium for hours until you come out and 
apologise).

You also have to do it if you’ve just won 5-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/30/bayern-munich-borussia-monchengladbach-match-report>
 and were booed for 90 minutes by your own fans, like Mats Hummels had been at 
the Westfalenstadion on Saturday.The want-away Borussia Dortmund captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/28/mats-hummels-bayern-munich-borussia-dortmund>
 coolly faced up to an island of irate fists amid the ocean of black and yellow 
on the Südtribüne. “I think I’m the only player in league history to get jeered 
before a move [has been finalised],” he said, “but it was only 300 of them, a 
group of fans who didn’t love me before either, certainly not 80,000. Not 8,000 
even.” Whistles and an anti-Hummels placard (“The captain’s the first one to 
leave the ship – go now!”) on the Yellow Wall were countered by friendly 
applause from the main stand.

Atlético’s traffic control system proves decisive with Gabi at the wheel | Sid 
Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/02/la-liga-atletico-madrid-real-barcelona-sid-lowe>
Two hundred kilometres further south the Eintracht Frankfurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eintrachtfrankfurt> team were so relieved 
to have won 2-1 in theHessenderby at local rivals SV Darmstadt 98 that they 
overlooked a crucial detail on their jubilantGang zu den Fans: there weren’t 
any away fans at the Böllenfalltor Stadion. Or, to be more accurate, there 
shouldn’t have been any. The DFB (German Football Association) had banned all 
away supporters from the match after crowd trouble at the first meeting in 
December; a local court had also banned Eintracht fans from setting foot in the 
city of Darmstadt.

The city’s mayor revoked that blanket ban, however, on Saturday morning. A few 
hundred away supporters turned up to symbolically occupy rival territory, sing 
about “Darmstadtschweine” (Darmstadt pigs) and half-heartedly attempt to break 
through the police cordon to get to the stadium. There were a few minor 
skirmishes,530 (mostly temporary) arrests 
<http://hessenschau.de/sport/fussball/530-vorlaeufige-festnahmen-rund-ums-hessenderby,rund-um-das-spiel-frankfurt-darmstadt-100.html>
; for reasons that are still not entirely clear Eintracht ultras ripped out a 
bush while a few Darmstadt ultras trashed an ice cream parlour in their own 
city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Feintracht-frankfurt-borussia-dortmund-darmstadt-bundesliga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd35e973eefba9703add040335d987e11d120ada%2F0_108_3908_2345%2F3908.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eintracht%20applaud%20absent%20friends%20after%20derby%20win%20aids%20relegation%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Feintracht-frankfurt-borussia-dortmund-darmstadt-bundesliga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eintracht%20applaud%20absent%20friends%20after%20derby%20win%20aids%20relegation%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Feintracht-frankfurt-borussia-dortmund-darmstadt-bundesliga%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd35e973eefba9703add040335d987e11d120ada%2F0_108_3908_2345%2F3908.jpg>
 Eintracht Frankfurt fans in Darmstadt city centre. Photograph: Boris 
Roessler/EPA 
Inside the ground a few Frankfurt fans had managed to buy tickets for the main 
stand, somewhere in the Nordkurve, too, among the die-hard Lilies supporters. 
Cue more aggro when the infiltrators blew their cover to celebrate Stefan 
Aigner’s winner seven minutes before full-time. Riot police officers rushed in 
to stop fisticuffs as helicopters circled the ground and the stadium announcer 
castigated Eintracht fans as “violent thugs”.

The worst was over by the time of the strange spectacle Bild called “the most 
stupid celebration of the year”*, Niko Kovac’s men applauding in front of a 
vacant away end when the thrilling relegation six-pointer was over. “It was not 
meant as a provocation,” insisted SGE captain, Marco Russ. “We didn’t want to 
make a fuss.” The defender Bastian Oczipka explained the players had spotted an 
Eintracht flag and a few fans in the corner of the stadium; they had headed 
over “instinctively”, Kovac maintained. The board member Axel Hellmann 
apologised for a move he called “not good”, however, calling it “a tad too 
provocative in view of the DFB ban. There’s no need for it.”

To Darmstadt’s credit they did not regard the away team’s (empty) block party 
as too big a deal. The keeper Christian Mathenia criticised both sets for fans 
(“I have zero sympathy for people who go to the ground to have a fight in 
between families with kids”) for the flare-ups but seemed just as concerned 
with the home support’s over-confident attitude before the defeat. They had 
welcomed the Eintracht team with “Absteiger” (team to get relegated) chants, 
“but we can still go down, too,” Mathenia acknowledged.

Sassuolo show hare-brained Milan the value of simplicity and structure | Paolo 
Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/sassuolo-milan-serie-a-european-place>
After picking up many points with good ol’ long-ball football and great 
attitude Dirk Schuster’s team look as if they are running out of gas with the 
chequered flag in sight. They had started really well, taking the lead through 
Mario Vrancic and had a chance potentially to kill off the match when Haris 
Seferovic tugged Luca Caldirola in the box. To paraphrase Louis van Gaal: That 
might be allowed, welcome even - but not in this particular context.

The SV striker Sandro Wagner stepped up, gave Lukas Hradecky the eyes and saw 
his tame shot saved. “If that had been the 2-0 I couldn’t have imagined us 
coming back,” said the Eintracht chairman, Heribert Bruchhagen.Darmstadt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/darmstadt> had dominated so much before 
the break that their subsequent caving-in was hard to explain.

”We were afraid, we only reacted, we let them play their game,” Kovac said 
about the first half. “It was nothing, the worst 45 minutes of my time in 
charge.” Since the Croat took over at the beginning of March the Eagles haven’t 
exactly scaled new heights of playing fine football but the 44-year-old has at 
least been able to bring an element of resilience into the team. He tirelessly 
pushed his men forward from the touchline and made sure to have a ball ready 
for his side at all times, to stop the ball boys from time-wasting. Armin Veh’s 
easy-going hands-off regime has given way to a bit of Simeone-esque 
motivational intensity from the former Bayern Munich midfielder.

“Football is a matter of willpower,” explained Hellmann, “it’s good to have an 
instigator on the touchline, somebody who knows what’s going on.” Tactically, 
some semblance of order has returned as well. “We’re not all over the shop any 
more,” said Russ. A more concerted effort was enough to trouble the hosts: 
Makoto Hasebe equalised with a deflected shot shortly after the break to start 
the fightback.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Feintracht-frankfurt-borussia-dortmund-darmstadt-bundesliga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33215772d50079a07a4a92478804d3c09511b2da%2F0_51_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eintracht%20applaud%20absent%20friends%20after%20derby%20win%20aids%20relegation%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Feintracht-frankfurt-borussia-dortmund-darmstadt-bundesliga%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eintracht%20applaud%20absent%20friends%20after%20derby%20win%20aids%20relegation%20fight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Feintracht-frankfurt-borussia-dortmund-darmstadt-bundesliga%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33215772d50079a07a4a92478804d3c09511b2da%2F0_51_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The empty away end at Darmstadt’s Böllenfalltor stadium. Photograph: Ralph 
Orlowski/Reuters 
Frankfurt, for all their improvement, are by no means safe. Staving off 
relegation will continue to be a struggle without the services oftheir injured 
talisman Alexander Meier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/14/eintracht-frankfurt-mr-extraordinary-glory-days>
. He might be back for Saturday’s game at home to Dortmund; he might not be. 
But the main thing is that Eintracht have found hope. “We’re alive again,” 
proclaimed Hradecky.

Darmstadt are still two points to the good in comparison with their wealthier 
neighbours but the last two weeks of the season will now be much more fraught 
than necessary. They are only two points clear of the relegation play-off spot 
(before Werder’s Monday night date with VfB Stuttgart), with a pair of very 
tough opponents (Hertha and Gladbach) to come. “We’re still ahead of schedule,” 
Schuster claimed. He and Kovac shared a warm embrace at the final whistle to 
demonstrate there was no need to persist with the enmity beyond the confines of 
the pitch and in recognition of the mounting pressure they are both enduring. 
Thus the most troublesome derby of the season ended on a surprisingly 
conciliatory note, as the authorities also pleaded for a sense of perspective. 
“Considering the amount of people with potential for violence in the city, 
relatively little happened in our view,” the police director, Bernd Denninger, 
told Frankfurter Allgemeine.

*They obviously hadn’t watched the car-crash Laureus Awards, with Bill Murray 
as host <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yMqmo5LLq8w>.
 