
‘I’ve just found the original rehearsal tapes,” says William Forsythe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/oct/07/william.forsythe.dance>. “It is 
hilarious. We are all 12 years old.” The choreographer is talking aboutIn the 
Middle, Somewhat Elevated, created for the Paris Opera Ballet in 1987 – the 
work that changed ballet for ever.

It began that night with two ballerinas in green leotards and black tights, 
insolently and insouciantly standing on an empty stage, weighing each other up. 
They pushed their elegant toes into the floor, and looked upwards at the two 
golden cherries that hung there – the somewhat elevated objects of the title. 
Then, with a slight shrug, one stalked off, leaving the stage to the other, who 
began to dance in a jolting crash of electronic sound.

It was thrilling, a high-voltage shock to the world of ballet that would 
spread far from the stage of the Opera Garnier. It wasn’t the first ballet that 
Forsythe had made for Paris Opera Ballet at the request of its then director
Rudolf Nureyev <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/nureyev> – that was 
France/Dance, a little piece featuring famous Paris landmarks passing by on a 
conveyor belt and starring a youngSylvie Guillem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sylvie-guillem>.

But In the Middle was the one that illuminated everything around it, that made 
its creator and dancers international names to be reckoned with. The first cast 
included Guillem, Laurent Hilaire, Isabelle Guérin and Manuel Legris, the 
stunning generation that Nureyev plucked from the corps de ballet and turned 
into stars. They were called hischou chou but Forsythe today describes them as 
wunderkinder – young dancers who could do anything asked of them.

They all looked sensational as they propelled themselves through the work’s 
off-centre balances, its pulsing, shifting symmetries and casual but charged 
encounters. “The whole atmosphere there was electric,” Forsythe remembers. 
“Nureyev had an idea about excellence and he imposed that idea. That generation 
was one of the finest to come out of the company.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fin-the-middle-somewhat-elevated-william-forsythe-dance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F3%2F1425380972995%2Fbded2445-d4ad-4f40-8b6b-35d6fad5ceeb-2060x1458.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Elevated%20visions%3A%20how%20William%20Forsythe%20changed%20the%20face%20of%20dance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fin-the-middle-somewhat-elevated-william-forsythe-dance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Elevated%20visions%3A%20how%20William%20Forsythe%20changed%20the%20face%20of%20dance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fin-the-middle-somewhat-elevated-william-forsythe-dance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F3%2F1425380972995%2Fbded2445-d4ad-4f40-8b6b-35d6fad5ceeb-2060x1458.jpeg>
 Sylvie Guillem and Laurent Hilaire in In The Middle Somewhat Elevated in 1992. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Such was the impact of In the Middle, Somewhat Elevated that it has become 
Forsythe’s most famous work, danced worldwide by companies from the Mariinsky 
to the São Paulo Companhia de Dança from Brazil. NowEnglish National Ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/english-national-ballet> are giving their 
first performance of the work, as part of a bill called Modern Masters at 
Sadler’s Wells. It represents quite a challenge, but as Barry Douglas, one of 
the dancers says: “You seeSylvie Guillem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sylvie-guillem> on the DVD and think, ‘Oh my 
God, I would love to do this piece. It’s just so exciting.”

Ballet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> is all about history, or 
rather about the shifting allegiance of the present to the past. It is the only 
art form that, until very recently, was passed down “arm to arm, leg to leg” as 
the Russians say, with a dancer of one generation teaching a role to the next. 
Reverence for tradition is ingrained into its actual form.

But it is not preserved in aspic. The great classics such as Swan Lake, 
Sleeping Beauty and Giselle have been adapted for different audiences. New 
choreographers have come along and rethought the uses of traditional steps.
George Balanchine <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/georgebalanchine> arrived 
in the US from Europe and developed his 20th‑century neoclassical style.

Nobody knows and understands more about this great tradition than Forsythe, a 
voracious student of dance history who has been known to lose evenings of his 
life to studying and analysing the performances of the past on YouTube.

Born in New York in 1949, he only started formal dance training in his late 
teens. But there was no stopping him; he trained in Florida and danced with the 
Joffrey Ballet, before joining John Cranko’s Stuttgart Ballet in 1973, where he 
began to choreograph in earnest. In 1984, he was appointed artistic director of 
Ballet Frankfurt, and promptly transformed it into one of the most dazzling 
dance companies in the world.

Throughout this progression, he was seen as the natural heir to Balanchine, a 
lineage that timing alone made seem inevitable. He told me recently, for 
example, thatFrance/Dance, created in 1983, the year of Balanchine’s death, was 
“reflecting on the passing of Balanchine. I thought if he had seen Guillem it 
would have been a revelation to him. He would certainly have appreciated her 
gifts, and I was sad he wasn’t there to do so.”

But for all his technical brilliance, Forsythe was no Balanchine. His 
interests were always propelling him far away from elegant abstraction or 
traditional narrative. “I had to find my way around Balanchine, Petipa, Cranko, 
MacMillan, the whole crowd,” he once explained. “I realised I had to move on.” 
He is consequently the only choreographer who has ever been mentioned in the 
same sentence as the philosopher Michel Foucault, applying a similar critical 
intelligence to the nature of dance and its language, asking people not just to 
watch dance, but to analyse what they are watching and understand how dancers 
themselves think, how steps are forged, how spaces, shapes and scores are 
created. His entire career, as Ballet Frankfurt morphed into the smaller and 
even more experimental Forsythe Company in 2004, has been an exploration that 
has taken him far from his balletic origins. “No one ever participated in the 
big conversation by saying the same thing over and over again,” he says. “You 
have to see what is possible.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fin-the-middle-somewhat-elevated-william-forsythe-dance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F3%2F1425381189111%2F9266d4d8-4925-456a-944d-85b2190e3e2d-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Elevated%20visions%3A%20how%20William%20Forsythe%20changed%20the%20face%20of%20dance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fin-the-middle-somewhat-elevated-william-forsythe-dance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Elevated%20visions%3A%20how%20William%20Forsythe%20changed%20the%20face%20of%20dance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fin-the-middle-somewhat-elevated-william-forsythe-dance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F3%2F1425381189111%2F9266d4d8-4925-456a-944d-85b2190e3e2d-1360x2040.jpeg>
 William Forsythe. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
Even in 1987 he was well on the road. In the Middle was always conceived as 
the central abstract act of a larger work calledImpressing the Czar, which 
Forsythe mounted in Frankfurt a year later. “I was very economical in those 
days and I didn’t have much time to rehearse in Frankfurt, so I thought I could 
make part of it in Paris and bring it back.” The full-length piece explores the 
decline of western civilisation, with characters including Saint Sebastian and 
theBrothers Grimm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/12/grimm-brothers-fairytales-horror-new-translation>
 and a conclusion that sees the entire cast dressed as schoolgirls flying 
around the stage in a bacchanalian celebration of the power of dance.

In this context, In the Middle, Somewhat Elevated – which, despite its fierce, 
modern appearance is structured as a very traditional theme and variations – 
seems to represent a classic order tilting towards change and disruption. 
Forsythe describes it as “extending and accelerating the traditional figures of 
ballet. By shifting the alignment of positions and the emphasis of transitions, 
the enchainments begin to tilt obliquely and receive an unexpected drive that 
makes them appear at odds with their origins.”

Such statements, while true, fail to communicate the visceral impact of the 
piece. It has an almost elemental energy as it sets its six women and three men 
prowling around the stage, like fierce creatures exploring an alien space. 
Where most dance faces the front of the stage, these nine face all directions, 
their solos and duets deliberately disrupting the focus. Balletic formality is 
jettisoned in favour of a wild, off‑kilter theatricality that rethought 
conventions even as it held them up to the sharp, bright light.

The mood is set by Thom Willems’ powerful, pounding score, written in a strict 
4/4 time signature in the studio next door to where Forsythe was working with 
the Paris Opera Ballet dancers. It sends electronic shudders through the piece, 
adding to its impact. Guillem said, when the work was revived for the Royal 
Ballet in 1992, with her and Hilaire once again dancing the central duet:“I 
think of nothing while I am doingIn the Middle, except the steps. They take a 
real physical power and violence to perform and that is all that is in my mind 
at that moment: line and power.”

Agnès Noltenius, who danced in the work with Frankfurt Ballet and is now 
coachingEnglish National Ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/english-national-ballet> for their 
performances, takes a similarly pure approach. “Forsythe asked us to think 
about the geometric relationship between different parts of the body. He 
doesn’t want people to dance as one block, but to really articulate each part 
of the body.

“It is a different way of thinking about dance and what the body can achieve. 
It arrives at a point where you can see people can’t go any further. The body 
can’t do any more. That is what makes the piece so strong.”

The timing of the revival has particular relevance. At 65, Forsythe has 
stepped down from the running of his self-named company and will become 
associate choreographer back with Paris Opera Ballet, where he will create one 
new piece every year under the aegis of its new director Benjamin Millepied. He 
has also taken up a teaching post with the Glorya Kaufman School ofDance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance> in southern California, returning to 
his American roots. Meanwhile Guillem, now 50, is embarking on her farewell 
tour in a bill of new contemporary creations.

There couldn’t be a better time to look back to that moment which they both 
began to suggest that ballet was a world of infinite possibility. As Noltenius 
says: “After this emblematic piece, classical ballet was not the same any more. 
For 25 years, people have been inspired by it. And they still are.”

• Modern Masters is at Sadler’s Wells, London EC1R, from 10-15 March. 
ballet.org.uk <http://www.ballet.org.uk/>.
 