
Emmanuel Adebayor <https://www.theguardian.com/football/emmanuel-adebayor> has 
rejected claims he smoked cigarettes and asked for a shot of whisky in his 
coffee during a meeting with Lyon over a potential move to the French club.

Adebayor, who was released by Crystal Palace in the summer after his contract 
expired, met Lyon’s manager, Bruno Génésio, last week to discuss a move to the 
Ligue 1 side. The 32-year-old Togo international said the transfer fell through 
after Lyon were reluctant to release him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/19/emmanuel-adebayor-hits-out-lyon-excuse-not-signing-africa-cup-of-nations>
 for the Africa Cup of Nations in January, although reports in France stated 
that Génésio decided against signing the former Arsenal, Manchester City and 
Tottenham striker because of a series of bizarre requests during their meeting, 
including providing a private helicopter to take him to training, hiring 
celebrated chef Joël Robuchon as his personal cook and a villa with a swimming 
pool that “has a view of Corsica”.

Emmanuel Adebayor – a stubborn foe but loyal to those who stand by him
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/19/xx> 
“We had a place in our squad for Manu, so I arranged to meet him for a coffee 
in Lyon,” Geneseo is reported to have saidby spoof website Football France 
<http://www.footballfrance.fr/football/france/2016/09/ol-bruno-genesio-adebayor-arrive-rdv-clope-bouche/12010>
. “But, to my surprise, when he arrived he asked for a shot of whisky in his 
coffee. He also had a cigarette hanging out of his mouth.”

The quotes were picked up by several newspapers in the United Kingdom and 
Europe but Adebayor released a statement on Thursday to deny the story, adding 
that the journalist responsible will make a full apology.

“Usually I do not comment on any transfer negotiations or speculation but this 
time certain matters need to be cleared up,” said Adebayor.

“Lyon wanted to sign me and offered to pay for a private jet from Togo to 
bring me toLyon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> in order for me to 
sign ahead of their game against Marseille. The contract was all agreed and I 
was merely flying in to complete a medical and sign the paperwork.

“Unfortunately I could not get there in time to be registered for their game 
and they signed another young striker instead. They still asked if I could come 
and speak to the manager and director of football in order to establish if it 
would be possible to sign us both.

“We all had a perfectly amicable meeting in Lyon but the coach felt it was not 
fair on the young player’s development to sign us both and I felt I would not 
get the requisite game time I needed to make this opportunity worthwhile.

“For the avoidance of doubt I only drank water at this meeting and did not ask 
for whisky or have a cigarette.”
 