
It was announced yesterday that Emma Rice will step down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/25/emma-rice-step-down-artistic-director-shakespeares-globe>
 as artistic director of the Globe theatre in 2018, the news coming less than a 
year after she took the helm, and just days after the Stage’s article about the
disproportionate criticism 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/emma-rice-speaks-sexist-criticism/> her 
first season attracted.

Emma Rice to step down as artistic director at Shakespeare's Globe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/25/emma-rice-step-down-artistic-director-shakespeares-globe>
The board’s decision to dispense with Rice so quickly is a huge shame for the 
many audience members who have enjoyed her all-too-short tenure. Even the Globe 
noted, in thevery statement <http://blog.shakespearesglobe.com/> that announced 
her removal, that Rice’s work at the venue had attracted “new and diverse 
audiences, won huge creative and critical acclaim, and achieved exceptionally 
strong box-office returns”.

On her appointment, Rice was hailed 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/uploads/files/2015/05/2015_05_01_new_ad_final.pdf>
 by that same board as “an artist of vision, someone who will approach the 
Globe’s continued exploration of Shakespeare … with distinct clarity”. With 
queues for returns every day forher sold-out A Midsummer Night’s Dream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/08/midsummer-nights-dream-shakespeares-globe-theatre-review-emma-rice>
, and drawing some of the most excited and engaged audiences the Globe has had, 
it’s hard not to feel Rice has been forced out for doing exactly what was asked 
of her, and exactly what they should have expected.

Her first season shouldn’t have been a surprise to anyone familiar with her 
impressive oeuvre and extensive work withher own company, Kneehigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/dec/01/kneehigh-theatre-cornwall-maddy-costa>
, which makes the theatre’s decision to oust her look suspiciously like a 
panicked response to the reactionary criticism she has received in some corners 
of the press. If this wasn’t what they wanted, why on earth did they appoint 
her? But this is about more than just an excellent theatremaker being forced 
out of a venue – after all, Rice is a mighty talent who will go on being 
brilliant somewhere else – and more even than the loss of a great female 
artistic directorship, although Rice’s tenure had been all the more exciting 
for how rare it is that theatre jobs such as this one go to women.

Bottom's up: Emma Rice weaves A Midsummer Night's Dream at the Globe – in 
pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ng-interactive/2016/may/05/emma-rice-a-midsummer-nights-dream-globe-shakespeare-in-pictures>
No, most miserable of all is the reason the theatre has given: “The Globe was 
reconstructed as a radical experiment to explore the conditions within which 
Shakespeare and his contemporaries worked … we have now concluded that a 
predominant use of contemporary sound and lighting technology will not enable 
us to optimise further experimentation in our unique theatre spaces and the 
playing conditions which they offer.”

So basically, she used too much historically inaccurate music and lighting. Is 
that really what you’re going with as a reason? “Too many bright colours and 
big sounds”?
Joseph Kloska (@josklos) 
The Globe may be getting rid of 'light and sound' but thank GOD they're 
keeping the authentic and historically accurate Shakespeare giftshop
 <https://twitter.com/josklos/status/790861932802805760> October 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/josklos/status/790861932802805760> 
This decision looks like the Globe’s board choosing to honour one tradition 
over another: to honour their tradition of not having electric lights (because 
it was The Past) over their tradition of innovation and accessibility. Don’t 
tell me Shakespeare wasn’t an innovator: every time he needed a word for 
something and there wasn’t one yet he made one up. I expect he would’ve loved 
using lights and loud music if he hadn’t been born in the 16th century.

The “historical accuracy” drum is a strange one to bang, because the Globe’s 
board aren’t powerlessly recreating a historical experience, they’re deciding 
which parts of it matter most. And who are they upholding that tradition for, 
to the extent it’s been deemed more important than progress, excitement, 
greater accessibility? The sell-out season immediately preceding Rice’s removal 
suggests it isn’t being done for audiences – rather that the Globe wants to 
become, asLyn Gardner has said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/sep/28/emma-rice-shakespeares-globe-theatre-modern-audiences>
, a museum, and not a theatre, which by necessity is something both live and 
alive.

As Emma Rice departs, the Globe has egg on its face – and no vision
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/oct/25/shakespeares-globe-emma-rice-department-comment>
In this country, we have a sense of tradition and history that is at times 
quite sweet, and at other times an insidious symptom of the kind of 
rose-tinted, backwards-looking ideas – we used to be great and we need to be 
great again – we buy into with such willing blindness that we’ve just tanked 
our own economy to prove a weird, idiotic point. Traditions can be beautiful 
and uniting, but they can also be used to say: this belongs to us and not to 
you. Tradition is inseparable from history, which is not an immutable truth, 
and from nostalgia – and we must be wary of nostalgia’s power to seduce and to 
corrode. We’re at risk of becoming a country in love with a mostly imagined 
idea of its own past.

Rice’s removal from the Globe is about more than just a director losing a job 
she was good at and had earned – although that would be enough. It throws up 
questions about for whom this work is being made, to whom theatres such as the 
Globe feel they should be speaking and to whom they belong. The commitment it 
shows to keeping things as they are, instead of allowing them to progress, has 
unfortunate parallels with the side effect of this kind of arrested development 
– namely that when things remain as they are, power tends to remain with the 
same small group of people. Would Rice have been so criticised if she had been 
a man? And if she had been, would the venue have abandoned her so readily? It 
doesn’t seem likely.
 