
Emma Rice <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/emma-rice>, the artistic director 
of Shakespeare’s Globe, is to step down in 2018 after just two years in charge.

The theatre announced that it was returning to the stripped-down “shared 
light” productions that characterised work before Rice’s arrival.

As Emma Rice departs, the Globe has egg on its face – and no vision
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/oct/25/shakespeares-globe-emma-rice-department-comment>
That leaves no space for Rice, who has not been afraid to shake things up and 
risk upsetting traditionalists. In a statement after the announcement, she 
said: “I have had a wonderful time creatively here at the Globe, but I respect 
the board’s decision for its future direction.”

Neil Constable, the theatre’s CEO, praised Rice’s “mould-breaking” work that 
had achieved “exceptionally strong” box-office returns.

But he added: “Following much deliberation and discussion, the Globe board has 
concluded that from April 2018, the theatre programming should be structured 
around ‘shared light’ productions without designed sound and light rigging.

“The Globe was reconstructed as a radical experiment to explore the conditions 
within which Shakespeare and his contemporaries worked, and we believe this 
should continue to be the central tenet of our work.”

Shared light characterised productions under the direction of her predecessors 
Dominic Dromgoole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/11/shakespeare-globe-new-stage-dromgoole>
 and Mark Rylance. Because the Globe’s performances mostly take place in the 
evening, it uses electric light to simulate daylight so actors and audiences 
can see each other naturally.

The theatre said it enabled actors to play “with” rather than “to” or “at” 
audiences. It added: “Actors therefore develop their ability to give and take 
focus using voice, gesture and movement.”

Rice, who arrived in April and was previously in charge of Kneehigh, one of 
the UK’s most innovative companies <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/kneehigh>
, has upset some with her approach to both productions and Shakespeare himself. 
She has not been afraid to have actors miked up, and herproduction of A 
Midsummer’s Night’s Dream was wild and rowdy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/06/a-midsummer-nights-dream-review-a-rowdy-night-out-but-less-can-be-more>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Femma-rice-step-down-artistic-director-shakespeares-globe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5bbf76f1c29759e27f85f0a988992f05e7edc24%2F0_962_3654_2191%2F3654.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emma%20Rice%20to%20step%20down%20as%20artistic%20director%20at%20Shakespeare's%20Globe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Femma-rice-step-down-artistic-director-shakespeares-globe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emma%20Rice%20to%20step%20down%20as%20artistic%20director%20at%20Shakespeare%27s%20Globe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Femma-rice-step-down-artistic-director-shakespeares-globe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5bbf76f1c29759e27f85f0a988992f05e7edc24%2F0_962_3654_2191%2F3654.jpg>
 Meow Meow (Titania) in A Midsummer Night’s Dream at Shakespeare’s Globe, 
directed by Emma Rice. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Before she arrived Rice cheerfully admitted not having read many of 
Shakespeare’s plays. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/05/shakespeares-globe-emma-rice-if-anybody-bended-gender>
 “I have tried to sit down with Shakespeare but it doesn’t work,” she said. “I 
get very sleepy and then suddenly I want to listen to The Archers.”

But she struck a chord with many people when she talked about being 
overly-reverent to Shakespeare, and about his plays being a kind of cultural 
medicine.

Rice has not been afraid to take liberties with Shakespeare’s text. In her 
staging of A Midsummer’s Night’s Dream she cast cabaret star Meow Meow as 
Titania, while Helena became a man, Helenus, who falls in love with Demetrius. 
She commissioned a production ofCymbeline, “renamed and reclaimed” as Imogen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/25/imogen-review-shakespeares-globe-cymbeline-maddy-hill-matthew-dunster>
, which was set in a world of drugs and gang warfare.

While some saw Rice as a breath of fresh air, helping to attract new and 
younger audience members, others disagreed. Writing inthe Times last month 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/richard-morrison-the-globe-has-been-a-success-story-and-emma-rice-is-wrecking-it-xrrgxz3ml>
, the cultural commentator Richard Morrison said Rice was wrecking the Globe.

While Constable praised Rice’s brilliance and inventiveness, there remains a 
suspicion that the Globe’s decision to part company with her may be down to a 
desire for less controversy.

The theatre commentator Terri Paddock, founder of the website MyTheatreMates, 
said it was a sad day. “When I tweeted about the news the instant response was 
just complete shock, quite a lot of outrage and disappointment. Within the 
industry there was so much support and excitement for her appointment, that the 
Globe was being really innovative and giving the job to someone who could be 
properly pioneering.”

Paddock said it was particularly disappointing because Rice was one of the few 
women in charge of a flagship theatre organisation. The speed of the decision 
is also striking. “She has not been given much chance to fail and you need to 
have that right with artistic experimentation. If you look at when Kevin Spacey 
took over the Old Vic – a disastrous first season – but he was a man and a 
Hollywood name and he was given a chance, so to give up on Emma Rice after one 
year is really disappointing.”

The theatre critic Mark Shenton, associate editor of the Stage newspaper, said 
the affair smacked of “bad board management … They knew what they were getting 
when they appointed her. If that is not what they wanted then they should not 
have appointed her.”

Shenton said he liked Rice. “I thought she was bringing a really new energy to 
the Globe, for the first time they were doing something different there. I 
thought they would stick with it. It was a shock to see lighting at the Globe 
but was also very welcome, it was always difficult to peer at the productions 
through the gloom.”

Rice suggested some of the criticism she has received might be because she is 
a woman and that some of the language used about her made her blood boil.

She said one senior arts figure repeatedly described her as “naughty”. 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/emma-rice-speaks-sexist-criticism/> “Who 
would use that word to a man?” she asked.

In her statement Rice said she was still looking forward to her summer 2017 
season. It will feature a Romeo and Juliet directed by English National Opera’s 
artistic director Daniel Kramer and a new Twelfth Night directed by Rice.

Shakespeare’s Globe, meanwhile, said it would make a further statement when it 
announced the process for replacing Rice.






 