
The energy secretary, Amber Rudd, has been accused of misleading the public 
after a leaked letter revealed that the UK is predicted to fall short of its
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> obligations to get 15% of 
its energy from renewables by 2020.

The letter from Rudd, which was obtained by the Ecologist magazine 
<http://www.theecologist.org/News/news_analysis/2986190/leaked_letter_rudd_admits_25_green_energy_undershoot_misled_parliament.html>
, discloses that the department’s internal forecasts say the UK will only 
manage to get about 11.5% of energy from renewables by that point, but adds 
that “publicly we are clear that the UK continues to make progress to meet the 
target”.

The disclosure is particularly explosive because the government has been 
cutting subsidies for solar and wind energy, whilemaintaining that it is on 
course to meet its international targets 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/debates/?id=2015-06-22b.617.0&s=2020+target+speaker%3A24795#g620.0>
.

UK doesn't have right policies to meet renewable energy target, admits Amber 
Rudd
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/10/rudd-issues-transport-challenge-to-meet-uk-renewables-target>
In June, Rudd said in the House of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> that the UK “will still 
be meeting our targets” and was “committed to ensuring that we deliver on our 
decarbonisation targets”, as she spoke about ending new subsidies for onshore 
wind power.

But the letter, dated 29 October and circulated to four other ministers, says: 
“The trajectory … currently leads to a shortfall against the target in 2020 of 
around 50 TWh (with a range of 32-67TWh) or 3.5% points (with a range of 
2.1-4.5% points) in our internal central forecasts (which are not public). 
Publically we are clear that the UK continues to make progress to meet the 
target.”


It also warns that the UK could be liable for fines if it misses the EU target 
and a judicial review if it does not have a credible plan to meet its 
obligations.


To address the predicted shortfall, in the letter Rudd suggests a range of 
measures, including a last resort of paying for renewable projects in other EU 
countries as a way of offsetting the UK’s failure to increase its own 
generation, speeding upa planned undersea electricity cable to Norway 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-norway-electricity-interconnection-moves-closer>
 and attempting to engage with EU member states to make the target more 
“flexible”.

The letter also suggests a continued commitment to renewable heat, which has 
been named as a possible area for cuts in the Treasury’s spending review due on 
25 November.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fenergy-minister-expects-uk-to-miss-renewables-target-leaked-letter-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07273e6352ea2647aeed0c47005612ba170b563f%2F0_0_3000_2238%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Energy%20minister%20expects%20UK%20to%20miss%20renewables%20target%2C%20leaked%20letter%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fenergy-minister-expects-uk-to-miss-renewables-target-leaked-letter-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Energy%20minister%20expects%20UK%20to%20miss%20renewables%20target%2C%20leaked%20letter%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fenergy-minister-expects-uk-to-miss-renewables-target-leaked-letter-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07273e6352ea2647aeed0c47005612ba170b563f%2F0_0_3000_2238%2F3000.jpg>
 The Burbo Bank offshore windfarm in the mouth of the Mersey. Photograph: 
Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
Sources in the Department of Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and Climate Change (Decc) 
insisted Rudd had not misled parliament because she only specifically said that 
the UK was “on course” to meet a sub-target for 30% of all electricity to come 
from renewables.

But Labour, the Green party and environmental campaigners called on the energy 
secretary to explain why her department had not been transparent about its 
internal forecasts that suggest, on the current trajectory, that the UK is 
likely to fall short.

Rudd is likely to face questions about the issue from the Commons energy 
committee on Tuesday, when she appears to talk about the department’s annual 
report and accounts.

Daisy Sands, head of energy at Greenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace>, said it showed “the dark 
side of the government’s incoherent energy policy in full technicolour”.

“For the first time, we learn that the government is expecting to miss the 
EU’s legally binding renewables target,” she said. “This is hugely shocking. 
But more deplorably, it is wilfully hiding this from public scrutiny. The 
government is planning on cutting support for the solar and wind subsidies in 
the name of affordability.”

The Green MEP Molly Scott Cato also said Rudd had “serious questions to answer 
about why she has reported something to parliament which appears inconsistent 
with what she has been telling other ministers”.

“The UK’s energy policy is bound by European law which Rudd appears to be 
flouting,” she added. “I have already raised with the European commission my 
concerns about the fact that the government’s changes to energy policy make it 
unlikely we will meet our renewables target. The evidence in this letter shows 
the secretary of state is aware of this serious situation and I will now be 
following this up with further questions as a matter of urgency.”

A spokesman for Decc said: “We do not comment on leaked documents. As the 
secretary of state has set out clearly in the House, renewables made up almost 
20% of our electricity generation in 2014 and there is a strong pipeline to 
deliver our ambition of reaching 30% by 2020. We continue to make progress to 
meet our overall renewable energy target.”
 