
For some of its more well-heeled audience members, the prospect of moving from 
Kensington or Fulham to Canning Town in East London would not be something to 
relish. But that is what theEnglish National Ballet <http://www.ballet.org.uk/> 
is about to do – and the company hopes it will provide a new lease of life.

Both the ENB and its associated training facility, the English National Ballet 
School <http://www.ballet.org.uk/the-company/english-national-ballet-school/>, 
are to move to a joint home in the former dockland-dominated area of the 
capital, the companyhas announced 
<http://blog.ballet.org.uk/announcement-new-home/>.

They will move from their two current cramped bases into a purpose-built set 
of offices, studios and rehearsal spaces, being built withinLondon City Island 
<http://www.londoncityisland.com/>, a development under construction in Canning 
Town.

The aim is to “create a new space that allows us to produce and rehearse 
amazing work”, said the ENB’s artistic director,Tamara Rojo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/tamara-rojo>, adding that the facilities 
could also be used by other organisations. She said: “I want the space to echo 
to the sound of creative Britain.”

ENB’s move to the East End is a reflection of ENB’s wider ambitions under 
Rojo, who took over in 2012 after a glittering career at the RoyalBallet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet>.

The Spanish ballerina has quickly established herself as one of the UK’s most 
impressive arts leaders, shaking up what was a struggling company on the verge 
of losing its public funding. She has taken bold risks with the repertoire and 
delighted many people when she announced a programme of all-female choreography 
for the 2015-16 season.

The ENB is a touring company, with no permanent performance venue of its own. 
Its base is a 19th-century building in a mews in Kensington, central London, 
originally designed as student housing, with offices spaced over several floors 
and just two rehearsal studios. TheEnglish National Ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/english-national-ballet> School, from which 
a third of the ENB’s current dancers graduated, is located in a similarly 
cramped, and listed, building in Fulham, about a mile to the south.


The new facility, which the ENB hopes will open in autumn 2018, will feature a 
600 sq m theatre-sized space, eight teaching and rehearsal studios, training 
and rehabilitation facilities, and space allowing public access to the 
company’s work.

Canning Town, in the borough of Newham, remains one of the most deprived parts 
of the country. However, amid London’s ongoing property boom, it is 
experiencing renewed construction, most notably at London City Island.

Built by construction giant Ballymore, the 12-acre site will eventually 
contain about 1,700 apartments – two-bed units are currently selling for around 
£700,000 – as well as office and retail space. Ballymore is giving the ENB the 
shell of the building. The ballet company and its school aim to raise the funds 
to fit it out.

The ENB’s move emphasises two ongoing trends within London: first the 
breakneck speed of gentrification amid even previously unfashionable central 
districts; and second, a gradual but definite eastward shift for the city’s 
artistic scene.

The ballet group’s new home is near the Trinity Buoy Wharf arts centre, while 
many galleries have sprung up both in places such as Shoreditch and to the 
south-east in cheaper districts such as Deptford.

“The move will also open up new opportunities for local collaborations and 
further increase east London’s growing status as an important cultural centre,” 
said Boris Johnson, London’s mayor, calling the ENB’s decision “an exciting 
development for one of the finest dance companies and schools in the world”.

The ENB grew out of the Festival Ballet company, formed in 1950, with the 
school founded in 1988. They announced their plan to find a joint home last 
July.
 