
England 


Fraser Forster

No chance for the penalty, but saved well from Janssen in the buildup. A 
couple of nervy moments with ball at feet.6

Kyle Walker

Had to wait his moment before, on his first overlap, laying on Vardy’s goal 
incisively. Looked steady and dealt well with Depay.7

Chris Smalling

Some careless moments in the early stages but settled well enough. Arguably 
looks more at ease alongside Gary Cahill.6

John Stones

Showed the value of his technique before Vardy’s goal but a less well-judged 
attempt to play from the back led to the penalty.6

Danny Rose

Lucky after a risky tackle on Veltman; not so lucky when handling Narsingh’s 
cross. All-round game not as sharp as in Berlin.5

England frustrated as Luciano Narsingh goal seals Holland’s comeback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/england-holland-international-friendly-match-report>
James Milner

Heavily involved in the move for the opener and tried hard to stay involved on 
the right, although lacked guile to expose the Dutch.6

Danny Drinkwater

Similar energy to his Leicester showings and some fine pieces of tracking. 
Needed to release the ball more quickly at times6

Ross Barkley

Stifled by Bazoer for much of the game. Found the odd pocket of space but 
needs to be more prominent than he was here.5

Adam Lallana

Little had come off until the cute ball that released Walker, but he grew in 
influence and has done his cause much good this week.7

Daniel Sturridge

Too quiet in the first half, but finally got at Blind once or twice before the 
break and drew a sharp stop from Zoet before going off.6

England’s John Stones must learn quickly from slip of achilles heel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/john-stones-england-holland-friendly>
Jamie Vardy

Afforded little space to run behind, or at, the defence but finished Walker’s 
cutback confidently and later came close from range.7

Substitutes

Walcott (for Sturridge, 58); Clyne (for Rose, 58); Kane (for Lallana, 70); 
Jagielka (for Smalling, 70); Alli (for Milner, 82); Dier (for Drinkwater, 85). 
Not usedHeaton, Cahill, Henderson, Welbeck.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fengland-holland-player-ratings-jamie-vardy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffce87793cb2fb71cd6edcff21a526887ef938025%2F0_147_3983_2390%2F3983.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%201-2%20Holland%3A%20how%20the%20players%20rated&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fengland-holland-player-ratings-jamie-vardy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%201-2%20Holland%3A%20how%20the%20players%20rated&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fengland-holland-player-ratings-jamie-vardy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffce87793cb2fb71cd6edcff21a526887ef938025%2F0_147_3983_2390%2F3983.jpg>
 England playmaker Ross Barkley was kept under close observation by Holland 
midfielder Riecheldy Bazoer. Photograph: Frank Augstein/AP 
Holland


Jeroen Zoet

Had barely been involved before Vardy’s goal but was alert to deny Sturridge 
and Vardy in the second period. 7

Joël Veltman

Unfortunate not to win a penalty after being taken down by Rose. Rarely got 
forward after that but defended his back post well throughout.7

Jeffrey Bruma

Uncompromising at centre-back, blocking from Sturridge in the first half and 
putting head or boot on all that came his way.7

Daley Blind

England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> might have done more to 
expose his lack of pace but his reading of the game was accomplished and there 
were few alarms. 7

Jetro Willems

A competent, conservative 90 minutes from the left-back, who was rarely beaten 
by opponents for strength or speed. 6

Five things we learned from England’s defeat to Holland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/england-holland-five-things-we-learned>
Georginio Wijnaldum

Tidy and incisive, forcing a first-half save from Forster, although his most 
important work was done off the ball. 7

Riecheldy Bazoer 

Stuck tigerishly to Barkley and gave the playmaker little to work with. Sharp 
in the interception, and looks a genuine talent. 8

Ibrahim Afellay

Composed and disciplined in a compact midfield, with few chances to show his 
more constructive side. 6

Quincy Promes

Looked a sharp operator on the right but a knock seemed to hinder him and he 
was replaced by Narsingh before half-time.6

England 1-2 Holland: International friendly – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/mar/29/england-v-holland-international-friendly-live>
Vincent Janssen

Penalty was put away confidently, and his assist for Narsingh blended the work 
rate and composure that marked his night.8

Memphis Depay

Wayward with an early snap shot but put a disciplined shift in on the left of 
the attack, even if he did not have the beating of Walker.6

Substitutes

Narsingh (for Promes, 37); Van Ginkel (for Bazoer, 78); Van Aanholt (for 
Willems, 82); Clasie (for Janssen, 90).Not used Vermeer, Karsdorp, Huntelaar, 
De Jong, Letschert, Vorm.

Referee Antonio Miguel Mateu Lahoz (Spain).
 