
When Sadler’s Wells <http://www.sadlerswells.com/> promised a major 
announcement at its annual press conference, I assumed it was little more than 
routine PR speak. But this time the story lives up to the headline. From today 
the map of the British dance world is going to look rather different as the 
Wells has announced a new partnership with English National Ballet, which will 
result in the company dancing two seasons in that theatre each year.


For Tamara Rojo <http://www.tamara-rojo.com/>, who took over direction of ENB 
in 2012, this new alliance is a masterstroke. She came to the company with the 
promise of revitalising its repertory and its working process, but her creative 
ambitions were always going to be at odds with ENB’s historic performance 
patterns. The company’s commitment to UK-wide touring, and its two seasons at 
the huge Coliseum in London, had always weighted the repertory against new 
works and in favour of its bread- and-butter classics.

It was significant that Rojo’s highly successful Lest We Forget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/03/enb-lest-we-forget-review> 
programme (which took the company into new terrain with works by modern 
dance-makers Russell Maliphant and Akram Khan) was presented not at any of the 
company’s traditional venues, but at the Barbican. Now, as associate ballet 
company of the Wells, Rojo can tap into that theatre’s lovingly nurtured, 
open-minded dance audience.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDQEjyxF319c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDQEjyxF319c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDQEjyxF319c&media=>
ENB’s first season, in March 2015, will be relatively predictable, a triple 
bill of late 20th-century ballet works by Jiri Kylian, John Neumeier and 
William Forsythe, followed in September by a revival of the Lest we Forget 
programme. Things get really interesting in the following year, however, with a 
brand new Giselle, choreographed byAkram Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/akramkhan>.

The issues of what this alliance means for ENB’s regular audience are not yet 
clear. Rojo has said the company will continue their Christmas seasons at the 
Coliseum for at least three more years. However the extra Wells seasons, 
combined with a commitment to widen ENB’s international touring, may mean that 
theatres outside the capital may start to see less of the company.

Also up for speculation is the shift in the balance of power this alliance 
will create between ENB and the Royal. The ballet world in general has a 
tiresome habit of pitting company against company, as if one institution’s 
successes have to be measured in terms of another’s failings. But there’s no 
doubt that the Royal Ballet’s greater financial heft and profile have 
historically overshadowed ENB. Now, as a Wells associate, the latter start to 
look much more dominant. And it will be fascinating to see what effect this has 
on the future dancers and choreographers the company are able to attract.

The implications of this story are so interesting they’ve overshadowed what 
would otherwise have been the main story of the conference, the announcement of
Sylvie Guillem <http://www.sylvieguillem.com/>’s farewell show next year.

The great French dancer had already announced that she would be leaving the 
stage in 2015. Even though she seemed ageless in performance, she claimed that 
50 was a good time to go, while she was still, as she says, “happy doing what I 
do with pride and passion”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSIGVCUxlBYw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSIGVCUxlBYw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSIGVCUxlBYw&media=>
Now we have details of her final show which, titled Life in Progress, promises 
to be a great one, featuring work by the choreographers most closely associated 
with the late, experimental flowering of Guillem’s long career. It includes a 
new solo by Akram Khan, a duet (with La Scala dancer Emanuela Montanari) by 
Russell Maliphant and fittingly – as Guillem concludes her remarkable 34 years 
on stage – a revival of the Mats Ek solo Bye.
 