
The car rental giant Enterprise says it has resigned its membership in the 
American Legislative Exchange Council (Alec), an anti-regulation lobby group 
that has pushed against climate change legislation, effective immediately. The 
announcement followslast month’s revelation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/22/alec-enterprise-car-rental-environmental-laws>
 by the Guardian of the publicly environmentally friendly company’s 
contributions to the group.

Enterprise is the largest car rental company in the world and owns Enterprise 
Rent-A-Car, National and Alamo. It has sought recognition for its tree-planting 
programs, aimed at offsetting carbon emissions, and its increasingly large 
fleet of clean vehicles.

But association with Alec was too much for many consumers, who told the 
company on social media and in petitions that they would take their business 
elsewhere. A petition demanding the company withdraw its support from the 
lobbyist group had reached89,000 
<http://act.credoaction.com/sign/enterprise_stopfundingalec/?source=tw1> 
signatures at the time of writing.

After thoughtful consideration, we have decided to resign our membership
Laura Bryant, Enterprise spokeswoman 
A spokeswoman, Laura Bryant, said the company valued communication with its 
customers and that “[t]o that end, we have been carefully listening to those 
customers and partners who have expressed sincere concern about our ALEC 
membership.

“In fact, after thoughtful consideration, we have decided to resign our 
membership,” she told the Guardian.

The company’s membership in Alec, which has poured considerable resources into 
denying and minimizing scientific efforts to quantify climate change, was 
brought to the Guardian’s attention by the watchdog group theCenter for Media 
and Democracy. <http://www.prwatch.org/cmd>

How a powerful rightwing lobby is plotting to stop minimum wage hikes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/20/alec-rightwing-lobby-group-minimum-wage>
Enterprise becomes the latest major corporation to quit the organisation. Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> left Alec after considerable 
consumer pressure in February; Royal Dutch Shell left the rightwing group in 
July 2015. Others, including BP and eBay, have done the same. The political 
group’s positions have met with harsh criticism – beyond distributing model 
legislation designed to benefit its members financially by allowing them to 
skirt regulations, the group also opposes minimum wage laws.

Bryant said the company would “continue to integrate sustainable practices 
across our operations and seek new ways to minimize the environmental impact of 
our business”.


“This is yet another example of a cooperation with brand sensitivity not 
wanting to be publicly associated with Alec,” said Nick Surgey, director of 
research at the Center for Media and Democracy. “Enterprise should have known 
better than be associated with such a toxic organization, but they should now 
be applauded for having done the right thing.”

The Guardian has contacted Alec for comment.
 