
If you’re not a morning person, don’t have breakfast with Royal Ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/royal-ballet> star Eric Underwood. The 
32-year-old beams with the sort of superhero levels of confidence and joy that 
would make anyone feel a bit Eeyore-ish by comparison. As he tucks into his 
meal (two fried eggs with a side of chorizo; he leaves the toast), he even 
says, “I just really enjoy being myself.”

The British-American has been a dancer with the Royal Ballet for nearly 10 
years, after being spotted at the age of 21 while on tour with theAmerican 
Ballet Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/american-ballet-theatre> in 
London. He has since danced the lead in Swan Lake, Sylvia and Manon, and 
Alice’s Adventures In Wonderland. Now he’s finding a new audience as a model, 
being photographed byMario Testino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/mario-testino> and Nick Knight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2011/jul/20/nick-knight-interview-video>
, and sitting on front rows at fashion week.

Underwood came to ballet as a teenager, which is relatively late for a 
professional. He was raised in a low-income family in a suburb of Washington 
DC, one of three children, but his parents’ only biological child (he has two 
half siblings from his father’s previous marriage). His father passed away when 
Underwood was 17, and you get the sense that he got the lion’s share of his 
mother’s attention, with whom he is still best-friend close .
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Feric-underwood-royal-ballet-told-youre-black-wear-black-ballet-shoes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a4138e999ee49348379d1f1c6a97d49f920b04c%2F894_0_3728_5118%2F3728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eric%20Underwood%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20told%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20black%2C%20wear%20black%20ballet%20shoes%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Feric-underwood-royal-ballet-told-youre-black-wear-black-ballet-shoes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eric%20Underwood%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20told%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20black%2C%20wear%20black%20ballet%20shoes%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Feric-underwood-royal-ballet-told-youre-black-wear-black-ballet-shoes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a4138e999ee49348379d1f1c6a97d49f920b04c%2F894_0_3728_5118%2F3728.jpg>
 ‘I felt like I could be great at this. That I could change my family’s destiny 
if I got it right.’ Photograph: Linda Brownlee for the Guardian 
“My parents did the whole American, ‘We believe in you, you can do whatever 
you want to do thing,’” he says. Unlike his brother, who was into carpentry, 
and his academic sister, Underwood was more creative, something that manifested 
itself every time he danced with the neighbourhood kids or customised their 
jeans with a Magic Marker pen.

At home, he was nurtured and loved, but says he would hear the sound of 
gunshots outside every day. “It stressed my mother out and she would make us 
lie on the ground until the shots finished.” One night, somebody was killed 
outside their flat. “I don’t have any traumatising memories of seeing that 
body, because when you grow up hearing gunshots, at some point you know that 
there will be a dead body.” He adds that he was just glad it wasn’t a familiar 
face. “I have childhood friends who are no longer with us or who are in prison 
because of gun crime. That was a reality.”

His mother wanted him to go the nearby performing arts school, a more 
promising bet than mainstream school. “One day she said, ‘OK, we’re going to 
make you an actor.’ She got a book out of the library [so I could] learn an 
entire monologue for an audition.” But on the day, he got stage fright and 
forgot all his lines.

That might have been the end of it, but as he was leaving Underwood saw some 
girls practising ballet in the next room. “I couldn’t walk out of that building 
and say to my mum, ‘I didn’t get that’. That was a no-no.’” Underwood walked 
in, wearing jeans and a T-shirt, and insisted the teacher give him a go. “I 
felt like I could be great at this, and that I could change my family’s destiny 
if I got it right.” The experience was a baptism of fire, with the teacher 
shouting out specialist dance terms (tombé and glissé). “I knew nothing, but I 
said, ‘If you show me, I can do it.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Feric-underwood-royal-ballet-told-youre-black-wear-black-ballet-shoes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb07c4bf631afcd32cd319fe6a86c079a8033a002%2F0_1135_5106_3064%2F5106.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eric%20Underwood%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20told%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20black%2C%20wear%20black%20ballet%20shoes%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Feric-underwood-royal-ballet-told-youre-black-wear-black-ballet-shoes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eric%20Underwood%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20told%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20black%2C%20wear%20black%20ballet%20shoes%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Feric-underwood-royal-ballet-told-youre-black-wear-black-ballet-shoes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb07c4bf631afcd32cd319fe6a86c079a8033a002%2F0_1135_5106_3064%2F5106.jpg>
 ‘I’ve always thought, “I look great, I can dance, I’ve got some rhythm. Things 
are on the up and up.”’ Photograph: Linda Browlee for the Guardian 
I'd watch the Nutcracker and A Chorus Line over and over. I was obsessed

He was given a trial run that same day, and was soon taking regular classes. 
His teacher took him, one of the only boys in her class, under her wing and 
drove him around the city to attend different classes. This led to tensions 
between his teacher and his mother. “She was like, ‘I’m your mother, I’m used 
to giving you everything you need’. But then this ballet teacher came along and 
gave me something she couldn’t give me.” The two eventually realised they had a 
common goal and became friends.

Underwood, meanwhile, was absorbed in becoming a better dancer. “I would put 
my leg up on the bunk bed in my bedroom, stretch and watch videos of The 
Nutcracker and A Chorus Line over and over again. I was obsessed.”

His mother had anxiety issues and then a heart attack, which meant she could 
no longer work. The household income suffered, “but where the finances went 
away, it was replaced by time”. Underwood says: “My mother was home more, so 
she’d be able to say, ‘Eric, let’s do your homework together.’”

There was fun to be had, too. Every Friday night his mother would gather 
together the family, make a barbecue dinner, move the furniture and dance 
around the house toTeddy Pendergrass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jan/14/teddy-pendergrass-obituary>. “It 
wasn’t just a Friday night dressed in pyjamas,” Underwood explains. “She’d come 
fully dressed. She’s quite a vibrant woman who likes to do things, and this was 
her way of going out.”

At 15, he won the Philip Morris foundation scholarship to the School of 
AmericanBallet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> (“My mother was like, 
‘Oh, you must be quite good, then’”) and in New York, for the first time in his 
life, he heard people refer to him as “the black one”. Did that hurt? “No. My 
mother had always told me I was beautiful and amazing. I thought it was their 
problem. I never felt negative about being black. I’ve always thought, ‘I look 
great, I can dance, I’ve got some rhythm. Things are on the up and up! I’m just 
going to go home, put on some Marvin Gaye and have a blast!’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Feric-underwood-royal-ballet-told-youre-black-wear-black-ballet-shoes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcef560a9cf083b34f7b48dd0c4c801c91ead4f18%2F0_232_4075_4903%2F4075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eric%20Underwood%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20told%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20black%2C%20wear%20black%20ballet%20shoes%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Feric-underwood-royal-ballet-told-youre-black-wear-black-ballet-shoes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eric%20Underwood%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20told%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20black%2C%20wear%20black%20ballet%20shoes%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Feric-underwood-royal-ballet-told-youre-black-wear-black-ballet-shoes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcef560a9cf083b34f7b48dd0c4c801c91ead4f18%2F0_232_4075_4903%2F4075.jpg>
 ‘I never felt negative about being black. My mother had always told me I was 
beautiful and amazing.’ Photograph: Linda Brownlee for the Guardian 
Underwood joined the Dance Theatre of Harlem 
<http://www.dancetheatreofharlem.org> in 2000 and was promoted to soloist at 
the end of his first season; in 2003, he moved to American Ballet Theatre, 
where he andMisty Copeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/30/misty-copeland-success-ballet-right-direction>
 were the only two dancers of colour in the company. He tells me about 
something that happened on tour in Mississippi: he and Copeland were entering 
their hotel at the same time as a homeless man was being denied access. The man 
watched them go in and then screamed, “You won’t let me in, but you let these 
fucking niggers in?” Underwood remembers the sense of shock. “I felt singled 
out and defeated. In that moment, I wasn’t just one of the dancers.”

Until recently, ballet shoes for black feet didn’t exist – the “flesh tone” 
shoe was always a pale pink or beige – and Underwood’s pre-show ritual used to 
include a laborious 45 minutes spent caking his “nude” ballet pumps with dark 
makeup. Once, in Italy, he failed to find the right makeup and struggled to 
cover his shoes for a performance. “I posted an Instagram to some companies 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/5UE6auBFO9/>, suggesting there should be different 
coloured shoes. A Russian ballet company replied, saying, ‘You’re black. You 
should wear black shoes.’”

But one major manufacturer, Bloch, responded by creating a line in darker 
tones, including one co-designed with Underwood, which they call Eric Tan. 
Underwood has been dancing in themsince March this year 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BC0vjC3l_B_/>.

He believes that visibility is the best way to get more diversity in ballet. 
“It’s about having ballet on your radar, and it’s important to see people who 
reflect you doing it. Ballet can be incredibly elitist and expensive. Unless 
you can afford those luxuries, you don’t see it as being a possibility.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Feric-underwood-royal-ballet-told-youre-black-wear-black-ballet-shoes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F032b37eb89b6bc66d7c9aa87003578bdc75f66cc%2F0_0_4724_4975%2F4724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eric%20Underwood%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20told%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20black%2C%20wear%20black%20ballet%20shoes%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Feric-underwood-royal-ballet-told-youre-black-wear-black-ballet-shoes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eric%20Underwood%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20told%2C%20you%E2%80%99re%20black%2C%20wear%20black%20ballet%20shoes%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Feric-underwood-royal-ballet-told-youre-black-wear-black-ballet-shoes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F032b37eb89b6bc66d7c9aa87003578bdc75f66cc%2F0_0_4724_4975%2F4724.jpg>
 All clothes byPolo Ralph Lauren <http://ralphlauren.co.uk/>, available from 
the new flagship store on Regent Street, London. Stylist: Melanie Wilkinson. 
Photographer’s assistants: Sophie Teasdale and Will Lepper. Stylist’s 
assistant: Dinah Shaw. Grooming: Neusa Neves using Dermalogica and Nars. 
Photograph: Linda Brownlee for the Guardian 
Earlier this year, Underwood went to a school in east London with the BBC show 
Inside Out <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06yr98n>, to get some of the kids 
to try ballet. Out of 60 boys, he identified two whom he thought had real 
talent. One of the mothers went on to enrol her son in classes, but the other 
mother was immovable in her view that boys don’t do ballet. “She said, ‘His 
father wants him to play football. He doesn’t dance.’” Underwood shrugs: 
“People ask me why there aren’t more dancers of colour, or boys, and it’s about 
the parents.”

His own father’s reaction to his dancing was positive. “My father was quite a 
shy man. He said, ‘So I hear you’re dancing?’ I said, ‘Yeah,’ and he said, 
‘Well, as long as you’re happy’. That was the end of that.”

Underwood joined the Royal Ballet in 2006, and in 2008 became a soloist and 
moved to London; he recently became a British citizen. He says he loves 
London’s diversity, and now feels like a visitor when he goes back to the 
States to visit his mother, who has moved to North Carolina. His brother is now 
a furniture builder and his sister a teacher.

When people are getting shot outside your house, your priorities are different

Recently, Underwood has begun to look beyond dancing. “I love dancing,” he 
explains, “but I want to be able to stop early enough that I can reinvent 
myself.” Last year, he signed to the same talent agency as Alexa Chung, and has 
since been photographed by David Bailey (a full-frontal nude for British GQ);
Testino snapped him with Kate Moss for Italian Vogue 
<http://www.vogue.it/moda/cover-fashion-stories/2016/02/09/laugh-by-mario-testino/>
, an experience he describes as “in-cre-dible. She knew every angle. It was 
genius.”

He has loved fashion from a young age, and cites model Tyson Beckford 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tyson_Beckford> and the Fresh Prince 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AVbQo3IOC_A> as early style icons. “I think of 
clothing as costume. One day I can be punk, and another I can be Ralph Lauren 
on a yacht.” Today, he’s wearing a maroon, button-down shirt that’s more 
normcore than out-and-out fashion. “I’m in a classic look because of work,” he 
explains.

You’d think a lifetime of focusing on his body and what it can do, as both a 
dancer and a model, would make Underwood self-critical, but he’s too 
well-adjusted for that. “When people are getting shot outside your house, your 
priorities are different,” he says. “It’s not about having a bit of fat under 
your leg.”

But he once described training as “nine hours staring at your faults”, dancing 
in a room full of mirrors. What does that do to a person? “It can be a great 
thing or it can destroy you. I think it’s important to know who you are when 
you’re looking into that mirror.”
 