
March was marked by complaints that the puzzles were full of error of the kind 
that any competent crossword editor should have spotted and corrected. One such 
was fully justified: others (in my humble opinion) less so.

Part of the clue for BURR in Quick No 12,757 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quick/12757> (31 March, 20 down) was 
"Former US president" but should, of course, have been "Former US 
vice-president". This in no way mitigates the error, but Aaron Burr must 
qualify as the person who came closest in American history to becoming 
president without making it. Born in New Jersey and with his political power 
base in New York, as a young man he had a fine record in the War of 
Independence and was a prominent founding father of the United States. Drafted 
as a northerner and former US Senator for New York to balance the ticket as the 
Virginian Thomas Jefferson's running mate, in the subsequent electoral college 
ballot to choose the next president he and Jefferson got 73 votes each. The 
decision then passed under the constitution to the House of Representatives, 
which was deadlocked between Jefferson and Burr for its first 35 ballots. 
Jefferson only emerged the winner on the 36th attempt and Burr duly became the 
third vice-president of the United Sates. Jefferson dropped him as his running 
mate for 1804 and Burr is probably best remembered today as the man who that 
year mortally wounded his former New York political ally Alexander Hamilton in 
a duel, the two having fallen out with each other disastrously. Though duelling 
was illegal in New Jersey, where the shot was fired, no charge was ever brought 
against him.
_____

By contrast, the complaints (many expressed more in terms of sorrow than of 
anger) that Bacchus was a Roman god and, therefore, could not be the solution 
to a clue "Greek god of wine (7)" (Quick No 12,744, 16 March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quick/12744>) were wide of the mark. He 
clearly started life in Greek mythology (as Bakkhos, another name for Dionysus) 
and was then subsequently adopted by the Romans as their very own god of wine. 
It is true that, if you Google Bacchus, he comes up more often with his Roman 
hat on than with his Greek. But of his Greek origins there is no doubt. The 
great Greek dramatist Euripides even wrote a play about his female worshippers 
(The Bacchae). On reflection the clue would have been easier as either "Greek 
or Roman god of wine" or as just "God of wine", but it was not intended as a 
trick question.
_____

A gripe of a different kind was provoked by the clue "Hypothesis (6)" for 
THEORY (Quick No 12,749, 22 March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quick/12749>). My correspondent told me 
that any dictionary would surely confirm that a 'hypothesis' was not a 'theory' 
and that anyone who has ever taught science could put me right. I take the 
point in relation to the natural sciences: hypotheses, theorems (or theories) 
and laws are all different stages of the scientific method. But in ordinary, 
non-scientific English I would contend that both 'hypothesis' and 'theory' 
carry more general meanings: to choose more or less at random, idea, plan, 
view, guess, notion, opinion, proposal, conjecture, assumption and speculation 
and many other nouns would all be substitutable for either word in any number 
of totally legitimate sentences. I know that many words have a specialist and 
technical meaning behind them, but I don't think that crosswords can be so 
limited.
 _____

March's Genius (No 93) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/java/new/0,,-26751,00.html> by Paul 
produced 361 entries, with 38 of them on the first day. Dave of Ilkley in 
Yorkshire would have been the first correct entry to arrive (at 00:43) had it 
not been for a single typo at 8,11 down. In fact the first two home were usual 
suspects, Tony of London W5 at 00:44 and Ian of London N14 at 00:55. The next 
was a newcomer to this list: Ivan of Brunel University at 02:46.

Congratulations to James Glassonbury from Stonehouse, Gloucestershire, who is 
March's Genius winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com> 
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 