
1) Spain ▲3

By some distance, the best performance at the championship so far – no matter 
how willingly Turkey appeared to roll over and take a pummelling. The third 
goal was a beauty, even if Jordi Alba was a yard offside before teeing up 
Álvaro Morata. The move involved all outfield players apart from Gerard Piqué, 
and featured 21 passes. Same old Spain, then. Yet there was also a lingering 
sense that they can raise their game to another level. They toyed withTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/turkey> for long spells and it does not 
bode well for the rest that Andrés Iniesta is on form, their oft (and 
incorrectly) criticised defence has barely allowed an opportunity, and Jordi 
Alba and Juanfran are insatiable at wing-back.

• Match report: Spain 1-0 Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/spain-czech-republic-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Spain 3-0 Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/spain-turkey-euro-2016-match-report>

2) Italy ▼1


They listed in attack for long spells against a weak Sweden but, similarly to 
France, still found a way to win when not on top form. Antonio Conte has been 
told over and over that this is the worstAzzurri squad in years. Maybe that is 
the case, but they still possess the best defence in the tournament and, to 
paraphrase Alex Ferguson: “Lads, it’s Italy”. This is a side that may not 
pulverise teams into submission but will chip away and chip away, frustrating 
opponents to the extent where errors seem near inevitable. They might not have 
enough to go all the way, but no team will defeat them easily. With a last-16 
berth already sealed, it would be no surprise to see Conte rest at least a 
couple of the five players on a yellow card against theRepublic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> on Wednesday.

• Match report: Belgium 0-2 Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/belgium-italy-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Italy 1-0 Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/italy-sweden-euro-2016-match-report>

Euro 2016 interactive wallchart: tables, results, fixtures and more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2015/dec/12/euro-2016-interactive-wallchart-groups-fixtures-venues-and-more>
3) France ▼1

Are the hosts paralysed by pressure? Didier Deschamps’ brave gamble to drop 
Paul Pogba and Antoine Griezmann against Albania backfired, but the 
replacements were hardly weaklings and a fear of failure seemed to engulf the 
team early on. Olivier Giroud must be the next closest to being benched by the 
manager – in a tournament where no striker has yet stood out, he has missed 
more chances than any other. The cheers as he departed in Marseille were harsh, 
but the Arsenal man must do better if his country is to reach the final. Still,
Les Bleus found a way to win, becoming the first team to assure their place in 
the knockouts. FacingSwitzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> with less pressure should be 
a helpful tonic.
Payet 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Dimitri%20Payet&team=France&isSimple=true>
• Match report: France 2-1 Romania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/france-romania-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: France 2-0 Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/france-albania-euro-2016-match-report>

4) Germany ▼1

A first 0-0 draw in a Euros since 2008 and, more pertinently, the first time 
the tournament’s structure has been genuinely called into question since the 
games began. With both sides having won their openers, and four points likely 
to ensure progression, the meeting with Poland became the dullest game of the 
competition to date. Yet Germany undoubtedly have issues that need to be ironed 
out – in defence and attack. They conceded numerous cheap opportunities, most 
notably to Arkadiusz Milik, and the lack of a prominent striker meant that, for 
all their pretty midfield play, a lack of penetration at the top of a blunt 
formation has become a growing concern. But this isGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> and, when it boils down to 
decisive moments, they will find a way.

• Match report: Germany 2-0 Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/germany-ukraine-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Germany 0-0 Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/germany-poland-euro-2016-match-report>

5) Croatia ▶

So impressive and in total control against Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/czechrepublic>, until everything went 
pear-shaped. A draw was very much undeserved. First Luka Modric hobbled off 
with an injury – he is expected to miss the group closer against Spain, denying 
fans the opportunity to witness one of the (if notthe) tournament’s best 
midfield battles. Then the Czechs pulled one back before a portion of Croatian 
fans kicked off, placing them in hot water with Uefa and also, quite possibly, 
distracting their players to the extent where they conceded a penalty in injury 
time to lose two points that looked assured. They will still progress from the 
group but this draw means they will tread a tougher path in the knockout stages.

• Match report: Turkey 0-1 Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/turkey-croatia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Czech Republic 2-2 Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/croatia-czech-republic-euro-2016-match-report>

6) Belgium ▲6

That was better. Could the terribly off-key recital against Italy have been a 
one-off? Were the reports of widespread unrest in the squad and a near revolt 
against the manager, Marc Wilmots, overblown? Maybe – but it would be excessive 
to sayBelgium <https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> are completely out 
of the woods, despite an entirely convincing win over the Republic of Ireland. 
It was dominant enough to give Spain v Turkey a run for the most one-sided 
match and, in terms of build-up play for a goal, the Red Devils got one overLa 
Roja by stringing together 28 passes for their second. On this form they should 
have too much for Sweden, but can they keep it up?

• Match report: Belgium 0-2 Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/belgium-italy-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Belgium 3-0 Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/belgium-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>

7) England ▼1

Nothing if not contrary, England drew the game they played well in and won the 
match they stuttered through. Roy Hodgson deserves credit for his half-time 
substitutions, turning the game around by ditching the conservatism, but he 
would probably not have made those swaps if the game was scoreless at the 
interval. The most fascinating thing will be to see if Harry Kane and Raheem 
Sterling, both ineffectual, are benched from the start againstSlovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovakia> – word now is that Daniel 
Sturridge will replace the former. The points accrued already will be enough to 
see them through, but victory remains a must to ensure top place and an easier 
last-16 tie.

• Match report: England 1-1 Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/england-russia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: England 2-1 Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/england-wales-euro-2016-match-report>

8) Poland ▼1

If only Arkadiusz Milik was able to finish. Poland looked the happier of the 
two sides after the draw against Germany, but it should have been three points. 
Still, progression to the second phase of a Euros for the first time is in 
their grasp, and top spot could be theirs if they manage to knock a few past a 
desperate Ukraine, while Germany play a now buoyantNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland>. For that to happen, 
Robert Lewandowski will need to be more prominent. He has sacrificed himself 
for the team up to now – dropping deep often and nearly playing as a No10, 
albeit very well. Considering the obvious frailties in Ukraine’s defence, could 
Tuesday evening be the moment he – to plunge into football parlance – arrives 
at the tournament?
Robert Lewandowski 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Robert%20Lewandowski&team=Poland&isSimple=true>
• Match report: Poland 1-0 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/poland-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Germany 0-0 Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/germany-poland-euro-2016-match-report>

9) Hungary ▲1

Bernd Storck’s team, unfancied and unheralded before this tournament, are 
almost certain to reach the knockout rounds, even if a third place finish could 
still come to pass ifPortugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> 
win on Wednesday. Their group – the pool of draws – may be the weakest but the 
Magyars are the only ones with a win and it looks like being decisive. Utterly 
dominant against Iceland, such is the wonderful oddness about this tournament 
to date, there was still an element of luck about their equaliser, an 
87th-minute own goal. But who can deny one of the most historical football 
nations a piece of long-awaited glory?

• Match report: Austria 0-2 Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/austria-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Iceland 1-1 Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/iceland-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>

10) Portugal ▲1

Yes, Cristiano Ronaldo has endured a horror show in France – encapsulated by 
his penalty crashing off a post against Austria and an offside goal soon after 
– but Portugal must still be the favourites in Group F despite having drawn 
both games. There may be a lack of cohesion and unity in comparison to other 
teams in the group but their level of talent outweighs that of those rivals. A 
win overHungary <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hungary> in Lyon should 
see them top the group – though Iceland could end up level on points. 
Qualification may not yet be assured but already the main talking point seems 
to be how far Portugal are capable of going in the knockouts with the 
continent’s best player in a major sulk.
Ronaldo 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Cristiano%20Ronaldo&team=Portugal&isSimple=true>
• Match report: Portugal 1-1 Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/portugal-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Portugal 0-0 Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/portugal-austria-euro-2016-match-report>

11) Switzerland ▼2

Conceded a first-half penalty to Romania but came back strongly to equalise 
through another set piece and a smashing strike from Admir Mehmedi. From that 
point on, they were best placed to grab a winner, creating a healthy 19 
opportunities overall. Xherdan Shaqiri showed a bit more than againstAlbania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania>, Granit Xhaka looked good in the 
centre, and Breel Embolo again looked lively off the bench. Four points means 
they will, barring a complete shock, make it out of the group but Vladimir 
Petkovic’s team may need a little luck to progress to the quarter-finals.

• Match report: Albania 0-1 Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/albania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Switzerland 1-1 Romania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/romania-switzerland-euro-201-match-report>

12) Wales ▼4

The timescale of events in Lens on Thursday may suggest Wales were unfortunate 
but, really, Chris Coleman’s team performed poorly. Simply, they are better 
than that. A side set up to defend were riddled with errors, most strikingly 
from the captain Ashley Williams. He erred in the opening stages to almost 
allow Harry Kane in, headed the ball into Jamie Vardy’s path for England’s 
equaliser and was fended off by the Leicester striker with ease for Daniel 
Sturridge’s late winner. Gareth Bale’s brilliance and Aaron Ramsey’s workrate 
are not enough when the team drop so deep. Thankfully for Wales, they cannot 
sit back againstRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/russia>. Against 
one of the worst teams in the tournament, they should still get the result 
required to advance.

• Match report: Wales 2-1 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/wales-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: England 2-1 Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/england-wales-euro-2016-match-report>

Euro 2016: every performance rated and profiles of all 552 players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/jun/01/euro-2016-the-complete-guide-to-every-squad-and-every-player-in-france>
13) Iceland ▲3

Of all the late concessions in this tournament to date, Iceland’s to Hungary 
was the most heartbreaking. They will have been crestfallen considering the 
manner in which they let two points slip to Hungary but Heimir Hallgrimsson and 
Lars Lagerback, the joint managers, must take heart and drum it into their 
players that a win (maybe even a draw depending on results elsewhere) against
Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria> on Wednesday will be 
enough to prolong this most wonderful fairytale and reach the last 16.

• Match report: Portugal 1-1 Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/portugal-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Iceland 1-1 Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/iceland-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>

14) Northern Ireland ▲10

The contrast could hardly have been greater. Limp and ineffective against 
Poland, Michael O’Neill made five changes forUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ukraine>, took off the defensive shackles 
that weighed them down, and got his team playing. How handsomely it all paid 
off. Third place secure, that win on Thursday may be enough to make them one of 
the four third-placed teams to make the last 16. Now, with goal difference 
potentially decisive, O’Neill must decide whether to take on Germany or sit 
back and soak up the pressure. Either way, Lyon will go down in Northern 
Ireland history.

• Match report: Poland 1-0 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/poland-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Ukraine 0-2 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/ukraine-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>

15) Slovakia ▲7

It is just as well Marek Hamsik is on good form. The Napoli captain set up the 
first against Russia with a delicious pass and scored a wonderful second before 
some strange substitutions from Jan Kozak – notably bringing on the striker 
Michal Duris for the midfielder Robert Mak with 10 minutes to go – welcomed an 
awful Russia to attack. Slovakia almost threw a comfortable 2-0 lead away, 
clinging on desperately in the final moments, but four points from six augurs 
well before facingEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> on 
Monday. Third place looks most likely but they could finish in any of the four 
spots.

• Match report: Wales 2-1 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/wales-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Slovakia 2-1 Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/russia-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>

16) Republic of Ireland ▼3

That they were outclassed by Belgium was not a major surprise but the 3-0 
defeat makes their retreat when leading againstSweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sweden>, to chuck away two points, all 
the more exasperating. A victory there would have put them in a good position 
to progress in third. Now they must defeat Italy in Lille on Wednesday. Even if 
Antonio Conte reshuffles his team and rests key players (with top place in the 
group already assured), it will be a tall order. The biggest concern for Martin 
O’Neill is where a goal can come from – Shane Long has not shone as brightly as 
many had hoped.

• Match report: Republic of Ireland 1-1 Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/republic-of-ireland-sweden-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Belgium 3-0 Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/belgium-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>

17) Romania ▲3

Resilient and dogged once more, a draw with Switzerland has given Romania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/romania> a chance of creeping through if 
Anghel Iordanescu’s team can win against Albania on Sunday night. Four points 
should be enough to seal one of the four-best third place spots and, if they 
can beat Albania by more than one goal – no easy feat on the evidence thus far 
and blatant shortcomings in attack – while France defeat the Swiss, second 
would be in their grasp too. By no means the prettiest team on show but quietly 
effective.

• Match report: France 2-1 Romania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/france-romania-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Switzerland 1-1 Romania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/romania-switzerland-euro-201-match-report>

18) Czech Republic ▼1

The slowest, leggiest team in the tournament somehow, aided by the 
opposition’s unruly supporters, contrived to earn a point from a match in which 
they were completely outclassed. And now Czech Republic should reach the last 
16 with a win over ramshackle Turkey. Quite the turnaround after an hour of 
being played off the park byCroatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/croatia>, following 90 minutes of barely 
getting a touch in their opener against Spain. A poor team that would be little 
more than target practice for any team they could meet in the knockout stages.

• Match report: Spain 1-0 Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/spain-czech-republic-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Czech Republic 2-2 Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/croatia-czech-republic-euro-2016-match-report>

19) Sweden ▼5

Two games in and still no shot on target. Erik Hamren’s side do, however, have 
a point courtesy of an own goal, and retain a slim chance of progressing. A 
victory against Belgium on Wednesday night will be required but, on current 
evidence, that seems almost implausible. Zlatan Ibrahimovic has been handled 
with ease in both games and, while an argument could be made for a lack of 
service towards the striker, he has been quite a letdown. Of course, that tees 
him up to score a hat-trick against Belgium.
Zlatan Ibrahimovic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%20&team=Sweden&isSimple=true>
• Match report: Republic of Ireland 1-1 Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/republic-of-ireland-sweden-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Italy 1-o Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/italy-sweden-euro-2016-match-report>

20) Russia ▼1

Insipid against England and, up until the final moments in Lille on Thursday, 
even worse against Slovakia. Defending that should be soundtracked by the Benny 
Hill theme, midfield play that looked better suited to Hackney Marshes and, in 
Artem Dzyuba, a beanpole striker that must be considered among the most 
ineffective in the tournament – something will need to change dramatically for 
Leonid Slutsky if Russia are to win againstWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> on Monday night.

• Match report: England 1-1 Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/england-russia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Slovakia 2-1 Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/russia-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>

21) Albania ▲2

Based on their performance level and effort, this may seem quite harsh on one 
of the tournament debutants. They would have taken hope from a battling defeat 
to Switzerland after spending the majority of it without Lorik Cana, the 
captain sent off for two yellows, but to hold the hosts at bay until the final 
moments with a doughty defensive display only to have all the work undone by 
two late goals must have been heartbreaking. Albania will make things difficult 
for Romania, who need a win to stand a chance of progressing, and with nothing 
to lose Gianni De Biasi’s side may also show more attacking intent. A big win 
could see them progress as one of the four third-placed teams, but that is 
hugely improbable.

• Match report: Albania 0-1 Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/albania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: France 2-0 Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/france-albania-euro-2016-match-report>

Euro 2016 – where the thrill of football wrestles with the politics of fear | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/18/euro-2016-football-politics-france>
22) Austria ▼4

First the good news. Austria kept their first clean sheet at a major 
tournament in 14 matches and their first since 1982 (v Algeria) against 
Portugal. Then the bad. None of their last 32 shots at the European 
Championship have been converted. And then the worse news: they must beatIceland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland> in Paris on Wednesday evening 
to creep through, and even then it will be in second or third. So much for 
tournament dark horses. They have had a stinker.

• Match report: Austria 0-2 Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/austria-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Portugal 0-0 Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/portugal-austria-euro-2016-match-report>

23) Turkey ▼8

The standout moment came midway through the second half against Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> when Arda Turan, wide on the left, 
was met by a vicious chorus of jeers from the Turkey supporters. But the manner 
in which their heads dropped, an act of blatant surrender, when Álvaro Morata 
opened the scoring late in the first half said much more. “Today our national 
team threw in the towel,” the manager, Fatih Terim, said at full-time – and it 
was difficult to disagree. “You can be sure that I will never accept this. On 
behalf of my team I am deeply upset. I will do the necessary thing.” That, one 
suspects, would be wholesale changes and a renewed effort against Czech 
Republic.
Turan 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Arda%20Turan&team=Turkey&isSimple=true>
• Match report: Turkey 0-1 Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/turkey-croatia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Spain 3-0 Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/spain-turkey-euro-2016-match-report>

24) Ukraine ▼3

Suffered the humiliation of being the first team to be knocked out of a 
tournament where only a third of the sides go home after the group stage. After 
defending moderately well but ultimately succumbing 2-0 to Germany in their 
first game, Mykhaylo Fomenko’s outfit needed to come out and attack Northern 
Ireland in what, from the outset, appeared to be a shootout for third place. 
They lost with barely a whimper in a bland show of nothingness, which must be 
considered a huge disappointment for a country with a football-mad population 
of 45.5 million up against a minnow with a population of 1.8 million and the 
regular threat of players joining the Republic. Ukraine were poor four years 
ago when hosting the Euros, but this was really insipid for a team containing a 
Europa League winner, plenty of talent and much more depth than opponents who, 
more importantly, had more desire and hunger.

• Match report: Germany 2-0 Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/germany-ukraine-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Ukraine 0-2 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/ukraine-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>

• See how the standings compare to the first round of games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/euro-2016-power-rankings-italy-and-france-lead-the-way-as-belgium-slump>
 