
Joey Barton scored directly from a corner 
<http://bbcsporf.lockerdome.com/articles/102160925> for Marseille in their 2-2 
draw withBorussia Mönchengladbach, which leaves the two sides locked together 
on five points in Europa League Group C. Mike Hanke put the German club ahead 
before goals from Barton and Jordan Ayew turned the game in Marseille's favour. 
Juan Arango rescued a potentially crucial point in the third minute of stoppage 
time.

Atlético Madrid, the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> champions, stumbled 
to a shock 2-0 defeat to Group B rivalsAcadémica Coimbra in Portugal. A win 
would have been enough to guarantee progression but Atlético turned in a flat 
performance against the side lying 10th in the Portuguese table. A goal in each 
half from Wilson Eduardo gave Académica victory.

While the result is still unlikely to affect the holders' progress to the 
knockout stages, their status as group winners is now open to question after
Viktoria Plzen joined them at the top on nine points. The in-form Czechs 
brushed aside haplessHapoel Tel Aviv 4-0 with two goals from Daniel Kolar and 
one each for David Stipek and Marek Bakos.

The Swiss side Young Boys blew Group A wide open with a shock 3-2 win over 
Serie A'sUdinese in Italy. Raul Bobadilla opened the scoring for Young Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/young-boys-berne> in the 27th minute and 
despite Antonio Di Natale's equaliser, they regained the initiative through 
Alexander Farnerud and Rapha Nuzzolo. Diego Fabbrini gave the Italians late 
hope with an 83rd-minute effort but the defeat leaves them stranded at the 
bottom on four points.

Udinese's loss was good news for Liverpool, who were beaten by Lacina Traoré's 
45th-minute goal forAnzhi Makhachkala in Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/nov/08/anzhi-makhachkala-liverpool-europa-league>
. Anzhi now top the group by a point, with Liverpool and Young Boys tied second.

Fenerbahce all but guaranteed progression from Group C with a 2-0 win over AEL 
in Turkey. Dirk Kuyt and Moussa Sow scored the goals while AEL had Edwin Ouon 
sent off late on.

Newcastle failed to grab the win they needed to guarantee qualification from 
Group D but will be happy after fighting back for a 2-2 draw atClub Brugge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/nov/08/club-brugge-newcastle-united-europa-league>
. Ivan Trickovski and Jesper Jorgensen gave the Belgians a 2-0 lead inside the 
first 19 minutes before goals from Vurnon Anita and Shola Amoebi kept Alan 
Pardew's men on track.

Bordeaux stay second after David Bellion's 16th-minute goal proved enough for 
them to see offMarítimo 1-0 in France.

Steaua Bucharest kept control of Group E with a 2-1 win at Molde, Alexandru 
Chipciu and Iasmin Latovlevici netting before Daniel Chima hit a late 
consolation.

Goals from Vedad Ibsevic and Martin Harnik kept Stuttgart's hopes alive with a 
2-0 win overCopenhagen in Denmark.

Edison Cavani scored all four as Napoli beat the Group F leaders Dnipro 
Dnipropetrovsk 4-2 in Italy. Artem Fedetskiy and Roman Zozulya replied for the 
visitors, who remain top. Also in Group F,AIK gave themselves hope as a Mohamed 
Bangura goal gave them a 1-0 home win overPSV.
 