
Croatia v Portugal, Saturday 8pm, ITV

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2b25d97efcb2ee811ab62e70bff79d1e733ab16%2F178_401_2980_1788%2F2980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20previews%20of%20the%20last-16%20ties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20previews%20of%20the%20last-16%20ties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2b25d97efcb2ee811ab62e70bff79d1e733ab16%2F178_401_2980_1788%2F2980.jpg>
 Ivan Perisic celebrates after scoring for Croatia against Spain. Photograph: 
Ian Walton/Getty Images 
Croatia have emerged as favourites to reach the final given their favourable 
position in the draw. The winners of this match will be strongly tipped to go 
all the way, withBelgium <https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> the 
only other big name who could hold them back from a trip to the Stade de France 
on 10 July.

While Croatia have been very entertaining, Portugal are the only team in the 
last 16 who didn’t win a group game – but it hasn’t been for a lack of effort. 
They have fired off more shots than any other team (70), with Cristiano Ronaldo 
responsible for 30 of them. His return of two goals is fairly modest, but his 
tail will be up after scoring twice in the final group game to become the first 
player to score in four differentEuropean Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/european-championship> finals.

David Squires on … a review of the Euro 2016 group stage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/jun/24/david-squires-on-a-review-of-the-euro-2016-group-stage>
Despite the obvious threat of Ronaldo and Nani, Croatia go into the game as 
favourites. Their captain Darijo Srna (7.43) and winger Ivan Perisic (8.16) 
made it into our team of the tournament so far. Perisic has been particularly 
impressive – with two goals and one assist – even though more attention has 
been focused on the enviable midfield pairing of Luka Modric and Ivan Rakitic.
Portugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> dominated possession 
(61.2%) in their group but will have to adapt against a Croatia team that are 
incredibly dangerous on the break.

France v Republic of Ireland, Sunday 2pm, ITV
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c2b706d0853a3a73e4c950b03956746e64ecbc4%2F0_113_3698_2219%2F3698.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20previews%20of%20the%20last-16%20ties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20previews%20of%20the%20last-16%20ties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c2b706d0853a3a73e4c950b03956746e64ecbc4%2F0_113_3698_2219%2F3698.jpg>
 Robbie Brady puts his team in the last 16. Photograph: Philippe 
Huguen/AFP/Getty Images 
France will be aiming to improve on an underwhelming group stage campaign. 
They have not been at their best but Martin O’Neill will be aware that the odds 
are stacked against his side once more. TheRepublic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> were underdogs in 
their group but a last-gasp winner against Italy in their third match ensured 
that no side went into the round of 16 with a perfect record.

France also fell short in their last group game against Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> but they came close to 
embarrassing results against both Albania and Romania. Indeed the hosts are 
among almost half the teams in the tournament that failed to score in the first 
half of matches. With the Republic of Ireland another, we can perhaps expect a 
cagey affair early on, which would suit the underdogs. Tense atmospheres have 
proven conducive to late drama at this tournament, but the strain has not aided 
France’s composure, particularly in front of goal, where only Poland fired off 
a lower proportion of shots on target (22%) of the teams to reach the knockout 
phase.

Ireland will hope the hosts’ frustrations continue, but will need to keep one 
of the stars of the tournament quiet. Dimitri Payet emerged from the shadows of 
Paul Pogba and Antoine Griezmann to earn the second highest rating – behind 
Gareth Bale – in the group stages (8.21), so the role of Ireland’s industrious 
midfield will be key. James McCarthy will need to improve on an underwhelming 
showing so far then, with Jeff Hendrick far more impressive. Wes Hoolahan will 
be asked to alleviate the pressure on the defence along with Shane Long, who 
gave France’s Laurent Koscielny the runaround to score twice in a 4-0 win when 
the two went head-to-head in the Premier League at the end of last year.

Germany v Slovakia, Sunday 5pm, ITV
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc89ff4e9d7d81395209643835bac9bfa80f8c13%2F0_178_3778_2267%2F3778.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20previews%20of%20the%20last-16%20ties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20previews%20of%20the%20last-16%20ties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc89ff4e9d7d81395209643835bac9bfa80f8c13%2F0_178_3778_2267%2F3778.jpg>
 Marek Hamsik in full voice for Slovakia. Photograph: Philippe Huguen/AFP/Getty 
Images 
World champions Germany have been semi-finalists in the last five major 
tournaments, while debutants Slovakia are yet to go past the round of 16 – a 
stage they also reached at the 2010 World Cup. Jan Kozak’s men ensured their 
place in the knockout phase by drawing with England and they will probably 
deploy similarly defensive tactics again on Sunday.Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovakia> ended their final group game 
with seven defenders and not a single forward on the pitch but they will need 
to spring a counter at some point against Germany.

Picking their opportunities to break wisely will be key, with Germany proving 
just how devastating they can be on counterattacks, though in truth this match 
is likely to be played in one half.Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> had the highest possession share 
(66.5%) of all 24 teams in the group stage, while Slovakia had the lowest 
proportion of their touches in the opposition’s final third (19%).

Hungary v Belgium, Sunday 8pm, BBC
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8476bfef09f1aee0c39d5aa8cd65feb8e8837c11%2F0_159_2429_1582%2F2429.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20previews%20of%20the%20last-16%20ties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20previews%20of%20the%20last-16%20ties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8476bfef09f1aee0c39d5aa8cd65feb8e8837c11%2F0_159_2429_1582%2F2429.jpg>
 A couple of Belgium players ‘tackle’ Shane Long during their win over Ireland 
in the group. Photograph: Ray McManus/Getty Images 
While their achievements have been slightly overshadowed by the progression of 
Iceland from their own group, Hungary must surely be considered the surprise 
package so far. Iceland were impressive en route to France but Bernd Storck’s 
side qualified for the tournament after finishing third in their group, behind
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland> and 
Romania.

The Guardian’s Euro 2016 team of the tournament so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/24/guardian-euro-2016-team-of-the-tournament-so-far>
Nevertheless, Hungary topped Group F in front of Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland> and Portugal and, despite 
lacking star quality in attack, were one of only four sides to score in all 
three of their group games. Indeed, no side scored more goals en route to the 
round of 16 (six). Belgium bounced back from an opening defeat to Italy to 
score four times, making this the last-16 tie with the most goals scored by the 
two teams combined thus far (10).

That said, Marc Wilmots’ team only really impressed against an Ireland side 
that afforded them far too much space to counter. Hungary will need to be wary 
of the same, with Belgium having had more shots as a result of fast breaks than 
any other side in the group stages. Regardless, with only three sides having 
had more shots on target than Belgium thus far (18), andHungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hungary> just behind in fifth (16), this 
should be an entertaining game.

Italy v Spain, Monday 5pm, BBC
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fb852bac08cc4315ea865fb950daec96d6683f5%2F0_86_2752_1651%2F2752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20previews%20of%20the%20last-16%20ties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20previews%20of%20the%20last-16%20ties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fb852bac08cc4315ea865fb950daec96d6683f5%2F0_86_2752_1651%2F2752.jpg>
 Éder plays at being Marco Tardelli for Italy. Photograph: Vincenzo 
Pinto/AFP/Getty Images 
Italy have every right to feel hard done by. They topped a difficult group and 
have been rewarded with a game against holders Spain, who fell to second place 
in their group after losing toCroatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/croatia>. The Azzurri were doubted before 
the tournament, having suffered injuries to key players and seemingly being 
bereft of world class talent up front, but their defence has helped to see them 
through.

The Juventus quartet at the back will need to be in top form once more if they 
are to deny Vicente del Bosque’sSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain>, who had more than twice as many 
shots in the group stages (51) as their opponents (25). Only Sweden, Iceland 
and Northern Ireland have had fewer shots than Italy, although a repeat of the 
Euro 2012 final between these sides, withLa Roja running out 4-0 winners, seems 
unlikely this time around.

Antonio Conte made wholesale changes in their final group game, against Ireland
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/italy-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
, whereas Spain are the only side to have used the same starting XI in every 
match. Indeed, this tie pitches the team that has used the fewest players from 
the start (Spain: 11) against the team that has used the most (Italy: 20), with 
Conte still seemingly undecided on his favoured line-up in attack. The new 
Chelsea boss is likely to err on the side of caution and try to frustrate 
Spain, which should set up an intriguing tactical battle.

England v Iceland, Monday 8pm, ITV
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61b06b90ccda14d5fa4cc4788e0076427ce70bf1%2F0_260_3300_1981%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20previews%20of%20the%20last-16%20ties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20previews%20of%20the%20last-16%20ties&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Feuro-2016-last-16%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61b06b90ccda14d5fa4cc4788e0076427ce70bf1%2F0_260_3300_1981%2F3300.jpg>
 Iceland players celebrate a goal during their win over Austria. Photograph: 
Tobias Schwarz/AFP/Getty Images 
Completing the round of 16 fixtures, England face major tournament debutants 
Iceland, whose fairytale finish against Austria ensured that they, rather than 
Portugal, would be facing England. It’s a dream draw for the fans, not because 
they see Roy Hodgson’s side as particularly beatable opposition, but becausethe 
English game is by far the most popular in Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/iceland-england-euro-2016-influence-roy-hodgson>
. England fans, meanwhile, celebrated Iceland’s late winner on Wednesday as if 
it were one of their own, but must now be wary ofthe same old story from the 
group stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/roy-hodgson-england-not-underestimate-iceland>
.

Euro 2016: who will win the last-16 matches and reach the quarter-finals?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/euro-2016-full-last-16-draw-polls>
At no stage did any of England’s three opponents in the group look to sustain 
any real pressure on their backline and that will be the case again on Monday 
night. Indeed, Iceland ranked second last in the group stages for possession 
(34.3%), pass accuracy (60.9%) and shots per game (7.7) – and they have had the 
highest proportion of touches in their own third so far (34%), withEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> having the lowest (20%).

England’s inability to break down Slovakia was widely criticised, though it 
was arguably their failure to hold out against Russia that ultimately cost them 
a spot on the more favourable side of the draw. Only Portugal mustered more 
shots per game than Roy Hodgson’s side (21.3) in the group stages, but they hit 
the target with just 15 of 64 efforts (23.5%) and will need to be far more 
clinical against Iceland to find a way past Hannes Thor Halldorsson, who has 
made the most saves at the tournament (17).


Switzerland v Poland, Saturday 2pm BST, BBC

Kicking off the round of 16 at the Stade Geoffroy Guichard in Saint-Étienne, 
Switzerland andPoland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/poland> are in 
uncharted territory as far as their European Championship histories are 
concerned, with both progressing past the group stage for the first time.

Adam Nawalka’s side are the more fancied of the two teams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/euro-2016-full-last-16-draw-polls>
 given their firepower, though star striker Robert Lewandowski failed to 
register a single shot on target in the group stages. Switzerland have 
goalscoring problems of their own though, with both sides having scored just 
twice en route to the knockout phase. Haris Seferovic has been the guiltiest 
culprit for Vladimir Petkovic’s men.

The sides adopt different approaches, with Switzerland favouring a patient 
style – ranking among the top five sides for both possession (57.9%) and pass 
accuracy (86.2%) – with new Arsenal signing Granit Xhaka attempting the second 
most passes per game in the group stages (105.7). Poland, by contrast, have 
been content to soak up possession, averaging just 45.8%, and were one of only 
two teams to progress without conceding a goal. They’ll be confident of keeping 
another clean sheet on Saturday, and with Lewandowski determined to prove a 
point and the impressive Arkadiusz Milik in support, their status as narrow 
favourites is justified.

Wales v Northern Ireland, Saturday 5pm, BBC

The meeting between Wales and Northern Ireland on Saturday evening will ensure 
that at least one of the home nations reaches the quarter-finals. Both of these 
teams were always going to need some stellar individual performances on top of 
their exceptional team spirit and organisation, and that has been the case – 
they both have players in our team of the group stages: Michael McGovern and 
Jonny Evans for Northern Ireland, and Gareth Bale, Aaron Ramsey and James 
Chester forWales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales>.

Chris Coleman’s back three have all played their part, with Chester standing 
out – no player made more interceptions in the group stage than his 13. 
Ramsey’s tireless running has kept Bale from becoming isolated and helped the 
team get up the pitch. Ramsey and Eden Hazard are the only players with more 
than one assist so far and Bale shares the lead in the scoring charts with 
Álvaro Morata (three), having fired off five more shots on target than any 
other player. His tally of 12 was more than 14 teams in total, includingFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> (11), Italy (10) and Northern 
Ireland (eight).


Northern Ireland will need to continue working as hard, with Jonny Evans and 
Oliver Norwood – who produced the joint most tackles in the group stages (12) – 
both standout performers, but Michael McGovern may need to replicate his 
heroics from the game against Germany. With Northern Ireland progressing by 
virtue of goal difference, their goalkeeper was the key, producing the second 
most saves in the group stages (15) to take his place in the team of the group 
stages (7.38 rating). He will be called upon once more this weekend without 
question, though Wales could struggle to break Northern Ireland down if they 
are starved of the space they enjoyed against Russia.

• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
WhoScored <https://www.whoscored.com/>’s team of the group stage. Photograph: 
WhoScored  