
1) Germany ▲1

Joachim Löw was lacking balance in his team – overstocked with No10s – during 
the group stage but Germany seemed far better going forward with Mario Götze 
relegated to the bench againstSlovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovakia>. The most notable thing of all, 
though, isdie mannschaft are the only side yet to concede a goal and possess 
the tournament’s most consistently impressive player to date in Toni Kroos. 
Their quarter-final against Italy on Saturday night in Bordeaux will likely be 
the toughest game the world champions play – but it could also take a lot out 
of them before a likely semi-final against France.

• Match report: Germany 2-0 Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/germany-ukraine-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Germany 0-0 Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/germany-poland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Northern Ireland 0-1 Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/northern-ireland-germany-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Germany 3-0 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/germany-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
Toni Kroos 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Toni%20Kroos&team=Germany&isSimple=true>
2) Italy ▲1

If some pre-tournament predictions were to be believed, this was Italy’s most 
uninspiring squad ever. Yet they have beaten one of the ante-post favourites in 
Belgium 2-0; knocked out the champions, Spain, with an accomplished, tactically 
perfect win by the same scoreline; and also kept a clean sheet against Sweden. 
Their loss to theRepublic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> was an exception, with 
the second string failing to impress, and that aside theAzzurri have ticked all 
the boxes. With more than just cynicism, too; Antonio Conte has his players 
passing the ball well and attacking with menace.

• Match report: Belgium 0-2 Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/belgium-italy-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Italy 1-0 Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/italy-sweden-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Italy 0-1 Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/italy-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Italy 2-0 Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/italy-spain-euro-2016-match-report>

3) Belgium ▲4

Eden Hazard delivered the individual performance of the tournament so far 
against Hungary, and it was telling at the end when Marc Wilmots playfully 
squirted his water bottle at the Chelsea player after he was substituted in the 
final moments. So much for all the earlier discussion of fall outs between the 
players and manager along with rumours of them playing to spite Wilmots – this 
was a team on top form and the question now is if they can keep it going 
against Wales, who the Red Devils struggled against in qualifying. One concern 
will be how they pushed forward almost too much and allowedHungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hungary> space to break into – better 
sides will punish them.

• Match report: Belgium 0-2 Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/belgium-italy-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Belgium 3-0 Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/belgium-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Sweden 0-1 Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/sweden-belgium-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Hungary 0-4 Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/hungary-belgium-euro-2016-match-report>

4) France ▲1

In many ways, les bleus’ last 16 win was much the same story for Didier 
Deschamps and company – a bad start, a questionable defence but enough 
individual brilliance in attack to keep the hosts on course. Antoine Griezmann 
was the go-to player this time, scoring twice to defeat the Republic of Ireland 
and tee up a quarter-final withIceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland>. Adil Rami being suspended for 
that may be a blessing in disguise – to say the Sevilla central defender has 
failed to impress would be kind. Then again, he could be replaced by Eliaquim 
Mangala, who, as Manchester City fans may attest, is not entirely reliable.

• Match report: France 2-1 Romania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/france-romania-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: France 2-0 Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/france-albania-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Switzerland 0-0 France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/switzerland-france-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: France 2-1 Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/france-republic-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>

5) Wales ▲3

It was far from pretty but, helped by the one outstanding player on the pitch 
in Gareth Bale, Wales still found a way pastNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland>. Now they face familiar 
rivals in Belgium and Chris Coleman must play up to the fact that their 
better-fancied, technically superior opponents could only take one point from 
six in qualifying. Ashley Williams’ shoulder injury is a concern, though 
Coleman has told the fans to keep dreaming. Dare they look beyond Belgium?

• Match report: Wales 2-1 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/wales-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: England 2-1 Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/england-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Russia 0-3 Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/wales-russia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Wales 1-0 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/wales-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-germany-and-italy-on-top-as-england-nosedive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff426a819878fc586d2438d60d58da98c1b3ce75c%2F0_191_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Germany%20and%20Italy%20on%20top%20as%20England%20nosedive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-germany-and-italy-on-top-as-england-nosedive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Germany%20and%20Italy%20on%20top%20as%20England%20nosedive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-germany-and-italy-on-top-as-england-nosedive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff426a819878fc586d2438d60d58da98c1b3ce75c%2F0_191_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Wales players and fans celebrate after the last-16 victory over Northern 
Ireland Photograph: Alex Grimm/UEFA via Getty Images 
6) Poland =

“We still have reserves of strength in our minds,” the manager, Adam Nawalka, 
said after knockingSwitzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> out on penalties, yet Poland 
looked jaded and conceded numerous opportunities in the second half having 
dominated the first. They should have had the game wrapped up by the time 
Xherdan Shaqiri made it 1-1: Arkadiusz Milik missed a sitter in the opening 
minute and several other good opportunities went begging. Robert Lewandowski is 
still not firing but, with opponents marking him so closely, it has allowed 
others additional space. The top goalscorer in qualifying has become the 
tournament’s most effective foil.

• Match report: Poland 1-0 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/poland-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Germany 0-0 Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/germany-poland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Ukraine 0-1 Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/ukraine-poland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Switzerland 1-1 Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/switzerland-poland-euro-2016-match-report>

7) Iceland ▲6

After the group stage, their ranking started with: “this is the dream that 
never ends”. Same again, then. England were abject, sure, but Iceland’s 
performance to not only win but to do so coming from behind deserves piles of 
credit. This is a team that plays such simple but effective football, it makes 
you nostalgic for previous eras. They deserve to go down as more than just the 
team that embarrassedEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england>. 
Can they also get in the faces of France, who start slow and look unconvincing 
in defence? At this point, you could not bet against them and they evidently 
relish the underdog tag.

• Match report: Portugal 1-1 Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/portugal-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Iceland 1-1 Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/iceland-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Iceland 2-1 Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/iceland-austria-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: England 1-2 Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ficelandic-commentator-goes-wild-again-as-team-beat-england-at-euro-2016-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Icelandic%20commentator%20goes%20wild%20again%20as%20team%20beat%20England%20at%20Euro%202016%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ficelandic-commentator-goes-wild-again-as-team-beat-england-at-euro-2016-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Icelandic%20commentator%20goes%20wild%20again%20as%20team%20beat%20England%20at%20Euro%202016%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ficelandic-commentator-goes-wild-again-as-team-beat-england-at-euro-2016-video&media=>
Icelandic commentator goes wild again as team beat England at Euro 2016 – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jun/28/icelandic-commentator-goes-wild-again-as-team-beat-england-at-euro-2016-video>
8) Portugal ▲3

Yet to win a game in 90 minutes, the draw is opening up kindly for Fernando 
Santos’ team. Nonetheless, they appear the weakest of the eight remaining sides 
and only advanced on account ofCroatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/croatia> being several shots over par in 
Lens on Saturday night. It may sound familiar from previous rankings, but with 
Cristiano Ronaldo there is always a chance. On general play, though, they look 
a cut below. “We do have room for improvement,” Santos said. They need to show 
it against Poland.

• Match report: Portugal 1-1 Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/portugal-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Portugal 0-0 Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/portugal-austria-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Hungary 3-3 Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/hungary-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Croatia 0-0 Portugal (0-1 aet) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/croatia-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>

9) Croatia ▼8

Croatia, breakout stars of the group stage, were stifled in midfield and blunt 
in attack against Portugal, and eventually outdone by a breakaway goal late in 
extra-time. That was the first shot on target in the match, leading to
justifiable questions over where it ranked among the worst tournament games ever
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/open-thread-croatia-portugal-worst-match-major-tournament>
. Considering Croatia were also in the weaker half of the draw and looked slick 
in all three Group D games, it was a major opportunity missed. As Ante Cacic 
remarked afterwards: “Football isn’t always fair.” Euro 2016 is a lesser place 
without Luka Modric, Ivan Rakitic and Ivan Perisic.

• Match report: Turkey 0-1 Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/turkey-croatia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Czech Republic 2-2 Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/croatia-czech-republic-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Croatia 2-1 Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/croatia-spain-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Croatia 0-0 Portugal (0-1 aet) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/croatia-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>

10) Switzerland ▲2

Xherdan Shaqiri maybe deserved better for that amazing overhead kick and 
although they started sloppily – what was Johann Djourou planning when he 
gifted Arkadiusz Milik that first minute chance? – and could have allowedPoland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/poland> more than a one goal advantage, 
their second half performance was arguably their most impressive of the 
tournament. It was especially cruel that Granit Xhaka, the team’s most tidy and 
dependable player throughout the campaign, was the fall guy for missing in the 
penalty shootout. On the whole though, theirs was an average campaign, 
especially considering the weakness of their group compared to others.

• Match report: Albania 0-1 Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/albania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Romania 1-1 Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/romania-switzerland-euro-201-match-report>
• Match report: Switzerland 0-0 France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/switzerland-france-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Switzerland 1-1 Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/switzerland-poland-euro-2016-match-report>
Granit Xhaka 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Granit%20Xhaka&team=Switzerland&isSimple=true>
11) Spain ▼7

The outgoing champions were outfought in every department but above all in the 
dugout. Vincent del Bosque was out-thought by Antonio Conte, whose tactical 
masterplan silenced Sergio Busquets (by half-timeLa Roja’s key player, the one 
who makes it all come together, had only made 16 passes) and ensured there was 
no service to Álvaro Morata, who was smothered by the Juventus defence he 
trained with week in, week out for two seasons. Now, the question is how the 
team rebuilds after a crashing end of their golden era.

• Match report: Spain 1-0 Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/spain-czech-republic-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Spain 3-0 Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/spain-turkey-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Croatia 2-1 Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/croatia-spain-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Italy 2-0 Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/italy-spain-euro-2016-match-report>

12) Republic of Ireland ▲3

Martin O’Neill’s side looked shattered in the second half against France, a 
symptom of having only three days rest after their final group game while the 
hosts enjoyed a full week. But how well did they do to have Didier Deschamps’ 
team rattled at the interval? It has also been forgotten, due to the brilliance 
of Antoine Griezmann after the break, that Ireland could easily have been two 
or maybe even three goals to the good. Overall it was a solid campaign that saw 
the coming of age of several young players – a long way from the shellacking of 
four years ago, in which they gave the worstEuropean Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/european-championship> performance of all 
time.

• Match report: Republic of Ireland 1-1 Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/republic-of-ireland-sweden-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Belgium 3-0 Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/belgium-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Italy 0-1 Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/italy-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: France 2-1 Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/france-republic-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-germany-and-italy-on-top-as-england-nosedive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9f7d0e0e7437c713a308e802b09b670c267455d%2F356_335_1810_1086%2F1810.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Germany%20and%20Italy%20on%20top%20as%20England%20nosedive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-germany-and-italy-on-top-as-england-nosedive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Germany%20and%20Italy%20on%20top%20as%20England%20nosedive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-germany-and-italy-on-top-as-england-nosedive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9f7d0e0e7437c713a308e802b09b670c267455d%2F356_335_1810_1086%2F1810.jpg>
 Shane Long is left dejected and exhausted as the final whistle blows in Lyon. 
Photograph: Paul Mohan/Sportsfile via Getty Images 
13) Northern Ireland ▲3

Narrowly beaten by Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales>, undone 
by an unfortunate own goal in a low-quality but keenly-fought game, there was 
still much to cheer for Michael O’Neill’s team. That they emerged from a group 
containing three technically superior sides was an achievement in itself and 
while disappointment after bowing out in Paris on Saturday was only natural, 
when the dust settles this must be considered a moderately successful campaign, 
on the basis of their convincing win over Ukraine alone. The Ulsterman may have 
lost their other three matches, but they were all by a single goal.

• Match report: Poland 1-0 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/poland-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Ukraine 0-2 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/ukraine-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Northern Ireland 0-1 Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/northern-ireland-germany-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Wales 1-0 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/wales-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>

14) England ▼4

A squad of highly-rated players failed to beat the worst team in the 
tournament, required a late goal to defeat Wales and could not break down 
Slovakia. But apparently, Roy Hodgson’s team would be better against sides that 
needed to attack against them. Iceland showed more fight, more passion and 
actually had better chances when England were chasing the game. Pathetic, 
embarrassing, humiliating does not do it justice. Hodgson’s side no longer, the 
players involved should collectively feel disgrace for weeks to come.

• Match report: England 1-1 Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/england-russia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: England 2-1 Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/england-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Slovakia 0-0 England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/england-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: England 1-2 Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Feuro-2016-roy-hodgson-resigns-england-lose-iceland-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20Roy%20Hodgson%20resigns%20after%20England%20lose%20to%20Iceland%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Feuro-2016-roy-hodgson-resigns-england-lose-iceland-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20Roy%20Hodgson%20resigns%20after%20England%20lose%20to%20Iceland%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Feuro-2016-roy-hodgson-resigns-england-lose-iceland-video&media=>
Euro 2016: Roy Hodgson resigns after England lose to Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jun/27/euro-2016-roy-hodgson-resigns-england-lose-iceland-video>
15) Hungary ▼6

In one sense admirable, in another incredibly naive. The Magyars tried to take 
onBelgium <https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> at their own game but 
came off poorly. They had chances at 1-0 to equalise but in the end their lack 
of class told, suffering the biggest defeat of the tournament so far – a proper 
walloping that could have been even harsher if Gabor Kiraly had not reached 
double figures in saves. Ultimately, this was a good return to a major 
tournament, but a pity it was tainted by the ugly manner in which they bowed 
out.

• Match report: Austria 0-2 Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/austria-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Iceland 1-1 Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/iceland-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Hungary 3-3 Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/hungary-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Hungary 0-4 Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/hungary-belgium-euro-2016-match-report>
Gabor Kiraly 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=G%C3%A1bor%20Kir%C3%A1ly&team=Hungary&isSimple=true>
16) Slovakia

There is no shame in losing to Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> but doing so without a fight 
should leave Jan Kozak and his players red-faced. Despite continuing with the 
sit back and frustrate approach that irritated England so much, they still 
allowed 22 shots – the most in the tournament – against the world champions and 
returned fire with only two meek attempts on target. Dull and limited, their 
over-reliance on Marek Hamsik to create was made even more obvious in the face 
of a heavy defeat.

• Match report: Wales 2-1 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/wales-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Russia 1-2 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/russia-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Slovakia 0-0 England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/england-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Germany 3-0 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/germany-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>

Already knocked out

17) Turkey
18) Albania
19) Sweden
20) Romania
21) Austria
22) Czech Republic
23) Ukraine
24) Russia

• Power rankings: part one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/euro-2016-power-rankings-italy-and-france-lead-the-way-as-belgium-slump>
• Power rankings: part two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/euro-2016-power-rankings-spain-set-the-tone-as-competitors-stutter>
• Power rankings: part three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/euro-2016-power-rankings-croatia-go-top-but-problems-for-france>
 