
Sevilla and Real Betis set up a mouthwatering derby in the last 16 of the 
Europa League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> with 
victories on Thursday night.

Sevilla <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> won 2-1 at home to 
Maribor of Slovenia, goals from José Antonio Reyes and Kévin Gameiro helping 
them complete a 4-3 aggregate win. Dare Vrsic pulled one back in stoppage time 
for the visitors, but it did not affect the tie.

Betis claimed an impressive 2-0 win at Rubin Kazan to go through 3-1 on 
aggregate. Nono put the visitors ahead on the stroke of half-time and Rubén 
Castro grabbed a second shortly after the hour mark.

Napoli and Porto both survived scares to progress. The Italians, following a 
goalless first leg, won 3-1 at home toSwansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/27/napoli-swansea-city-europa-league-match-report>
, but the game was tougher than the scoreline suggested. The Swans were heading 
through on away goals until the 78th minute when Gonzalo Higuaín put Napoli 2-1 
up, Gokhan Inler adding a third in injury time. Jonathan de Guzman had earlier 
levelled for Swansea, cancelling out Lorenzo Insigne's opener.

Next up for Napoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> are Porto, 
who came from 2-0 and 3-2 down to draw 3-3 atEintracht Frankfurt and advance on 
away goals after the tie ended 5-5 on aggregate. The Germans led 2-0 following 
a goal either side of half-time from Stefan Aigner and Alexander Meier, but the 
visitors responded through an Eliaquim Mangala brace. Meier struck again to put 
Eintracht back in pole position to progress, but substitute Nabil Ghilas' 
86th-minute goal turned the tie back in the Portuguese side's favour.

Elsewhere, two sides who came into the competition from the Champions League 
fell by the wayside asShakhtar Donetsk and Ajax crashed out.

Shakhtar went down 2-1 at home to Viktoria Plzen, first-half goals from Daniel 
Kolar and Milan Petrzela putting the Czechs in charge. Luiz Adriano's 
89th-minute consolation meant it finished 3-2 to Plzen on aggregate.

Ajax <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> were as good as out following 
their 3-0 home defeat toSalzburg and things got little better for them in the 
second leg as they lost 3-1. The Austrians scored three second-half goals 
through a Mike van der Hoorn own goal, Sadio Mane and Jonathan Soriano – adding 
to his first-leg brace, which included a goal from the halfway line. Davy 
Klaassen grabbed a late consolation.

Salzburg play Basel in the last 16 after the Swiss side won 3-0 at home to 
Maccabi Tel-Aviv. After a goalless first leg in Israel, a Valentin Stocker 
strike and a Marco Streller brace earnedBasel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/basel> a comfortable win.

Lazio were beaten 4-3 on aggregate by Ludogorets Razgrad after they threw away 
a two-goal lead and conceded an 89th-minute equaliser in a 3-3 draw in 
Bulgaria. The Rome side looked to have turned around their home-leg deficit 
when goals from Keita Balde, who scored inside the opening 18 seconds, and 
Brayan Perea after 54 minutes put them 2-0 up on the night. Roman Bezjak and 
Hristo Zlatinski brought it back to 2-2, only for Miroslav Klose to putLazio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> back in front after 83 minutes. 
But 85th-minute substitute Juninho Quixada struck four minutes after coming on 
to put Ludogorets through.

Antonio Conte's Juventus won 2-0 in Turkey at Trabzonspor thanks to first-half 
goals from Arturo Vidal and Dani Osvaldo to seal a 4-0 aggregate victory. They 
will now meet domestic rivalsFiorentina.

La Viola also held a healthy lead from the first leg at Esbjerg, 3-1, and 
completed the job with a 1-1 draw in Florence. Josip Ilicic scored a free-kick 
early in the second half and Mikkel Vestergaard's well-taken stoppage-time goal 
was mere consolation.

Tottenham Hotspur set up a clash with Benfica after coming from 2-0 down on 
aggregate to go through 3-2following a 3-1 win at White Hart Lane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/27/tottenham-hotspur-dnipro-dnipropetrovsk-europa-league-match-report>
. Spurs looked on their way out when Roman Zozulya doubled the Ukrainians' 
aggregate lead just after the break. But Christian Eriksen's free-kick put the 
hosts back in the contest before Zozulya's 62nd-minute red card for a headbutt 
on Jan Vertonghen changed the match. Emmanuel Adebayor scored twice in five 
minutes to give Tim Sherwood's side the three they needed.

Benfica found things far easier at home to Paok Salonika, winning 3-0 to go 
with their 1-0 success in Greece. A sending-off also proved pivotal in Lisbon, 
Konstantinos Katsouranis seeing red for Paok in the 69th minute. Nicolas Gaitan 
putBenfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> ahead a minute later, 
Rodrigo Lima adding a second from the spot in the 79th minute and Lazar 
Markovic adding another a minute after.

Valencia booked a tie with Ludogorets, a 0-0 draw at home to Dynamo Kyiv 
sending them through 2-0 on aggregate.

Lyon won 1-0 at home to Chornomorets to set up a tie with Plzen. With the tie 
level at 0-0 from the first leg, the Ligue 1 side were given a boost when their 
opponents had Evgeniy Zubeyko sent off after 76 minutes and took advantage with 
Alexandre Lacazette's goal four minutes later.

The final last-16 tie will be between AZ Alkmaar and Anzhi Makhachkala. AZ, 
1-0 up from the first leg againstLiberec, went through after a 1-1 home draw, 
Nick Viergever's 19th-minute opener for the hosts cancelled out by Yevhen 
Budnik 18 minutes from time.

Anzhi, having been held 0-0 in the home leg, won 2-0 at Genk. A Katuku 
Tshimanga own goal just after the hour and an Oleksandr Aliyev effort seven 
minutes later settled the match, with Rasim Tagirbekov's needless 81st-minute 
dismissal for the Russians not affecting the outcome.
 