
The Europa League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> 
holdersSevilla played out a goalless draw in the first leg of their last 16 tie 
atBasel after having Steven Nzonzi sent off three minutes from time for a 
second bookable offence.

Liverpool’s Sturridge and Firmino make feeble Manchester United pay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/10/liverpool-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
The Spanish side had dominated the second half, with the Basel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/basel> goalkeeper Tomas Vaclik making 
good saves to deny Nzonzi, Kevin Gameiro and Yevhen Konoplyanka.

Meanwhile, Athletic Bilbao’s Raúl García headed the only goal of a 
near-farcical first leg of their all-Spanish tie with Gary Neville’sValencia. 
García glanced in from a free-kick after 20 minutes to give Bilbao the least 
they deserved from a match played in torrential rain and on a saturated pitch 
at the Estadio de San Mamés.

The fourth Spanish side to have reached the last 16, Villarreal, ran out 2-0 
winners over 10-manBayer Leverkusen at El Madrigal. Cédric Bakambu scored both 
goals, getting his side off to a flying start with a fourth-minute opener and 
then doubling the lead 11 minutes into the second half.

Leverkusen had their goalkeeper Bernd Leno to thank for a fine late save from 
Léo Baptistão but their night ended on a sour note when Tin Jedvaj received a 
second booking in injury time.

Sparta Prague and Lazio drew 1-1 in the Czech capital. Martin Frydek rewarded 
Sparta for a bright start with a superb opener after 13 minutes but Marco 
Parolo pounced on a rebound to equalise before the break.

Lazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> went the closest to a 
winner with Antonio Candreva hitting the bar.

Shakhtar Donetsk claimed a 3-1 win over Anderlecht in Lviv. Two goals in the 
space of three minutes from Taison and Olexandr Kucher gave the Ukrainian side 
the lead during a first half in which they also hit the post through Eduardo.

Anderlecht <https://www.theguardian.com/football/anderlecht> rallied after the 
break and pulled one back through Frank Acheampong but Eduardo’s 79th-minute 
effort ensured a healthy lead for Shakhtar.

And Mehmet Topal scored an 82nd-minute winner as Fenerbahce beat Braga 1-0 in 
Istanbul. The decisive strike came just moments after the Fenerbahce goalkeeper 
Volkan Demirel made a fine save to deny Josué at the other end.
 