
1) Croatia ▲4

The most notable thing from beating Spain is that without Luka Modric they 
remain a force to be reckoned with. Their record should have been 100% only for 
that bizarre collapse againstCzech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/czechrepublic> – and, really, the 
disruptive element in their fanbase deserve as much blame as the players. Based 
on what we have witnessed so far, calling them dark horses is playing their 
chances down, especially now their path in the knockout stages is moderately 
easier on account of finishing above the reigning champions. While Modric and 
Ivan Rakitic are the star turns, Ivan Perisic has arguably been their best 
player. Defensively they are sound. And Mario Mandzukic could yet have a big 
impact in attack.

• Match report: Turkey 0-1 Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/turkey-croatia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Czech Republic 2-2 Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/croatia-czech-republic-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Croatia 2-1 Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/croatia-spain-euro-2016-match-report>

2) Germany ▲2
Mario Gomez 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Mario%20Gomez&team=Germany&isSimple=true>
In the first half against Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland> the world champions 
looked outstanding – a penetrating performance full of intricate attacking play 
– but they could only score once through Mario Gómez. He missed a succession of 
good chances and the second half became a bit more muddled. Should we expect 
more prolonged spells of brilliance or are they set to remain a team that 
performs in fits and starts? On top form irresistible, it must be a worry for 
Jogi Löw that they look incapable of remaining at that level for more than a 
few minutes at a time. It would not be inconceivable for them to dominate a 
game only to lose out because of a single lapse in concentration.

• Match report: Germany 2-0 Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/germany-ukraine-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Germany 0-0 Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/germany-poland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Northern Ireland 0-1 Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/northern-ireland-germany-euro-2016-match-report>

3) Italy ▼1

Let’s not get carried away by their weakened team’s limp performance against 
theRepublic of Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland>.
The Azzurri deserved to lose despite Antonio Conte suggesting otherwise but 
there was an obviouslaissez faire attitude in the team with many of their best 
players resting thanks to top place in the group being guaranteed in advance. 
Taking on Spain promises to be the tie of the round, but with both teams losing 
their final games, their form in the opening two (in which Italy conceded just 
two shots on target) may provide a better indicator.

• Match report: Belgium 0-2 Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/belgium-italy-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Italy 1-0 Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/italy-sweden-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Italy 0-1 Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/italy-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>

4) Spain ▼3

How much can be read into the defeat to Croatia? If Sergio Ramos had converted 
his second half penalty, things would have been so much different. Instead, 
Antonio Conte’s impenetrable Italy await in the last 16 and Andrès Iniesta, 
muted againstCroatia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/croatia>, David 
Silva and friends will need to be at their creative best to advance. The manner 
in which David de Gea was beaten, twice at his near post, in the Group C closer 
was unusual and questions may be asked over whether the off-field furore 
surrounding the goalkeeper has had an impact.


• Match report: Spain 1-0 Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/spain-czech-republic-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Spain 3-0 Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/spain-turkey-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Croatia 2-1 Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/croatia-spain-euro-2016-match-report>

5) France ▼2


They failed to perform in the one game they will have in this tournament where 
the pressure was not unbearably intense. Without Dimitri Payet, Didier 
Deschamps’ team seemed to lack a spark in attack, even though Paul Pogba was 
more convincing in the opening half. Issues over their ability to defend set 
pieces remain a concern, but not as much as their ability to ride the hopes of 
a nation. Could they channel the World Cup winners of 1998 by turning a not 
overly-convincing start into a relentless machine come the knockout stages?

• Match report: France 2-1 Romania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/france-romania-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: France 2-0 Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/france-albania-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Switzerland 0-0 France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/switzerland-france-euro-2016-match-report>

6) Poland ▲2

Poland looked like a team coasting through the group and if suspect finishing 
had not let them down against Germany, Adam Nawalka’s side would have had nine 
points and top spot in Group C. Such was Germany’s bluntness in attack, they 
have not been properly examined defensively yet. It is safe to say there is 
more to come and there is no doubt, barring a mental collapse, they should have 
the measure ofSwitzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> – 
and after that would likely come Croatia. Still we wait for Robert Lewandowski 
to leave his mark, though.

• Match report: Poland 1-0 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/poland-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Germany 0-0 Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/germany-poland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Ukraine 0-1 Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/ukraine-poland-euro-2016-match-report>
Robert Lewandowski 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Robert%20Lewandowski&team=Poland&isSimple=true>
7) Belgium ▼1

There are still considerable problems for Marc Wilmots to iron out, but the 
Red Devils showed enough in the second half of their game against the Republic 
of Ireland, and the 1-0 victory over Sweden, to justify some of the hype. As 
stoic and stodgy asHungary <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hungary> have 
been, it would be a disaster if Belgium did not reach a quarter-final against 
Wales or Northern Ireland. The former took four points off Belgium in 
qualifying, so the draw is not as favourable as it may initially seem.


• Match report: Belgium 0-2 Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/belgium-italy-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Belgium 3-0 Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/belgium-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Sweden 0-1 Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/sweden-belgium-euro-2016-match-report>

8) Wales ▲4

It must have been beyond the wildest dreams of most in Wales to finish top of 
the group and whatever happens now this tournament will go down in history as a 
success. Chris Coleman and his players should not – and will not – settle for 
that though, with finishing aboveEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> giving them an appetising path 
through the knockout stages. They will fear nobody and if their big three – 
Gareth Bale plus Aaron Ramsey and Joe Allen – perform they can beat any team in 
a one-off match. The dismantling of Russia was the highlight of Coleman’s 
career, but what odds that being usurped in the coming days?

• Match report: Wales 2-1 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/wales-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: England 2-1 Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/england-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Russia 0-3 Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/wales-russia-euro-2016-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-croatia-go-top-but-problems-for-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6568d71c00cbf9753de18e6946f9e2de369ec7d%2F72_0_1856_1114%2F1856.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Croatia%20go%20top%20but%20problems%20for%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-croatia-go-top-but-problems-for-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Croatia%20go%20top%20but%20problems%20for%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-croatia-go-top-but-problems-for-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6568d71c00cbf9753de18e6946f9e2de369ec7d%2F72_0_1856_1114%2F1856.jpg>
 How much better can it get at Euro 2016 for Wales stars Aaron Ramsey and 
Gareth Bale? Photograph: Hassan Ammar/AP 
9) Hungary =

Zoltan Gera is 37. Let that sink in for a moment. He is still pulling the 
strings for Hungary, who have crept up on everybody but themselves by topping 
Group F. For a team that prides itself on defensive solidity, conceding three to
Portugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> will be a concern 
before taking on Belgium but they still dug deep to get a point.

• Match report: Austria 0-2 Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/austria-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Iceland 1-1 Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/iceland-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Hungary 3-3 Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/hungary-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>

10) England ▼3

How to rate their chances in the knockout stages? Dominating games is all well 
and good but it is blatantly obvious that a squad with five strikers have been 
lacking a clinical edge. Roy Hodgson said “we’re not doomed” four times in his 
post-match press conference after the draw withSlovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovakia>, but his lack of a coherent 
plan and playing style is an undoubted concern. Maybe things will straighten 
out when they face teams that need to attack instead of group opposition that 
appeared happy to sit back and let England have the ball.

• Match report: England 1-1 Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/england-russia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: England 2-1 Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/england-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Slovakia 0-0 England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/england-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>

11) Portugal ▼1

Cristiano Ronaldo has looked in the mood since the start of this tournament, 
despite his penalty miss againstAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria>. It just took him a while to 
find his finishing touch and now he has – with two crucial goals against 
Hungary – Euros beware. Croatia, their last 16 opponents, have looked more 
unified and, based on the group games, are a superior outfit. But a team with 
the continent’s best player cannot be ruled out - though others will need to 
step up in other areas for them to progress.


• Match report: Portugal 1-1 Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/portugal-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Portugal 0-0 Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/portugal-austria-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Hungary 3-3 Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/hungary-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>

12) Switzerland ▼1

Proved surprisingly stubborn against France and could have won it late on if 
it was not for a dodgy handball call. Granit Xhaka has stood out as their best 
player, certainly enough to give Arsenal fans reason to be excited, and while 
Xherdan Shaqiri has drifted in and out of games, Vladimir Petkovic’s team may 
be able to frustratePoland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/poland> on 
Saturday afternoon. To progress, however, would require a more clinical level 
of finishing.

• Match report: Albania 0-1 Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/albania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Romania 1-1 Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/romania-switzerland-euro-201-match-report>
• Match report: Switzerland 0-0 France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/switzerland-france-euro-2016-match-report>
Granit Xhaka 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Granit%20Xhaka&team=Switzerland&isSimple=true>
13) Iceland =

This is the dream that never ends. Ninety three and a half minutes had passed 
when Arnor Ingvi Traustason produced the greatest moment of this tournament 
(and his country’s sporting history?) to give Lars Lagerback and his team of 
overachievers – that is not meant disparagingly – a last 16 tie with England. 
Again they will be underdogs but it is a tag they obviously relish. Considering 
their nothing-to-lose attitude coupled with England’s lack of goalscoring 
sharpness, would it be really wise to doubt them?

• Match report: Portugal 1-1 Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/portugal-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Iceland 1-1 Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/iceland-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Iceland 2-1 Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/iceland-austria-euro-2016-match-report>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcommentator-gumundur-benediktssong-iceland-austria-euro-2016-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Icelandic%20commentator%20goes%20wild%20when%20Iceland%20score%20last-minute%20goal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcommentator-gumundur-benediktssong-iceland-austria-euro-2016-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Icelandic%20commentator%20goes%20wild%20when%20Iceland%20score%20last-minute%20goal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcommentator-gumundur-benediktssong-iceland-austria-euro-2016-video&media=>
Icelandic commentator goes wild when Iceland score last-minute goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jun/23/commentator-gumundur-benediktssong-iceland-austria-euro-2016-video>
. 
14) Slovakia ▲1


In the opening two games the central defensive partnership of Martin Skrtel 
and Jan Durica looked bothersome, but they showed a newly-acquired resoluteness 
against England to keep a clean sheet and ensure their qualification as one of 
the best third-placed teams. Marek Hamsik, of course, has the ability to light 
up any match no matter how important but this remains a team with too many 
passengers and it would be a major surprise to see them reach the 
quarter-finals.

• Match report: Wales 2-1 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/wales-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Russia 1-2 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/russia-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Slovakia 0-0 England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/england-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>

15) Republic of Ireland ▲1

Fourteen years it took for the Republic to win a game in a major tournament, 
but what a way to do it. Robbie Brady’s late header against Italy proved enough 
to see Martin O’Neill’s team squeeze through as a third-placed qualifier. They 
celebrated in Lille as if they had won the competition and the players were 
seen enjoying a beer and pizza. It would be remiss to say that their job is 
complete, though. In ordinary circumstancesFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> should not be too bothered by a 
hard-working if technically limited team, but a squad with a persevering 
attitude will provide a testing obstacle.

• Match report: Republic of Ireland 1-1 Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/republic-of-ireland-sweden-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Belgium 3-0 Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/belgium-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Italy 0-1 Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/italy-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-croatia-go-top-but-problems-for-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff72737443d6904432d7ced62f1aaf0c6c5dbd821%2F4_149_3591_2156%2F3591.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Croatia%20go%20top%20but%20problems%20for%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-croatia-go-top-but-problems-for-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Croatia%20go%20top%20but%20problems%20for%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-croatia-go-top-but-problems-for-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff72737443d6904432d7ced62f1aaf0c6c5dbd821%2F4_149_3591_2156%2F3591.jpg>
 Robbie Brady scores a late header to put Republic of Ireland through as one of 
the four best third-placed teams Photograph: Ray McManus/Sportsfile via Getty 
Images 
16) Northern Ireland ▼2
Michael McGovern 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Michael%20McGovern&team=Northern%20Ireland&isSimple=true>
Similar to Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> in that reaching 
the last 16 equates to a stunning success, but wildly different in that this is 
a squad with no star player. The West Brom pair of Gareth McAuley and Jonny 
Evans have been outstanding in defence but it is hard to fault anyone. Michael 
McGovern produced the game of his life to keep Germany’s tally down to one – 
amazingly he had more touches and more passes than any outfield player – and a 
similar show will be required if they are to advance to the quarter-finals, on 
top of a renewed attacking effort. In all likelihood, heading home at the 
weekend.

• Match report: Poland 1-0 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/poland-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Ukraine 0-2 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/ukraine-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Northern Ireland 0-1 Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/northern-ireland-germany-euro-2016-match-report>

17) Albania ▲4

Got the win their astounding effort deserved but the wild celebrations were 
soon tempered by the anxious wait to find out if that win was enough to see 
them creep into the last 16. Albania needed two third-placed teams to finish 
with worse records, but saw Turkey beat Czech Republic 2-0, Slovakia held out 
against England, Northern Ireland avoid a walloping against Germany and 
Republic of Ireland left them bottom of the third-place league. Nonetheless, 
for a first major tournament they did alright.
• Match report: Albania 0-1 Switzerland
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/albania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: France 2-0 Albania
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/france-albania-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Romania 0-1 Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/romania-albania-euro-2016-match-report>

18) Turkey ▲5

Played off the pitch by Croatia and pummelled by Spain, that it took the 
Republic of Ireland’s late win againstItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/italy> to halt them from progressing to 
the last 16 meant they were the team that, above all, highlighted the flaws of 
the tournament’s structure. A poor side made worse by their star player, Arda 
Turan, not being at the races. Their surrender againstLa Roja will live long in 
the memory.

• Match report: Turkey 0-1 Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/turkey-croatia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Spain 3-0 Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/spain-turkey-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Czech Republic 0-2 Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/czech-republic-turkey-euro-2016-match-report>


19) Sweden =


At least they had a shot on target against Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> (three, to be precise). This was 
quite an unfortunate and undeserved way for Zlatan Ibrahimovic to bow out of 
international football, playing with a team that permanently looked a couple of 
levels below him. Erik Hamren’s team depart with a point but without any of 
their players scoring. The group was difficult but their campaign can be 
considered nothing less than a disappointment.


• Match report: Republic of Ireland 1-1 Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/republic-of-ireland-sweden-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Italy 1-o Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/italy-sweden-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Sweden 0-1 Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/sweden-belgium-euro-2016-match-report>

20) Romania ▼3

Aware that a win against Albania, the perceived weak link in the group, would 
all but ensure their progress, Anghel Iordanescu’s team simply did not turn up, 
and lost after a bizarre goalkeeping error from Ciprian Tatarusanu. Throughout 
the group they showed nothing in attack and for all their solid defending and 
esteemed qualifying record, failed to keep a single clean sheet. Their campaign 
can be considered nothing more than a drastic failure – dropping out at the 
group stage for the fourth time in fiveEuropean Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/european-championship> campaigns.

• Match report: France 2-1 Romania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/france-romania-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Romania 1-1 Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/romania-switzerland-euro-201-match-report>
• Match report: Romania 0-1 Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/romania-albania-euro-2016-match-report>

21 Austria ▲1

Collectively they had a stinker and only rise on this list on account of other 
teams’ ineptitude. The No10-ranked team in the world finished bottom of the 
weakest group in the tournament, a hard fall from predictions that the 
craftiness of David Alaba and tireless work of Christian Fuchs was enough 
reason to make them an outside shot to go far. Fun fact: Aleksandar Dragovic’s 
missed penalty againstIceland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland> 
was the third successive miss at the tournament after the first four were 
scored.

• Match report: Austria 0-2 Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/austria-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Portugal 0-0 Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/portugal-austria-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Iceland 2-1 Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/iceland-austria-euro-2016-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-croatia-go-top-but-problems-for-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1403933825e09d33211cc32fc7bf15c9e2554ede%2F0_281_4904_2941%2F4904.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Croatia%20go%20top%20but%20problems%20for%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-croatia-go-top-but-problems-for-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Croatia%20go%20top%20but%20problems%20for%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-croatia-go-top-but-problems-for-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1403933825e09d33211cc32fc7bf15c9e2554ede%2F0_281_4904_2941%2F4904.jpg>
 Florian Klein reflects on Austria’s early exit as Iceland players celebrate in 
the background. Photograph: Shaun Botterill/Getty Images 
22) Czech Republic ▼4

That perennial Arsenal reserve Tomas Rosicky was their key midfield player 
said much for the state of the squad. Coming back to take a point off Croatia 
was a fluke and a freak, helped largely by the unruly mob supporting the 
opposition that were intent on causing trouble. Yet if we are to weigh this 
squad up against others, it is among the weakest and it is therefore not 
especially surprising to find them near the bottom of this list.

• Match report: Spain 1-0 Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/spain-czech-republic-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Czech Republic 2-2 Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/17/croatia-czech-republic-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Czech Republic 0-2 Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/czech-republic-turkey-euro-2016-match-report>
Tomas Rosicky 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Tom%C3%A1%C5%A1%20Rosick%C3%BD&team=Czech%20Republic&isSimple=true>
23) Ukraine ▲1

Of the sides that endured shocking tournaments, this may be the most 
surprising of all, considering the attacking talent in the squad. Losing 2-0 to
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany>, with the last goal 
coming in the final throes, was no major surprise but their meek response 
against Northern Ireland cost them. The first team knocked out, they battled 
without any reward against Poland in the final game. Still, the record reads a 
pitiful three defeats, five goals conceded and none scored. Only spared bottom 
place on account of being a modicum less shambolic than Russia.

• Match report: Germany 2-0 Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/germany-ukraine-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Ukraine 0-2 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/ukraine-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Ukraine 0-1 Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/ukraine-poland-euro-2016-match-report>

24) Russia ▼4

We will miss their haphazard defending, laughable goalkeeping and technically 
inept lone striker. The tournament will be a less amusing place without their 
incompetence but the shambles that proceeded their opening game begs the 
question how England could not destroy them in Marseille. Most worrying of all 
forRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/russia> now will be how to form 
a capable team in time for the World Cup they host in two years time. Being so 
out of their depth on home turf, one imagines, would not go down too well.

• Match report: England 1-1 Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/england-russia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Russia 1-2 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/russia-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
• Match report: Russia 0-3 Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/wales-russia-euro-2016-match-report>

 * Power rankings part one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/euro-2016-power-rankings-italy-and-france-lead-the-way-as-belgium-slump>

 * Power rankings part two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/euro-2016-power-rankings-spain-set-the-tone-as-competitors-stutter>
 