
Bundesliga fans start early. It’s 11am on the normally sombre walkway between 
Berlin’s central station and the Brandenburg Gate, a route that is home to 
several dignified memorials commemorating the city’s darkest days. But sombre 
is not on the agenda for the legions ofHamburger SV <http://www.hsv.de/en/news/>
 supporters who have descended on the German capital for this afternoon’s 
encounter withHertha Berlin <http://www.herthabsc.de/en/>. Almost everyone has 
a bottle of beer on the go. Several have two. We’re barely past breakfast.

But such prodigious intake carries no cause for alarm. German domestic 
football is renowned for its happy-go-lucky, celebratory atmosphere, where 
clashes between opposing fans are rare. German football is also applauded for 
its inexpensive admission prices. For instance, entry to aBayern Munich 
<http://www.fcbayern.de/en/> home match – one of the top three teams in Europe, 
no less – can cost as little as €15. The cheapest ticket for one of Arsenal’s 
top home games is more than £65. In search of more affordable matches, I’m 
taking my nine-year-old son Finn for a half-term short break to see how Europe 
does football. Our tickets, bought in advance from the club website to avoid 
disappointment on the day, are burning a hole in our pockets. Four days of 
father-son bonding, with lashings of football, trains and pizza. We’re as 
excited as each other.

As we’ll be making good use of Berlin’s excellent rail network for the next 24 
hours, our base in the German capital is the smart yet comfortableSteigenberger 
Hotel Am Kanzleramt <http://de.steigenberger.com/> (doubles from €85), barely a 
goalkeeper’s clearance from the city’s Hauptbahnhof. The station is a 
fascinating destination in itself. It’s like a scene fromFritz Lang’s Metropolis
 <http://www.kinolorber.com/metropolis/>, with trains of various sizes and 
colours crisscrossing the concourse on different levels. The match is a 
20-minute ride across the city on the overground S-Bahn network, autumn’s 
yellows and browns warming up the grey suburbs we see from the window.

Hertha Berlin’s home ground is the Olympiastadion, the venue for this season’s 
Champions League final, and the crucible for the 1936 Olympics. I give Finn a 
rudimentary history lesson on the significance of that particular sporting 
event, a lecture that’s helped by our seats being just along from where Hitler 
sat scowling as Jesse Owens collected his four gold medals. The Olympiastadion 
is still used for athletics, but the running track is now a strikingly modern 
blue in colour.
 The Olympiastadion, during a Bundesliga game between Hertha Berlin and 
Borussia Dortmund in 2014. Photograph: City-Press via Getty Images 
The track might separate crowd and pitch, but our view is faultless and, come 
kick-off, we’re engrossed, especially Finn (“my heart is pounding,” he tells me 
between mouthfuls of a hot pretzel the size of his face). Both sets of fans, 
almost 60,000 in total, are in full voice throughout, competing choirs doing 
battle using the weapon of song. Both sets of fans also appear to be keen 
advocates of mass pogo-ing – a way of showing devotion to their respective 
teams while also keeping out the biting Berlin chill.

A sharply contested match is decided by three second-half goals for the home 
team. The Hamburg fans around us are far from despondent, though. Despite the 
result – and the amount of pre-match refreshment – there’s little visible 
disgruntlement, no tense atmosphere ready to boil over. I don’t see so much as 
a discarded beer can getting kicked in frustration.

Then it’s off for the second leg of our tour: Constant Vanden Stock Stadium in 
Brussels to catch Belgium’s league-leaders,Anderlecht <http://www.rsca.be/en>, 
in action. Finn and I have travelled west taking one of Europe’s many sleeper 
trains: in our case, the 14-hour service that glides between Berlin and Paris. 
Last night, from the cosiness of our two-berth compartment, Finn watched the 
lights of eastern Germany flicker past our window. This morning, as he tucked 
into his complimentary breakfast of baguette, brioche and chocolate milk, his 
top-bunk view was of sunrise over the green fields of France.

From Paris, another train takes us to Brussels by midday, where we press our 
noses up against the windows of the out-of-our-price-bracket designer shops of 
Avenue Louise, the city’s upmarket retail district, before grabbing an hour or 
two of stamina-saving rest at our hotel. Just off Avenue Louise and a 20-minute 
walk from the Eurostar terminal,Hotel Zoom <http://zoomhotel.be/en/> (doubles 
from €100) is a recently opened, photography themed boutique establishment that 
describes itself as “cosy industrial”. Finn is particularly intrigued by its 
huge collection of analogue cameras; to a nine-year-old’s eyes, these are 
relics of a bygone era.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Feuropean-football-breaks-games-berlin-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417007710359%2Fa66b6139-0b4d-4f25-a554-3691cb0f0d1a-1530x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20football%20breaks%3A%20why%20it%20pays%20to%20see%20games%20in%20Berlin%20and%20Brussels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Feuropean-football-breaks-games-berlin-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20football%20breaks%3A%20why%20it%20pays%20to%20see%20games%20in%20Berlin%20and%20Brussels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Feuropean-football-breaks-games-berlin-brussels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417007710359%2Fa66b6139-0b4d-4f25-a554-3691cb0f0d1a-1530x2040.jpeg>
 Finn meets the Hertha Berlin mascot. Photograph: Nige Tassell 
If you’re following a more relaxed itinerary than us, Brussels makes a perfect 
single-city destination for the UK-based football tourist. Closer to London by 
train than Manchester, it offers a host of cultural attractions with which to 
fill the weekend (seevisitbrussels.be <http://visitbrussels.be/> for more). 
Plus, you can get into an Anderlecht match for €25 (£20); some non-league 
English teams charge almost that much every Saturday afternoon.

This evening’s visitors are bitter rivals Standard Liège but, as in Berlin, 
the pre-match mood is calm and fraternal. The stadium is in a residential 
neighbourhood and surrounded by several bars serving Anderlecht’s fans, 
watering holes that you suspect do slow trade outside of match days, if they’re 
open at all. Finn and I share a portion offrites and mayonnaise outside a bar 
called Le But (The Goal), before taking our seats in the main stand. The 
capacity may only be a quarter of that of Berlin’s Olympiastadion, but a full 
house ensures the atmosphere is even more passionate. In a stadium reminiscent 
of QPR’s tight Loftus Road ground, we’re closer to the action too.

Again, though, we’re sitting with the losing supporters. Tonight Standard 
upset the form book, dishing out a 2-0 defeat to the top-of-the-table locals. 
It’s deep sighs and disbelieving shrugs all around us. But Finn doesn’t care 
who wins. He’s more delighted that all five goals this weekend have been scored 
at the end of the stadium where we’ve been sitting. I’m just relieved that our 
1,800-mile odyssey has avoided a pair of 0-0 draws.

Next morning, arriving at Gare du Midi to take the Eurostar home, we make a 
pact to undertake a continental football pilgrimage every season. We’re both 
hooked. But why wait another 12 months? I glance at the departures board. 
There’s a train for Amsterdam in five minutes. Perhaps the mightyAjax 
<http://english.ajax.nl/> are at home tonight …

Way to go
Flights to Berlin were provided by British Airways Holidays 
<http://www.britishairways.com/en-gb/flights-and-holidays/holidays>, which 
offers breaks to various European cities from £129pp, including flights and two 
nights’ accommodation. The return train journey on Eurostar was provided by
Voyages-sncf.com <http://voyages-sncf.com>, specialists in organising journeys 
across the European rail network.
 