
Schalke and Ajax advanced to the knockout stages of the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> with victories in 
their group games on Thursday.

Ajax made sure of qualification from Group G with a 3-2 win against Celta Vigo 
in Amsterdam, holding off a late resurgence from the Spaniards, who are now 
level withStandard Liège after their 3-0 win at Panathinaikos.

Schalke’s 2-0 win against Krasnodar left the German club six points clear at 
the top of Group I, whileRed Bull Salzburg kept their hopes alive after winning 
2-0 atNice.

Elsewhere, the League of Ireland champions Dundalk were beaten 2-1 at the 
Group D leadersZenit St Petersburg.

Giuliano put the Russian club in front on 41 minutes, but Daryl Horgan’s goal 
– following a swift counterattack – levelled matters on 52 minutes. Zenit, 
though, maintained their 100% record when Giuliano, the Brazilian, scored again 
with 22 minutes left and they have also qualified for the last 32.

Manchester United sunk by stunning strikes from Fenerbahce’s Sow and Lens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/fenerbahce-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
The game between Maccabi Tel-Aviv and AZ Alkmaar ended goalless, meaning 
Dundalk retain second place in the table.

Aritz Aduriz scored all five of his team’s goals as Athletic Bilbao beat Genk 
5-3 to open up the qualification race in Group F, the striker completing his 
impressive haul in stoppage time with a hat-rick of penalties. With two 
penalties, Aduriz put his side 3-1 up at the break. The Belgian club closed to 
within one, but Aduriz scored his fourth and then converted his third penalty.

Sassuolo remain top after they drew 2-2 at home against Rapid Vienna, who 
scored a late equaliser – but now all four teams are separated by just one 
point.

Roma won 4-2 at Austria Vienna with two from former Manchester City striker 
Edin Dzeko to climb to the top of Group E, with the other tie ending 1-1 between
Astra Giurgiu and Viktoria Plzen.

Apoel Nicosia lead Group B after the Cypriot club beat the Swiss side Young 
Boys 1-0 and Olympiakos drew 1-1 away to FC Astana.

Southampton sink Inter thanks to Yuto Nagatomo own goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/southampton-internazionale-europa-league-match-report>
Anderlecht thumped Mainz 6-1 in Group C, where the French team Saint-Etienne 
continued their qualification push with a 2-1 win atQabala, who have yet to 
register a point.

Shakhtar Donetsk ran out 5-3 winners at Gent to secure a place in the last 32 
as Group H winners.Sporting Braga beat Konyaspor 3-1 in a match which saw both 
sides have a player sent off.

Fiorentina beat Slovan Liberec 3-0 to top Group J, and Qarabag secured a 1-0 
win atPAOK Salonika.

In Group L, the Turkish side Osmanlispor moved ahead of Villarreal at the top 
with a 2-1 win atEl Madrigal, while Zurich and Steaua Bucharest played out a 
goalless draw.

Manchester United’s troubles continued with a 2-1 defeat  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/03/fenerbahce-v-manchester-united-europa-league-live>
atFenerbahce which leaves qualification out of Group A in the balance for José 
Mourinho’s side. The Turkish side took the lead inside two minutes with an 
overhead kick from Moussa Sow and Jeremain Lens curled in a free-kick on the 
hour to double their lead with Wayne Rooney scoring a late consolation.

Following Feyenoord’s 1-1 draw at Zarya Lugansk, – the Dutch club finished 
with 10 men after Eric Botteghin was sent off for two yellow cards in a minute 
– United are third in the table, a point behind leaders Fenerbahce and the team 
from Rotterdam.

Southampton secured a 2-1 win against  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/southampton-internazionale-europa-league-match-report>
Internazionale to stay on course to reach the last 32 out of Group K. Inter, 
who sacked head coach Frank de Boer in the run-up to the tie, went ahead on 33 
minutes through their captain, Mauro Icardi. Virgil van Dijk equalised on 64 
minutes before a low cross from Tadic deflected off Yuto Nagatomo and into the 
roof of the Inter net.

Southampton have seven points from four games and will secure a place in the 
knockout stage if they can secure victory at leadersSparta Prague, who beat 
Hapoel Be’er Sheva 2-0.
 