
Dundalk bowed out of their first Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> group stage campaign 
after losing 2-1 atMaccabi Tel-Aviv in Group D although events elsewhere would 
have made their effort irrelevant had they won. Tal Ben Chaim opened the 
scoring from the spot for the Israeli side and, although Eli Dasa’s own-goal 
squared things up, Dor Miha provided the winner before half-time. It mattered 
not, asAZ Alkmaar came up with the win they needed to guarantee progression, 
beating the group winners,Zenit St Petersburg 3-2.

Manchester United defeat Zorya Luhansk to advance in Europa League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/manchester-united-zorya-europa-league-match-report>
The matchday’s biggest drama came in Turkey, where Gent scored four minutes 
into added time to defeatKonyaspor 1-0. Souleymane Coulibaly scored the goal 
and it meant the Belgian side leapfroggedBraga, who lost 4-2 at home to 
Shakhtar Donetsk. Gent join Shakhtar, who finished top of Group H with a 100% 
record, in the last 16.

The Romanian minnows Astra Giurgiu, who knocked West Ham out in the play-off 
round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/west-ham-astra-giurgiu-europa-league-match-report>
, continued their fine run by squeezing through as runners-up in Group E. They 
heldRoma, who topped the quartet, to a goalless draw and stayed ahead of 
Austria Wien, who had seemed home and dry when they went 2-0 up at Viktoria 
Plzen but saw the Czech side – who were already eliminated – come back to win 
3-2 and in effect knock them out of the competition.

Villarreal progressed from Group L after beating Steaua Bucharest 2-1 at home, 
a superb late chip from Manu Trigueros earning them the points after the 
visitors’ Vlad Achim had cancelled out Nicola Sansone’s opener. It meant Steaua 
were knocked out along withZurich, who lost 2-0 at the surprise group winners, 
Osmanlispor.

Wasteful Southampton crash out of Europa League to Israeli champions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/southampton-hapoel-match-report>
The Group F match between Sassuolo and Genk was postponed due to fog and will 
be played at lunchtime on Friday. Three points for Genk would see them win the 
group – overtakingAthletico Bilbao, who drew 1-1 at Rapid Vienna – but 
Sassuolo’s elimination is already sealed.

The 12 group winners and 12 runners up will be joined in the last 32 by eight 
third-placed teams from the Champions League.Besiktas, FC Copenhagen, Legia 
Warsaw, Ludogorets, Lyon, Borussia Mönchengladbach, Rostovand Tottenham all 
enter Monday’s draw.
 