
The Chelsea loanee Nathaniel Chalobah’s goal helped Napoli advance with the 
Europa League’s only 100% record. The England Under-21 international, who is 
yet to play a senior game for José Mourinho’s side, broke the deadlock in 
Naples as the Italians made it six wins from six with a 5-2 win overLegia Warsaw
.

Their qualification had already been sealed before kick-off and FC Midtjylland 
joined them in advancing from Group D thanks to a 1-1 draw withClub Brugge, for 
whom the ex-Middlesbrough and Burnley forward Jelle Vossen scored.

It finished 1-1 between Ajax and Molde too, a result that was good enough for 
the visitors to finish top of Group A ahead ofFenerbahce with the Dutch side 
going out alongside Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/10/celtic-fenerbahce-europa-league-match-report>
.

Sporting Lisbon came from behind to make it out of Group H as Besiktas threw 
away a lead given to them by Mario Gómez to lose 3-1 and go out. The former 
Fulham midfielder Bryan Ruiz scored the second goal and Teofilo Gutiérrez 
sealed the result with a goalhe celebrated by using the referee’s vanishing 
spray 
<http://sport.bt.com/video/teo-booked-for-stealing-refs-spray-for-celebration-91364028274776>
.

Lokomotiv Moscow, 3-0 winners over Skenderbeu, finished at that group’s summit 
whileKrasnodar and Sporting Braga did likewise ahead of Borussia Dortmund and 
Marseille respectively.

Krasnodar were 3-0 victors over Gabala whereas Dortmund stumbled to a 1-0 home 
reverse toPAOK Salonika while Braga’s 0-0 draw with Groningen proved enough 
despite Marseille’s 4-2 triumph atSlovan Liberec.

Augsburg got the win they needed to advance behind the Group L winners, 
Athletic Bilbao, who drew 2-2 with AZ Alkmaar. Partizan Belgrade succumbed to a 
3-1 home loss to the Germans to be eliminated on goal difference.

Schalke went through in first and Sparta Prague as runners-up following their 
respective 4-0 and 3-1 success overAsteras Tripoli and Apoel Nicosia.

Bruno Soriano’s stoppage-time equaliser saved the second-placed Villarreal in 
a 3-3 draw withViktoria Plzen, who had gone ahead in the 90th minute through 
Tomas Horava at the Doosan Arena.Rapid Vienna sealed Group E’s top spot with a 
2-1 success overDinamo Minsk.

St Etienne and Lazio, who had already qualified in second and first, drew 1-1 
in France whileDnipro Dnipropetrovsk, finalists last year, bowed out with a 3-0 
win overRosenborg.

Basel and Fiorentina went through as one and two in Group I after they defeated
Lech Poznan and Belenenses 1-0 respectively.
 