
Dominic Fifield

Match of the tournament The best I attended was France’s 2-0 win over Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/07/germany-france-euro-2016-match-report>
, when the upgrade in quality was very obvious. From afar Wales’ rumbustious 
elimination of a much-fancied Belgium was jaw-dropping.
Aaron Ramsey 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Aaron%20Ramsey&team=Wales&isSimple=false>
Player of the tournament Aaron Ramsey. Antoine Griezmann would have been a 
shoo-in had he enjoyed a better final so the man who inspiredWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> into the semi-finals gets the nod. 
That was arguably Ramsey more than Gareth Bale, with the Arsenal player so 
integral in ensuring his compatriot could thrive. There were four assists, a 
goal and an untimely absence through suspension which cost his country dear.

Goal of the tournament Hal Robson-Kanu’s Cruyff turn to leave a trio of 
Belgians dizzied and the calm finish beyond Thibaut Courtois. Dimitri Payet’s 
stunning finishin the opening game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/dimitri-payet-didier-deschamps-france-romania-euro-2016>
 comes in a close second.

Personal highlight The din in the Stade Vélodrome as the hosts weathered a 
storm and eventually knocked out the reigning world champions. A proper 
football city rejoicing in a proper footballing occasion.

Biggest disappointment The scenes in Marseille around England’s group game 
with Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/old-enemy-rears-its-ugly-head-as-england-fans-clash-with-police>
, not least on Stade Vélodrome’svirage sud at the end, which served as a 
reminder that, even now, hooliganism remains an issue.

Team of the tournament Iceland. Aside from the reality they are the smallest 
nation ever to appear at a major finals, their first participation at this 
level was mind-boggling from start to finish. Recall the drama oftheir win 
against Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/iceland-austria-euro-2016-match-report>
, their well-meritedsuccess over England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
 and even their second half show of strength against the French (even when the 
result was beyond recovery).

Fondest memory of France <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> 
Returning to Lyon, where I once called myself a student. A stunning city.

What now for England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england>? Familiar 
soul-searching, a new manager, another comfortable qualification campaign and, 
no doubt, a huge anticlimax in Russia in two years’ time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcd439a45791bc5c2d001cad719aea65ee49f94f%2F0_51_2180_1308%2F2180.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20pick%20their%20highs%20and%20lows%20from%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20pick%20their%20highs%20and%20lows%20from%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcd439a45791bc5c2d001cad719aea65ee49f94f%2F0_51_2180_1308%2F2180.jpg>
 Portugal’s 3-3 draw with Hungary in the final set of Group F fixtures was one 
of the tournament’s standout games. Photograph: Max Rossi/Reuters 
Andy Hunter

Match of the tournament Italy’s professional job on Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/belgium-italy-euro-2016-match-report>
 and the end-to-end drama ofHungary 3-3 Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/hungary-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 were the highlights from matches attended butWales’ quarter-final defeat of 
Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/wales-belgium-euro-2016-match-report>
 was the standout tie.

Player of the tournament Antoine Griezmann. Came under intense scrutiny and 
pressure in France after a subdued start, losing his place at one point, but 
responded with class and composure to help guide the hosts to the final.

Goal of the tournament Hal Robson-Kanu’s exquisite tribute to Johan Cruyff 
against Belgium. Honourable mention to the goal that followed from Sam Vokes – 
I love a good soaring header.

Personal highlight Visiting Iceland’s training camp in Annecy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/iceland-england-euro-2016-influence-roy-hodgson>
 the morning after their historic first tournament win over Austria. I was in 
the privileged position of witnessing the warm reception they received on their 
return, the camaraderie between players and staff and their training session. I 
was also given time with their joint coaches, Lars Lagerback and Heimir 
Hallgrimsson. “I wouldn’t want to be Roy Hodgson if he lost to Iceland,” said a 
clearly confident Hallgrimsson. Accessible, friendly, spirited and hard-working 
– the team they humiliated in the last 16 could learn a thing or two.

Biggest disappointment The embarrassing behaviour of some England fans, later 
equalled by the Russian unit.

Team of the tournament Too close to call between Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland> and Wales.

Fondest memory of France Lyon, Annecy, driving along the Côte d’Azur with the 
Clash on at full blast, covering enthralling and sometimes historic matches 
(Iceland’s debut,Albania’s first victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/romania-albania-euro-2016-match-report>
, Northern Ireland’sdefeat of Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/ukraine-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
) and the stirring rendition ofLa Marseillaise before France’s win over the 
Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/france-republic-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
. All of it, in fact.

What now for England? Same as usual – the inquests and appetite for change 
will be pushed to the margins once the Premier League season begins and the 
culture that breeds international failure returns.

David Hytner

Match of the tournament Wales 3-1 Belgium. I enjoyed Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> 3-3 Hungary and Italy 2-0 Spain 
but I’d nominate Wales’s quarter-final win because of the end-to-end tempo, the 
phenomenal atmosphere and the knowledge that we had witnessed history.
Antoine Griezmann 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Antoine%20Griezmann&team=France&isSimple=false>
Player of the tournament Antoine Griezmann. The complete striker and just a 
beautiful player to watch, whose sense of exuberance is contagious.

Goal of the tournament Hal Robson-Kanu v Belgium. It can be no other. With the 
biggest game in Welsh football history finely balanced at 1-1, Robson-Kanu – to 
borrow his phrase – “Cruyffed” inside the box to destroy three defenders. “See 
you later Meunier, see you later Denayer, see you later Fellaini,” roared 
Robbie Savage, in his BBC commentary. Robson-Kanu then kept his cool to beat 
Thibaut Courtois.

Personal highlight There were a few I-was-there moments, including Wales v 
Belgium andRobbie Brady’s dramatic late winner for the Republic of Ireland 
against Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/italy-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
. But the one that springs most readily to mind wasDimitri Payet’s Roy of the 
Rovers-style 89th-minute rocket into the top corner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/france-romania-euro-2016-match-report>
 on the opening night for France against Romania – and his subsequent tears 
when he was substituted to a thunderous ovation.

Biggest disappointment England, obviously. The most shocking part of the 
Iceland debacle was how technically assured players like Wayne Rooney and Harry 
Kane became so gripped by the looming failure that they could barely trap or 
pass the ball.

Team of the tournament Wales. Chris Coleman always felt that the 
quarter-finals were a possibility. The run to the first major semi-final of 
their history galvanised the nation and took the breath.

Euro 2016: The Guardian’s team of the tournament
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/11/euro-2016-team-of-tournament>
Fondest memory of France The emotion during the pre-game anthems; finding out 
that the rebuilt Vélodrome in Marseille is the best stadium in Europe and just 
being in Paris – the coolest city in the world. Oh, and being starstruck when I 
walked past Quentin Tarantino on Pont Neuf.

What now for England? I still think there are reasons to be optimistic, given 
the talent in the squad, if we can get the right manager in – one with a clear 
tactical plan, which he drums into the players over the next two years. Then 
again it is the hope that kills you.

Owen Gibson

Match of the tournament Wales 3-1 Belgium. A great story, a great atmosphere 
and won by a team that played for one another and their manager against one 
stuffed with more gifted individuals who did not.

Player of the tournament Antoine Griezmann. The French media expected Paul 
Pogba to be their talisman but instead the razor-sharp Atlético striker has 
emerged as the star of this French side. Started slowly but grew into the 
tournament and scored vital goals at crucial times, none more so than when he 
put hisChampions League final penalty disappointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/real-madrid-atletico-madrid-champions-league-final-match-report>
 behind him to put the hosts ahead against Germany.

Goal of the tournament Strong claims from Dimitri Payet and Xherdan Shaqiri 
but for sheer chutzpah and game-changing brilliance it has to be Hal 
Robson-Kanu’s Cruyff turn and cool finish that left Thomas Meunier completely 
bamboozled.

Personal highlight Travelling the length of line No9 on the Paris Métro to 
Parc des Princes as the train slowly filled with giddy Northern Ireland fans, 
mingling happily with their German counterparts, and then the scenes that 
followed as they comprehensively outsang their rivals for the 90 minutes that 
followed in one of the mostone-sided 1-0 victories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/northern-ireland-germany-euro-2016-match-report>
 in the tournament. Although it did leave me unable to shift the accursed “Will 
Grigg’s on fire” song from my head for days.

Biggest disappointment England, natch. Plus the grim pall that hung over the 
opening few days of the tournament like a black cloud in the wake of the scenes 
in Marseille and the tension that gripped the streets of Lille in the aftermath.

Team of the tournament Wales. “Don’t be afraid to dream,” indeed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8573ecbb588584a2612913c89be4926848788c27%2F85_59_3743_2246%2F3743.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20pick%20their%20highs%20and%20lows%20from%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20pick%20their%20highs%20and%20lows%20from%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8573ecbb588584a2612913c89be4926848788c27%2F85_59_3743_2246%2F3743.jpg>
 Wales were told don’t be afraid to dream by Chris Coleman – and they ended up 
surpassing all expectations by reaching the last four. Photograph: Richard 
Sellers/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Fondest memory of France The fans from Northern Ireland, the Republic of 
Ireland, Wales, Iceland and Slovakia who revelled in the experience and 
elevated the tournament beyond the exercise in money-making cynicism that the 
Uefa machine sometimes threatened to turn it into. Despite justified concerns 
about the expanded format in footballing terms, the melting pot vibe of the 
group stages undoubtedly added something. In turn, they slowly ignited 
enthusiasm among a French public who appeared, for good reason, equivocal about 
the tournament to begin with.

What now for England? Same as usual, even if the inquest seems to be being 
conducted with more rigour than usual. Not that it would take much to clear 
that low bar, given the previous decision to let Roy Hodgson blithely carry on 
after Brazil. If anything is to change, there needs to be an attempt to 
disentangle the long-term structural issues from the short-term coaching and 
psychological ones. And to understand that English football’s dysfunctional 
structure is part of the problem.

Jamie Jackson

Match of the tournament Iceland 2-1 Austria. A last-kick winner from Arnor 
Ingvi Traustason 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/22/austria-v-iceland-euro-2016-live>
 for the fairytale nation of Euro 2016 sent the Stade de France ballistic and 
took Iceland into a last-16 meeting with England. Guess what happened next?
Cristiano Ronaldo 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Cristiano%20Ronaldo&team=Portugal&isSimple=false>
Player of the tournament Cristiano Ronaldo. He is not the footballer he was 
but what a footballer he still is. Remains the big watch despite the diminished 
ability to take the opposition apart with one of those barnstorming runs.

Goal of the tournament Ronaldo’s header v Wales. Fifty minutes were played 
when the Portuguese soared before unloading a bullet of a header that gave 
Wayne Hennessey zero chance.

Personal highlight Luka Modric’s volley for Croatia against Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/turkey-croatia-euro-2016-match-report>
 – a strike so regal it deserved a red carpet as 25 yards out the playmaker’s 
right boot met a ball dropping from the skies with the sweetest of hits.

Biggest disappointment England. Roy Hodgson should have been sacked after the 
two-game exit from Brazil 2014. Instead he was allowed to continue and oversaw 
a muddled shambles against Iceland. The key to England doing better is not 
hard: employ a genius manager. Look what Eddie Jones has done for the rugby 
side.

Team of the tournament France. They sparkle and attack, then sparkle and 
attack. Any side that can reach theEuropean Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/european-championship> final while 
leaving a player like Anthony Martial out of their starting XI has to be pretty 
decent.

Fondest memory of France Czech Republic 0-2 Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/czech-republic-turkey-euro-2016-match-report>
. A summer tournament with incessant rain does not feel like a summer 
tournament and for the first 11 days there had been almost incessant rain. So 
when the sun came out and set in vivid hues of oranges over the Stade 
Bollaert-Delelis in Lens the senses tingled.

What now for England? Forget the Sam Allardyce or Gareth Southgate route. Find 
an absolute managerial wizard and ask his price. Sit back and watch England 
become the world and European champions.

Euro 2016: every performance rated and profiles of all 552 players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/jun/01/euro-2016-the-complete-guide-to-every-squad-and-every-player-in-france>
Amy Lawrence

Match of the tournament France beating Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> in the semi-final was riveting 
but, for the quality of the goals as well as the surprise, Wales v Belgium. 
Robbie Savage caught the mood when Hal Robson-Kanu performed his ode to Cruyff, 
screeching: “Go and wake your kids up!”

Player of the tournament Chapeau, Antoine Griezmann. Highly skilled, perpetual 
motion, loves scoring goals and courageous with it – especially when he stepped 
up to take that penalty in the semi-final after what happened in the Champions 
League final.

Goal of the tournament Xherdan Shaqiri’s bicycle kick against Poland (special 
mention to a non-goal moment of bewilderingly inventive technique – Florenzi’s 
clearance against Germany).

Personal highlight Iceland. Absolutely everything about Iceland. In particular 
the eruption of communal joy (which included one of the players hurling the 
corner flag into the crowd) at the final whistle of their England smiting. 
Everyone from their management to their players to their fans was an absolute 
pleasure to talk toand be around. 
<https://twitter.com/amylawrence71/status/747533765103222784>

Biggest disappointment The violence around the England v Russia game was 
utterly depressing. Seeing an eight-year-old boy crying at 2am because he and 
his dad could not get back to their hotel, lost and frightened as the city 
reacted to the challenging situation by going into shutdown was the opposite of 
what an international football tournament should be about.

Team of the tournament Iceland. So easy to make a compelling case for them or 
Wales. But the fact that their manager also works as a dentist because a 
full-joint time job in football back home is not really considered a living 
underlines how extraordinary their achievement was.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd25369e1b2dd5514b7dfb458763793a1dc023126%2F196_122_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20pick%20their%20highs%20and%20lows%20from%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20pick%20their%20highs%20and%20lows%20from%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd25369e1b2dd5514b7dfb458763793a1dc023126%2F196_122_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 Marseille: an atmospheric city with a stunning stadium in the Stade Vélodrome. 
Photograph: BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
Fondest memory of France Being in Marseille when England and Russia were not. 
It is an atmospheric city with a stunning stadium and France v Albania, Iceland 
v Hungary andUkraine v Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/ukraine-poland-euro-2016-match-report>
 were all played out with fans mixing superbly and noisily around town, at the 
beach and at the ground.

What now for England? Soul-searching, a strong qualification campaign, a sorry 
and fruitless escapade at a major finals … Repeat to fade for ever and ever.

Sid Lowe

Match of the tournament Wales-Belgium, Italy-Spain and France-Germany. Is it 
cheating to name three? And is it miserable and begrudging to think they were 
pretty much the only three?
Pepe 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Pepe&team=Portugal&isSimple=false>
Player of the tournament I was tempted to say Aaron Ramsey, perhaps even more 
so in light of how much difference his absence seemed to make to Wales in the 
semi-final. Gareth Bale is a candidate too and I was very impressed with Toni 
Kroos. No one matched Andrés Iniesta’s level from the first two games – but it 
was only two games. It’s got to be Antoine Griezmann really, despite the final. 
And then there’s Pepe. Seriously.

Goal of the tournament That Xherdan Shaqiri goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/switzerland-poland-euro-2016-match-report>
 against Poland was wonderful and had more than a touch of the Manuel Negrete 
about it. But how could it not be Hal Robson-Kanu? Defenders sliding by like 
cartoon characters off a cliff, realising they have been had but unable to do 
anything about it. And as for his description: “I’ve Cruyffed it” – golden.

Personal highlight Hungary’s fans after beating Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/austria-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
: a genuine sense of witnessing a historic moment, celebrated the way it should 
be. And Wales’s fans too, especially afterthe Russia game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/wales-russia-euro-2016-match-report>
, were a joy. Listening to them on the train back from Toulouse frantically 
changing travel plans (for the better) and trying to get unexpectedly necessary 
days off work nicely summed up what they had achieved. As did talking to Neil 
Taylor, who had gonefrom a Portakabin to the Parc des Princes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/neil-taylor-wales-journey-portakabin-paris>
 and was very enjoyable to talk to, fantastically engaging and clearly enjoying 
himself hugely.

Biggest disappointment England. Spain. Discovering Île de Ré so late. What a 
lovely place – and how short the stay there felt (after a lifetime on an 
industrial estate outside Bordeaux with a furniture warehouse for company). 
Gabor Kiraly not wanting to talk tracksuit trousers. Just about everything Marc 
Wilmots did and said. Also: missing out on the chance to see more of Croatia 
and Luka Modric in particular, a player I love watching. Oh, and Jogi Löw being 
outed and thus forewarned before he could do something really grotesque.

Team of the tournament Wales.

Fondest memory of France Sharing my last chocolate finger with Stu James. And 
the rabbits. And of course the answers to “personal highlights” could come 
under “fondest memory” too. Wales and Hungary fans really were great to see, 
genuinely warming at a time in the tournament when so much of the attention was 
on the trouble. Some of the scenes were truly terrifying.

What now for England? Same as usual, at a guess. Obviously the most important 
thing is that all the players have their phones and posh sinks taken off them. 
That’ll sort it.

Barney Ronay

Match of the tournament Germany v France had the most absorbing half-hour of 
the tournament as Germany threw their entire delicately knitted kitchen sink 
and came up short. For surge and countersurge Wales v Belgium was pretty hard 
to beat.
Gareth Bale 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Gareth%20Bale&team=Wales&isSimple=false>
Player of the tournament Not really a tournament of individuals, despite the 
irresistible urge to pick them out. Gareth Bale bestrode the group stages. 
Antoine Griezmann was the most ruthless cutting edge. Renato Sanches for the 
future.

Goal of the tournament Hal Robson-Kanu. Three brilliant things in one: Bale’s 
pass, Ramsey’s run and a turn that made me leap up and punch the air and yell 
something incoherent even before he had scored. Sorry, nearby Belgian 
journalists.

Personal highlight Genuinely enjoyed Ronaldo’s night of the two left feet 
against Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/portugal-austria-euro-2016-match-report>
, the greatest, or at least the funniest 0-0 draw one is likely to see. No 
player can ever have succeeded in not scoring with such style and comedic 
timing.

Biggest disappointment Some of Uefa’s organisation has been baffling. The lack 
of segregation in Marseille stands out, the fighting in the stands called two 
hours before kick-off from the press box. Also: I am also now more baguette 
than man.

Team of the tournament France. Biggest let-down: Russia. Awful.

Fondest memory of France Renting a bike to travel an easy-looking 8km to the 
stadium in Bordeaux and ending up wobbling down the hard shoulder of the 
motorway, being chased by a pack of dogs and cycling through some sort of camp 
where people were burning tyres. Amazing what still seems like fun after 25 
days of air-conditioned tents.

What now for England? The same thing as the last 50 years. Incoherent 
squealing. Weak leer of hope. Familiar baffling defeat. Until the FA and 
Premier League have an unfettered common interest wider plans are all just 
talk. Otherwise hire a good manager and have a simple plan. I would go with 
Allardyce for the uber-banter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e9a501e825c264d0919bc00689e8965765f0cec%2F183_229_2984_1790%2F2984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20pick%20their%20highs%20and%20lows%20from%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20Guardian%20writers%20pick%20their%20highs%20and%20lows%20from%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e9a501e825c264d0919bc00689e8965765f0cec%2F183_229_2984_1790%2F2984.jpg>
 Iceland players celebrate after their famous 2-1 win over England in the last 
16 game in Nice. Photograph: Laurence Griffiths/Getty Images 
Daniel Taylor

Match of the tournament England 1-2 Iceland. A night England will probably 
never live down but, more than anything,one of the great underdog stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/08/iceland-stunning-rise-euro-2016-gylfi-sigurdsson-lars-lagerback>
 of any international tournament.

Player of the tournament Antoine Griezmann. Yes, he could not influence the 
final, but the third Frenchman in history to finish as the top scorer in a 
major tournament, emulating Michel Platini from 1984 and Just Fontaine in the 
1958 World Cup.

Goal of the tournament Cristiano Ronaldo vs Hungary. Apparently Ronaldo was 
finished, washed-up, no longer a player to fear. That improvisational flick – 
behind his standing leg at high speed – was a nice riposte.

Personal highlight An unexpected invitation to watch Wales vs Northern Ireland 
from behind Chris Coleman’s dugout. Lowlights: biting into a slab of butter 
thinking it was cheese. See also: walking into a lamp-post outside England’s 
hotel.

Biggest disappointment A day in Marseille genuinely thinking someone would end 
up being kicked to death. Or Uefa’s killjoys charging Wales for the heinous 
crime of the players inviting their children on to the pitch to celebrate their 
wins.

Team of the tournament Wales. An honorary mention to Iceland but just consider 
one of the players Chris Coleman brought on to try to rescue their semi-final 
against Portugal: Simon Church, a striker who could not get into the MK Dons 
side that finished second from bottom of the Championship last season.

Fondest memory of France The same as at every major tournament – taking your 
seat for the final, remembering you should feel fortunate to be in this 
profession.

What now for England? My hunch is that Sam Allardyce might get the job instead 
of Jürgen Klinsmann – ignoring the fact that Slaven Bilic has taken West Ham to 
a different level since Allardyce left the club.

Paul Wilson

Match of the tournament There was no outstanding game. Some were a lot better 
than others but there were no classic encounters worth digging out and 
replaying 20 years from now. Hungary 3-3 Portugallooked a lot of fun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/hungary-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 but the best game I attended was Wales 3-1 Belgium. A fabulous night for the 
Welsh but a bit one-sided in the end.

Player of the tournament Antoine Griezmann announced himself fairly 
effectively to all the non-believers, even before running away with the golden 
boot. Aaron Ramsey was in the running until his unfortunate suspension. 
Cristiano Ronaldo was exceptional and unignorable but lost points for 
belittling Iceland.

Goal of the tournament Hal Robson-Kanu against Belgium. Ronaldo’s towering 
header against Wales was pretty good too, but we’ve seen him do that before. 
Robson-Kanu’s effort had the priceless element of surprise. I had a quick 
conference with my colleagues in the Lille press box and we agreed we were all 
gobsmacked.

Personal highlight Stepping off a crowded métro in Paris, hearing the din made 
by both sets of supporters singing Will Grigg’s on Fire fade into the distance.

Biggest disappointment That’s a bit obvious, isn’t it? England played four 
games and still ended up not knowing their best team. While that situation 
remains they have no hope of playing as effectively as a team as Iceland and 
Wales.

Team of the tournament Wales. They caught the imagination more than anyone 
else and reaching the last four at Belgium’s expense was a bigger achievement 
than Iceland beating a clueless England. They might even have gone further – 
extra time at least – if they had not been hit by suspensions.

Fondest memory of France It was interesting being there the day the Brexit 
result was declared. There was a certain amount of sarcasm – “welcome to 
Europe” etc – but most people were keen to know which way I had voted and why. 
Few people seemed to take sides on the issue but everyone was interested in the 
debate. The food was a considerable upgrade on Brazil 2014 too.

What now for England? At club level to fail so badly would result in 
relegation. In some ways it is a pity nothing similar exists in international 
football to concentrate the mind, cut out unnecessary luxuries and lead to an 
acceptance among players, fans, administrators and anyone else with an interest 
that nothing can be taken for granted. It is not as clear what England have to 
do to regain lost status. As soon as we win a couple of friendlies or 
qualifiers we tend to fall into the same trap of overexcitement all over again. 
Hiring a new coach is the obvious next step and already it is being invested 
with more ceremony than appears necessary. It would be ridiculous to start the 
season with a temporary manager when there are viable candidates who would step 
in right now. The FA has been known to pay people on the basis that the England 
manager’s job is the most important in world football but it is not by a long 
way.
 