
Back in the rookie days of his coaching career, as a promising young manager 
taking his first foray into the dugouts of Serie A, the 1990-91 season was a 
voyage of considerable discovery for Claudio Ranieri. The then 38-year-old, 
just a handful of years into the job after starting out as a coach in amateur 
football, had made an impression guiding Cagliari to successive promotions from 
Serie C1 and into the top tier of the Italian game. Under those circumstances 
surviving, merely avoiding relegation, was a mission in itself. But that 
1990-91 season inSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> 
taught Ranieri an unforgettable lesson about football’s eternal sense of 
possibility.

The forgotten story of … Sampdoria's only scudetto | Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/jun/25/sampdoria-1991-rob-smyth> 
Not only did Cagliari stay up, something else happened in Italy that season 
that shook up everybody’s idea ofcalcio’s status quo. This was an era dominated 
by the excellence of Arrigo Sacchi’s European champions Milan, thescudetto 
winners from Napoli inspired by Diego Maradona, with muscles flexed by an 
Internazionale squad that boasted three of the best of the West German world 
champions in Lothar Matthäus, Jürgen Klinsmann and Andreas Brehme, as well as a 
Juventus newly boosted with the expensive purchase of Roberto Baggio.

Ranieri took his Cagliari team into the world’s most alluring footballing 
show, where the establishment had feathers more beautiful than anyone else, 
only to see the winners that season would not be one of the biggest peacocks. 
Sampdoria usurped all and sundry towin the title for the first time in their 
history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/jun/25/sampdoria-1991-rob-smyth>. 
Something magical occurred.

Verona had done it a few years previously – another extraordinary anomaly – 
and this time aSampdoria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> side 
propelled by the blend of Gianluca Vialli’s insatiable attacking play with 
Roberto Mancini pulling clever strings behind, backed by a solid defence, 
overcame the rest. Samp lost only three Serie A matches all season. Their 
coach, the much-travelled Vujadin Boskov, was known for his quirky humour, but 
within the camp was admired by the players for his smart coaching, sharp 
psychology and father-figure inspiration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Feurope-leicester-claudio-ranieri-premier-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe84e5a68c4d6f386c17f20afabae939753e39ea9%2F0_112_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Europe%E2%80%99s%20unlikely%20heroes%20have%20lessons%20for%20Leicester%20and%20Claudio%20Ranieri%20%7C%20Amy%20Lawrence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Feurope-leicester-claudio-ranieri-premier-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Europe%E2%80%99s%20unlikely%20heroes%20have%20lessons%20for%20Leicester%20and%20Claudio%20Ranieri%20%7C%20Amy%20Lawrence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Feurope-leicester-claudio-ranieri-premier-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe84e5a68c4d6f386c17f20afabae939753e39ea9%2F0_112_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Deportivo fans invade the pitch to celebrate their La Liga victory in 2000. 
Photograph: Reuters Photographer / Reuter/Reuters 
The president of Sampdoria, Paolo Mantovani, had a plan to take on the big 
guns based on investing in some of the best young Italian talent. He was 
popular with the players and would invite them to dinner and ensure they felt 
valued. Mantovani was also willing to at least match the highest salaries of 
the day to buy prized young players. Mancini came as a teenager with the golden 
boy nickname ofbambino d’oro. Vialli turned 20 the summer he joined. The 
technical winger Attilio Lombardo and renowned defender Pietro Vierchowod 
arrived in their early 20s. They all blossomed into great players in 
Sampdoria’s classic kit of blue with a flash of white, black and red horizontal 
stripes.

When La Liga was just as unpredictable as this season's Premier League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/these-football-times/2016/feb/12/la-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid>
The Serie A success they engineered, remember, was a quarter of a century ago. 
Since then in Italy nobody without a title already on their honour roll has 
finished top. First-time winners, clubs without historical pedigree, are an 
outright rarity to triumph in modern football. A glance around Europe’s top 
five leagues indicates how unusual it is to have a new champion, a name not 
previously inscribed on the domestic trophy. Over the past 20 years across 
England, Italy, Spain, Germany and France, the title has been won by a previous 
winner 95 times out of 100.

The exceptions have mostly come in Ligue 1, which has had the greatest variety 
of champions in that time. Auxerre in 1996, Lens in 1998 and, most recently, 
Montpellier in 2012 relished their moment in the sun. La Liga last hailed a new 
winner in 1999-2000 asDeportivo La Coruña 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/deportivo-la-coruna> stunned the Spanish 
game despite being an unpretentious enough set-up that they trained in a local 
park in Galicia.

Ranieri, incidentally, was managing in La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> at the time so also got 
to observe once again how a major league can be conquered with an air of the 
unexpected. The qualities of that Deportivo team were summed up by their 
long-standing servant, the Brazilian Mauro Silva. “We are a club that still has 
its limitations. But we have a playing philosophy. As soon as we enter the 
stadium we are great players who have an appetite for major occasions,” he said.

It felt like a freakish season considering Deportivo won the league with just 
69 points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/these-football-times/2016/feb/12/la-liga-unpedictable-league-deportivo-barcelona-real-madrid>
. Barcelona, defending champions, lost a remarkable 12 times that season. Real 
Madrid did not even finish in the top four. For any unusual champion it 
certainly helps if the usual suspects underperform.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Feurope-leicester-claudio-ranieri-premier-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71dd580db9ff4d34184e5d6bac530172c4f5402b%2F0_101_4134_2481%2F4134.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Europe%E2%80%99s%20unlikely%20heroes%20have%20lessons%20for%20Leicester%20and%20Claudio%20Ranieri%20%7C%20Amy%20Lawrence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Feurope-leicester-claudio-ranieri-premier-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Europe%E2%80%99s%20unlikely%20heroes%20have%20lessons%20for%20Leicester%20and%20Claudio%20Ranieri%20%7C%20Amy%20Lawrence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Feurope-leicester-claudio-ranieri-premier-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71dd580db9ff4d34184e5d6bac530172c4f5402b%2F0_101_4134_2481%2F4134.jpg>
 Montpellier are Ligue 1’s most recent first-time title winners, having been 
crowned champions in 2011-12 despite coming up against PSG’s financial might. 
Photograph: Gerard Julien/AFP/Getty Images 
More recently, Wolfsburg took the opportunity to claim the Bundesliga in 
2008-09 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2009/may/23/football-wolfsburg-bundesliga-title-picture-gallery>
. That was so unexpected that midway through the campaign their coach Felix 
Magath agreed to take over a rival, Schalke, at the end of the season. At that 
time he gave little consideration to a grandstand finish. “I didn’t think we 
could win the title here,” he said. As it turned out a remarkable run over the 
second half of the campaign delivered the greatest prize for a team renowned 
for its tough training regime and feisty attacking football, with Edin Dzeko 
and the Brazilian Grafite breaking goalscoring records (this was the first time 
a Bundesliga club boasted two players scoring more than 20 goals in a season). 
They pipped Bayern Munich by two points.

A crest-of-a-wave atmosphere, and a sense that taking on the establishment is 
something to be relished without fear, are common themes for first time 
winners. Montpellier’s feat was all the more surprising because they were 
taking on the nouveau riche Paris Saint-Germain, who had spent heavily in their 
first season backed by the Qataris who have launched them to the last fourLigue 
1 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> titles.

Olivier Giroud was Montpellier’s top scorer, and put their success down to an 
ability to “build a team through training, through recruiting players who can 
become something. You have to fight with other values. The collective, the 
group spirit. Compared to PSG we had a fraction of their budget. We had less 
money but a lot of quality. To keep going for the whole season was something 
extraordinary. We had a young group of guys and we told ourselves we achieved 
something really huge.”

Montpellier had to hold their nerve to win the title on the final day, and the 
tension in their last match at relegated Auxerre jangled as the match was 
stopped three times for crowd disturbances. The Auxerre fans expressed their 
discontent by lobbing tennis balls, eggs, toilet paper and flares on to the 
pitch. TheMontpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> coach René 
Girard described it as “the longest night of my life” as the final whistle on 
the season eventually blew 41 minutes later than scheduled.

If Leicester are to preserve the Premier League lead they have held so boldly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/apr/04/claudio-ranieri-compliments-leicester-citys-magical-season-after-win-over-southampton-video>
 for such a long period of this unconventional season, they will join an 
impressively select group of first-time champions in the modern game. In 
England it has not happened for 38 years, when Brian Clough cast his spell over 
Nottingham Forest.

For Leicester, and Ranieri, their shot at history goes on. As the Italian 
says: “You just need to keep an open mind, an open heart, a full battery, and 
run free.”
 