
Euro 2016 drew to a close on Sunday night with Portugal beating France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 in the final in Paris. As with all tournaments there were some good games and 
some bad games but most were intense and highly watchable.

At the Guardian we have rated every single performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/jun/01/euro-2016-the-complete-guide-to-every-squad-and-every-player-in-france>
 in France and can now present our official best and worst team of the 
tournament.

Euro 2016: every performance rated and profiles of all 552 players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/jun/01/euro-2016-the-complete-guide-to-every-squad-and-every-player-in-france>
A player must have played in at least four games to be included in the 
starting XI for our team ofEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>. For our flops XI a minimum of 
two matches were required to be included.

Goalkeeper

Lukasz Fabianski –7.25

The Pole gets the nod instead of Italy’s Gianluigi Buffon and Northern 
Ireland’s Michael McGovern (both also on 7.25/10) because he made more saves 
during the tournament (20) than McGovern (17) and Buffon (10). The Swansea City 
player replaced Wojciech Szczesnyfor Poland’s second group game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/16/germany-poland-euro-2016-match-report>
 and was given three 7/10s and one 8/10 (the latter for his performance against 
Switzerland in the last 16,when Poland proceeded on penalties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/switzerland-poland-euro-2016-match-report>
). Hugo Lloris was handed straight 7s and Portugal’s Rui Patricio paid for
conceding three goals against Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/hungary-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 and ended up with an average rating of 6.42.

Defence

Joshua Kimmich – 7.5 

Aged only 21, the Bayern Munich player has showed remarkable maturity 
throughout the tournament. Has mainly played centrally for RB Leipzig and, last 
season, for Bayern, in defence or midfield, but excelled at right-back for
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> in France. Pep Guardiola 
said last season that he “has got absolutely everything” and he is so versatile 
he has already been dubbed the new Philipp Lahm. He scored one of the penalties 
against Italy and his only rivals for the right-back spot in the team of the 
tournament were Kyle Walker (7) and Elseid Hysaj (7) – who played three games 
each and would not have been considered – and Darijo Srna and Lukasz Piszczek 
(both 6.75).

Ragnar Sigurdsson – 7.2 

A totemic presence in the centre of an Iceland defence that proved extremely 
difficult to break down. Helped out by his central defensive partner, Kari 
Arnason,they frustrated Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/portugal-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
 (1-1),Hungary (1-1) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/18/iceland-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>
,Austria (2-1) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/iceland-austria-euro-2016-match-report>
 andEngland (2-1) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
 before succumbingto France 5-2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/03/france-iceland-euro-2016-quarter-final-match-report>
. Benefitting from the coaching and organisation of his co-coaches Lars 
Lagerback and Heimir Hallgrimsson (as did the whole team), the 30-year-old 
Krasnodar player could be on his way to the Premier Leaguewith several clubs 
interested in signing him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/29/tottenham-leicester-ragnar-sigurdsson-iceland-premier-league>
.

Giorgio Chiellini – 7.5 

Superbly aided by his Juventus team-mates Andrea Barzagli and Leonardo Bonucci 
– and guided by Gianluigi Buffon behind him in goal – the 31-year-old from Pisa 
got the best average rating of the three Italian central defenders (7.5 
compared to Bonucci’s 7.0 and Barzagli’s 6.0) and was the best defender at the 
tournament together with Kimmich, according to our judges. Other contenders for 
centre back were Kamil Glik (7.2), José Fonte, Michal Pazdan and Jérôme Boateng 
(all 7.0) as well as Pepe (6.83)
Giorgio 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Giorgio%20Chiellini&team=Italy&isSimple=true>
Raphaël Guerreiro – 7.2

Grew stronger as the tournament wore on. The 22-year-old Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> left back, who was born in 
Paris, was solid defensively and a threat going forward. Borussia Dortmund will 
be pleased they signed him from Lorient before the Euros for a fee reported to 
be around £9m. It was not a vintage tournament for full-backs and Guerreiro’s 
nearest challengers were Jonny Evans and Martin Olsson (both on 7.0 but the 
latter only played three games) as well as Jonas Hector (6.83) and Ricardo 
Rodríguez (6.75).

Defensive midfield

Grzegorz Krychowiak – 7.2

The Pole keeps his place after being named in the team of the group stages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/24/guardian-euro-2016-team-of-the-tournament-so-far>
 – but only just. Eden Hazard and Mesut Özil also scored 7.2 but this team 
needed a more defensive-minded holding player and therefore Krychowiak gets the 
nod. Toni Kroos and Renato Sanches finished on 7.17 with Paul Pogba on 7.14 
after a disappointing final. Krychowiak was a supremely calm presence at the 
heart of Poland’s midfield as they progressed to the quarter-finals, where they
lost on penalties to the eventual winners Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/30/poland-portugal-euro-2016-quarter-final-match-report>
. The 26-year-oldsigned for Paris St-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/03/psg-complete-grzegorz-krychowiak-signing-sevilla-unai-emery>
 from Sevilla a few days after Poland were eliminated.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fthe-story-of-euro-2016-video-animation&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20story%20of%20Euro%202016%20%E2%80%93%20video%20animation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fthe-story-of-euro-2016-video-animation>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20story%20of%20Euro%202016%20%E2%80%93%20video%20animation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fthe-story-of-euro-2016-video-animation&media=>
The story of Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jul/11/the-story-of-euro-2016-video-animation>
. 
Midfield

Ivan Perisic – 7.5

The Inter player flourished on the right hand side of midfield as Croatia 
surprised everyone and won Group D over Spain. Extremely hard-working – as well 
as skilful – he scored two goals and provided one assist. Was part of one of 
the best midfields of the tournament (together with Ivan Rakitic and Luka 
Modric) before theyran aground against Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/croatia-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 in the last 16. Still only 27, he has improved every season since leaving 
Borussia Dortmund in 2013. Jakub Blaszczykowski (6.8) and Ricardo Quaresma 
(6.86) were two other players who performed well on the right hand side of 
midfield.

Andrés Iniesta – 7.5 

Spain may have gone home after losing to Italy in the last 16 and largely had 
a tournament to forget but with two 8/10s and two 7/10s Iniesta still makes our 
team of the tournament. Such a classy player, he makes the game look so simple. 
Did not feature in ourteam of the group stages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/24/guardian-euro-2016-team-of-the-tournament-so-far>
 but, as others fell away, he now makes up the central midfield with Aaron 
Ramsey.

Aaron Ramsey – 7.8
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-team-of-tournament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d7382582eb3f54035d8a8575d2e4b55746542fb%2F0_90_6271_3763%2F6271.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20team%20of%20the%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-team-of-tournament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20team%20of%20the%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-team-of-tournament%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d7382582eb3f54035d8a8575d2e4b55746542fb%2F0_90_6271_3763%2F6271.jpg>
 Aaron Ramsey celebrates after Wales’ win over Belgium. Photograph: 
JMP/REX/Shutterstock 
The Welshman had a superb tournament and was his team’s best player by some 
distance. Gareth Bale had moments of brilliance and Ashley Williams led the 
defence heroically but Ramsey was at the heart of everything. His tireless 
running exhausted opponents and galvanised his team-mates. Was given an 8/10 in 
four of the five games he played and Wales looked a completely different side 
without himwhen he was suspended  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
for the semi-final loss against Portugal.

Dmitri Payet – 7.29

Has been a joy to watch in the past month (well, all season in fact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/12/dmitri-payet-west-ham-fa-cup-manchester-united>
), and his technique when shooting or crossing has been exemplary. Pretty much 
carried the hosts through the group stages when his stunning 89th-minute goal 
beat Romaniain the opening game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/france-romania-euro-2016-match-report>
 and his strike against Albaniaensured progress into the last 16 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/france-albania-euro-2016-match-report>
. His influence faded as Antoine Griezmann took centre stage but his place in 
our team of the tournament was never in doubt, despite his substitution in the 
final.

Forward

Antoine Griezmann – 7.29

The Atlético Madrid forward takes the sole attacking place in this team after 
he won the Golden Boot with six goals – twice as many as any other player at 
the tournament. In the end it was not enough to help his side win the 
tournament, and coming so soon after Atlético fell at the last hurdle in the 
Champions League, will have left the 25-year-old heartbroken. He showed at Euro 
2016 that he is a complete player. Gareth Bale just misses out on a place in 
the team with an average rating of 7.17 while Italy’s Éder finished with 7.0.

Flops of the tournament 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-team-of-tournament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6dd09d1c11e6f275a20f57aa7d08410b9e22ce1e%2F1_0_3023_1814%2F3023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20team%20of%20the%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-team-of-tournament%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20The%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20team%20of%20the%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Feuro-2016-team-of-tournament%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6dd09d1c11e6f275a20f57aa7d08410b9e22ce1e%2F1_0_3023_1814%2F3023.jpg>
 The Euro 2016 flops XI. Illustration: Jim Powell  