
1) Italy

Very impressive, even if their opponents were disorganised and borderline 
uninterested. There may not be a glitzy attacking name in Antonio Conte’s team 
but their spirit is immense, they were tactically slick and it will take quite 
an effort to break down that Juventus defence. Italy barely featured 
pre-tournament in discussions of potential champions, but critics who reckoned 
theazzurri were uninspiring and lacking distinction are hurriedly retracting 
their claims. Zlatan Ibrahimovic and his cast of Swedish lieutenants are next – 
and once he can be silenced,Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/football/italy> 
should ensure their progression with a game to spare.

• Match report: Belgium 0-2 Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/belgium-italy-euro-2016-match-report>

Euro 2016: the complete guide to every squad and every player in France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/jun/01/euro-2016-the-complete-guide-to-every-squad-and-every-player-in-france>
2) France

Not as convincing as some may have expected on opening night but Didier 
Deschamps’ team found a way to win against obstinate opposition, a factor that 
was somewhat underplayed. They have the greatest depth, several players capable 
of producing a game-changing moment, illustrated by Dimitri Payet, and have 
previously thrived off home support.Les Bleus will, barring a horror show, be 
too strong for Albania andSwitzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland>, meaning an easier last 16 
game. There can be no doubt they will go deep.

• Match report: France 2-1 Romania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/france-romania-euro-2016-match-report>

3) Germany

The world champions did enough to win but perhaps lacked the zip of Brazil 
2014 and Poland andUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ukraine> in 
2012. Still, they were one of only three sides to win by two goals or more and, 
as always, will be expected to improve as the tournament progresses. Were they 
playing within themselves on Sunday? It seemed so for long spells, despite 
flashes of brilliance – mostly from the inconsistent Toni Kroos. There are 
persistent concerns over an unfamiliar defence, but those can be offset by the 
world’s best goalkeeper serving as protection.

• Match report: Germany 2-0 Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/germany-ukraine-euro-2016-match-report>

4) Spain

There was much chatter after the late win over Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/czechrepublic> – thanks to an unlikely 
source in Gerard Piqué – that Vicente del Bosque’s team are short on goals. 
While there is justification for concern over Álvaro Morata’s beige 
performance, he has proven at club level more than once he is capable of 
producing on the big occasion. Of more importance, chance creation against a 
team reluctant to cross the halfway line was obviously not an issue and they 
appeared as crisp and dominant in midfield as ever. It is worth remembering 
their history of starting tournaments slowly. Spain lost their opening game at 
the 2010 World Cup, and drew their first match at Euro 2012 – and they ended up 
winning both.
Alvaro Morata 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=%C3%81lvaro%20Morata&team=Spain&isSimple=false>
 Alvaro Morata 
• Match report: Spain 1-0 Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/spain-czech-republic-euro-2016-match-report>

5) Croatia

With the exception of France and Spain, is there a stronger midfield in the 
tournament? Probably not. Ante Cacic‘s team were a joy to watch againstTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/turkey>. Luka Modric was Luka Modric, a 
fine performance capped by a sumptuous winning goal, and Ivan Rakitic was a 
menace in the No10 role. It would be remiss to discount their aptitude 
elsewhere, too. Mario Mandzukic has the power to bully the best defences and 
Darijo Srna and Vedran Corluka occupy a strong defence. Could they re-live the 
1998 World Cup in France, where they finished third?

• Match report: Turkey 0-1 Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/turkey-croatia-euro-2016-match-report>

6) England

It would be too easy to put the draw with Russia down as ill-fortune 
considering the time of their concession and utter dominance throughout the 
game, but Roy Hodgson’s team only had themselves to blame for missing so many 
chances. There was much to be positive about, though, aside from the 
profligacy, in particular the vibrancy of their first-half performance.England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> should still top the group, but 
how far they go beyond that remains hard to judge.

• Match report: England 1-1 Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/england-russia-euro-2016-match-report>

7) Poland

Far too strong for Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland>, Adam Nawalka’s team 
should have won by more than a single goal. The 19-year-old midfielder Bartosz 
Kapustka controlled the game in midfield and it would be a safe bet to assume 
his time in the domestic league, with Cracovia, will come to an end this 
summer. Poland’s star man Robert Lewandowski, however, was muted, unable to get 
a sight at goal when those around him managed 18 attempts. He will hardly be as 
ineffective against Germany on Thursday night – a fixture he will relish.

• Match report: Poland 1-0 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/poland-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>

8) Wales

Of little surprise to anybody, Gareth Bale was rather good but Chris Coleman’s 
team proved they are not merely about one man. Considering the increased 
pressure on England, it would not be a big surprise to see them get a result – 
especially after a concerted effort to let all and sundry know that there is a 
far greater expectation on their neighbours. Either way,Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> should find a way into the last 16 
– which must be considered a success on the basis of this being their first 
tournament since 1958. Beyond that, the picture is not so clear – but a second 
place in Group B ensures a meeting with second place in Group F, perhaps the 
weakest pool of the six.

• Match report: Wales 2-1 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/wales-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-italy-and-france-lead-the-way-as-belgium-slump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde99c91ba30be3d186c847017ab108697440ff0b%2F0_0_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Italy%20and%20France%20lead%20the%20way%20as%20Belgium%20slump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-italy-and-france-lead-the-way-as-belgium-slump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Italy%20and%20France%20lead%20the%20way%20as%20Belgium%20slump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-italy-and-france-lead-the-way-as-belgium-slump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde99c91ba30be3d186c847017ab108697440ff0b%2F0_0_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
 Wales proved they are more than just Gareth Bale on matchday one. Photograph: 
Huw Evans/Rex/Shutterstock 
9) Switzerland

Earned a first opening win in a tournament but were not especially emphatic, 
Fabian Schär’s early winning goal coming courtesy of a goalkeeping howler. 
Struggling to break down 10 men, afterAlbania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> lost their captain late in the 
first half, the Swiss could easily have dropped two points if their opponents 
had had a player capable of finishing. Expect them to get out of the group 
behind France but they will need to make drastic improvements to go any further.

• Match report: Albania 0-1 Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/albania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report>

Euro 2016 interactive wallchart: groups, fixtures, venues and more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2015/dec/12/euro-2016-interactive-wallchart-groups-fixtures-venues-and-more>
10) Hungary

The biggest surprise thus far? Along with Albania and Northern Ireland, they 
were ante-post outsiders, and everything pointed to an opening defeat to a 
vauntedAustria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria>. Instead the 
striker Adam Szalai, who had not scored for the Magyars for almost two years 
and could not find the net for two Bundesliga clubs last season, scored a 
wonderful team goal before a late counterattack earned only the third win by 
two goals or more. The last 16 beckons already. Ranking them 10th here may 
appear harsh but are they likely to repeat the trick?

• Match report: Austria 0-2 Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/austria-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>

11) Portugal

Cristiano Ronaldo’s regular stares of disgust told the story. A level above 
almost every player in the world, he is several higher than most of his 
team-mates. Little wonder he was exasperated against Iceland, watching on as 
others in red dawdled. He was muted by his own lofty standards, an iffy 
performance summed up by a pair of injury-time free-kicks hitting the wall and 
a header straight into the goalkeeper’s arms, but the lack of clinical players 
around him meantPortugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> failed 
to convert their dominance – almost 72% possession and 26 attempts – into 
victory. They should, however, still finish top of an open group that lacks the 
quality of the others.

• Match report: Portugal 1-1 Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/portugal-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>

12) Belgium

Considering the pre-tournament expectations, there can be little argument they 
were the biggest disappointment from the opening set of games. Marc Wilmots has 
a wealth of talent at his disposal but the manager seems intent on misusing it. 
They should still make it out of the group on account of facing two inferior 
teams – but early evidence suggests they are a level below contending for the 
championship. Still, the Red Devils can scarcely perform any worse.

• Match report: Belgium 0-2 Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/belgium-italy-euro-2016-match-report>

13) Republic of Ireland

An impressive first half in Saint Denis should have seen them ahead but they 
retreated after taking the lead early in the second period through that lovely 
Wes Hoolahan goal and were eventually punished, resulting in what seems like 
the country’s default result of 1-1. Martin O’Neill has already ensured 
progress on their disastrous 2012 campaign but they will need to beatBelgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> or Italy to get through the 
tournament’s toughest group.

• Match report: Republic of Ireland 1-1 Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/republic-of-ireland-sweden-euro-2016-match-report>
Wes Hoolahan 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Wes%20Hoolahan&team=Republic%20of%20Ireland&isSimple=true>
 Wes Hoolahan 
14) Sweden

The 1-1 draw with the Republic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland>, in which Erik 
Hamren’s team failed to have a shot on target, showed their reliance on a 
single player is greater than any other team in France. Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s 
importance to Sweden exceeds Gareth Bale’s to Wales and Cristiano Ronaldo’s to 
Portugal. Without him they would struggle great but thankfully for Sweden, the 
striker is gifted enough to change games single-handedly. If he is not at his 
best against Belgium and Italy, however, they will be going out.

• Match report: Republic of Ireland 1-1 Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/republic-of-ireland-sweden-euro-2016-match-report>

15) Turkey

Arda Turan, their key player, was not at his best against Croatia, evidently 
lacking sharpness after a season largely spent warming the bench at Camp Nou, 
but this is a squad with several bright young things, not least the substitute 
Emre Mor, a recent signing for Borussia Dortmund. They are realistically not 
going to threaten Spain in Nice on Friday night, so will face a shootout with 
Czech Republic for third place, assuming the Czechs also fall toCroatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/croatia>.

• Match report: Turkey 0-1 Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/turkey-croatia-euro-2016-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-italy-and-france-lead-the-way-as-belgium-slump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b3ae40f655f037ce592cb8febb76ecf272f3271%2F184_0_3223_1934%2F3223.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Italy%20and%20France%20lead%20the%20way%20as%20Belgium%20slump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-italy-and-france-lead-the-way-as-belgium-slump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Italy%20and%20France%20lead%20the%20way%20as%20Belgium%20slump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-italy-and-france-lead-the-way-as-belgium-slump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b3ae40f655f037ce592cb8febb76ecf272f3271%2F184_0_3223_1934%2F3223.jpg>
 Turkey’s Arda Turan, lacking sharpness after a season spent on the Barcelona 
bench Photograph: Francisco Leong/AFP/Getty Images 
16) Iceland

What a fantastic story – proof that hard work and proper structuring behind 
the scenes can pay off in the face of adversity and a minuscule playing pool. 
Lars Lagerback’s team were outplayed against Portugal but the minnows crucially 
made their chance count to ensure a point. They displayed a wonderful, if 
expected, spirit throughout and frustrated Cristiano Ronaldo significantly. 
With Austria stuttering andHungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hungary> hardly world beaters despite 
their good opening performance, the open nature of this group could see the 
fairytale extend by another chapter.

• Match report: Portugal 1-1 Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/portugal-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>

17) Czech Republic

They defended resolutely but it was hard to gauge their attacking threat to 
any degree due to 87 minutes of conservatism againstSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain>. Perhaps the most startling 
statistic from any game was that Petr Cech made more passes than any of his 
team-mates. They will need to attack against Croatia, who are a better team 
with a crafty midfield that should be able to pick holes, making their meeting 
with Turkey a battle for next best.

• Match report: Spain 1-0 Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/spain-czech-republic-euro-2016-match-report>

18) Austria

The frustrated reaction of their players, most strikingly Marko Arnautovic, in 
Bordeaux on Tuesday spoke volumes. Their first game was a letdown and they 
failed to perform. Considered a dark horse for the tournament outright, they 
fell short in almost every facet of the game against the hungrier Magyars. 
Plenty of improvements are required before Portugal on Saturday, though they 
may benefit from having a very winnable game last, againstIceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland>, which would likely still be 
enough to advance.

• Match report: Austria 0-2 Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/austria-hungary-euro-2016-match-report>

19) Russia

Four debutants in the team and it showed in a dismal first half against 
England. They improved in the second period, when the match could easily have 
been out of sight, but were still quite fortunate to earn a point. Wednesday’s 
game againstSlovakia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovakia> appears 
decisive – lose that and their prospects (assuming their ‘supporters’ behave 
and keep them in the competition) will look bleak before the final game with 
Wales.

• Match report: England 1-1 Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/england-russia-euro-2016-match-report>

20) Romania

As expected from a team that conceded only twice in qualifying, they defended 
quite well againstFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> – the 
hosts failed to register a shot on target until the 52nd minute – and 
considering neither Albania nor Switzerland were particularly impressive, could 
still progress to the last 16 with a solitary win. They face the former in 
their third group game, and are expected to frustrate the latter on Wednesday 
evening.

• Match report: France 2-1 Romania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/france-romania-euro-2016-match-report>

21) Ukraine

They did OK to stifle Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> 
for long spells but were forced to come out of their shell after falling 
behind, which was just as well for the neutral. The manager, Mykhailo Fomenko, 
had warned pre-match that “we are not adventurers” but when 1-0 down they had 
no option but to push a little further forward. Most dangerous from set pieces. 
They may, nonetheless, find a way to frustrate Poland in their final game.

• Match report: Germany 2-0 Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/germany-ukraine-euro-2016-match-report>

22) Slovakia

Largely underwhelming. Marek Hamsik was lively and Robert Mak showed a couple 
of decent turns, but apart from a 15-minute spell in the second half Slovakia 
were inferior to Wales. Questions must be posed over their defence – Martin 
Skrtel and Jan Durica are among the slowest centre-half pairings in the 
tournament – and the goalkeeper, Matus Kozacik, is not one to inspire 
confidence. A toss-up whether they can finish aboveRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/russia>.

• Match report: Wales 2-1 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/wales-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-italy-and-france-lead-the-way-as-belgium-slump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2d9843e28bccb8c90b22d420bbb5e6bb06902a8%2F0_9_3216_1931%2F3216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Italy%20and%20France%20lead%20the%20way%20as%20Belgium%20slump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-italy-and-france-lead-the-way-as-belgium-slump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%20power%20rankings%3A%20Italy%20and%20France%20lead%20the%20way%20as%20Belgium%20slump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feuro-2016-power-rankings-italy-and-france-lead-the-way-as-belgium-slump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2d9843e28bccb8c90b22d420bbb5e6bb06902a8%2F0_9_3216_1931%2F3216.jpg>
 Marek Hamsik: a rare bright spark for Slovakia against Wales. Photograph: 
Albert Gea/Reuters 
23) Albania


The tournament debutants will not trouble France but could capitalise on the 
competition’s structural flaw with a win againstRomania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/romania>. Battled gamely with 10 men 
against Switzerland but were ponderous when in decent positions to equalise. 
Like most teams with restricted ability, they work hard. But that is unlikely 
to be enough against superior opposition.

• Match report: Albania 0-1 Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/albania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report>

24) Northern Ireland

The most limited team of all? Michael O’Neill’s side sought to frustrate and 
containPoland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/poland> but it was obvious 
within minutes that they were a grade below their opponents. Apart from Czech 
Republic (v Spain) and Ukraine (v Germany) they had the worst share of 
possession – and only had two shots. Meeting Ukraine on Thursday evening will 
be decisive, it is near inconceivable that they can defeat Germany in their 
final group game on Tuesday.

• Match report: Poland 1-0 Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/poland-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
 