
What causes varicose and thread veins on the legs?

Many people are distressed by the appearance of their legs – 15-20% of people 
have visible varicose veins, and an equivalent percentage may have hidden ones 
that can, nonetheless, cause symptoms such as aching legs, swollen ankles and 
discoloured patches of skin. Thread veins do not usually cause any medical 
symptoms, but are even more common; up to 84% of us have thread veins on one of 
our legs. Both conditions arise from the same basic issue: pressure in the 
vessels that return blood from the feet and legs back up to the heart.


“When you stand up, your heart has to pump blood against gravity,” says 
Professor Mark Whiteley 
<http://www.thewhiteleyclinic.co.uk/team/prof-mark-whiteley/>, a consultant 
vascular surgeon. “Your veins contain valves to stop the blood falling back 
down the legs, but if they don’t close properly, the blood falls back down and 
stretches the vein wall, resulting in varicose veins.” The same pressure in the 
system can also cause smaller veins under the skin’s surface to become enlarged 
and therefore more visible, resulting in thread veins.

Is it all genetic, or are there things I can do to prevent them?

Although it is true that the more relatives you have with varicose veins, the 
more likely you are to develop them yourself, “it’s not as reliable as the 
inheritance of hair or eye colour,” saysBill Tennant 
<http://finder.bupa.co.uk/Consultant/view/20473/mr_william_tennant>, a 
consultant vascular surgeon, and senior examiner at the Royal College of 
Surgeons of Edinburgh. People who do a lot of standing do seem to be more prone 
to them, but they probably had a propensity to start with and standing 
aggravates the situation.


Pregnancy increases pressure on the leg veins, and can also increase the 
likelihood of some of the valves failing, while the pregnancy hormone, 
progesterone, can cause the walls of the veins to become more relaxed and 
stretchy. There is little evidence that taking hot baths or crossing your legs 
causes problematic leg veins, but thread veins can appear in response to 
trauma. “You often find them in horse-riders, on the inside of their knees, and 
you also sometimes get them where bra straps rub,” saysBrian Newman 
<https://www.linkedin.com/in/brian-newman-a7681335>, a consultant vascular 
surgeon who specialises in the removal of thread veins. They also become more 
prevalent with age.

Are they purely a cosmetic problem?

Thread veins are largely a cosmetic issue, but ignoring varicose veins can 
cause problems. For instance, an estimated 3-6% of people with varicose veins 
will develop leg ulcers – painful sores that can take months to heal – at some 
point. And a greater proportion of people may develop less serious symptoms, 
such as skin damage, or swollen ankles. TheNational Institute of Health and 
Care Excellence (Nice) recommends <https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/qs67> that 
anyone whose varicose veins are causing pain, aching, heaviness, ankle swelling 
– or problems such as bleeding, eczema or leg ulcers – should be referred to a 
specialist vascular service for aduplex ultrasound scan 
<https://vascular.org/patient-resources/vascular-tests/duplex-ultrasound>. This 
creates a picture of how blood is flowing through the legs and will identify 
any damaged valves. The problem is that some UK regions possess neither the 
funding, nor the specialist teams, to allow this. If your leg veins are not 
causing any medical symptoms, you could simply leave them alone, or you could 
pay for private treatment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Feverything-wanted-to-know-varicose-vein-problems-thread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7729cf73cc4138068f0cd1fcd6eed7ad09681315%2F0_180_3345_3345%2F3345.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everything%20you%20wanted%20to%20know%20about%20vein%20problems%20(but%20were%20too%20busy%20pulling%20up%20your%20socks%20to%20ask)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Feverything-wanted-to-know-varicose-vein-problems-thread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everything%20you%20wanted%20to%20know%20about%20vein%20problems%20%28but%20were%20too%20busy%20pulling%20up%20your%20socks%20to%20ask%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Feverything-wanted-to-know-varicose-vein-problems-thread%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7729cf73cc4138068f0cd1fcd6eed7ad09681315%2F0_180_3345_3345%2F3345.jpg>
 Compression stockings can help, particularly for pregnant women who are prone 
to varicose veins. Photograph: Ruth Jenkinson/Getty Images/Dorling Kindersley 
What treatments are available?

For varicose veins 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Varicose-veins/Pages/Treatment.aspx>, Nice 
recommends endothermal ablation – in which the problematic veins are closed off 
using heat – or failing that, foam sclerotherapy, where a chemical foam is used 
to destroy the vein. Surgical “stripping” of varicose veins is third 
preference; it requires a longer hospital stay and more recovery time. For 
those whose varicose veins are causing symptoms, “compression hosiery should 
only be recommended as a permanent treatment, if the other options are 
unsuitable,” says Nice.

Thread veins can be treated at private clinics, where they may be injected 
with saline or another substance that causes the walls of the vein to collapse. 
Alternatively, they can be destroyed by heating them with microwaves delivered 
through a hair-width filament. This can be done during a lunch-hour, but 
treated areas can look as if a cat has scratched them for up to two months 
afterwards, and most people require three or four sessions. A new treatment 
being launched this month called Vein Away  <http://www.naturastudios.co.uk>
promises to focus heat even more precisely, resulting in a shorter recovery 
time and fewer treatments.

But surely we need our veins?

“A varicose vein by definition isn’t working properly, so losing it makes no 
difference,” says Tennant. There are a number of veins delivering blood back to 
the heart, so these will generally pick up the slack. If I get my veins 
treated, will more unsightly veins come back?

That depends on whether the root cause of the problem has been identified. “If 
you’ve got cracks in the wall, you need to make sure you check the foundations 
before you start painting again,” says Whiteley. The reason NICE advises people 
with varicose veins to be assessed with duplex ultrasound is to ensure that the 
defective vein is correctly identified; if it isn’t there’s a good chance your 
problems will return.

My varicose veins aren’t causing any symptoms. Is there anything else I can do 
to make them less visible?

You could try compression stockings. These provide gentle external support and 
encourage the blood in the veins to flow back towards the heart. “If you start 
wearing them as soon as you get early signs of varicose veins appearing, such 
as little spider veins around the ankles, it may stop them progressing to more 
severe symptoms,” says Rachael Sykes, a lymphedema specialist nurse and 
clinical support manager for Activa Healthcare, which manufactures compression 
stockings. However, “if someone has varicose veins and they stop wearing them, 
the problem will progress and they will come back again,” she says. Compression 
stockings can be bought over the counter, but Sykes recommends speaking to a GP 
to ensure you’re getting the right level of compression.

Are high-street beauticians adequately qualified to treat thread veins?

It is easy enough to get a certificate that allows you to treat thread veins, 
but, says Tennant, high-street beauticians “do not have the extensive training 
and regulation that medical practitioners have”. If a therapist misses the vein 
and injects into the surrounding tissue, this can result in brown patches, 
which can take several years to disappear. In rare cases, patients have also 
received burns from microwave treatment. “My advice is that if you’re going to 
get your veins done, find a reliable organisation and have a doctor do them,” 
Tennant says.
 