
Unlike those broadsheets whose crossword compilers are anonymous, it has long 
been the policy of the Guardian to present puzzles that vary enormously in 
difficulty. As far as my predecessor, John Perkin, was concerned, the rationale 
for this policy was that it was less exclusive.

This range of difficulty offers more to solvers than having puzzles pitched at 
roughly the same level each day. For experts, the majority of weekday puzzles 
can be done without reference books on the journey home, or in the pub, but 
every now and then even they get a stinker. And they can time themselves on how 
long it takes them to finish the easier crosswords.

The real advantage of the policy, though, is that it encourages new solvers to 
have a go at our crosswords and get hooked. Nothing is more discouraging than 
being unable to get even a single clue, and for many, once they have got the 
hang of the more simple crosswords, it is then almost as satisfying to complete 
half a difficult puzzle as it is to finish off an easier one.

When I took over from John Perkin, this range of difficulty seemed to me 
exactly the right policy for the paper to follow. My aim is to have about equal 
thirds of hard, middling and easier puzzles.

The internet has allowed us, on top of that, to offer subscribers the monthly 
Genius puzzle to make up for the fact that the paper itself does not carry 
anything as hard as, say, Azed in the Observer. Every week we also give 
subscribers the intentionally straightforward Quiptic, so that beginners get an 
extra something as well.

___________ 

All of this, though, begs the question of how to decide which compilers are 
harder, middling, or easier. The answer can only be subjective.

My own feeling, to pick a few of our compilers, is that Bunthorne, Enigmatist, 
Paul, Shed, Taupi and Brummie are hard and that Audreus, Janus, Logodaedalus, 
Quantum and Rufus are easier.

Araucaria is undoubtedly hard for beginners, but he is so scrupulously fair 
that, as solvers grow accustomed to his ways, they discover that he is 
definitely on their side.

In my March column, I published the results of a more objective study sent in 
by Rod Prince of London. Over 10 months and 255 puzzles, Rod counted the 
percentage of each compiler's grids that he had managed to complete. His 
results roughly coincided with my prejudices.

___________ 

Now I am grateful to another Guardian solver, Nigel Finlay, for sending me the 
results of his further research into the question, which used a quite different 
methodology to analyse about 100 crosswords.

His controls were rigorous. He commutes to London each weekday and does the 
crossword on the train going home, so there is no bias in the findings for 
morning alertness versus evening exhaustion. His train journey in the evening 
takes about 60 minutes (he does not say if he made any allowance for signal 
failures or the wrong sort of leaves on the line). Since he does not go to work 
on a Saturday, his sample necessarily excluded the (usually harder) Saturday 
prize crossword.

He recorded the proportion of clues solved in each crossword in the sample 
(some grids having more clues than others). Because he was on a train, he had 
no access to reference books or Google.

Here are his results:

Chifonie: 36%
 Shed: 37%
 Taupi: 41%
 Brummie: 44%
 Araucaria: 45%
 Rover: 48%
 Bunthorne: 49%
 Paul: 50%
 Gordius: 55%
 Pasquale: 55%
 Janus: 58%
 Audreus: 63%
 Crispa: 76%
 Rufus: 76%
 Quantum: 79%
 Auster: 87%
 Logodaedalus: 89%

 My only comments on this helpful data are that, first, Chifonie comes out 
higher and Bunthorne lower on the Finlay scale than I would have expected and, 
second, if the researcher had been working a six-day week, the inclusion of 
some of the harder Saturday puzzles might have produced a slightly different 
ordering.

 Needless to say, any other anecdotal or fact-based observations from other 
solvers would be very welcome.

Â·  Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor.
 