
Many of us waking up will feel the familiar pang of New Year’s Day 
self-loathing and decide that this is the day to start that new diet, begin 
that new detox, finally attempt to get the body of our dreams. Within a month 
we will probably feel miserable, hungry and no closer to achieving our goal.

Now a new film is set to challenge the increasingly pervasive message that 
there is one way to look by tackling the myth of the perfect body and the 
celebrity culture that fuels it.Embrace <https://uk.demand.film/embrace/> 
follows Australian writer and campaigner Taryn Brumfitt as she travels across 
the world talking to a huge variety of women about how they see themselves. She 
speaks to actor and talk-show host Ricki Lake about body image and Hollywood, 
to an entertainingly directAmanda de Cadenet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/may/01/pass-notes-amanda-de-cadenet>
 about what it was like living with tabloid scrutiny at the age of 18 (“The 
message I took from it was that if you were thinner you were better … these 
days I’d say if you want to eat the biscuit, eat the fucking biscuit”) and to
Harnaam Kaur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/13/lady-with-a-beard-if-youve-got-it-rock-it-guinness-world-records>
, a British Sikh woman who celebrates the beard caused by polycystic ovary 
syndrome rather than break her religious beliefs.

Most movingly of all, the film introduces us to women who have seen their 
bodies change in dramatic ways, from Kirsty who lost a breast to cancer (“My 
boys think it’s cool, they’ve got a mum with one boob – it’s a bragging point”) 
to the inspirational Turia Pitt who suffered burns to 65% of her body when she 
was caught in a bush fire and who admits: “I’ve gone through something so huge 
… and I think, well, if I’ve managed to start my life from scratch then I’m not 
sure why other people can’t. That probably sounds a little bit harsh but it’s 
just how I feel.”

“I made the film because I really wanted to have a conversation about this,” 
says Brumfitt. “I felt as though a lot of people behind closed doors felt the 
way I did – that they were being pressured to look a certain way and I wanted 
people to know that they’re not alone.”

Brumfitt knows the price of striving for perfection. After the birth of her 
third child she became obsessed with regaining a pre-pregnancy figure and began 
a punishing weight-loss and exercise regime that culminated in competing in a 
bodybuilding contest. But despite having what society would claim was the 
perfect figure, she was desperately unhappy and decided to return to a more 
relaxed regime. One day she posted an online before-and-after picture, with a 
twist. The before picture was her at her thinnest, the happy after shot was 
Brumfitt as she was, carrying a few pounds yet content.

“I thought it might help people but the response was mind-blowing,” she says. 
“It went viral and became this internet sensation and suddenly I found myself 
doing media across the world and talking about how women see their bodies.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ftaryn-brumfitt-embrace-women-body-image-ditch-diets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e97bb9f8befd7c2c8896a0cdf662ee51b7f65e9%2F0_257_2680_3350%2F2680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ex-bodybuilder%20Taryn%20Brumfitt%20campaigns%20to%20ditch%20diets%20and%20end%20myth%20of%20the%20ideal%20shape%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ftaryn-brumfitt-embrace-women-body-image-ditch-diets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ex-bodybuilder%20Taryn%20Brumfitt%20campaigns%20to%20ditch%20diets%20and%20end%20myth%20of%20the%20ideal%20shape%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ftaryn-brumfitt-embrace-women-body-image-ditch-diets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e97bb9f8befd7c2c8896a0cdf662ee51b7f65e9%2F0_257_2680_3350%2F2680.jpg>
 Taryn Brumfitt. Photograph: PR Company Handout 
Brumfitt swiftly realised that the brief chats she was doing on morning 
television were only scratching the tip of a very large iceberg. She started up 
theBody Image Movement <https://bodyimagemovement.com> to provide a forum for 
discussion but still wanted to do more. “I was hearing from all these women 
from all over the world and I knew this was a subject that needed a bigger 
platform so I nonchalantly thought, ‘Oh, I know, I’ll make a documentary, how 
hard can that be?’ And of course the answer was very.”

It might have been hard but the result is compelling. Embrace delves into 
every aspect of body image pressure from the plastic surgeon who spends a large 
amount of time telling Brumfitt that her post-pregnancy nipples “should be up 
here” (“I took one for the team there,” she remarks drily) through the magazine 
editors who talk frankly about the way in which the perfect body is sold to the 
world. There are screenshots of the body shamers who contacted Brumfitt online 
after her pictures went viral, telling her she should be ashamed and that her 
husband must be devastated.

“I really gave the audience the parental guidance version of that,” she admits 
with a laugh. “It bothered me at first but then I realised what’s the point? I 
feel great about my body. The more shocking thing was that no matter where I 
went in the world, body shaming and body hating was everywhere. It was like an 
epidemic and I found that heart-breaking and mind-blowing.”

Certainly one of the most powerful moments in the film comes when Brumfitt 
asks women across the world how they feel about their bodies. They are a range 
of ages, body shapes and nationalities yet they all say they’re unhappy with 
how they look.

“I feel as though I’m drowning in a sea of media,” announces a distressed 
mother talking about how hard it is to convince her teenage daughter that she 
doesn’t have to look a certain airbrushed way – andEmbrace is at its strongest 
when it tackles how we collude in this objectification.

“We live in a world where women are objectified and sexualised in advertising 
campaigns or on television on a daily basis,” says Brumfitt. “I really do hope 
that this film allows us to keep pushing back against the toxic ideal of 
perfection.”

A moment that changed me: being abused on the street about my weight | Sofie 
Hagen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/verbally-abused-weight-street-fat-people>
She has already had positive responses from some unlikely sources. “Quite a 
few men who have seen the film have contacted me and been so beautiful,” she 
says. “They’ve said things like, ‘I’ve told my wife for ever that I love her 
the way she is and I just don’t care about all the things she’s so worried 
about’. And that’s important because I don’t think this is just a women’s issue 
– it’s a problem for humanity.”

Indeed, although Embrace was “made for women first and foremost”, Brumfitt 
says she’s increasingly aware of how many young boys are also suffering from 
body image problems.

“There have been so many studies recently on the use of steroids in teenage 
boys – they’re under pressure to conform to a certain kind of muscled, manly 
stereotype as well and they’re equally bombarded with images of how they should 
look and behave.”

Her main hope is that the uplifting Embrace will convince audiences to start 
treating their bodies as something to love rather than loathe. “Absolutely. We 
need to detox from the toxic messages we’ve allowed inside our minds for so 
long,” she says. “I want people to know that they do have a choice: you can 
either spend your life being at war with your body and hating it, dieting, 
shaming yourself, using exercise as punishment, or you can embrace your body, 
move it for pleasure and live an exciting and uninhibited, liberated life. I 
know which one I’d choose.”

Embrace will be available in cinemas across the UK from 16 January
 