
Julian Tagg is thinking back to the moment when Brad Smith equalised for 
Liverpool againstExeter City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/exetercityfc>
 in their third-round FA Cup tie at St James Park and vehemently denying the 
mischievous, tongue-in-cheek accusation that was levelled at the League Two 
club’s chairman afterwards.

“I walked into the dressing room, as I do after every game, and I always try 
to be very level whether we win or lose, and Clinton Morrison said: ‘Hey, 
Taggy, there is a rumour going round that you jumped up when they scored,’” 
says Tagg, breaking into laughter as he tells the story.

Liverpool’s Brad Smith strikes to deny Exeter a memorable FA Cup scalp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/exeter-liverpool-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
With Wednesday night’s replay at Anfield set to take Exeter’s windfall from 
the two games againstLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> 
through the £500,000 barrier, Tagg could have been forgiven for seeing a few 
pound signs when Smith drilled home to make it 2-2. “It did work out rather 
well,” he says. “But I can tell you that the rumour is completely untrue – I 
had my head in my hands when they scored. You just want to win at that point.”

Born and educated in the city as well as being a lifelong fan of the club, 
Tagg is Exeter through and through. He has held just about every position going 
at St James Park, including spells as under-12 coach, player-manager of the 
reserves and an earlier stint as a ballboy, and he talks with great passion 
about Exeter, whether praising the fans who paid for new floodlights last 
season or railing against the “ridiculous embarrassment” the club became when a 
celebrity spoonbender and musical genius joined the board.

Tagg shakes his head when the names of Uri Geller and Michael Jackson are 
brought up. “One of the things that galvanised me was I remember listening to 
local radio and somebody from Plymouth phoned up and said: ‘What’s going on at 
Exeter City? Uri Geller, Michael Jackson – all they need now is Coco the Clown 
for the full set.’ Inside I’m an Exeter boy and that really hurt, the idea that 
the outside world thought that of our football club, and that reflects on our 
city.”

It was such a turbulent, chaotic time for Exeter, with or without the Geller 
and Jackson sideshow. In 2002 the club were taken over by John Russell and Mike 
Lewis, both of whom left a year later in disgrace with Exeter on the brink of 
collapse, £4.5m in debt and relegated to the Conference. Russell and Lewis, a 
couple of smooth criminals, later pleaded guilty to fraud.

Tagg had been heavily involved in the youth setup around that time and, when 
he realised that Russell and Lewis were going to shut that down, he “lost all 
sense and ended up going into the boardroom”, not realising the full extent of 
the financial mess at the club. A supporters’ trust was born out of that crisis 
and remains the majority shareholder at the most democratic of football clubs.

“I don’t have the same decision-making or the same power as other chairmen,” 
Tagg says. “I have to engage very carefully. There are 3,500 members that have 
a say – we’ve gained about another 400 off the back of theLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> match – and those people sing: 
‘We own our football club.’ That’s great. I love it when they sing that. They 
also feel they have the right – or do have the right – to tell you what you 
should be doing. That makes it a tricky position at times.”

For that reason it is easy to see why Tagg was so pleased when it emerged that 
Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-exeter-cup-replay>
 and BT Sport, who were at loggerheads at one point last week over the 
scheduling of the replay, eventually reached an agreement that means the match 
will be broadcast live. “That makes a huge difference, it’s another £72,000 
[each],” Tagg says. “Half a week’s wages for Mr Benteke. But for us that’s 
probably two players for a year.”

One of the frustrations for Tagg is that some wild figures have been bandied 
about in relation to Exeter’sFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> run – “The BBC talking about £1m 
is not helpful in any way. It’s inaccurate and sets all kinds of hares running 
in terms of the fans and what we can and can’t do” – and he also makes the 
point that finding ways of spending the money will not be difficult.

Around a third will go back into the manager Paul Tisdale’s playing budget, 
with the rest put towards the day-to-day running of the club, including the 
academy, and a lengthy to-do list. “We’re desperate for a new Tannoy system, so 
we hope to replace that,” Tagg says. “The buildings we use at the training 
ground were temporary when they were built in 1974 and we’re in desperate need 
for a rubber-crumb pitch, which is anything from £500,000 to £1m. So those FA 
Cup figures, once you start to divide them up, are hugely significant. They 
make a big difference to us but they’re not changing our world. Don’t get me 
wrong – we’re so grateful for it and it’s our lifeblood.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fexeter-city-chairman-fa-cup-liverpool-replay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7aec2ebc38175859d8368b2223e905af93ed2547%2F0_0_3455_2254%2F3455.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exeter%E2%80%99s%20reluctant%20chairman%20Julian%20Tagg%20can%20enjoy%20big%20night%20at%20Liverpool%20%7C%20Stuart%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fexeter-city-chairman-fa-cup-liverpool-replay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exeter%E2%80%99s%20reluctant%20chairman%20Julian%20Tagg%20can%20enjoy%20big%20night%20at%20Liverpool%20%7C%20Stuart%20James&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fexeter-city-chairman-fa-cup-liverpool-replay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7aec2ebc38175859d8368b2223e905af93ed2547%2F0_0_3455_2254%2F3455.jpg>
 Liverpool manager Jürgen Klopp with the Exeter City mascot before the first 
game. Photograph: Henry Browne/Action Images via Reuters 
The FA Cup was also kind to Exeter back in 2005, when they reached the third 
round as a non-league club and heldManchester United to a 0-0 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2005/jan/10/match.sport10> in front of 
67,000 at Old Trafford. Tagg, who was vice-chairman at the time, remembers how 
well Sir Bobby Charlton looked after the Exeter board in the directors’ box 
while at the same time wishing he had been singing alongside their 9,000 
travelling supporters.

“Importantly we put in a good performance at Old Trafford,” Tagg says. 
“Importantly we made a significant financial step forward. But more importantly 
from where we’d come from we gained some self-respect back from the nonsense 
and ridiculous embarrassment that Exeter City Football Club had been before, 
and that third one was probably the most significant gain that we made on that 
day.”

A physical education lecturer for 20 years as well as the owner of a 
successful property business, Tagg reluctantly stepped up to the role as 
chairman at Exeter in 2014 and earns £45,000 a year for his efforts. He 
describes the job as “like being on a treadmill in a pressure cooker” and makes 
no bones about the fact that he would happily step aside and return to 
concentrating solely on the club’s academy and their work in the community, 
both of which he cares deeply about, if the right person stepped forward.

Now, though, all his focus is on Liverpool and a replay that seems to be 
giving him no end of headaches as the 59-year-old fields call after call about 
everything from tickets to mascots while walking through the streets of Exeter 
to have his photograph taken.

Tagg is literally taking it all in his stride, looking forward to his first 
trip to Anfield with Exeter since a 5-0 defeat in 1982 – “I don’t think we 
kicked the ball in the first 20 minutes that day” – and refusing to subscribe 
to the view that they missed a trick against a depleted and inexperienced 
Liverpool team at home. “There was a lot of talent on that pitch that night. 
These are professional Liverpool players. A lot was made out of their injuries. 
Well, we had five. Five out of 27 or 12 out of 54 – and what a player No54 
was,” says Tagg, referring to Sheyi Ojo, who impressed after coming off the 
bench against Exeter.

“I am sure Liverpool will play better on a better surface. But Paul always 
wants to play football. That’s another raison d’être of Exeter City, so a 
better surface will improve our game. I don’t think the statistics are very 
good the second time round, when the opposition manager knows a bit more than 
he did in the first place. But Paul is an exceptional manager, he’ll come up 
with a plan, as he does for every game, and I wouldn’t put it past him causing 
an upset.”
 