
The times are changing at Salford City and not everyone is totally convinced 
theClass of 92 buyout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/27/class-of-1992-salford-city-deal-agreed>
 of a club founded in 1940 is taking them in the best direction.

So far Gary and Phil Neville, Paul Scholes, Nicky Butt and Ryan Giggs have 
said and done the right things since their takeover in the summer of last year. 
When Notts County arrive for Friday night’sFA Cup first-round tie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/26/salford-city-notts-county-fa-cup-first-round-draw>
, a crowd of 1,400 will be crammed into Moor Lane. There are new toilets, a new 
kitchen for the caterer and tea lady, Barbara “Babs” Gaskill, and a sparkling 
new warmer for the pies and sausage rolls.

The ambition of the new owners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/30/class-of-92-review> is to 
build a 25,000-seat stadium and take the club into the Football League, three 
tiers above the Northern Premier League top division to which Salford won 
promotion last season.

Class of 92 review: what the Neville brothers and Giggsy did next​
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/30/class-of-92-review> 
Jim Birtwhistle is one of the 15-strong club committee. He became involved 12 
years ago when installing a turnstile “because of Swinton’s big gates”, he says 
of the rugby league team that played then at Moor Lane. Since he gave up 
drinking alcohol, which he says nearly ruined his life, Salford has become more 
central to Birtwhistle, as a hub of community and shared experience with other 
volunteers and fans.

Of the Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> old boys’ ambitions, 
he says: “It’s heading the right way but we don’t know what they’re like, do 
we? Like this weekend we’re playing Notts County – there are 1,400 tickets and 
some who have been coming for donkey’s years have not got any. They’re going 
everywhere else but here. What’s happening is Manchester FA get 100, and other 
people like that. There won’t be many tickets left for the proper fans. It’s 
all right talking, isn’t it? A lot of talking goes on but not many people do 
anything.”

Birtwhistle has been busy in the buildup to a tie that will be shown live on 
the BBC. “I’m there about four times each week,” he says. “On Wednesday I took 
all the gates out so the wagons can get in. None of the committee get paid but 
we still do it voluntarily.”

He has no wish to be remunerated, however. “No, not really, it would be like a 
job then,” he says. “The club’s been good for me because I gave up drinking. 
For me it’s about the club and the people who come there, the fans. I’ve been 
there on a Tuesday night, freezing, and there were 57 people.”

Birtwhistle is one of the stars of the BBC documentary Class of 92: Out of 
Their League 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b06n31l6/class-of-92-out-of-their-league-episode-1>
, which has its second and final episode on Thursday night. Another is Gareth 
Seddon, a journeyman striker and male model whose doting mum and instantly 
likable persona allow him to outshine the screen presence of his famous bosses.

Seddon’s 11-club career includes periods at Padiham, Worcester City, and Hyde 
United, and a high was playing for Bury in the Football League. Yet after the 
first episode the striker found himself teasing Gary Neville in an apt 
illustration of the strange new era at Salford. “I textedGary Neville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-neville> and said: ‘I thought you 
did really well on my show,’ as a joke,” says Seddon in his broad Burnley 
brogue. “‘A few people have said you’re made for TV.’”

The 35-year-old is just that. So is the club and a cast of colourful 
characters who are its lifeblood. As well as Birtwhistle and Gaskill, a 26-year 
veteran of the cafe, there is Karen Baird, the chairwoman and an accountant by 
trade, who had to inform an unimpressed Gary Neville the Sky TV box was not 
strictly legal, a moment of some comedy given his position as a pundit for the 
broadcaster.

At the heart of the club are the players. Salford are fourth, in a play-off 
berth, nine points behind the leaders, Blyth Spartans. The focus on success 
moved the Class of 92, who each retain a 10% share – 50% is owned by Peter Lim, 
the Singaporean billionaire who also owns La Liga’s Valencia – to sack Phil 
Power last season and install Anthony Johnson and Bernard Morley as 
joint-managers.

Johnson and Morley play “usually a 4-3-1-2, with three forwards”, says Seddon, 
who has a knee injury but when fit is partnered by Danny Webber, a former 
Manchester United forward who is 33 and says Salford, his ninth club, may be 
his last.

Webber was at United from 1999-2003 when the Nevilles, Butt, Scholes and Giggs 
were in their pomp. He offers an instant answer when asked what single 
difference their ownership of Salford has made. “Standards,” says Webber. “From 
top to bottom of the club – standards. The desire to win, the desire to do 
well, making sure it’s all the right way, on and off the pitch.”

Webber adds of Salford’s hopes of reaching the FA Cup second round: “I’d like 
to think we’ve got a chance. It’s anFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> tie, they’re never scripted.”

As the club’s trajectory continues upwards Seddon is enjoying the ride. His 
profile is rising and he may even be a candidate for a spin-off reality TV 
series. “I’d love that,” he says, before laughing at Attitude magazine tweeting 
stills of him in his pants in the Salford changing room, which he retweeted. “I 
only found it the other day,” he says.

Others, though, wonder where the ride will end. “Them five lads they’re all 
winners, aren’t they?” says Birtwhistle. “They’ve been brought up with Fergie 
to win – that’s all they know. Gary Neville’s a top businessman, he never 
forgets a bloody thing – no matter what you say, he remembers it. He’s a very 
clever man.

“As it is now he comes along, sometimes with Scholesy. They go and stand at 
the far side of ground with a few people and that’s it. But I presume they’re 
going to put a new stand up at the end of this season.

“If they put a new stand up and you get all the corporate in with these fancy 
rooms, it’ll take away from it, won’t it? From standing next to the pitch 
they’ll be up in a room. We’ll just have to see how it goes, really.”
 