
Formula One’s phoney war gets under way in Jerez on Sunday, the first of three 
pre-season testing sessions leading up to the start of the season proper in 
Melbourne on 15 March.

It will only be on the day of the Australian Grand Prix – or perhaps during 
qualifying the day before – that we will be able to properly gauge the strength 
of the new cars and their drivers, and how well they have spent their winters. 
But there are still things to be learned during the four days in Jerez, which 
will be followed by two more back-to-back tests in Barcelona later in February.

If any team has produced an absolute dog of a car their drivers will know all 
about it next week. And there will be precious little time to put matters right 
before the start of the season.

By the same token, any driver who feels the right sense of balance and 
drivability in Jerez will look forward to Australia with a fresh sense of 
optimism. So the teams will have an idea about things in Jerez; it’s just that 
they won’t be letting on.

The cars will be faster this year, despite a slight increase in the minimum 
weight to 702kg. That’s because there will be improved performances from the 
engines introduced last year. And expect enhanced downforce, too.

There are no major changes this year, a few new nose jobs are the most 
noticeable feature of recent launches. And the biggest non-change could be 
another double championship for Mercedes. They are clear favourites to repeat 
their total domination of 2014, and if they can improve their reliability 
problems it is possible that they could win even more emphatically.

The same goes for the tussle between their drivers, Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> and Nico Rosberg. It is not 
only Hamilton’s father, Anthony, who thinks the British driver could have the 
title wrapped up by the halfway stage of the season.

That’s unlikely, but fundamentally Hamilton was about 0.2sec quicker than 
Rosberg last year, and however diligent the German is that’s a difficult gap to 
bridge. Rosberg will have the first go in the car on Sunday, the day the team 
launches their new car.

Lewis Hamilton gives first F1 sighting of new Mercedes before unveiling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/30/lewis-hamilton-mercedes-first-sighting-silverstone>
For the neutral fan, there are still some reasons to be hopeful for a 
competitive 2015 given Mercedes’ rivals will be able to make a limited number 
of improvements to their cars in the course of the season.

It should also be remembered that Red Bull, even with an uncompetitive Renault 
engine last year, still won three races. Renault have come up with a stronger 
power unit this time, though even they admit they may not have closed the gap.
Red Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> should still be stronger 
than in 2014, despite the loss of four-times champion Sebastian Vettel. Expect 
them to push Mercedes harder than any other team.

The battle between Daniel Ricciardo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/daniel-ricciardo>, the new star of F1, and 
the brilliant and precocious Daniil Kvyat will also be worth watching.

Ferrari <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> also need to come up with 
a better power unit. The Italian team is a fire that has sat low in the grate 
for too long, a fading glow where flames once danced. But there is an ache to 
get things right once again.

Perhaps the most fascinating team is Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams>, the biggest achievers last year 
aside from Mercedes. They beat Ferrari and McLaren in the constructors’ 
championship, where they finished third. Can they be better still, or have they 
peaked? Their lack of resources, when counted against the big four teams, may 
ultimately count against them.

McLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren>, back with engine 
suppliers Honda once again, are something of an unknown. It may take time for 
the two to bed in once again. At least they have come up with the right driver 
pairing at last – Fernando Alonso and Jenson Button.

Ferrari launch new FS15-T car for 2015 F1 season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/30/ferrari-new-car-formula-one-sebastian-vettel>
The McLaren chief executive Ron Dennis has, arguably, done more than anyone 
apart from Bernie Ecclestone to position F1 where it is today. But he greatly 
damaged his reputation with his hand-wringing Hamlet performance last year, when
he seemed incapable of making a decision about Button 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/20/mclaren-fernando-alonso-jenson-button>
. To err is human, but to um-and-er in F1 is unforgivable. In the end McLaren 
were morally obligated to retain both Button and Kevin Magnussen, who will be 
their reserve driver.

The sport’s money worries have not gone away, despite a rather quiet couple of 
months. The end of last season was dominated by the problems atMarussia and 
Caterham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/07/marussia-go-out-of-business-f1> 
and there are more headaches now. Force India will not take part in testing in 
Spain next week and the explanation that they need more “development time” is 
not convincing.

Meanwhile, there are reports that the big drop in oil prices has hit 
Venezuela’s state owned PDVSA, Lotus’s major sponsor. New cars may be launching 
all over the place but some things never change.
 