
MERCEDES AMG PETRONAS F1 TEAM

Engine Mercedes Team principal Toto Wolf Grand prix debut France 1954 Grands 
prix 108 Constructors’ titles 1 (2014)

The drivers

#6 Nico Rosberg: Grand prix debut Bahrain 2006 Wins 8 Poles 15 Drivers’ titles 
0Last season 2nd Odds for 2015 11-4

#44 Lewis Hamilton: Grand prix debut Australia 2007 Wins 33 Poles 38 Drivers’ 
titles 2 Last season 1st Odds for 2015 8-15

Test drivers Pascal Wehrlein, Anthony Davidson

Paul Weaver’s verdict 

The pre-season favourites looked even stronger than everyone expected during 
the three testing runs, which was all about cool running. And at the end Nico 
Rosberg pulled out a shattering lap without even using super softs. Awesome. 
They have the best car in the paddock and a settled team, and if they can 
improve on a disappointing reliability record in 2014 they will be impossible 
to stop.

INFINITI RED BULL RACING

Engine Renault <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/renault> Team principal 
Christian HornerGrand prix debut Australia 2005 Grands prix 184 Constructors’ 
titles 4

The drivers

#3 Daniel Ricciardo: Grand prix debut Great Britain 2011 Wins 3 Poles 0 
Drivers’ titles 0 Last season 3rd Odds for 2015 18-1

#26 Daniil Kvyat: Grand prix debut Australia 2014 Wins 0 Poles 0 Drivers’ 
titles 0 Last season 15th Odds for 2015 113-1

Test drivers Sébastien Buemi, António Félix da Costa

Paul Weaver’s verdict 

The runners-up from last year have produced yet another good-looking car, but 
doubts remain about the quality of that Renault engine even if it has stepped 
up from 2014. Daniel Ricciardo, the sensation of last season, will be a strong 
team leader and Daniil Kvyat is an exciting addition judging by his 
performances withToro Rosso <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toro-rosso> last 
year. Their results could depend on how well they use their development tokens 
through the season.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Ff1-2015-season-team-driver-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426285823820%2F19853439-c5ed-4291-88cf-08ece3cd27b5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%202015%20season%3A%20team-by-team%20and%20driver-by-driver%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Ff1-2015-season-team-driver-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%202015%20season%3A%20team-by-team%20and%20driver-by-driver%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Ff1-2015-season-team-driver-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426285823820%2F19853439-c5ed-4291-88cf-08ece3cd27b5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Danil Kvyat of Red Bull Racing during the first practice session at the Albert 
Park circuit for the Australian F1 Grand Prix in Melbourne. Photograph: Srdjan 
Suki/EPA 
WILLIAMS MARTINI RACING

Engine Mercedes Team principal Sir Frank Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams> Grand prix debut Spain 1977 Grands 
prix 642 Constructors’ titles 9

The drivers

#19 Felipe Massa: Grand prix debut Australia 2002 Wins 11 Poles 16 Drivers’ 
titles 0 Last season 7th Odds for 2015 75-1

#77 Valtteri Bottas: Grand prix debut Australia 2013 Wins 0 Poles 0 Drivers’ 
titles 0 Last season 4th Odds for 2015 43-1

Test drivers Susie Wolff, Alex Lynn

Paul Weaver’s verdict


Last year’s big jumpers, from ninth in 2013 to third. They finished 2014 as 
the second strongest car behind Mercedes. In testing, they appeared to have 
made progress with their downforce and rubber preservation problems. Now they 
are just looking for the win which eluded them last season. The determined 
Valtteri Bottas will give further evidence he is a future champion and Felipe 
Massa is still capable of a blitzing lap.

SCUDERIA FERRARI

Engine Ferrari <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> Team principal 
Maurizio ArrivabeneGrand prix debut Monaco 1950 Grands prix 889 Constructors’ 
titles 16

The drivers

#5 Kimi Raikkonen: Grand prix debut Australia 2001 Wins 20 Poles 16 Drivers’ 
titles 1 Last season 12th Odds for 2015 75-1

#7 Sebastian Vettel: Grand prix debut USA 2007 Wins 39 Poles 45 Drivers’ titles
 4Last season 5th Odds for 2015 18-1

Test drivers Esteban Gutiérrez, Jean-Eric Vergne, Pedro de la Rosa

Paul Weaver’s verdict

If they can topple their rivals as efficiently as they have been getting rid 
of their own people in the past year they will be a real force. In testing, the 
SF15-T looked a move up from last year. This is the first car that carries the 
fingerprints of the brilliant British designer James Allison. It will fight 
Williams andRed Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> for the 
podium places after Mercedes. Sebastian Vettel will be out to make a point.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Ff1-2015-season-team-driver-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426286225835%2Fbcbf0527-4283-4d2e-8c36-c70e424bdf75-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%202015%20season%3A%20team-by-team%20and%20driver-by-driver%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Ff1-2015-season-team-driver-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%202015%20season%3A%20team-by-team%20and%20driver-by-driver%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Ff1-2015-season-team-driver-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426286225835%2Fbcbf0527-4283-4d2e-8c36-c70e424bdf75-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel speeds through a corner during the second practice 
session in Melbourne. Photograph: Mal Fairclough/AFP/Getty Images 
MCLAREN HONDA

Engine Honda Team principal Éric Boullier Grand prix debut Monaco 1966 Grands 
prix 761 Constructors’ titles 8

The drivers

#14 Fernando Alonso: Grand prix debut Australia 2001 Wins 32 Poles 22 Drivers’ 
titles 2 Last season 6th Odds for 2015 61-1

#20 *Kevin Magnussen: Grand prix debut Australia 2014 Wins 0 Poles 0 Drivers’ 
titles 0 Last season 11th Odds for 2015 -

#22 Jenson Button: Grand prix debut Australia 2000 Wins 15 Poles 8 Drivers’ 
titles 1 Last season 8th Odds for 2015 94-1

*Magnussen replaces Alonso for the Australian GP

Test drivers Kevin Magnussen, Oliver Turvey, Stoffel Vandoorne

Paul Weaver’s verdict

It will be another difficult year for a team who came fifth last year when 
they had the best engine in town. Honda will take time to bed in. But the car 
appears to have made some progress with their aero since the arrival of Peter 
Prodromou. Thank goodness they have stuck with Jenson Button, whose experience 
could be vital. Meanwhile fingers are crossed Fernando Alonso will return to 
the driver lineup after his crash in testing and subsequent concussion.

SAHARA FORCE INDIA

Engine Mercedes Team principal Vijay Mallya Grand prix debut Australia 2008 
Grands prix 131 Constructors’ titles 0

The drivers

#11 Sergio Pérez: Grand prix debut Australia 2011 Wins 0 Poles 0 Drivers’ 
titles 0 Last season 10th Odds for 2015 949-1

#27 Nico Hülkenberg: Grand prix debut Bahrain 2010 Wins 0 Poles 1 Drivers’ 
titles 0 Last season 9th Odds for 2015 911-1

Test driver Pascal Wehrlein

Paul Weaver’s verdict

They came late to the testing party in Spain but when they got there they 
pounded in the laps. This solid outfit could overcome their financial 
difficulties to be consistent performers yet again, using the Mercedes engine. 
They have one of the best drivers outside the leading teams in Nico Hülkenberg, 
who is unlucky not to have been given bigger opportunities. And Sergio Pérez 
has the experience to perform with greater consistency.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Ff1-2015-season-team-driver-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426286458874%2Fa6e576e9-bd19-41d6-9e34-8201a40dd53d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%202015%20season%3A%20team-by-team%20and%20driver-by-driver%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Ff1-2015-season-team-driver-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%202015%20season%3A%20team-by-team%20and%20driver-by-driver%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Ff1-2015-season-team-driver-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426286458874%2Fa6e576e9-bd19-41d6-9e34-8201a40dd53d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sergio Perez of Force India during practice at Albert Park. Photograph: Robert 
Cianflone/Getty Images 
SCUDERIA TORO ROSSO

Engine Renault Team principal Franz Tost Grand prix debut Bahrain 2006 Grands 
prix 166 Constructors’ titles 0

The drivers

#33 Max Verstappen: Grand prix debut - Wins 0 Poles 0 Drivers’ titles 0 Last 
season NC Odds for 2015 312-1

#55 Carlos Sainz Jr: Grand prix debut - Wins 0 Poles 0 Drivers’ titles 0 Last 
season NC Odds for 2015 949-1

Test driver Sébastien Buemi

Paul Weaver’s verdict

There will be more than the usual interest in the Toro Rosso team, as they 
have two rookie drivers. And one of them is the exciting Max Verstappen, at 17 
the youngest driver ever in F1. We already know he is quick and he was 
ridiculously consistent in testing. He could be the most exciting driver this 
season and beside him is Carlos Sainz Jr, who was good enough to win the 
Renault 3.5 title.

LOTUS F1 TEAM

Engine Mercedes Team principal Gérard Lopez Grand prix debut Australia 2012 
Grands prix 58 Constructors’ titles 0

The drivers

#8 Romain Grosjean: Grand prix debut Europe 2009 Wins 0 Poles 0 Drivers’ titles
 0Last season 14th Odds for 2015 246-1

# Pastor Maldonado: Grand prix debut Australia 2011 Wins 1 Poles 1 Drivers’ 
titles 0 Last season 16th Odds for 2015 474-1

Test drivers Jolyon Palmer, Carmen Jordá, Charles Pic

Paul Weaver’s verdict

They might be the surprise team this season, with their new Mercedes engine. 
They had some impressive run-outs in practice and they have one of the quickest 
drivers out there in Romain Grosjean, who everyone is taking seriously after 
some cavalier times in his early career. Pastor Maldonado, though, is still 
having his silly moments.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Ff1-2015-season-team-driver-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426286523111%2Faef170c9-9b14-4e30-a798-bfaedfe089e9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%202015%20season%3A%20team-by-team%20and%20driver-by-driver%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Ff1-2015-season-team-driver-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%202015%20season%3A%20team-by-team%20and%20driver-by-driver%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F13%2Ff1-2015-season-team-driver-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F13%2F1426286523111%2Faef170c9-9b14-4e30-a798-bfaedfe089e9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Lotus’s Pastor Maldonado during practice in Melbourne. Photograph: Hoch 
Zwei/Action Images 
SAUBER F1 TEAM

Engine Ferrari Team principal Monisha Kaltenborn Grand prix debut South Africa 
1993Grands prix 292 Constructors’ titles 0

The drivers

#9 Marcus Ericsson: Grand prix debut Australia 2014 Wins 0 Poles 0 Drivers’ 
titles 0 Last season 19th Odds for 2015 949-1

#12 Felipe Nasr: Grand prix debut - Wins 0 Poles 0 Drivers’ titles 0 Last 
season NC Odds for 2015 949-1

* Giedo Van der Garde: Grand prix debut Australia 2013 Wins 0 Poles 0 Driver’s 
titles: 0Last season NC Odds for 2015 -

Test driver Raffaele Marciello

* Van der Garde is in dispute with Sauber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sauber> for breaching his contract

Paul Weaver’s verdict

They caught the eye in testing when with their Ferrari engine they put in some 
impressive runs. But in recent times Sauber hit the headlines as much for their 
financial problems as anything they have done on the track. And matters came to 
a head in Australia when everyone discovered they had three drivers due to a 
contractual dispute. This was still being resolved in the run-up to race day. 
Why does F1 appear to spend more time in court than any other sport?

MANOR MARUSSIA F1 TEAM

Engine Ferrari Team principal John Booth Grand prix debut Australia 2012 
Grands prix 55 Constructors’ titles 0

The drivers

#28 Will Stevens: Grand prix debut Abu Dhabi 2014 Wins 0 Poles 0 Drivers’ 
titles 0 Last season 23rd Odds for 2015 No odds available

#98 Roberto Merhi: Grand prix debut: - Wins 0 Poles 0 Drivers’ titles 0 Last 
season NC

Odds for 2015 No odds available

Test driver Jordan King

Paul Weaver’s verdict

The old Marussia team went into administration in October and there seemed no 
way back so everyone was delighted to see them return asManor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manor>, with fresh and optimistic backing. 
But they failed to run in the first practice session in Melbourne on Friday, 
placing a big question mark against them not only for the weekend but for the 
rest of the season.

• Additional research by Piotrek Magdziarz and Sean Morrison
 