
1) McLaren are dire

We never expected McLaren to be up there with the big boys – although they 
should be – but we didn’t expect them to come in last, coughing and spluttering 
likean also-ran in Wacky Races 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wacky_Races#Race_results>. OK, so they had a 
Mercedes power unit last year and Honda is a whole new deal. However, Honda 
were working on this engine all last year. What were they doing? McLaren should 
have gone to Derek Trotter.

2) Red Bull are bad losers

They haven’t had much practice in the past few years but threatening to quit 
the sport after only one race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/16/red-bull-could-contemplate-f1-exit>
 is the sort of spoiled attitude for which you would reprimand a child. They 
should be told they have signed a contract until 2020 and made to stand in the 
corner for the next race in Malaysia. Before worrying about Mercedes they 
should attempt to catch up with Williams and Ferrari – and be looking over 
their shoulder for Lotus.

3) Formula One is poor value

This is the pinnacle of motor sport but sometimes it gives frighteningly poor 
value for money. Other series are cheaper to watch and are often much more 
exciting. Only75% of the cars turned up on the grid on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/15/f1-australian-grand-prix-reduced-to-14-cars>
 and then four of the 15 starters dropped out – and that’s not counting Sauber, 
who at one point looked likely to have their cars taken away by the bailiffs. 
As for the “race”, it was nothing of the sort, only a test run in the sun for 
Mercedes. This was no way to recapture declining TV audiences but don’t heap 
all the blame on Bernie Ecclestone. He doesn’t control the sport as he once did.
 Pastor Maldonado exits his Lotus on the first lap. Photograph: Hoch 
Zwei/Action Images 
4) Hamilton is a whole class above Rosberg

Mercedes and some pundits like to stress the closeness of this rivalry but 
Lewis has Nico in his pocket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/15/lewis-hamilton-mercedes-f1-australian-grand-prix>
. When Hamiltonis on it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/15/f1-australian-grand-prix-race-report>
 he is too good for Rosberg, or anyone else for that matter, certainly in this 
car. Rosberg is admirable but Hamilton has the X-factor of the champion driver. 
He is, however, incident-prone, rather than accident-prone. Things happen to 
him, and it’s often not even his fault, and that’s our only chance of an 
exciting battle for the championship.

5) Williams and Ferrari are the best of the rest

Kimi Raikkonen failed to finish and Valtteri Bottas didn’t even get started 
but they and Felipe Massa andSebastian Vettel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel> did enough over the 
weekend to suggest there could be some good battles for the third podium place 
this season. James Allison, the brilliant British designer, has done a good job 
at Ferrari, while Williams are in the mood to consolidate on last season’s rise 
from ninth to third.

6) Vettel is back

Even in testing there were signs that Vettel had regained his spark after a 
disappointing defence of his title last year. He won a well-deserved podium 
place in the season’s opener and also showed his friend and team-mate, Kimi 
Raikkonen, how ruthless he can be in the heat of battle. The Ferrari looks 
reborn – and Vettel along with it. On both counts that is good news forFormula 
One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>.

7) Trust the kids

If you’re good enough you’re old enough, they say, and the rookies had an 
excellent time in Melbourne, only to be let down by their equipment in some 
cases. Many people were worried that Max Verstappen was too young for this 
game, at 17, but he showed his pace over the weekend, while Carlos Sainz Jr and 
Felipe Nasr also had impressive moments. Jenson Button and Kimi Raikkonen must 
feel ancient at 35 apiece.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ff1-2015-australian-gp-the-shakedown-lewis-hamilton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426504520294%2F086e953a-53c8-431f-8ddc-3843b937d9eb-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%202015%3A%20Australian%20GP%20%E2%80%93%20the%20shakedown%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ff1-2015-australian-gp-the-shakedown-lewis-hamilton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%202015%3A%20Australian%20GP%20%E2%80%93%20the%20shakedown%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Ff1-2015-australian-gp-the-shakedown-lewis-hamilton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426504520294%2F086e953a-53c8-431f-8ddc-3843b937d9eb-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Felipe Nasr and his Sauber in action during the race. Photograph: Diego 
Azubel/EPA 
8) It wasn’t Manor from heaven

It was one of the most romantic comebacks in the history of Formula One. 
Marussia went into administration in October and nobody really thought they 
would see them again but three weeks is not long enough to build a car, andthe 
Manor garage was as quiet as a village library on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/14/manor-f1-australian-gp-qualifying-no-show>
. Now the cynics are suggesting that they only went to Melbourne to pick up 
their £30m prize money from last season. If Manor are to dispel such dark 
thoughts they will have to come out fighting in Malaysia.

9) Melbourne is the only place to start the season

This is arguably the greatest sporting city in the world and ideal to launch 
the F1 season. They really know their sport here and appreciate their F1. It’s 
just a pity theydidn’t get a better show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/15/f1-rivals-mercedes-australian-gp-win-boring>
. The great thing about a street circuit is that it fully engages the city it 
is held in – unlike those far-flung, white-elephant stadiums that are usually 
half-empty because spectators can’t be bothered to make the long trek. The 
atmosphere was terrific on Sunday, as usual.

10) Always take your earplugs when you go to Albert Park

It’s not for the cars, which aren’t noisy enough in the opinion of the locals. 
It’s for the particularly loud air displays that go on all weekend and threaten 
to blow your head off.

• This article was corrected on 16 March 2015 to reflect the fact that 75% of 
the grid turned up, not 25%.
 