
Best driver

In terms of extracting the most from himself, Nico Rosberg. No driver worked 
harder thanthe champion in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/27/nico-rosberg-first-f1-drivers-title-lewis-hamilton-abu-dhabi>
, both with his team and with himself – changing his diet, his sleeping 
patterns, his gloves, turning his mobile phone off for two weeks and emptying 
his mind of all distractions.Daniel Ricciardo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/21/daniel-ricciardo-red-bull-f1> 
was also superb and consistent. Everyone knows that Lewis Hamilton is the best 
driver out there, but apart from those technical setbacks he failed to always 
get the best from himself, was way off form in Singapore and took a long time 
to get over hisproblem with bad starts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/05/lewis-hamilton-mercedes-cure-start-problem>
.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Nico Rosberg seals Formula One championship title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/nov/27/nico-rosberg-seals-formula-one-championship-title-video>
Worst driver

Rio Haryanto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/18/rio-haryanto-manor-racing-first-indonesian-f1-driver>
, if you remember him. He always looked destined to replacethe maladroit Pastor 
Maldonado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/29/f1-farewell-crashtor-pastor-maldonado-kevin-magnussen-renault>
 in our hearts. He made his debut in the first race in Australia and crashed 
into Romain Grosjean in practice. He was handed a three-place grid penalty and 
had two points added to his licence; he retired from the race on the 18th lap. 
In August, Manor demoted him to reserve team driver. The most disappointing 
driver, though, was Kevin Magnussen. Many thought him unlucky when he was 
demoted to test and reserve driver at McLaren but at Renault he ended the 
season looking second-best to the rookie Jolyon Palmer.
 Manor driver Rio Haryanto of Indonesia flies over Sauber’s Marcus Ericsson 
after the start of the Russian Grand Prix in May. Photograph: Denis Tyrin/AP 
Best team

Related: Nico Rosberg grinds out first F1 driver’s title to put Lewis Hamilton 
in shade | Paul Weaver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/27/nico-rosberg-first-f1-drivers-title-lewis-hamilton-abu-dhabi>

Mercedes. No argument there, surely, even though Red Bull saved the season 
from becoming totally predictable, while Force India, those habitual 
overachievers, came a magnificent fourth for the first time. But Mercedes, 
admirably dissatisfied with their dominance in 2014 and 2015, remained well 
ahead of the game, winning 19 of the 21 races. They have dominated even more 
completely than Red Bull managed between 2010 and 2013.

Worst team

Ferrari. No, not Manor, or Sauber, who were never going to achieve much with 
their limited resources. Ferrari are the biggest and richest F1 team of them 
all but they again frustrated their passionate supporters, and everyone else in 
Formula One who wanted to see somebody step up and challenge Mercedes. If they 
were bad enough last year, when they won only three races and finished a 
distant second to Mercedes, they were dire this time round, with problems with 
their chassis, their aerodynamics and their strategy. They failed to win a 
single race and finished 367 points behind Mercedes and 70 points behind 
second‑placed Red Bull. And they let their brillianttechnical chief, James 
Allison, leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/27/ferarri-technical-director-james-allison-leaves-team>
, suggesting they lack not only performance but ambition, too. The mystery is 
how the team principal, Maurizio Arrivabene, was allowed to survive it all.
 Ferrari endured a difficult season and finished a distant third in the 
constructors’ standings, 367 points behind Mercedes. Photograph: Jeremy 
Lee/Reuters 
Best drive

Although Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg had 19 wins between them, I’m not 
picking one of them. I’m going forMax Verstappen – but not his famous maiden 
victory in Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/max-verstappen-youngest-winner-f1-history-spanish-gran-prix>
, where he became the youngest ever F1 winner. It was a great performance there 
by Verstappen but it came after Hamilton and Rosberg had collided, and after 
his team-mate Ricciardo had been placed on a three-stop strategy against his 
own two-stopper. No, it’shis drive in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/14/max-verstappen-brazilian-grand-prix-felipe-massa>
, at sodden Interlagos, which caught the eye more than any of his other 
sensational performances. He dropped to the back of the field after making an 
unnecessary extra stop and then carved his way back through the pack in 
thrilling fashion to finish a most unlikely third, having made up 13 places in 
16 laps.
 Max Verstappen celebrates his third place in Brazil. Photograph: Clive 
Mason/Getty Images 
Best race

The Brazilian Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-brazilian-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-rain>
, the penultimate round of the year, literally got the thumbs down from the 
locals when it started behind a safety car. And there was plenty of booing when 
the five safety cars stayed out too long, and on the two occasions the race was 
red-flagged. But by the end, three hours after the start, they had seen a wet 
drive of rare mastery from Hamilton, bringing back memories of his famous
victory in the rain at Silverstone in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jul/06/lewishamilton.formulaone>, and 
bravery and skill from almost everyone else. It was breathless, it was chaotic 
and it was difficult to follow at times. Verstappen caught they eye more than 
any other driver but they all contributed to the spectacle. At the end they 
cheered the local hero Felipe Massa but that had more to do with the fact that 
this was his last home race than for any ability driving in wet conditions.

Most daring overtake 

Related: 2016 Formula One season – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/nov/28/2016-formula-one-season-in-pictures>

In the context of what was at stake, it has to be Rosberg’s pass on Verstappen 
in Abu Dhabi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/27/f1-title-decider-abu-dhabi-gp-live>
. Verstappen has pulled off some of the most memorable passes of the season – 
and his team-mate Ricciardo has been no slouch either. But in the end it is 
Verstappen being overtaken that will live in the memory for ever. Rosberg was 
told that he had to make the move. He delayed for a while and then almost 
collided with the prodigy when going past through turns eight and nine of lap 
20. If the German had got it wrong he would have seen his entire season’s work 
go up in smoke. He is often criticised for not being the equal of Hamilton when 
it comes to wheel‑to‑wheel action – and he’s not – but this was a move to 
remember.

Hero of the year

Jolyon Palmer. This is a slow burner of a driver. It took him a long 
apprenticeship in GP2 before he finally won the series and now the same thing 
appears to be happening to him in F1. After a hesitant starthe has settled in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/09/jolyon-palmer-renault-f1-second-season>
 at Renault and, in the latter part of the season, regularly got the better of 
his more experienced team‑mate, Kevin Magnussen. He may not be a future world 
champion but he is a British driver to be proud of.
 Jolyon Palmer has secured a second season with Renault after a solid debut 
year that saw him finish 15 of the 21 races. Photograph: Clive Mason/Getty 
Images 
Villain of the year



Sebastian Vettel. He is a four-times world champion but has forgotten how to 
win. That is mostly because of his inferior car but too often his frustrations 
spilled over and he was too aggressive with his driving and a little too blue 
with his language. There were far too many petulant outbursts and he was lucky 
to get away with swearing at the race director, Charlie Whiting, following the 
Mexican Grand Prix.

What F1 must do next

Improve the product. The new regulations for 2017 will help. The tyres will be 
fatter, the cars will be more aggressively designed and they should be four or 
five seconds faster, too. But that is only a start.Liberty Media, the new 
owners, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/f1-liberty-media-8bn-takeover-deal-agreed-bernie-ecclestone>
 must show their vision for the future. They must address falling attendances 
and television audiences. They must embrace social media and do their best to 
attract a younger audience, while not alienating the old. Rules and regulations 
should be simplified. But it is also up to the teams to raise their game. It is 
no good blaming Mercedes for being too good. We need more teams and drivers 
competing for wins, we need more overtaking – or at least attempted overtaking. 
We need a better show.
 