
1) Ferrari’s pace is real

We saw it in testing in Jerez and again in Barcelona, and everyone was looking 
sceptical and questioning their fuel loads. Were they just trying to impress 
with some flashy runs? But after this winter there can be no more doubt. Both 
in terms of their chassis and their power unit Ferrari have made a massive step 
forward under British technical director James Allison. Mercedes might go and 
win the next dozen races butFerrari <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> 
are on the way back. And this was only the start.

2) Max Verstappen is heading for the big time

It is time to praise, not patronise, the 17-year-old from Toro Rosso, who was 
seventh on Sunday and looks a champion in the making. It won’t be long before 
we see Verstappen driving for one of the bigger teams at the front of the grid. 
He may graduate to Red Bull, whose cars were beaten by Verstappen and the also 
impressive Carlos Sainz Jr on Sunday.

3) We now know the top pecking order

Mercedes still have the best car, but they are followed by the emerging 
Ferrari and the solid-againWilliams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams>
, who are desperate for the win that eluded them last year. That’s the podiums 
sorted out. It’s after that it gets complicated. Force India are not quite as 
fast as they were in terms of straight-line speed, but they did lose testing 
time. They still might be involved in some decent scraps with McLaren, who 
still have massive reliability issues. But if they can sort them out they 
appear to have a real chance of making it into mid-table. But they are still 
light years away from being front-runners.

4) Sebastian Vettel looks like a world champion again 

After his miserable final year at Red Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/04/sebastian-vettel-leave-red-bull-end-season>
, following his four titles, there were those who questioned his desire and his 
ability to make an impression in a lesser car. He was regularly beaten by his 
young team-mate Daniel Ricciardo in 2014. But he was doing a jig of delight in 
his cockpit after his victory on Sunday, and he’s obviously learned some 
Italian too. He always fancied driving for the team where his idol, Michael 
Schumacher, was so dominant in the early years of the century. And his tears 
after the Malaysian Grand Prix showed everyone how much victory meant to him.

5) Bernie Ecclestone was spot-on in Australia

Ecclestone told everyone not to make a knee-jerk judgement after the dismal 
first race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/14/lewis-hamilton-pole-australian-grand-prix>
 and Malaysia gave us a cracking one. Hopefully this season will be like 2010, 
when an awful opener in Bahrain was followed by a compelling season in which we 
reached the last race in Abu Dhabi with four possible winners, Vettel, Alonso, 
Lewis Hamilton and Mark Webber. But there is more scepticism concerning 
Ecclestone’s remarks about double points. It was arotten idea to have double 
points in Abu Dhabi last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/30/lewis-hamilton-criticism-double-points-final-f1-race-abu-dhabi>
, and turn the championship into a lottery. Ecclestone, though, would like to 
have them awarded for the final three races.
 