
1) Penalties proving pointless

That the arms race of spending within Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> needed to be curtailed was clear 
to all. Fitting a new engine for each day of a race weekend had become 
unsustainable and limiting the number of power-unit components to five per 
season was designed to rein in costs.

To an extent the policy has achieved its goal, but in Spa the policing of that 
rule with grid penalties was made to look farcical. Lewis Hamilton was given a 
55-place drop (plus five more for breaking a gearbox seal inparc ferme), most 
of which became entirely meaningless once he had already been relegated to the 
back. Fernando Alonso’s 60-place sanction was equally absurd. Both teams fitted 
three new power units – Mercedes for tactical reasons to give Hamilton a stock 
of parts,and McLaren for an upgrade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/mclaren-triumphs-spa-francorchamps-belgian-grand-prix-f1>
 and because of technical failures – and the expense will not have been a 
concern to either team.

Fans on Saturday were denied a qualifying shootout involving Hamilton as he 
took the penalty and opted to conserve his rubber, which left a hollow ring to 
the whole affair. The British driver has long been critical of the engine 
formula, and was so again last weekend, also taking aim at the penalty rule. 
His team executive director, Toto Wolff, agreed with him.

“The figures are pointless and we shouldn’t bother with them any more,” said 
Jenson Button <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jenson-button>, which is true 
but the reality is the sport needs to find a way to control costs that does not 
impact on the spectacle it is selling – perhaps by deducting constructors’ 
points – and it needs to do it right. “In Formula One every time we try to save 
money, we spend more,” McLaren’s team principal, Éric Boullier, noted after 
Alonso took his third engine on Saturday.

Lewis Hamilton comes third to keep F1 lead as Nico Rosberg wins Belgian GP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/28/nico-rosberg-lewis-hamilton-f1-belgian-gp>
2) Verstappen is at the limit

He is young, he is very popular, he is talented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/01/red-bull-max-verstappen-safety-f1-lewis-hamilton>
 and there was evidence of all three in the Ardennes for Max Verstappen. In 
qualifying Verstappen had taken Ricardo Rodríguez’s record, held since 1961, 
for being the youngest driver to start from the front-row of the grid. He did 
so in front of a huge contingent of Dutch and Belgian fans, with both claiming 
him as their own. He is registered as a driver for the Netherlands,as was his 
father Jos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/20/f1-dynasties-max-verstappen-red-bull-spanish-gp>
, but his mother is Belgian and he was born just 40 miles from Spa in Hasselt.

He has been unafraid all season to take on experienced drivers, not least 
Sebastian Vettel on the outside of Becketts and Kimi Raikkonen in Spain and 
Hungary. But although he was not punished by the stewards, much of his drive at 
Spa has given many cause for concern.

He was too impetuous at La Source on lap one, which is the very first place 
this race can be lost and where it consequently was for him, Raikkonen and 
Vettel (who was also at fault). But much worse was the late block in front of 
the Finn on the Kemmel Straight.

Coming out of Eau Rouge in eighth gear at 200mph is no place to risk a 
pointless accident. He did similar in Spain to prompt similar ire from 
Raikkonen but again no action from the stewards. His advance to F1 has been 
shockingly quick with little time to learn his race craft, or indeed his 
limitations. “We were fortunate there wasn’t a big accident because of that,” 
Raikkonen said, and the Finn was right. At the moment Verstappen is an accident 
waiting to happen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ff1-five-things-learned-spa-lewis-hamilton-mclaren%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d4a930f56999a31ffa465c6dc0577b46eca4fe0%2F0_129_3488_2092%2F3488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%20Belgian%20Grand%20Prix%3A%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20Spa%20%7C%20Giles%20Richards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ff1-five-things-learned-spa-lewis-hamilton-mclaren%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%20Belgian%20Grand%20Prix%3A%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20Spa%20%7C%20Giles%20Richards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ff1-five-things-learned-spa-lewis-hamilton-mclaren%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d4a930f56999a31ffa465c6dc0577b46eca4fe0%2F0_129_3488_2092%2F3488.jpg>
 Max Verstappen benefitted from raucous home support - both Belgian and Dutch - 
in Spa but he is starting to seem an accident waiting to happen. Photograph: 
Action Press/REX/Shutterstock 
3) No wonder Lewis Hamilton is smiling 

Mercedes had predicted no better than eighth at Spa for the British driver and 
Hamilton himself had expressed doubts about reaching the top 10.

He accepted a hit in return for three new power units but his chief concern 
was to limit the damage to his championship lead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/nico-rosberg-pole-belgian-grand-prix-hamilton-penalties>
. It was perfectly feasible that Rosberg would, in fact, surpass him in Belgium 
in the championship standings. As it transpired, though, the bigger challenge 
for Hamilton was not so much that, nor the glorious Spa circuit, nor even 
fighting through the field, but the state of his tyres. Exceptionally high 
temperatures all week – it was 43C (109F) on track in qualifying – combined 
with the Mercedes power and downforce being overly tough on the Pirelli rubber 
that would be running in dirty air, made everyone cautious.

Third place, then, was way beyond expectations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/28/lewis-hamilton-belgian-gp-third> 
and Hamilton still has a nine-point lead in the championship. Lower 
temperatures, the safety car, three rivals out at turn one and the red flag all 
played their part as did Hamilton in keeping his head. If the title goes to the 
wire this was the sort of performance that would make the difference and was an 
object lesson to Verstappen. But what will please Hamilton even more is what 
awaits – he knows he is exceptionally strong going into the races that 
constitute the run-in. His recent record post-Belgium issix wins from seven in 
2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/23/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-title-nico-rosberg>
 for the title andfour from five to clinch it three races early last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-world-title-third-time-us-grand-prix>
.

McLaren back at scene of triumphs and preparing for repeats in future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/mclaren-triumphs-spa-francorchamps-belgian-grand-prix-f1>
4) Force India on the move

There were smiles, too, for Force India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/force-india>, who continued their happy 
hunting at Spa with Nico Hülkenberg and Sergio Pérez in fourth and fifth. The 
team’s first and only pole was scored here in 2009 by Giancarlo Fisichella, who 
converted it into what is still their best finish – second place. They, too, 
benefited from the turn-one incident but Hülkenberg’s race was somewhat 
compromised by the safety car and red flag and might even have yielded a third 
position.

Nonetheless both drivers put in very strong drives and such a strong result 
was huge for them. It is the first time they have put two cars in the top five
since Bahrain in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/06/bahrain-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg>
 and most importantly it has moved them ahead of Williams to fourth in the 
constructors’ championship.

From 15 points behind before Spa they are now two points ahead and in a 
position to potentially take the greater financial reward that place will offer 
should they hold it until the end of the season. Fifth last season is the 
team’s best finish but bettering it will mean a big fight with Williams.

The Grove-based squad, who have underperformed this year, will be in no mood 
to give up their place as best of the rest. How much more each team can bring 
to this year’s car with the bulk of resources already on the 2017 iteration may 
prove vital. The midfield battle for the run-in should be as exciting as the 
one at the front.

F1: Nico Rosberg wins Belgian Grand Prix; Lewis Hamilton third – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/28/f1-belgian-grand-prix-live> 
5) Fernando Alonso still has it 

An absolute rollercoaster of a weekend for McLaren ended on a high note. It 
had begun with the Honda directorYusuke Hasegawa telling me of his optimism for 
next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/mclaren-triumphs-spa-francorchamps-belgian-grand-prix-f1>
, of the strides his team were making in developmentand a real desire to be 
fighting for wins in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/mclaren-triumphs-spa-francorchamps-belgian-grand-prix-f1>
.

They had used seven development tokens on engine upgrades for the race and 
although they were always going to struggle on a power track like Spa, they 
were confident of a good performance. Then a water leak forced another engine 
change for Alonso’s car and what Hasegawa admitted was a bad call when they 
sent him out for qualifying with an oil-pressure problem, forcing a third 
engine change and a 60-place grid penalty. Then, reason for cheers as Jenson 
Button wrung the neck of hisMcLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> 
to take ninth on the grid.

But his actual race was short-lived after he was unceremoniously biffed out by 
Pascal Wehrlein on lap one. Alonso, however, had a stormer from last on the 
grid. He had joked about following Hamilton through the pack on Saturday but 
after two laps of the race he was ahead of the British driver in 11th. He 
avoided incident and took every advantage as the runners on soft rubber stopped 
early, putting him as high as fourth.

He was never going to hold it but he did fight to the last and clung on to 
take seventh ahead of both Williams drivers in undoubtedly faster cars. 
“Seventh is very good points for the team and to be in the points, on a circuit 
like this, was unthinkable a couple of months ago,” he said.

It moved McLaren into sixth in the championship ahead of Toro Rosso and 
perhaps the early optimism of the weekend was borne out. Certainly Alonso 
thought so. “The progress that the team has made is just amazing and if we keep 
this momentum for next year that will be great news,” the Spaniard said.
 