
1) Rosberg will be praying for sunshine

Nico Rosberg <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg> is washed up as 
a title contender if many more grands prix are hit by rain. We saw it atMonaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/lewis-hamilton-formula-one-victory-monaco-grand-prix>
 andwe saw it again at Silverstone on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/lewis-hamilton-wins-british-grand-prix-formula-one-race-report>
: when there’s rain aboutLewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> is the master. He seems as 
happy as a hippo wallowing in water.

Hamilton also looked faster than Rosberg in the high-speed parts at 
Silverstone, especially in sector two and has now cut his team-mate’s 
championship lead to only one point. There’s a rhythm to his driving at the 
moment, and that’s bad news for Rosberg because Hamilton loves hooking up the 
fast corners and many elevation changes in Budapest, where the next race will 
be run on 24 July.

2) Ferrari will become more competitive when they stop moaning

“In terms of problems, bad luck and everything we have had already, we are at 
the top in terms of points,” the Ferrari team principal, Maurizio Arrivabene, 
said after another disappointing outing at Silverstone, where their cars came 
fifth and ninth as Red Bull closed again on their second place in the 
constructors’ championship.

Sebastian Vettel <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel>, who 
managed to finish behind a Toro Rosso and both Force India cars, was 
compromised by a grid penalty. But an indifferent qualifying performance was 
followed by a poor race. Perhaps Arrivabene should listen toKimi Raikkonen, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kimi-raikkonen> the driver he has just 
re-signed for next year. Raikkonen said in the build-up to Silverstone: “We 
don’t have enough speed.” Quite. Raikkonen doesn’t say much but when he does 
open his mouth he is usually spot on. And Vettel added: “We were not quick 
enough. Simple as that.” We will be halfway through the season midway through 
the next race so excuses are wearing thin.

3) There is still spirit at struggling Sauber

On Sunday, Felipe Nasr started 21st but finished 15th after giving Valtteri 
Bottas, in his Merc-powered Williams, and Haas, a tough time. Poor Sauber, a 
team everyone is fond of, have gone from middling to piddling, and are 11th out 
of 11 in theFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> world 
championship table. They are the only team not to have picked up a point so 
far. But with drives like this, all is not lost.

4) Hamilton may be ploughing lonely furrow at Silverstone

Lewis Hamilton might be the only British driver at Silverstone next year. 
Jenson Button <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jenson-button> looks likely to 
see the curtain fall on his F1 career without achieving much at his home race – 
unless rumours linking him with Williams next year come to fruition. This is 
almost certainly his last year with McLaren. In his 17th race at Silverstone, 
where he has never managed a podium place, he was 12th. And compatriot Jolyon 
Palmer had another difficult race day but was not to blame when Renault made a 
mess of his pit-stop.

5) Massa and Bottas feel the pressure

Felipe Massa and Valtteri Bottas, whose futures at Williams are less than 
secure, are not making a strong case for their retention. Massa, who reacts to 
rain like Superman handled kryptonite, struggled with his inters and then did 
not give his slicks due care and attention. Bottas was slow and mistake-prone, 
which is hardly a successful combination in this business.
 