
The head of the Williams Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> team has said the value of F1 to 
the UK economy is undervalued and that the sport is at the forefront of vital 
research and development that can boost the manufacturing industry.

Claire Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams> said the sport 
was showcasing the pinnacle of technology and was a vital test bed for new 
innovations.

Seven of the 10 Formula One teams are based in Britain and invest an estimated 
£1bn into research and development every year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/09/formula-1-f1-engineering-skills-uk-economy>
. The motorsport industry employs more than 40,000 people in the UK.

George Osborne’s march of the makers has suffered a setback in the last month, 
with Rolls-Royce and BAE Systems announcing job losses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/15/bae-eurofighter-rolls-royce-aircraft-manufacturers>
.

We hoped for a march of the makers, but even BAE is failing to produce the 
goods
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/15/bae-eurofighter-rolls-royce-aircraft-manufacturers>
However, the investments being made by the leading Formula One teams in the UK 
remain a bright spot for industry.

Williams, the deputy team principal and commercial director of the team, said: 
“Having the UK as the F1 heartland shouldn’t be underestimated. I think it is 
undervalued the contribution we make.”


She was one of the main speakers at the CBI conference last week and is the 
daughter of the team’s founder and principal, Sir Frank Williams, although she 
effectively has day-to-day control.

The 39-year-old said Formula One is leading the way in the development of 
hybrid technology in engines and kinetic energy recovery systems, known as 
Kers. Williams has set up an advanced engineering division to transfer the 
innovations developed in Formula One into other areas, such as road cars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Ff1-contribution-to-uk-economy-undervalued-says-williams-boss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe83c3036922ddc43cbda4a17b9129bac31ce85a5%2F0_281_4309_2586%2F4309.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%20contribution%20to%20UK%20economy%20is%20underrated%2C%20says%20Williams%20boss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Ff1-contribution-to-uk-economy-undervalued-says-williams-boss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%20contribution%20to%20UK%20economy%20is%20underrated%2C%20says%20Williams%20boss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Ff1-contribution-to-uk-economy-undervalued-says-williams-boss%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe83c3036922ddc43cbda4a17b9129bac31ce85a5%2F0_281_4309_2586%2F4309.jpg>
 Claire Williams: ‘Technology and engineering are at the centre of what we do.’ 
Photograph: Leon Neal/AFP/Getty Images 
“Technology and engineering are at the centre of what we do and always have 
been,” she added. “The cars are extraordinary pieces of kit. That is one of the 
most exciting things about it [the sport].”

Formula One has been criticised for placing too much emphasis on the 
technology of the cars rather than the skill of individual drivers, with
television audiences dwindling as the Mercedes team led by Lewis Hamilton 
dominates races. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/23/f1-bernie-ecclestone-max-mosley>

However, Williams hit back at critics of the sport. “Innovation is at the 
forefront and always should be. This is the pinnacle [of technology],” she said.

“F1 is a great sport. All sports have challenges, and we need to make sure we 
are addressing these challenges. However, we are the most-watched sport 
globally, that should not be forgotten.”

Williams said it was important that Formula One is sustainable for the teams 
involved, with some under financial strain as they try to meet the costs of 
developing new technology.

The Williams team has agreed partnership deals with other companies to work on 
new developments. These include BT, the FTSE 100 car parts makerGKN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gkn?page=3>, and Avanade, the technology 
group.

Avanade <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/avanade-uk> provides the 
technology that allows Williams to condense and analyse the 60 gigabytes (GB) 
of data the company receives about its car each race weekend. This data is used 
to establish the performance of the cars and when they need to make a pitstop 
during a race.

Adam Warby, the chief executive of Avanade, said: “The association with the 
sport is a great alignment for us. Financially we don’t disclose the amount of 
effort and money, but it is an important amount. This is not about making 
decisions [for Williams] but about helping to make the best decisions.”
 