
1) Rosberg is back in the driving seat

Nico Rosberg <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg> is once again 
bossing the Formula One championship table – and with Austria to come, where he 
has won for the past two years, there was an extra spring in his step on Sunday 
night. He believes this could be his lucky season.

After two bad race weekends in Monaco and Montreal, after which he had seen 
his 43-point lead slashed to nine,Rosberg is now 24 points ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/19/nico-rosberg-wins-european-grand-prix-in-baku-to-extend-championship-lead>
. As the season’s halfway stage approaches Lewis Hamilton, who has won two 
races to Rosberg’s five, cannot afford to slip further behind.

Nico Rosberg wins European Grand Prix in Baku to extend championship lead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/19/nico-rosberg-wins-european-grand-prix-in-baku-to-extend-championship-lead>
2) Ferrari still cannot make a good strategy call

It has ruined Ferrari’s season so far, but they have not learned anything. On 
the face of it, they did not have a bad race in Baku, withSebastian Vettel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel> finishing second and his 
team-mate Kimi Raikkonen fourth. But that was only after Vettel totally ignored 
a call to pit for fresh rubber. “Why?” he asked. “My pace is good.” And so it 
was. Vettel was helped by troubles at Red Bull, and by Lewis Hamilton’s failure 
to find his right engine mode. But he was right to show a lack of faith in his 
team and that is why he finished strongly. But there will be more problems 
ahead if Ferrari’s very experienced drivers do not have faith in their pitwall.

3) Massa is feeling the heat

Felipe Massa <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/felipe-massa> is showing signs 
of pressure at Williams, where his contract expires at the end of the season. 
In the past the Brazilian, now 35, has done well to keep up with his younger 
team-mate Valtteri Bottas. But lately the Finn has looked the stronger driver. 
On Sunday Massa started fifth and finished 10th and even he described it as a 
“terrible” day.

Massa is not helped by rumours linking Jenson Button with the team. The 
British driver looks certain not to have his contract renewed by McLaren and 
Williams are known to be long-term admirers.

4) Pérez is under-rated

McLaren’s decision to split with Sergio Pérez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/14/kevin-magnussen-sergio-perez-mclaren>
 at the end of the 2013 season, and replace him with Kevin Magnussen, looks 
stranger by the race. On Sunday Pérez was asked, very strangely, if he would 
consider a return to McLaren. He replied “No” in the politest terms. Why should 
he? His current Force India team are much more competitive, with the Mercedes 
engine. Besides, Ferrari have been linked with Pérez as they look to replace 
Kimi Raikkonen. Yet the Mexican looks perfectly happy where he is.

5) Baku delivered as a racing venue

Forgetting the politics and looking purely at the racing, Baku was a great 
success. OK, not much happened on Sunday – perhaps the drivers were spooked by 
what had happened in GP2 a little earlier, with a raft of chaotic safety car 
restarts. But over the entire weekend the venue really delivered.

Vettel was in no doubt. “It’s the first time here and I didn’t know what to 
expect but it’s been a great track,” he said. “The circuit is incredible – you 
need to be well equipped around here.”
 