
We will miss Pastor Maldonado, if reports of his imminent departure from 
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> are correct. He was 
a wonderful mix of F1 man and dodgem star, the prang-ster among the world’s 
elite drivers.

Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel fastest at F1’s wet tyre test for Pirelli
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/26/ferrari-sebastian-vettel-f1-quickest-wet-tyre-test-pirelli>
Now, however, Maldonado’s career looks set to crash and burn in the way that 
he has always threatened to do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/13/grands-prix-pastor-maldonado-f1-future-lotus>
 every fortnight through the season, following sponsorship problems with PDVSA, 
the Venezuelan state-owned oil company. Kevin Magnussen, the former McLaren 
driver, stands by to replace him at Renault next season.

Maldonado, or Crashtor as he is affectionately known, has represented a 
reminder of just how difficult it is to manhandle a car round a tight grand 
prix circuit at 200mph. Ordinary mortals, who cannot imagine possessing the 
sublime skills of Lewis Hamilton or Sebastian Vettel, can identify with a man 
who has a website dedicated to him:Has Maldonado Crashed Today? 
<http://hasmaldonadocrashedtoday.com/> It tells us that he has not crashed for 
more than 60 days – but then there has not been a Formula One race sincethe end 
of November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/29/nico-rosberg-lewis-hamilton-abu-dhabi-grand-prix>
.

Other drivers steer clear of him, if only because his own ability to steer 
clear is in considerable doubt. In fact, Maldonado’s only conspicuous strength 
has been his association with PDVSA, which sounds like a veterinary charity but 
is one of the sport’s most important sponsors, especially if you happen to be a 
relatively small team, such as Williams and Lotus, where the driver has spent 
his five years in F1.

Maldonado spent three seasons at Williams, starting in 2011, before moving to 
Lotus in 2014.Renault <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/renault>, who have 
taken over the Lotus team after protracted talks last year, will announce their 
driver lineup in a relaunch jamboree in Paris next Wednesday.

Magnussen drove for McLaren in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/14/kevin-magnussen-sergio-perez-mclaren>
 but was then demoted to reserve driver to make way for the arrival of Fernando 
Alonso. In October Magnussen was informed that his contract at McLaren would 
not be renewed.

Renault have already signed one new driver, with Britain’s Jolyon Palmer 
coming in to replace Romain Grosjean, who has moved to the new team, Haas.

Renault obviously have a lot of faith in the judgment of the former Red Bull 
driver Mark Webber, who the other day described Maldonado as the weakest driver 
on the grid. When Webber was asked to name the worst driver he told Wheels 
Magazine: “Probably Maldonado. He’s out of his depth and just shouldn’t be 
there. He’s making up the numbers basically.”

For the record Webber reckons that Vettel, his old team-mate at Red Bull, is 
the best driver out there followed by Lewis Hamilton and Alonso.

“If you’re talking Formula One, the good boys always find themselves at the 
front and the good guys always find themselves in the best cars,” he said. 
“Lewis has always been an incredibly fast, naturally gifted guy in all 
conditions and he’s very, very insensitive to tracks and to light rain and 
drizzle. It’s these sorts of things that make the calibre of a very, very fast 
and phenomenal driver.

Other drivers steer clear of him, if only because his own ability to steer 
clear is in considerable doubt

“If I had to pick one, I’d probably pick Sebastian, in terms of pulling the 
whole juggernaut together and getting the whole team going, which I think he 
will do at Ferrari shortly.”

And there you have it. Most would agree with Webber that Hamilton, Vettel and 
Alonso are the top three, in whatever order. Then there is a big gap. The same 
judges would place poor old Crashtor at the back – but it was fun while it 
lasted.
 