
1) With the US Grand Prix on Sunday, some choice moments from F1 in the US: 
Bruce McLaren takes the flag, becoming the sport’s youngest winner but Jack 
Brabham is the star – pushing his car over the line to take fourth and the 
world championship atSebring in 1959 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5FXgBbxsE6Q>; Gilles Villeneuve magnificent in 
the wet atWatkins Glen 1979 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DOre43k_ED0>; John 
Watson with some glorious overtaking during his win atDetroit in 1982 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UrlWl_UwIHs> and his comeback to win from 22nd 
on the grid in 1983 at Long Beach in full: partsone 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y44mZ0RZKvg>, two 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1h1vs0c5MGM>, three 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jn4T2sLsZH4>, four 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0bRymdiGri4>, five 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WoYwJ2eblEA>, six 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OyTi1hZhkJY>, seven 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9lJPggdHcjQ> and eight 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vk0hQqRXb4Q>; Watson talking through both races
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EVSUH2Zmbnk>; Keke Rosberg and Villeneuve 
battle atLong Beach in 1982 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y0kdfyNpzYU>; 
Ayrton Sennna v Jean Alesi atPhoenix in 1990 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YdmiprP97BA> and Lewis Hamilton uncompromising 
through turn <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D7Cc7W1T2zQ> one at the Circuit 
of the Americas on his way to the world championship last year.


2) 14 years ago: remember the name – how Wayne Rooney’s introduced himself 
with thatfirst goal <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zDs-eERbhaM> against 
Arsenal,more  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lxqvssg3do0>were to follow. More 
up to date: Egyptian goaliemakes great save 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VtHj6Er19yI> outside the box, no one notices, 
photographerfails to make catch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Om1_ImKIncs> 
outside the end zone, everyone notices.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvzXJwiWsvNE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvzXJwiWsvNE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvzXJwiWsvNE&media=>
3) Kevin Eriksson takes a huge drift  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vzXJwiWsvNE>to go round the outside off the 
start in the World Rallycross Championship.

4) Inspired by pigs on the pitch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sDks4GNZKkw> 
at Charlton last weekend more items in the air: top tenat ice hockey 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VtHj6Er19yI>; those tennis balls 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hHPnaI2tFD8> at Borussia Dortmund; Dani Alves 
deals with a banana <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y22qdUsYzZo>; the world’s 
greatestpaper aeroplane <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BV6EP9bBbac>; a pigs 
head <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zDeCyYju5dA> and back at Charlton its 
beachballs <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KeHPm-OaGVo> this time.

5) Joey Barton: “Homophobia in football shows the problems the UK faces” – 
Owen Jones meets Barton <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O2TRo6kbDPY> at, yes, 
the Cheltenham Literary Festival.

6) Wales’s Justin Tipuric does it all himself 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8hLJIsDztCI> with this spectacular try.

Highlights from last week’s blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/13/classic-youtube-sports-clips-nba-shoe-throwing-jurgen-klopp-plays-bowls-rugby-league>

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpSQ-LADAdXg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpSQ-LADAdXg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpSQ-LADAdXg&media=>
1) Karate football. Sounds good enough on its own right? But stick to the end 
as whatever it is, it get increasingly bonkers until concluding witha naked 
goalie in a hurricane <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pSQ-LADAdXg>. Equally 
surreal here’s what happens whentwo Japanese horror icons face off 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Co6zFxXw5-Q> at a baseball match. And to round 
off the triple bill: ladies and gentlemen, start your, er,belt sanders 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YrgfFcxrIy8>.

2) 1975 and “Snatch of the Day” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TXEbVo69QcM> 
gives a pleasing spin to the football roundup, in this public information film 
on the dangers of pickpockets. “Where is it impossible to snatch? A nudist 
colony ...” More gorgeous retro film here with a1950s ski jumping competition 
in Norway <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8MZZMpq91is>. Clue it is the 
fifties: one of the competitors is wearing a proper collar and tie.

3) Jimmy Greaves: “I haven’t seen a boardroom like this since I was in Doug 
Ellis’s house.” WhenDonald Trump made the draw 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2zoioohWdqQ> for the 1992 League Cup 
quarter-finals.


4) What a talent: Venezuela’s Deyna Castellanos slots a cracke 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TfTn1bqXPEA&t=0m38s>r at the Under-17 World Cup
and another <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3wzUhuJkI2Q&t=0m31s>. 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgLt53RoZri4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgLt53RoZri4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgLt53RoZri4&media=>
5) Remembering Jerry Quarry and his fights with Muhammad Ali: His first in 1970
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gLt53RoZri4>, the second in 1972 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8iEO2-061Iw> and as evidence of his grand 
spirit, his brilliantimitation of Ali 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5YSC6XLh7fo>. Before he died in 1999, 
suffering from dementia, he was inducted into the Boxing Hall of Fame but was 
sadly barely aware of where he was, as seen inthis very moving tribute 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8pARExGEOW0>.

6) Red Bull continues its quest to become the world’s premier supplier of 
caffeine-based drinks that pay men to hurtle about on bicycles: Danny MacAskill 
revels in theHD beauty of Scotland’s countryside 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K_7k3fnxPq0&feature=youtu.be>; Man attaches 
lump of meat to back in order to makea peregrine falcon chase him down a 
mountain <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VM8tShcn-dY> and Dan Atherton on the 
breathtakinghardline downhill track 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DhBPFr3RRso>.


Spotters’ badges: whobroughtoranges, BlackCaeser, GrahamClayton, StuartRG, 
Vesuvial, slimjim68, thatchapcarnell, whobroughtoranges.

Guardian YouTube football channel

Do subscribe, if you fancy <https://www.youtube.com/user/GuardianFootball>

Guardian YouTube sport channel

Do subscribe, if you fancy 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCwD9E_QNwFwrQC7OnPnrg2Q>
 