
To see how much Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> has 
changed, you could go back 60 years, to the finale of the 1956 season, when a 
24-year-old Englishman voluntarily gave up his chance of the world championship 
to an Argentinian rival old enough to be his father. It was a race in which the 
two early leaders fought each other so hard that they both had to come in for 
new tyres after only four laps, and in which the eventual winner, having run 
out of petrol with a handful of laps to go, was shunted a mile or so back to 
the pits for a quick fill-up by a fellow competitor who happened to be driving 
the same make of car.

Today’s F1 fans, watching Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg regularly treating 
each other with glacial disdain before mounting the podium, might find it hard 
to believe that such a universe ever existed – one in which drivers fought 
every bit as fiercely but behaved on and off the track as if they respected and 
even liked each other. Nowadays we have Sebastian Vettel, a four-time world 
champion, and Max Verstappen, a 19-year-old future champion, settling their 
petty on-track differences byexchanging text messages 
<http://www.motorsport.com/f1/news/vettel-texted-verstappen-after-brazilian-gp-853163/>
, as they did after the race at Interlagos a fortnight ago.

Christian Horner, the boss of the Red Bull team, mischievously suggested this 
week that were the two Mercedes drivers to start, as usual, from the front row 
in Abu Dhabi on Sunday, and were Hamilton to take an early lead, the Englishman 
might choose to slow up and back his team-mate into the pursuing pack, thus 
putting the championship leader into the sort of difficulties that could cost 
him the points he needs to secure the title.

Although Hamilton immediately dismissed the notion, the fact that the idea 
could even be voiced shows how far the moral compass of Formula One has swung. 
Of course, Horner might say that he was merely reacting to the equally 
gratuitous and even improper suggestion a fortnight earlier from Toto Wolff, 
his opposite number at Mercedes, that the two Red Bull drivers should leave the 
Mercedes pair to race for the title without hindrance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d45a1fc7126aea41087dd7bfeb90731948cc047%2F0_734_2448_3016%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%E2%80%99s%20age%20of%20chivalry%2C%20when%20drivers%20gave%20up%20cars%20for%20others%2C%20is%20a%20distant%20dream%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%E2%80%99s%20age%20of%20chivalry%2C%20when%20drivers%20gave%20up%20cars%20for%20others%2C%20is%20a%20distant%20dream%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-formula-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d45a1fc7126aea41087dd7bfeb90731948cc047%2F0_734_2448_3016%2F2448.jpg>
 Peter Collins at the Syracuse Grand Prix in April 1956. Photograph: Getty 
Images 
Sixty years ago, on a warm but overcast day at Monza, Peter Collins, the 
almost unfeasibly handsome blond-haired son of a Kidderminster garage owner, 
went into the eighth and final round of the series as one of three drivers 
still in with a chance of taking the championship. His Ferrari team-mate Juan 
Manuel Fangio, already three times champion, led the standings with 30 points. 
Collins and Jean Behra, the No2 to Stirling Moss in the Maserati team, had 22 
apiece.

In those days the points per race went from eight for a win down to one for 
sixth place, with an extra point for setting the fastest lap. To take the 
title, the Englishman and the Frenchman needed to win the race and record the 
fastest lap, with Fangio completely out of the points. Back then, too, drivers 
were allowed to share a car and divide the points, as Fangio had done in the 
opening round in Argentina, when he won the race after taking over the Ferrari 
of his team-mate, Luigi Musso, when his own fuel pump failed. He had taken 
Collins’s car after crashing at Monaco, where they finished second. This was 
motor racing’s equivalent of thedroit de seigneur, a team leader’s prerogative, 
and it was eventually outlawed.

As the grid formed up in front of the Monza grandstand, with the dampness from 
a morning shower still drying on the track, Fangio had won two and a half 
grands prix that season, to Collins’s two. Moss, with one win and a total of 19 
points, was just out of contention. The grid consisted of five Ferraris, 10 
Maseratis and three cars each from Vanwall, Connaught and Gordini.

Two of Ferrari’s young Italian tearaways, Musso and Eugenio Castellotti, 
roared away at the start, each hoping to win his home race, only to run into 
trouble caused by the inability of their tyres to handle the rough surface of 
the track’s high-speed banked section. Musso fought his way back to second 
place but was doing 160mph on the banking when he suffered Ferrari’s third 
steering failure of the weekend, returning to pits shaken and in tears.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c65a5d51e0d4e31d201690e8c56a3aa9b8416f6%2F0_209_3724_2235%2F3724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%E2%80%99s%20age%20of%20chivalry%2C%20when%20drivers%20gave%20up%20cars%20for%20others%2C%20is%20a%20distant%20dream%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%E2%80%99s%20age%20of%20chivalry%2C%20when%20drivers%20gave%20up%20cars%20for%20others%2C%20is%20a%20distant%20dream%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-formula-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c65a5d51e0d4e31d201690e8c56a3aa9b8416f6%2F0_209_3724_2235%2F3724.jpg>
 Peter Collins, left, Stirling Moss, centre, and Argentina’s Juan Manuel Fangio 
at the British Grand Prix at Silverstone in July 1956. Photograph: Getty Images 
When Fangio’s steering had broken at a safer speed earlier in the race, Musso 
had sat tight and refused point-blank to give up his car. Collins, however, 
graciously let the maestro take over his cockpit with 15 of the 50 laps to go, 
handing Fangio a share of second place and the three points that secured a 
fourth title.

Afterwards Collins said to a friend, the photographer Bernard Cahier: “It’s 
too early for me to become world champion – I’m too young. I want to go on 
enjoying life and racing, but if I became world champion now I would have all 
the obligations that come with it. And Fangio deserves it, anyway.” He told the 
Daily Mail: “I think Fangio is the best driver in the world, and a charming 
man, too.”

Jenson Button and Felipe Massa sign off with call for stronger rivals to 
Mercedes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/jenson-button-felipe-massa-f1> 
Although the Italian newspaper Momento-sera praised his “nobility, style, 
class and sporting dignity”, not everyone joined the applause. The Sunday 
Express vented its harrumphing disapproval of what it saw as a “quixotic 
gesture” that had potentially deprived Britain of its first world champion. Two 
years later Collins might well have gone on to achieve that distinction had he 
not been killed in the German Grand Prix; instead it would go to Mike Hawthorn, 
his team-mate and best friend.

A fortnight before his death he had looked well set when driving his Ferrari 
to victory in the British Grand Prix at Silverstone. The trophy presented to 
him that day, an elegant silver-plated cup 18 inches tall, goes under the 
hammer at Bonhams next month, the auctioneers’ estimate of around £5,000 hardly 
reflecting its significance as a reminder of the values of a different time.
 