
1) Verstappen headed for greatness

We already knew Max Verstappen was precociously good – now we know he’s going 
to be one of the greats. He was faster than his vastly more experienced 
team-mate Daniel Ricciardo for most of qualifying and thenwon on his Red Bull 
debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/max-verstappen-youngest-winner-f1-history-spanish-gran-prix>
 to show everyone that the Milton Keynes-based team are back in business. He 
has looked totally at ease from the moment hestepped up from the junior Toro 
Rosso team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/05/red-bull-drop-daniil-kvyat-f1-max-verstappen>
 earlier this month. Now we know why he was fast-tracked straight from Formula 
Three.To bea Formula One race winner at 18 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/15/f1-spanish-gp-live-lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg>
 is incredible. It also means that, starting so young, all the records could 
fall to him. He could still be driving in 20 years.

Nico Rosberg ponders clear-the-air talks with Lewis Hamilton after crash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/16/nico-rosberg-lewis-hamilton-mercedes-crash-f1-spanish-gp>
2) Horner will need to keep ‘devastated’ Ricciardo happy

Red Bull’s team boss, Christian Horner, will have to show his man management 
skills to keep Ricciardo happy. Horner has the nimblest footwork of all the 
team principals and he has the experience of dealing with the intenserivalry 
between Sebastian Vettel and Mark Webber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/14/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-sebastian-vettel-red-bull-christian-horner>
. However, Ricciardo’s nose has been put out of joint by the arrival of the 
sensational Verstappen from Toro Rosso. Ricciardo lost out to Verstappen after 
Horner decided to put the Australian on a three-stop strategy to cover the 
expected threat from Vettel’s Ferrari, which never really came. “I’m a bit 
devastated. A big part of me is happy the team are on winning form but it’s 
hard to celebrate,” Ricciardo said. “To not be on the podium sucks. I will pull 
the guys aside who I need to ask what the deal was today.”

3) Raikkonen motoring and motivated for new deal

A fully motivated Kimi Raikkonen, whose contract with Ferrari runs out at the 
end of the year, is clearly driving for a new one-year deal. Ferrari have been 
linked with a number of drivers. Carlos Sainz, who was almost as good as 
Verstappen at Toro Rosso, is one. Valtteri Bottas has also been mentioned, 
although the Finn is not dominating the veteran Felipe Massa at Williams in the 
way he might be expected to, given the respective stages of their careers. 
Ferrari would also have no difficulty in acquiring Romain Grosjean from Haas. 
Raikkonen, at 36, looked lucky tostill have a drive at Ferrari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/19/kimi-raikkonen-handed-contract-extension-ferrari-f1-2016>
 at the start of the year. He appeared to have lost the edge off his speed, and 
perhaps a little motivation. However, he was 0.221 seconds quicker than Vettel 
in qualifying in Barcelona and looked the only man capable of beating 
Verstappen at the end.

4) Financially troubled Sauber show spirit

Maybe everyone has been a bit premature in writing obituary notices for 
Sauber. In Barcelona McLaren’s chairman and CEO, Ron Dennis, said that two 
teams might go to the wall before the end of the season – and financially 
troubledSauber <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sauber> look the most 
vulnerable of them all. On Sunday, however, Marcus Ericsson drove very well, 
and he thought his performance on Saturday was one of his best qualifying 
experiences. He still qualified only 19th but finished 12th, beating both 
Renault cars in the process. Sergio Pérez had a good race again for Force 
India, another of the teams with money worries, finishing seventh.

5) Sainz catches the eye
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Ff1-spanish-grand-prix-five-things-barcelona-max-verstappen-kimi-raikkonen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff301b250caf13f077a5ad7514e4da8c9442d5245%2F52_38_4016_2410%2F4016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%20Spanish%20Grand%20Prix%3A%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20Barcelona&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Ff1-spanish-grand-prix-five-things-barcelona-max-verstappen-kimi-raikkonen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%20Spanish%20Grand%20Prix%3A%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20Barcelona&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Ff1-spanish-grand-prix-five-things-barcelona-max-verstappen-kimi-raikkonen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff301b250caf13f077a5ad7514e4da8c9442d5245%2F52_38_4016_2410%2F4016.jpg>
 Carlos Sainz finished sixth for Toro Rosso at the Spanish Grand Prix. 
Photograph: Alejandro Garcia/EPA 
After Verstappen, the most eye-catching drive at the Circuit de 
Barcelona-Catalunya came from Sainz, who is surely destined to secure a drive 
with one of the big teams. He put in a particularly fast first lap and finished 
in sixth place, his best finish. In doing so he beat his Toro Rosso team-mate 
Daniil Kvyat, who hashad a few weeks he would like to forget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/12/daniil-kvyat-red-bull-demotion-toro-rosso-max-verstappen-f1>
.
 