
Watching testing in Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> 
is akin to being trapped in the middle of a speech by Donald Rumsfeld. The 
former US defence secretary, who might be described as pellucid when placed 
beside the politicians who infest F1, talked about known knowns, known unknowns 
and then unknown unknowns – things we don’t know we don’t know. Quite.

Testing is a smokescreen multiplied by 11 teams, a sleight of greasy hand, a 
noisy dissimulation, a study in agonistic behaviour. When it is all over, few 
people are any wiser.

Lewis Hamilton scorns F1 rule changes and wants bigger say for drivers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/24/lewis-hamilton-scorns-f1-rule-changes-and-wants-bigger-say-for-drivers>
But in the kindly warmth of a February Catalan sun, Formula One folk looked 
about themselves on Thursday afternoon and dared to be hopeful. With just over 
three weeks to go before the start of the new season in Melbourne on 20 March, 
there was a sense of defiant optimism in the paddock.

Bernie Ecclestone offended people in F1 the other day when he said the sport 
was the worst it had ever been. They feel he not only damaged the product but 
also that he was plain wrong. The people who run F1 may well be terminally 
hopeless but the drivers and teams are confident enough to exchange nervous 
smiles as the real action approaches.

Paddy Lowe, Mercedes’ technical whizz, told me at the end of the first 
four-day testing session: “We are going to see a healthier, more sustained grid 
and tighter, with the back moving towards the front, which is really good.

“Manor will be in the mix. Honda have improved. Renault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/renault> are going to be on the up. The 
teams in general are in better shape than they were in 2015.”

The quickest two cars will be Mercedes and Ferrari, probably in that order. It 
has been difficult to compare them this week because they have been running 
very different programmes. Mercedes have pounded in the mileslike Eddie Izzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/sep/20/eddie-izzard-marathon-runner> 
while Ferrari have done shorter runs, using softer rubber.

The relentless professionalism of Mercedes has been so impressive this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/24/lewis-hamilton-scorns-f1-rule-changes-and-wants-bigger-say-for-drivers>
. They have brought innovations to the car on an almost daily basis.

Ferrari <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari>, though, have caught the 
eye, like a show-off neighbour driving an old Testarossa. At this stage 
Mercedes may still be a little faster but last season’s half-a-second a lap may 
be down to two or three-tenths.

Behind them, Williams could well hang on to the third place they have occupied 
over the past two seasons, a great achievement for an essentially small team. 
ButRed Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> are likely to chase 
them harder, particularly in the second half of the season, when their extra 
resources will start to make up for their lack of preparation after making an 
end-of-year engine deal with Renault.

So the top four could well be the same as last year but the gaps between them 
may be narrower. It’s what comes after them that is fascinating. The other 
seven teams argue, with some credence, that they will be in the midfield.

Force India <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/force-india>, middleweights who 
always fight like cruiserweights, have looked good in Barcelona this week, 
though they have pushed themselves a little harder than some of the other teams.

Haas appear to be the best new team we have seen for a while. Toro Rosso, now 
with a 2015-spec Ferrari engine, could be good enough to embarrass Red Bull on 
a few occasions.

Renault, like a number of teams, are likely to come good later in the season. 
But again it will be a major improvement on last year when – as Lotus – they 
often seemed on the very brink of extinction.

But if everyone is holding down a midfield place, who will come last? Last 
season it was Manor, who were being lapped every 10 circuits. But now,with a 
Mercedes engine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/01/mercedes-engines-f1-manor-marussia>
 and another technical deal with Williams, they are entertaining loftier 
thoughts.

Sauber, the great survivors, did not bring this year’s car to Barcelona, so 
they are already off the pace. That leaves us withMcLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren>, yet another midfield aspirant. The 
good news for Jenson Button and Fernando Alonso is they will be better than 
last year. The bad news, I think, is it will not be by much. So they still look 
bottom-three material.

Apart from on Thursday, when they had more problems, they have put in a lot of 
miles at the Circuit de Catalunya this week. But as Ron Dennis, the CEO, 
observed many years ago, it’s easy to make a reliable slow car. And McLaren 
have looked as slow as a hearse this week.
 