
Formula One’s top teams could lose tens of millions of pounds in payments after
Bernie Ecclestone <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernie-ecclestone> 
revealed he plans to scrap the current bonus scheme.

Teams such as Red Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull>, Ferrari, 
McLaren and Mercedes have historically been paid more than others in a system 
intended to keep them locked into the series.

But the payments have led to claims from smaller teams they are disadvantaged. 
Red Bull, for instance, have seen their payments boosted after winning four 
consecutive titles between 2010 and 2013.

F1 European Grand Prix: five things we learned from Baku | Paul Weaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/20/f1-european-grand-prix-baku-five-things-we-learned-nico-rosberg-lewis-hamilton>
Ferrari <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> have received special 
bonus payments as the only team to remain in F1 since the world championship 
began in 1950.

The first opportunity to change the payments will come in 2020, when the 
current commercial deal between the teams and the sport’s rights holders comes 
to an end.

Ecclestone, Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> 
Management’s chief executive, revealed he had warned the head of Mercedes, Toto 
Wolff, that change may be on the way. “I told Toto not to think about banking 
any money yet,” Ecclestone told The Times. “I am going to have a good look at 
how things work to see if I can come up with something more equal for all the 
teams.”

Ecclestone is considering a system like that in football’s Premier League, 
where all 20 teams receive an equal share of revenue from TV coverage as well 
as prize money.

“The Premier League has a good way of distributing the prize money, so maybe 
that could work for us,” he said. “There will be people who will like it and 
people who won’t like it, and people who will suffer.”

In figures published by Autosport magazine in April, Ferrari is set to receive 
£143m this year and Manor £35m.
 