
In Abu Dhabi this weekend Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> and Nico Rosberg will – 
metaphorically at least – touch gloves like a couple of heavyweights as the 
bell chimes for the final round. The Mercedes duo’s slugfest for the Formula 
One world championship has endured for eight months and 20 rounds and the Yas 
Marina Circuit has got what it paid for: the decider.

Rosberg, with a 12-point lead, is the clear favourite to win his first title, 
for he has only to finish in the top three. It is the fifth time in eight 
years, since Hamilton snatched his first championship from the grasp of the 
home favourite, Felipe Massa, in São Paulo, that the title race has gone to the 
wire. Last year Hamilton got home in Austin with three races to spare butwe 
were here in Abu Dhabi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/23/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-title-nico-rosberg>
 two years ago, the year ofthe double points fiasco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/30/lewis-hamilton-criticism-double-points-final-f1-race-abu-dhabi>
, when Hamilton was required to finish in the top two – instead of the leading 
six – to take the championship; he won.

Lewis Hamilton admits he faces ‘pretty impossible odds’ to win F1 title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/lewis-hamilton-admits-pretty-impossible-odds-formula-one-title>
In 2012, in the last round in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/nov/25/sebastian-vettel-wins-f1-title>, 
Fernando Alonso led the race and the championship before Vettel came through to 
take his hat-trick of titles. And in 2010, continuing the two-year pattern,the 
last race was held in Abu Dhabi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/nov/15/ferrari-formulaone> with the 
leader, Alonso, Mark Webber, Vettel and Hamilton all in contention; Vettel won.

There have been other, famous last race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2010/nov/11/f1-season-finishes-final-grand-prix>
 finishes,such as James Hunt’s drive in Fuji in 1976 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/05/niki-lauda-james-hunt-f1>, which 
brought him the title,and the 1986 climax in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/that-1980s-sports-blog/2013/mar/15/reliving-1986-brazilian-grand-prix>
 where three drivers, Nigel Mansell, Alain Prost and Nelson Piquet, all went 
into the final round with a chance, with Prost coming out on top afterMansell’s 
dramatic tyre failure <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IIX-JmmmonY>.

This time it all looks very cosy for Mercedes, who have already won the 
constructors’ championship. But two wrecking balls loom over Hamilton and 
Rosberg in the shape of Red Bull’s Max Verstappen andDaniel Ricciardo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/daniel-ricciardo>, according to the 
three-times champion Sir Jackie Stewart.

Stewart told the Guardian: “I think the two Red Bulls cars will be very, very 
competitive. That’s what could decide the weekend. And the last race is also 
very important for Ferrari. A podium finish would be very big for them. So we 
have four drivers capable of disturbingNico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg> from having what I would call 
a calculated race.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ff1-title-race-abu-dhabi-mercedes-hamilton-rosberg-red-bull%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0105ac689211cb15d85d0dd5be7a07fad66cf6f%2F0_43_4459_2674%2F4459.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%20title%20race%20goes%20to%20the%20wire%20in%20Abu%20Dhabi%20but%20will%20Red%20Bulls%20have%20a%20final%20say%3F%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ff1-title-race-abu-dhabi-mercedes-hamilton-rosberg-red-bull%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%20title%20race%20goes%20to%20the%20wire%20in%20Abu%20Dhabi%20but%20will%20Red%20Bulls%20have%20a%20final%20say%3F%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ff1-title-race-abu-dhabi-mercedes-hamilton-rosberg-red-bull%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0105ac689211cb15d85d0dd5be7a07fad66cf6f%2F0_43_4459_2674%2F4459.jpg>
 Lewis Hamilton begins the celebrations after winning the 2014 Abu Dhabi Grand 
Prix and the F1 world title in the final race of the season. Photograph: Clive 
Mason/Getty Images 
“But the big risk for Lewis and Nico is that the two Red Bulls will upset 
things. Verstappen is remarkably quick and the Australian lad is equally fast 
and considerably more experienced.

“I can see Verstappen making some moves that may not be in the repertoire of 
any of the other drivers. That could have a profound effect on the outcome.”

Stewart does not feel that Rosberg would be an undeserving champion. “He’s 
driven a very intelligent season. He’s clean, he’s tidy, and he’s served a big, 
long apprenticeship to get this far. You have to take your hat off to anybody 
who wins it. A lot of people who have won the title may not have been the 
greatest driver. The secret for Nico now is mind management. He can’t be 
overaggressive, overexcited or overambitious.”

The driver and TV pundit Paul di Resta, who this year ended a two-year absence 
fromFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> when he joined 
Williams as a reserve driver, says: “It is Nico’s title to lose. But the one 
danger for him is that he’s too cautious, as he was in Monaco, and maybe 
Malaysia, where he collided with Vettel.

“The other danger will come from Red Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull>. In the last three races Mercedes 
haven’t had everything their own way. If the Red Bulls smell an overtake they 
will go for it. Both Mercedes drivers deserve it. Lewis has had more bad luck. 
But Nico has been more consistent. If he dominates qualifying and wins on 
Sunday he will have won more races than Lewis and there can be no arguments.”

Ben Edwards, Channel 4’s F1 commentator, is hoping that Hamilton does not just 
blame mechanical failures if he loses out. “Lewis has been a little unlucky. 
But then again life isn’t fair and it would be true to say that there have been 
a couple of occasions, in Baku and Singapore, where he hasn’t quite delivered.

“I can see him winning the race in Abu Dhabi and Nico taking the championship. 
But so many things can go wrong, as Lewis himself knows after problems with his 
car ultimately cost him the 2007 title. And Nico would be a worthy champion. He 
has nine wins already – his father, Keke, won only one race when he won the 
championship in 1982.”

Jenson Button prepares for emotional Formula One farewell after 16 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/22/jenson-button-formula-one-final-race-abu-dhabi>
Stewart, meanwhile, has more interest in the outcome of Sunday’s race than 
most. He and Hamilton are Britain’s greatest F1 champions, with three titles 
each, so Hamilton can move ahead of him this weekend.

Stewart says: “I wouldn’t be upset about it. I’ve had a long run. I’ve had the 
record for 43 years. When Alain Prost beat my record for most wins I had held 
it for a long time and I was very happy to be the most successful driver by 
beating the records of Jim Clark and Juan Manuel Fangio. So if Lewis takes four 
championships against my three I will have no regrets.”

So another title would make Hamilton the greatest British driver? Stewart is 
not so sure: “I don’t think that is an issue at this time. Mercedes have a huge 
advantage over everybody else.

“Lewis should be very grateful that he’s driving for a team with such 
resources and financial support, a team of great engineers with unquestionably 
the fastest engine. That kind of domination is unusual. I was lucky enough to 
drive in an era when everybody had the Ford Cosworth and there wasn’t a feared 
driver, or favoured team. It was a much more level playing field in those days. 
It was up to the driver to get the most out of the chassis.”
 