
Sheffield United have shown a steely determination when it comes to knockout 
competitions in recent years and it was evident again againstPreston North End. 
Trailing to Paul Gallagher’s dipping free-kick, the visitors looked to be 
heading for only a third defeat in 19FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> and League Cup matches during 
Nigel Clough’s tenure as manager.

With the Capital One Cup semi-final second leg against Tottenham Hotspur on 
Wednesday a willingness to surrender would have almost been understandable, but 
Clough’s team do not readily give in.

It took a goal from Diego De Girolamo, a young Italian, to secure Sheffield 
United a 1-1 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/24/preston-north-end-sheffield-united-fa-cup-match-report>
. The 19-year-old forced the ball home from six yards after a low cross from 
Jamie Murphy. After a succession of shocks over the course of the weekend, 
Sheffield United fancy their chances of emulating the success of last season 
when they reached the semi-final, provided, of course, they can see off their 
League One rivals in the replay at Bramall Lane.

“We were just having a laugh in the changing room saying we’ve got to be 
favourites now after a few have gone out,” Jose Baxter, the United midfielder, 
said afterwards. “There are still some great teams in there though, and that’s 
what the cup is all about, the underdogs beating the big boys.”

The replay, on 3 February, will be United’s 40th match of the season, but 
Baxter is confident they can cope with the workload, particularly after signing 
three new players in John Brayford, Paul Coutts and Keiron Freeman over the 
weekend. “Games are better than training,” he said. “More games is better for 
us and we want to get fitter and keep learning. We’ve got a big squad and a lot 
of youngsters who can come in and put a shift in.”

Like Sheffield United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited>, 
Preston are also fighting on three fronts. Simon Grayson’s team are very much 
in the League One promotion race and are preparing for the second leg of 
Northern Final of the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy, in which they face Walsall on 
Tuesday.

“We still want to be in the best competition in the world,” said the Preston 
defender David Buchanan. “At our level people play good football and there are 
good players. Sometimes people don’t give League One and Two enough credit. You 
just want to get as far as you can. We will go there full of confidence. “They 
might think it’s all over but if we set off like we did in the first half today 
we know we have enough quality.”

Darren Bent scored his first Derby County to help secure a place in the fifth 
round for Steve McClaren’s side; Will Hughes was also on target ina 2-0 home 
win over their Derbyshire neighboursChesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/24/derby-county-chesterfield-fa-cup-match-report>
.Reading are also through after a 2-1 win at Cardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/24/cardiff-reading-fa-cup-fourth-round-match-report>
 thanks to Hal Robson-Kanu’s 88th-minute winner. Kenwyne Jones had put Cardiff 
in front with a first-half header but Oliver Norwood levelled with a 20-yard 
free-kick.
 