
Exeter City, who are 11th in League Two, will host Jürgen Klopp’s Liverpool in 
the pick of the FA Cup third round ties following a draw that also paired
Tottenham Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> with 
the Premier League leaders, Leicester City, and non-league Salford City with 
the Championship’s Derby County should the Northern League Premier Division 
club beat Hartlepool in a second-round replay.

The third round, which will be played across the weekend of 8 to 11 January, 
also pits José Mourinho’s Chelsea, whose faltering Premier League title defence 
has so far featured eight defeats, against League Two Leyton Orient or 
Scunthorpe United at Stamford Bridge.

FA Cup third round draw – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/dec/07/fa-cup-third-round-draw-live>
The Conference’s Eastleigh, the only non-league club confirmed in the third 
round, have a home tie against Bolton Wanderers, who are bottom of the 
Championship. Chris Todd, the Eastleigh manager, said: “We’ll be looking 
forward to the tie, it’s not too bad.”

Mark Jewell, the Eastleigh chief executive, said: “Everyone’s looking for the 
Arsenal away but it is good for the club taking on a Championship team. We did 
well in a previous round against Crewe [winning 1-0], a League One club, so 
let’s see if we can get into the fourth round.”

Arsenal, the holders for the past two years and 12-times winners of the Cup, 
welcome Sunderland to the Emirates Stadium in a repeat of Saturday’s Premier 
League meeting in north London, in whichArsène Wenger’s side managed an 
unconvincing 3-1 victory. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/05/arsenal-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>

Whitehawk of the National League South have the incentive of a trip to 
Goodison Park to faceEverton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> if 
they can beat Dagenham and Redbridge in their second round replay.

Steve King, the Whitehawk manager, who was present at the draw in Cardiff, 
said: “I wanted the Reds [Liverpool] but I got the Blues. It’s a tough, tough 
game and Dagenham are going to fancy their chances too. It’s a massive carrot 
for whoever wins through.”

Asked whether the prospect of facing Roberto Martínez’s side at what should be 
a packed Goodison will increase the pressure on his players or inspire them, 
King said: “I think it inspires. I think everybody is going to want to play in 
that game. It’s 50-50, the best team on the day to see who gets through [when 
playing Dagenham] but its going to be a tough game.”

Manchester United, whose tally of 11 Cup triumphs is second only to Arsenal’s 
but who have not won the trophy since 2004, take on Sheffield United. Their 
crosstown rivals, Manchester City, travel to Norwich City while struggling 
Swansea City face a potentially tricky trip to Oxford United, who are currently 
top of League Two.

Aston Villa, currently bottom of the Premier League after a harrowing season 
which has seen the side fail to win in the league since the opening day, run 
the risk of further misery after being drawn to face League Two side Wycombe 
Wanderers at Adams Park.

“I’m really happy,” said the Wanderers manager, Gareth Ainsworth. “The boys 
deserve their chance to have a shot at Premier League opposition.”

Newport County, who play in League Two, have a home tie against the 
Championship’s Blackburn Rovers, the club having recently appointed Paul 
Lambert as the manager.

Gavin Foxall, the Newport chief executive, said: “We’re happy with that. 
Hopefully we’ll get a bumper crowd over Rodney Parade and we look forward to 
welcoming Blackburn.”

Third round draw in full

Arsenal v Sunderland

Birmingham v Bournemouth

Brentford v Chesterfield/Walsall

Bury v Bradford

Cardiff v Grimsby/Shrewsbury

Carlisle v Yeovil

Chelsea v Leyton Orient/Scunthorpe

Colchester v Charlton

Doncaster v Stoke

Eastleigh v Bolton

Everton v Dag & Red/Whitehawk

Exeter v Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>

Huddersfield v Reading

Hull v Brighton

Ipswich v Portsmouth

Leeds v Rotherham

Manchester Utd v Sheffield Utd

Middlesbrough v Burnley

Newport County v Blackburn

Northampton v MK Dons

Norwich v Manchester City

Nottingham Forest v QPR

Oxford Utd v Swansea

Peterborough v Preston

Salford City/Hartlepool v Derby

Southampton v Crystal Palace

Sheffield Wednesday v Fulham

Tottenham v Leicester

Watford v Newcastle

West Bromwich Albion v Bristol City

West Ham v Wolves

Wycombe v Aston Villa

Ties to be played between 8-11 January 
 