
1) Eastleigh wave non-league flag against Bolton

Previously best known for surviving leukaemia and subsequently being pecked to 
within an inch of his life by emus on Soccer AM 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DAhPT3NovNc> while wearing a coat made from 
cabbage and biscuits in the name of charity, Eastleigh’s young Welsh manager 
Chris Todd has every right to fancy his Hampshire side’s chances of advancing 
to the fourth round at the expense of Bolton Wanderers. The only non-league 
side left in the competition, Eastleigh sit fourth in the Conference and have 
been bankrolled to the tune of £3m by their sugar daddy, Stewart Donald, in 
recent years. They number the former QPR winger Lee Cook and the ex-Nottingham 
Forest defender Dan Harding among their ranks, two players who won’t have come 
cheap. Of course Bolton Wanderers have plenty of Championship experience too, 
having played badly enough in the division this season to find themselves 
anchored to the bottom of the table as well as £173m in debt, the subject of a
winding-up order from HM Revenue and Customs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/10/bolton-winding-up-petition-hmrc-unpaid-tax>
, under a transfer embargo and resigned to the possibility of having to sell 
their best players during this January window. These are dark times at the 
Macron Stadium on and off the pitch, with results poor and staff uncertain when 
or if they will next be paid. With securing Championship survival almost 
certainly a priority for Neil Lennon and his players, Eastleigh fans could be 
forgiven for being more expectant than hopeful of beating them in the compact 
environs of the 5,192-capacity Ten Acres and going into the draw for round Four.
Barry Glendenning

• Sachin Nakrani: what on earth has gone wrong at Bolton? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/01/sale-money-bolton-relegation-administration>
• All the latest news from the Conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/vanarama-conference>
 Listen to the pod on the FA Cup 
2) Senseless timing mars famous night for Exeter

It ought to beggar belief that the powers that be have done their utmost to 
make an ordeal out of the most appealing tie in a draw short of traditional Cup 
romance. But here we are, and if it seems self-defeating that supporters of a 
competition whose lustre remains difficult to maintain are being actively 
inconvenienced then it is worth reminding ourselves that we should not be 
remotely surprised by now. It would be fascinating to hear the logic behind the 
BBC’s decision to move this fixture to 7.55pm on a Friday night – 90 minutes 
after the last train of the day departs Exeter St Davids station for the 
250-mile journey to Liverpool – but that is the power broadcasters have. It 
will be a fine day when their requirements are drawn up with half a thought for 
matchgoing fans such as the 1,347 away supporters who will nonetheless make the 
trip.Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> should not 
require too much assistance in disposing of League Two opponents but asking 
them to fulfil this tie three days after a Tuesday night League Cup semi-final 
at Stoke City was surely not necessary, either.

None of this grumbling should, of course, detract from a famous occasion for 
Exeter City and their excellent manager, Paul Tisdale. Their league form – four 
consecutive defeats – does not bode well for a surprise but they might just 
have caught Jürgen Klopp, who had torecall the almost-forgotten Tiago Ilori 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/06/tiago-illori-liverpool-aston-villa>
 from his loan at Aston Villa this week to partly offset a lack of available 
centre-backs, and his team at a good time. St James Park will be rocking – a 
spectacle that should make good television. It is just a shame that little else 
seems to matter.Nick Ames

• Klopp to field young, inexperienced Liverpool against Exeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-exeter-fa-cup-injury-curse>
• Puzzle-loving Oakley gives Exeter clues how to beat Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/matt-oakley-exeter-liverpool-fa-cup>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffa-cup-third-round-10-ties-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ae189da3a11e1c8d6bfa55a6415d82f68ab32b7%2F0_104_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%2010%20ties%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffa-cup-third-round-10-ties-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%2010%20ties%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffa-cup-third-round-10-ties-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ae189da3a11e1c8d6bfa55a6415d82f68ab32b7%2F0_104_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
 Paul Tisdale: hat’s entertainment. Photograph: ProSports/Rex Shutterstock 
3) Aston Villa should go for broke to avoid a shock


This tie yells “shock” louder than most and perhaps Rémi Garde would be well 
advised to make good use of an early opportunity to experience belt-and-braces 
life in the Football League. Wycombe Wanderers, sixth in League Two, are still 
some way from meeting Aston Villa on a level playing field but Gareth Ainsworth 
has assembled an impressive side that will hope to bounce back from a home 
defeat to Morecambe last weekend. In Garry Thompson and Paul Hayes, Ainsworth 
could field a strikeforce with a combined age of 67, but Wycombe aim for a 
high-energy style and Villa supporters may as well hope their team enters into 
a similar spirit of things. It has all been downhill since Theo Walcott opened 
the scoring for Arsenal in the 40th minute oflast season’s final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/30/fa-cup-final-arsenal-aston-villa-alexis-sanchez>
; even if Wembley holds a few chastening memories, any respite from the weekly 
grind will seem like a relief at the moment. History should encourage them to 
go for goals: Villa made League Cup visits to Adams Park in 2003 and 2005, 
winning 5-0 and – incredibly – 8-3.NA

• Cole completes free transfer to Coventry City from Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/joe-cole-free-transfer-coventry-city-aston-villa-tony-mowbray>
• Garde wants Arsenal’s Debuchy to join Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/remi-garde-mathieu-debuchy-aston-villa-arsenal-wycombe>

4) Resting players has bitten Allardyce in the past

The holders get their latest defence of the trophy underway and they do so in 
the knowledge that Sam Allardyce and Sunderland are not especially fixated on 
the prize. Allardyce has had a particularly talkative week buthis proclamations 
about the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/04/sam-allardyce-sunderland-premier-league-devaluing-fa-cup>
 gave pause for thought. “Of course I’m going to make changes,” said Allardyce, 
pointing to the fact that Sunderland will play Swansea City on Wednesday as 
part of a full league programme. “If the Premier League decides to put a stupid 
fixture midweek when they don’t bloody need to, then I haven’t got much choice.”

The Premier League would argue that it does bloody need to, with Euro 2016 
among the factors truncating the domestic calendar, but Allardyce is far from 
wrong and this regrettable piece of scheduling provides a ready-made excuse for 
managers in need of Premier League points to give their bigger performers a 
weekend off. It would be wise for Sunderland fans to set expectations even 
lower than usual, then, although Allardyce might recall that it does not always 
pay to rest players in anticipation of future problems. Two years ago, the 
then-West Ham manager made nine changes – fielding the youngsters Seb Lletget, 
Dan Potts, Danny Whitehead, George Moncur and Callum Driver – for a third-round 
tie at Nottingham Forest, with a League Cup semi-final first leg against 
Manchester City just three days away.If a 5-0 defeat at the City Ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/05/nottingham-forest-west-ham-fa-cup-match-report>
 was not entirely unexpected;the 6-0 thumping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/08/manchester-city-west-ham-united-capital-one-cup>
 when senior players returned at the Etihad was definitely not part of the 
masterplan.NA

• Allardyce ready to rebuild Sunderland around Defoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/sam-allardyce-rebuild-sunderland-jermain-defoe>
• Wenger gives Arsenal injury update and rules Sánchez out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/arsene-wenger-arsenal-injury-update-alexis-sanchez-fa-cup>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsam-allardyce-didnt-mean-to-upset-jurgen-klopp-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F7%2F1452186225436%2FKP_1256546_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Allardyce%20%E2%80%98didn%E2%80%99t%20mean%20to%20upset%E2%80%99%20J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsam-allardyce-didnt-mean-to-upset-jurgen-klopp-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Allardyce%20%E2%80%98didn%E2%80%99t%20mean%20to%20upset%E2%80%99%20J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsam-allardyce-didnt-mean-to-upset-jurgen-klopp-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F7%2F1452186225436%2FKP_1256546_crop_640x360.jpg>
Sam Allardyce ‘didn’t mean to upset’ Jürgen Klopp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jan/07/sam-allardyce-didnt-mean-to-upset-jurgen-klopp-video>
. 
5) A packed house could swell Oxford United’s hopes

Things are looking up for Oxford United, who have sold out their 
12,000-capacity Kassam Stadium for only the third time in its 15-year history 
with the prospect of bloodying a Premier League nose. Michael Appleton’s team 
are third in League Two and on course both for promotion and their highest 
position in 15 years. The midfielders Kemar Roofe and Liam Sercombe have scored 
19 league goals between them and both – in particular the former West Brom 
youngster Roofe – are attracting covetous glances from elsewhere. Oxford pack a 
punch but they are stingy, too: they have conceded only eight times in 12 home 
games and Swansea City might have wished for an easier assignment before next 
Wednesday’s face-off with fellow relegation contenders Sunderland. The 
announcement thatAlan Curtis will stay on as manager until the end of the season
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/swansea-alan-curtis-manager-end-of-season>
 has provided a timely shot of stability (regardless of what it might suggest 
about the past month’s search for Garry Monk’s replacement) but it would not be 
a surprise if minds were elsewhere. The Kassam roar tends to drift out of the 
three-sided stadium and across the car park behind its open end, but perhaps it 
will be more audible than ever on Sunday lunchtime.NA

• Napoli reject £14.1m Swansea bid for Italy’s Gabbiadini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/napoli-swansea-bid-manolo-gabbiadini>

6) Cureton eyeing chance to put Everton to sword

Dagenham & Redbridge have led a charmed life in the previous two rounds of 
this year’s FA Cup. Despite trailing 2-0 after only seven minutes of their 
first round replay against Morecambe, they made it into the second round where 
they again needed a replay, not to mention extra-time,to get past lowly 
Whitehawk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/17/fa-cup-second-round-whitehawk-dagenham>
 from English football’s sixth tier. The League Two club’s reward for these 
exertions is a trip to Goodison Park, where they will face an Everton team that 
have played twice since the Daggers stuck it to Exeter on 2 January, although 
it remains to be seen how many first team regulars Roberto Martínez fields 
considering his team has Premier League visits to Manchester City and Chelsea 
in the week ahead.

One Dagenham & Redbridge player unlikely to be fazed by the prospect of lining 
up at Goodison Park is Jamie Cureton, even if, like most of his team-mates, the 
40-year-old has never played there before. In his 22nd season as a professional 
footballer at his 14th club, the striker actually made his professional debut 
for Norwich City against Everton in 1994, but has stated that, despite all 
those miles on the clock, this is the biggest FA Cup match of his life. “There 
aren’t many grounds I haven’t played at and before the draw I was looking at 
that and thinking what a great drawEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> would be,” he said. “It’s 
another one to cross off the list.” One could be forgiven for presuming 
Dagenham & Redbridge would have a better chance of beating their Premier League 
opposition if they were entertaining them at Victoria Road, but having failed 
to win a single league game there all season they may well prefer their chances 
of notching up victory on the road.BG

• Still back at Dagenham for challenging third stint as manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/31/john-still-appointed-dagenham-manager>
• Besic, the cultured scrapper who could turn out to be an Everton gem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/07/muhamed-besic-srapper-everton-gem-roberto-martinez>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffa-cup-third-round-10-ties-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde53b652759cdf640a9abd3518ed18ce362de87f%2F0_200_2140_1284%2F2140.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%2010%20ties%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffa-cup-third-round-10-ties-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%2010%20ties%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffa-cup-third-round-10-ties-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde53b652759cdf640a9abd3518ed18ce362de87f%2F0_200_2140_1284%2F2140.jpg>
 Dagenham & Redbridge Ayo Obileye’s celebrates scoring his side’s third goal 
against Whitehawk. Photograph: Steve Paston/PA 
7) FA Cup can provide Chelsea with sole chance of trophy

Imagine the fun that could have been had with this fixture a few short weeks 
ago. The Twitter memes, the arch comments pondering whether Chelsea – Chelsea, 
get it? – could pull off an almighty third-round upset. There is less to 
wisecrack about now: Chelsea have, at last, strung together a run of improved 
form in the Premier League and their relentlessly efficient old ways might just 
be returning under Guus Hiddink. With neither relegation nor a Champions League 
place looking realistic, a concerted tilt at the FA Cup might hold particular 
appeal and it would certainly put a few noses out of joint if, given their 
fortunes so far, Chelsea emerged from this season with one more trophy than 
many of their rivals. What hope, then, for Mark Robins’ Scunthorpe United, who 
visit Stamford Bridge for the first time since a 3-1 third-round defeat in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2005/jan/10/match.sport11>? There is 
always Bradford’s stunning 4-2 victory last January, which in retrospect was a 
harbinger for the lack of care prevalent in the first half of Chelsea’s 
2015-16. Another reverse against League One opponents would appear unlikely, 
but Chelsea must still treat hurdles like this seriously if their recovery is 
to gather pace.NA

• Costa and Oscar separated after Chelsea training confrontation <http://Costa 
and Oscar separated after Chelsea training confrontation>
• Win (home) tickets to Chelsea v West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/win-home-tickets-to-chelsea-v-west-bromwich-albion>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffa-cup-third-round-10-ties-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F751f8d1cb4bd265bba1607ba26587e7513f7d506%2F171_255_2654_1594%2F2654.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%2010%20ties%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffa-cup-third-round-10-ties-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%2010%20ties%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffa-cup-third-round-10-ties-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F751f8d1cb4bd265bba1607ba26587e7513f7d506%2F171_255_2654_1594%2F2654.jpg>
 There were issues on the training ground between Oscar and Diego Costa. 
Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
8) Spurs v Leicester City a prequel to a Premier League showdown

It is a quirk of the fixture list that this encounter will be repeated a mere 
three days later, whenLeicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> return to White Hart Lane 
– if they see any point in leaving at all – for a Premier League match. And not 
just any Premier League match: few could have predicted that these two would 
both be strongly involved in the title race at the season’s midway point, so it 
remains to be seen whether Sunday’s meeting sees a bout of shadow puppetry or a 
full-scale removal of the gloves. Mauricio Pochettino has resisted wholesale 
changes in cup competitions so far this term, citing a better knowledge of his 
players’ fitness than in his first season, and if the league title looks up for 
grabs it is also fair to say that any Premier League side that treats the FA 
Cup diligently stands a decent chance of being rewarded, too.

Leicester will certainly break to some degree from the formula that has served 
them so spectacularly in recent months –Jamie Vardy will miss out through injury
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/04/jamie-vardy-leicester-city-groin-surgery-two-weeks>
 and Claudio Ranieri will probably rest others to minimise the chances of their 
minor stutter becoming anything worse – and probably run more risk of 
overstretching through battle on multiple fronts. One sure thing is that 
neither manager will be interested in prolonging the argument: expect this one 
to be settled entertainingly on the day, with the victor having sharpened their 
appetite by seeing off a credible rival for the trophy.NA

• Riyad Mahrez: The Gallery  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/jan/05/riyad-mahrez-gallery-leicester-city>
• Spurs on verge of signing teenager Shilow Tracey from Ebbsfleet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/06/tottenham-hotspur-shilow-tracey-ebbsfleet->

9) Big spending Derby County there to be shot at

Hartlepool United were on the end of a major shock last season when Blyth 
Spartans, of the Northern Premier League,beat them at Victoria Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/05/hartlepool-united-blyth-spartans-fa-cup-second-round-match-report>
 in the second round. More of the same seemed on the cards when Salford City, 
non-league darlings du jour, travelled to the north-east in December but Ronnie 
Moore’s team narrowly prevailed after a replay and can now look forward to 
receiving opponents whom there is rather less pressure to defeat.

Derby County are certainly there to be shot at: the recent signings of Nick 
Blackman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/06/derby-nick-blackman-reading-signing>
 and Abdoul Camara brought the Championship side’s spend on transfer fees alone 
this season up to around £26m and they are leaving little to chance in their 
pursuit of promotion to the Premier League. Their one-point advantage over 
third-placed Hull is not something Paul Clement and company will want to let 
slip after that kind of outlay; Hartlepool, then, will be eager to capitalise 
if Derby’s focus wavers and in the 19-year-old midfielder Brad Walker they have 
a talent who is surely not much longer for the lower reaches of League Two. The 
home team will need a significant improvement on their recent form, though. 
They have lost their last four league games and the danger is that Derby – 
bankrolled by Mel Morris, whose company, King, created the Candy Crush video 
game – will resemble kids in a sweet shop.NA

• Karanka and Clement, the former Madrid No2s, share No1 aim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/01/aitor-karanka-paul-clement-middlesbrough-derby>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffa-cup-third-round-10-ties-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9314a76c3c63edbb865505ca1bff9e88cd71850%2F0_91_2971_1783%2F2971.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%2010%20ties%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffa-cup-third-round-10-ties-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%2010%20ties%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffa-cup-third-round-10-ties-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9314a76c3c63edbb865505ca1bff9e88cd71850%2F0_91_2971_1783%2F2971.jpg>
 Scott Fenwick puts Hartlepool ahead in extra-time against Salford, helping 
them on their way to a third-round meeting with Derby. Photograph: Alex 
Livesey/Getty Images 
10) Championship contenders will have focus elsewhere

“The money they have spent already is a statement of intent; some of the sums 
Championship clubs are paying are astronomical.” So said Sean Dyche shortly 
before his Burnley team resumed life in the second tier following their 
relegation from the Premier League. He was speaking with particular reference 
to Middlesbrough and Derby County, who currently occupy first and second place 
in Championship, while his own Burnley team are reasonably poised back in 
fifth, 10 points off the pace-setters. With so much money up for grabs just for 
being in the Premier League next season, it’s difficult to imagine anyone at
Middlesbrough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> or Burnley 
giving even a single hoot about the outcome of their match at the Riverside, as 
long as promotion remains a possibility. Any sort of FA Cup run for either team 
would be a distraction, but not by any means one that is welcome.BG
 