
1) Bellerín shines brightly as one of Arsenal’s stars

When Arsène Wenger was asked after Arsenal’s 3-1 win against Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/theo-walcott-invites-arsenal-fan-to-join-him-in-on-pitch-bump-celebration>
 if there was abetter right-back than Héctor Bellerín 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/29/arsenal-hector-bellerin-wembley-fa-cup-final-aston-villa>
 in England he could not help laughing a little. “I don’t know,” Wenger said, 
clearly wishing the question could simply go away, before adding: “Look at the 
numbers, defensive and offensive, the fact he’s only 20 years old.” Wenger had 
just finished talking up Alex Iwobi’s contribution after a promising half-hour 
from an occasional team-mate of Bellerín’s in the development levels, valuable 
praise for a young player in need of reinforcement. With Bellerín the opposite 
is true. That laugh was Wenger initiating the reverse thrusters and taking an 
alternative path. Some might suggest the only real countdown now is how many 
seasons Wenger can hang on to him before the lure of one of Europe’s super 
clubs, perhaps a return to Catalonia, becomes irresistible. For now Bellerín 
seems to have it all: poise, craft, the athleticism and intelligence to cover 
his own mistakes and real creativity going forward, as he showed with two 
decisive surges to make Arsenal’s winning goals. Already his emergence has 
rearranged the careers of a few players around him. Mathieu Debuchy may well be 
off. Calum Chambers, who might have expected some time at right-back, is now 
popping up in central defensive midfield. Barney Ronay 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Farsene-wenger-fa-cup-tie-win-sunderland-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F10%2F1452425596638%2FKP_1291091_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20on%20FA%20Cup%20tie%20win%20against%20Sunderland%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Farsene-wenger-fa-cup-tie-win-sunderland-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20on%20FA%20Cup%20tie%20win%20against%20Sunderland%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Farsene-wenger-fa-cup-tie-win-sunderland-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F10%2F1452425596638%2FKP_1291091_crop_640x360.jpg>
Arsène Wenger reacts following the third-round FA Cup tie victory against 
Sunderland. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jan/10/arsene-wenger-fa-cup-tie-win-sunderland-video>
• Giroud puts seal on Arsenal’s Cup win against Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/arsenal-sunderland-fa-cup-match-report>

2) Oxford feed off success on several fronts 

Oxford United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/oxford-united> are 
embroiled in an intense battle for promotion from League Two and on Thursday 
they begin duelling with Millwall for a place in the Johnstone Paint Trophy 
final at Wembley. So they could have invoked plenty of excuses for playing 
below par against Swansea. Instead they tore into their Premier League 
visitors, outworking them and outplaying them, with the Welsh team’s interim 
manager, Alan Curtis, admitting: “Our players couldn’t cope”. It was a glorious 
win. On this evidence Oxford belong at a higher level (and MK Dons must have 
some excellent right-backs if they can afford to send George Baldock out on 
loan). Swansea, for years an inspiration for the likes of Oxford, need to 
improve hugely and quickly if they are to avoid slipping back down a level. It 
must alarm the Welsh club’s fans that some of the players who start often in 
the Premier League were among their worst performers at Oxford.Paul Doyle 

• Roofe falls in for Swansea in defeat at Oxford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/oxford-united-swansea-city-fa-cup-match-report>

3) Tottenham fail to make most of Trippier’s strengths

Mark Sampson’s tactics at World Cup propel him to Ballon d’Or awards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/mark-sampson-england-women-coach-2015-world-cup-ballon-dor-awards>
Kieran Trippier was, alongside Danny Ings, Burnley’s leading assist-maker last 
season and took that honour by a distance the previous season when he set up 12 
goals as they won the Championship title. Over several seasons his crossing has 
been excellent in open play and more dangerous still from set pieces, and he 
has one assist from one league start this campaign, his centre having been 
cleverlyturned in by Son Heung-min at Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/28/watford-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 on 28 December. It was, therefore, surprising to see Spurs focus so many of 
their attacks down the left flank against Leicester where, for all that he 
earned the match-saving penalty, Danny Rose’s delivery is far less reliable. 
With Nacer Chadli starting on the left of a front three and Josh Onomah, 
theoretically on the right of that group, often floating across the field to 
join him, Trippier was frequently left isolated on the opposite flank. It was 
tempting to wonder how many corners Christian Eriksen would be allowed to waste 
before Trippier was called in to take one in his stead – a question to which 
the answer was sadly never found. Mauricio Pochettino cannot be expected to 
plan his tactics round a player whom he selects so infrequently but neither 
does it seem sensible not to utilise his best attributes. Simon Burnton

• Harry Kane spot-on to earn replay for Spurs  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/tottenham-hotspur-leicester-city-fa-cup-match-report>

4) Walters is a one-off for the one-offs

Jonathan Walters enhanced his reputation as a Cup specialist extraordinaire 
with Stoke’s stunning winner at League One’s Doncaster. The 25-yard drive at 
the Keepmoat Stadium was his 19th goal for the club in knockout football in 
only his 30th full appearance. Add his brace that earned the Republic of 
Ireland a two-legged victory over Bosnia in the Euro 2016 play-offs last 
October and Walters’ ability to rise to the one-off occasion is given further 
credence. “Jon seems to score every time we play in the cups,” said Stoke’s 
manager, Mark Hughes. So, although his record of 37 Premier League goals in 191 
matches for Stoke is more reflective of his career productivity, Hughes may 
consider pitching the 32-year-old into the Capital One Cup second leg at 
Anfield a fortnight on Tuesday where the visitors will be looking to overturna 
1-0 semi-final deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/stoke-city-liverpool-capital-one-cup-semi-final-match-report>
.Richard Gibson

• Stoke class tells at Doncaster thanks to Walters’ Cup special 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/doncaster-rovers-stoke-city-fa-cup-match-report>

5) Are lower-league clubs now dismissing the Cup too?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1054ce93ec7a55a54aed34ce2be32a8c5202b639%2F0_159_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1054ce93ec7a55a54aed34ce2be32a8c5202b639%2F0_159_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
 Dagenham & Redbridge showed little ambition at Goodison Park. Photograph: 
TGSPhoto/REX/Shutterstock 
Worryingly, and somewhat inevitably, the days when only Premier League clubs 
could be accused of treating the FA Cup third round as an inconvenient 
distraction are ending. On the evidence of Dagenham & Redbridge’s approachto 
their 2-0 defeat at Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/everton-dagenham-and-redbridge-fa-cup-match-report>
, an outlook that poses a genuine threat to the competition’s reputation is now 
shared in League Two. It is harsh to condemn the visitors’ performance at 
Goodison Park. They are 22nd in their division and started with two loanees who 
had never trained with their team-mates against an Everton side fielding eight 
changes from their Capital One Cup semi-final win over Manchester City. But 
their ambition – or complete lack of it – was depressing. The money was in the 
bank from a third-round tie that attracted almost 31,000 to Goodison but, as 
the manager, John Still, admitted afterwards, Dagenham & Redbridge’s game plan 
was simply to avoid a heavy defeat that would impact on morale. The veteran 
manager said: “I think it is becoming more difficult. I think your best chance 
is at home on not the best pitch. To play in the Premier League now you have to 
be the best players in the world and in Europe. So that makes it more difficult 
to get shocks. You can’t affect what they do. You can affect what you do and I 
think that’s what we did today.”Andy Hunter

• Saturday Sundae: Goodison Cat v Anfield Cat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/saturday-sundae-goodison-cat-anfield-cat-eastleigh>
• Mirallas and Koné ease Everton past Dagenham & Redbridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/everton-dagenham-and-redbridge-fa-cup-match-report>

6) Adkins provides reminder of his talent against Manchester United

The way Sheffield United were set up and carried out Nigel Adkins’ 
instructions at Old Trafford on Saturday was evidence of his abilities as a 
manager. Only a late, late Wayne Rooney penalty knocked the Blades out of the 
FA Cup as the visitors stifled Manchester United throughout. It was Adkins’ 
first visit to the famous stadium, a reminder of his premature sacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jan/18/southampton-nigel-adkins-mauricio-pochettino>
 in January 2013 when leading Southampton in the Premier League. December’s 
League One Manager of the Month gong is a happier pointer regarding Adkins’ 
talents. His United side are ninth after winning four of their last five 
outings. Now 50, it is not too late for Akdins to rise again in the crazy 
cabaret that is English football management.Jamie Jackson

• Scholes: Manchester United players looked bored 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/paul-scholes-manchester-united-players-bored-sheffield-united>
• Rooney saves Manchester United’s blushes against Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/manchester-united-sheffield-united-fa-cup-match-report>

7) Scrambled Matic on the outside looking in

Matic was arguably the player of the first half of last season and his fall 
from form and favour has been remarkable

Heard the one about the Chelsea player who was left dizzy after an incident in 
training? But we are not talking about Oscar and Diego Costa, “the participants 
in the high-profile bust-up”, rather Nemanja Matic, who was left out of the 
squad after taking a blow during training on Saturday. According to Guus 
Hiddink, Matic was injured when one of the goalkeepers hurled the ball out and 
it struck him on the back of the head. “He was a little dizzy and is still a 
bit dizzy,” Hiddink said afterthe 2-0 win over Scunthorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/chelsea-scunthorpe-united-fa-cup-match-report>
. Matic missed out, having been dropped at Crystal Palace the previous Sunday. 
Hiddink has made it clear he prizes the balance that Mikel John Obi brings to 
the team and, having been an unused substitute against Scunthorpe, the 
Nigerian, rather abruptly, appeared to enjoy “rested-star-against-cup-minnow” 
status. What is also plain is that Matic faces a fight to regain his starting 
place. He was arguably the player of the first half of last season and his fall 
from form and favour has been remarkable.David Hytner

• Loftus-Cheek helps Chelsea see off Scunthorpe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/chelsea-scunthorpe-united-fa-cup-match-report>

8) Iheanacho begins to shine at Manchester City

Many Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> 
supporters have been keen to see more of Kelechi Iheanacho, if necessary at the 
expense of Wilfried Bony, and against Norwich the 19-year-old demonstrated he 
is a very genuine striking option for Manuel Pellegrini, either starting or 
from the bench. Strong and aware, Iheanacho appears to be an instinctive and 
precise finisher with a maturity that belies his youth, and what was also 
evident on Saturday was that his team-mates trust him with the ball. With 
Sergio Agüero almost back to his best, the emergence of Iheanacho as both a 
foil for the brilliant Argentinian and a goal-scorer in his own right could be 
crucial as City pursue success in four competitions. Richard Rae

• Touré’s agent warns Manchester City that Pep Guardiola is overrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/yay-toure-manchester-city-pep-guardiola>
• Manchester City ease past Norwich City as Agüero shows his class  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/norwich-city-manchester-city-fa-cup-match-report>
• Touré’s comments lack class and risk overshadowing his wonderful talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/yaya-toure-comments-african-footballer-of-the-year>

9) Lerner will have to do something quick to save Villa

Tom Fox, Aston Villa’s chief executive, is flying to New York for crisis talks 
with Randy Lerner about how to save the club’s season. Hendrik Almstadt, the 
club’s sporting director, will be on the same plane and the talks will revolve 
around trying to bring in some new signings for Rémi Garde. Yet Villa’s 
problems are so extensive it is difficult to think that a flurry of transfers 
is going to put everything right. And, besides, how easy will it be to bring in 
high-quality players when Villa are near-certainties for relegation? They 
finished this tie against the sixth-placed side from League Two with many away 
fans turning on their own players and Garde targeted for chants of “You don’t 
know what you’re doing”. Lerner might approve a period of emergency spending 
but Villa have made such a pig’s ear of their previous transfer business it is 
not easy to imagine that three of the people responsible for the club being in 
this mess will suddenly be able to put everything right.Daniel Taylor 

10) Newcastle must buy a striker
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c22082775660bf92958ab9d4f3769b0e94f4bef%2F0_0_1415_849%2F1415.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c22082775660bf92958ab9d4f3769b0e94f4bef%2F0_0_1415_849%2F1415.jpg>
 Steve McClaren holds his head after another wasted opportunity at Vicarage 
Road. Photograph: Peter Cziborra/Reuters 
Newcastle have lost four successive matches 1-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited/results>. They have 
scored 19 goals in the Premier League this season and, although they dominated 
against Watford, their lack of confidence in attack was evident once again.

Aleksandar Mitrovic has scored three goals since joining the club last summer 
while Papiss Cissé has been frustrated by injury. Steve McClaren’s side have 
not scored since 19 December. McClaren would not comment on whether a new 
forward would be drafted in this January but there is no question Newcastle 
need one. Charlie Austin, Saido Berahino and the Napoli forward Manolo 
Gabbiadini have all been linked with a move this month. Newcastle’s performance 
at Vicarage Road surely increases concerns at the club before Tuesday’s home 
match againstManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>. James Riach

• Deeney pounces to put wasteful Newcastle out of FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/watford-newcastle-united-fa-cup-match-report>

11) Hindsight is a wonderful thing

Remember Michael Woods? There was an awful fuss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/aug/03/newsstory.chelsea> when 
Chelsea were accused of poaching him from Leeds United’s academy a decade ago. 
Woods never made it at Stamford Bridge and has since spent a few years knocking 
around the lower divisions – at one point dropping into non-league football 
with Harrogate Town. He is back in League Two now, playing for struggling 
Hartlepool and in Saturday’s defeat by Derby County Woods looked the best 
player on the pitch. At 25 there is still time for this clearly talented 
midfielder to clamber back up the pyramid. But what might have been had he 
stayed at Leeds rather than being lured by Chelsea into what turned out to be a 
wrong turn?

You wonder how Darren Bent's career would have panned out had he stayed at the 
Stadium of Light

Then there is Darren Bent. He rarely starts for Derby these days but he scored 
their late winner at Victoria Park. It was the 200th goal of Bent’s club 
career. Reaching a double century is a considerable achievement for any striker 
but it is worth noting that five years ago, just before the one-time England 
forward’s £18m transfer from Sunderland to Aston Villa, he had already reached 
157 goals. Since leaving Wearside in January 2011 he has taken his time to 
reach 200 withthings swiftly going wrong at Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/aug/19/fuluam-darren-bent-horrible-aston-villa>
 and now proving frustrating at Derby. The days when Bent rattled in 36 goals 
in 63 games for Sunderland are long gone and one wonders how his career might 
have panned outhad he stayed at the Stadium of Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/jan/23/darren-bent-sunderland-aston-villa>
. The move earned Bent – and Sunderland – a lot of money but it was to cost 
both parties dear.Louise Taylor

• Bent destroys Hartlepool dream with late winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/hartlepool-derby-county-fa-cup-match-report>

12) Exeter’s welcome for Liverpool was commendable 

Teams are often accused of lacking respect for their opponents, usually around 
this time of year, and eyebrows were raised about Jürgen Klopp’s unfamiliar 
Liverpool line-up at St James Park, even taking his extensive injury list into 
consideration. Many thought it would be no great surprise if League Two Exeter 
won when news of Klopp’s team had filtered through. But Exeter, as a club, 
showed total respect for their opponents, including a message for away fans on 
the turnstiles. “Thank you for travelling 252 miles to support your club 
today,” it read. The players respected Liverpool without ever finding 
themselves too deep in awe of the opposition. “I think years ago Clint [Clinton 
Morrison] said he played against Manchester United and Gerard Piqué played and 
nobody wanted his shirt, because nobody knew who he was on the night,” said the 
Exeter defender Jordan Tillson. “I think whenever you play against Liverpool 
you expect them to be the best players.”Ben Fisher

• Match report: Exeter 2-2 Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/exeter-liverpool-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
• Klopp to pick callow Liverpool side again for Exeter Cup replay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-exeter-cup-replay>
• Liverpool struggle to find right wavelength after warm Exeter reception 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/08/exeter-liverpool-fa-cup-jurgen-klopp>

13) Questions over Carroll begin to grow stale 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec0a66e71426f7118bf9f2465e311009bd8e6db0%2F407_1174_3145_1887%2F3145.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec0a66e71426f7118bf9f2465e311009bd8e6db0%2F407_1174_3145_1887%2F3145.jpg>
 Andy Carroll, the big English striker, dominates discussion whenever he turns 
out for West Ham. Photograph: James Griffiths/West Ham United via Getty Images 
Every time Andy Carroll makes an impact for West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/03/andy-carroll-slaven-bilic-west-ham-liverpool>
 Slaven Bilic is asked the same series of questions. It usually begins with: 
“How important is it that he stays fit?” Bilic rattles off the answer we have 
heard so many times before and it is invariably followed by: “Does he need to 
change his game to keep fit?” When that was directed his way after Saturday’s 
dull 1-0 win, in which Carroll provided the assist for Nikica Jelavic, Bilic 
had had enough. The manager justifiably complained about being asked the same 
thing every week and instead of answering once more, said his response remains 
the same. But what are the odds on him being asked again on Tuesday if his big 
English striker – three words that encapsulate why this fascination persists – 
plays a key role at Bournemouth? Pretty low.Alan Smith

• Jelavic scores late for West Ham to defeat Wolves on dismal day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/west-ham-united-wolverhampton-wanderers-fa-cup-match-report>

14) Poor scheduling is harming the FA Cup

Seldom have those who schedule the football fixtures so tested the enduring 
appeal of the FA Cup. Not only is there a full programme of league games this 
week but the next round also precedes an entire slab of Premier League 
fixtures. No wonder Eddie Howe, the Bournemouth manager, promised to continue 
rotating his team after making 11 changes on Saturday. And he made no apologies 
for indicating he will do the same again before his club’s league game at 
Crystal Palace on 2 February, after the fourth round. “If the FA Cup wants to 
be considered the best cup competition in the world, and keep its standing in 
English football, I’m not sure that is the wisest thing to do,” Howe said. 
Premier League survival is too important and too lucrative for a manager of any 
medium-sized or small club to risk injury or fatigue in a Cup game three days 
before a league game. The top-flight sides that rotated the least on Saturday 
included West Ham United, Manchester United, Manchester City and Arsenal, all 
of whom are effectively assured of Premier League football next season. Unless 
the FA wants to increase the Cup winners’ jackpot – Arsenal earned £4.2m from 
their successful 2014 run, enough to buy nearlyhalf of Benik Afobe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/bournemouth-confirm-signing-benik-afobe-wolves-record-deal>
 – to a parallel amount to Premier League riches, or a Champions League place 
can be offered, then the FA Cup will continue to fall into the shadows for 
clubs from the top two divisions. Peter Lansley

• Murray rescues Bournemouth with late Cup winner at Birmingham City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/birmingham-city-bournemouth-fa-cup-match-report>
• Bournemouth complete £9m record signing of Wolves striker Afobe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/bournemouth-agree-deal-transfer-benik-afobe-wolves>

15) How much do referees consider fans at pitch inspections?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b3781ab34d80cb04e8e330653b28e0836655efc%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b3781ab34d80cb04e8e330653b28e0836655efc%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A groundsman brushes away the water as the referee, Iain Williamson, does his 
third pitch inspection before allowing the game at the Silverlake Stadium to go 
ahead. Photograph: Shaun Boggust/Colorsport/Corbis 
Following Bolton’s 1-1 draw at Eastleigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/eastleigh-bolton-wanderers-fa-cup-match-report>
, Neil Lennon did not hide his feelings about the pitch. “One of the worst I’ve 
ever seen and I’ve seen some crackers in Scotland,” he said. “I wasn’t overly 
enamoured with it.” That could be deemed sour grapes, yet given the 
mud-drenched surface Lennon’s criticism was not outlandish and it is fair to 
ask if the match should have gone ahead. It took the referee, Iain Williamson, 
three pitch inspections to give the go-ahead and it is possible there were 
severe doubts on his part even at 1.15pm, less than two hours before kick-off, 
when he carried out the last of his checks. For sure Williamson would have been 
criticised if he had then called the match off given the vast majority of 
Bolton’s 1,000-plus supporters had made their way to Hampshire – they could 
have demanded a refund for ticket, petrol, food and other expenses had they 
arrived at the Silverlink Stadium only to be told there would be nothing to 
see. Which raises the question of how late decisions regarding pitch 
inspections should be made. According to Football Association rules – Rule 
13(c) to be precise - “A referee shall whenever possible examine the ground and 
decide as to its fitness for play in sufficient time to save the expense of 
unnecessary journeys being incurred by clubs”. But is that not too vague? 
Should there not be a precise cut-off time so everyone, and travelling fans in 
particular, knows whether to continue or turn back for home? Sachin Nakrani 

• Eastleigh denied Cup glory by Bolton’s Darren Pratley but earn replay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/eastleigh-bolton-wanderers-fa-cup-match-report>

16) And talking of pitches … Sheridan let himself down

John Sheridan raised eyebrows by criticising his club, Newport, after the tie 
with Blackburn was postponed due to heavy rain at their Rodney Parade ground. 
“I think we should have done our best to get the game definitely on, and I 
don’t think we did,” Sheridan said. “People were telling me it was the biggest 
game for 30 years and I felt that, if we had covered the pitch, we’d have got 
it started.” Nobody present disagreed with the decision to call the game off at 
2pm. Puddles had formed on a pitch that had been unplayable for the match 
againstHartlepool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> the week 
before. “Groundstaff are extremely disappointed at his comments, very very 
unprofessional,” tweeted the Rodney Parade head of operations, Mark Jones, who 
later accepted an apology from Sheridan. As Jones pointed out, dome covers cost 
a significant five-figure sum and this would be a sizeable outlay for one of 
the league’s smallest clubs, who share their pitch with two rugby teams. The 
frustration was clear but managers are not always tuned into the logistics it 
takes to get a game on and on this occasion Sheridan would have been best 
advised to keep his mouth shut.Nick Ames 

• Blackburn sign winger Elliott Bennett from Norwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/blackburn-elliott-bennett-norwich>

17) Southampton’s season in danger of spiralling out of control
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0dbc5f1001c7c11f81339d52febb1427c24e83%2F597_105_2484_1490%2F2484.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-third-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0dbc5f1001c7c11f81339d52febb1427c24e83%2F597_105_2484_1490%2F2484.jpg>
 Ronald Koeman looks worried the future might not be all that pretty for 
Southampton. Photograph: Andrew Matthews/PA 
This is a very big week for Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton>. Throughout their recent, 
dismal run of form – only one win in 10 – there has been a familiar pattern. 
They dominate games for long spells but fail to take their chances and it is 
interesting to note how agitated the usually placid Ronald Koeman is growing 
with each passing week. He cannot put his finger on the root cause of the slump 
but is increasingly aware the confidence of his players is fragile. He has 
already warned they are not safe from being dragged into a relegation fight and 
how badly they need to win against Watford and West Bromwich Albion at home 
this week to stave off those fears.Alan Smith

• Zaha fires Crystal Palace through, making Southampton suffer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/southampton-crystal-palace-fa-cup-match-report>
• Koeman: Mané and Wanyama will stay at Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/ronald-koeman-sadio-mane-victor-wanyama-southampton>

People were telling me it was the biggest game for 30 years and I felt if we'd 
covered the pitch, we’d have got started
John Sheridan  