
5.23pm GMT 

That's about it from me, on a day when the Cup delivered again. Grimsby pushed 
Huddersfield all the way, while fellow non-leaguers Kidderminster and 
Macclesfield will at least be in the draw after earning replays.Sheffield United
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> earned an impressive 
2-1 victory at Aston Villa, while Cardiff came from behind to beat Newcastle in 
Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's first game in charge.

Today surely belongs to Rochdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale>, however - they beat Leeds 2-0 
and will play in the fourth round for the first time since 2003. More 
importantly, they broke America. I'll leave the final thought to Marie Meyer:

Sadly, Rochdale probably won't be America's Team for long because we are at 
the mercy of Fox Sports USA...surely in the next round they'll serve up Arsenal 
vs. Chelsea or some similar rubbish instead of what we want to see: Rochdale 
vs. Kidderminster.

5.19pm GMT 

FT: Southend 4-1 Millwall

All over - and it's been a long afternoon for Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> fans.

5.18pm GMT 

GOAL! Southend 4-1 Millwall (Leonard)

Humiliation complete for hapless Millwall, as Leonard finishes smartly to seal 
Southend's progress to the fourth round.

5.17pm GMT 

Here's Rochdale goalscorer Scott Hogan enjoying his moment in front of the 
cameras. Fair play.

5.15pm GMT 

Six minutes of added time at Roots Hall, but Millwall will need a miracle to 
escape embarrassment - they remain two goals and a man down toSouthend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend>.

5.11pm GMT 

They're still playing at Roots Hall - around ten minutes remain, rain and 
lighting permitting. It's currentlySouthend 3-1 Millwall.

Here's more from across the pond on the day Cup fever gripped Uncle Sam. 
Dominic O'Donnell tells us of Grimsby's heartbreak, which was also broadcast 
live:

The plucky Mariners held lead for much of the game before the most 
heartbreaking own goal you ever saw. Four Grimsby defenders lying in the mud in 
front of goal, with the ball trickling in off the lastGrimsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/grimsby> defender. Argh. No magic here.

All I can say is that sounds like a pretty textbook example of the wonder that 
is Cup football, Dominic.

5.07pm GMT 

All the full time scores

Aston Villa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> 1-2 Sheffield 
United

Barnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> 1-2 Coventry

Bolton 2-1 Blackpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool>

Brighton 1-0 Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading>

Bristol City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> 1-1 Watford

Doncaster 2-3 Stevenage <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage>

Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> 4-0 QPR

Grimsby 2-3 Huddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield>

Ipswich 1-1 Preston

Kidderminster 0-0 Peterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough>

Macclesfield 1-1 Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday>

Middlesbrough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> 0-2 Hull

Newcastle 1-2 Cardiff

Norwich 1-1 Fulham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham>

Rochdale 2-0 Leeds

Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> 4-3 Burnley

Stoke 2-1 Leicester

West Brom 0-2 Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace>

Wigan 3-3 MK Dons <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons>

Yeovil 4-0 Leyton Orient <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient>

Updated at 5.23pm GMT

5.03pm GMT 

FT: Grimsby 2-3 Huddersfield

The magic didn't last at Blundell Park - Grimsby, 2-1 up with five minutes to 
go, crumbled like a tinfoil cup discarded in a puddle, and it's the visitors 
who go through.

5.01pm GMT 

FT: Wigan 3-3 MK Dons

FA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> holders Wigan make a 
pretty shambolic fist of defending their trophy - but they're still in the hat. 
MK Dons came from 2-0 and 3-2 behind to earn a deserved replay.

5.00pm GMT 

FT: Aston Villa 1-2 Sheffield United

It's all over at Villa Park - and Paul Lambert's side, which looked strong on 
paper, have been dumped out by League One Sheffield United.

4.59pm GMT 

GOAL! Barnsley 1-2 Coventry (Clarke)

A shock of sorts at Oakwell, Leon Clarke netting late on for Coventry City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/coventry> to surely steal an away win.

4.58pm GMT 

FT: Newcastle 1-2 Cardiff

A fine away win for the 2008 finalists in Ole Gunnar Solskjaer's first game in 
charge. Goals from Craig Noone and substitute Frazier Campbell put the 
Bluebirds into the fourth round after Cisse gave Newcastle the lead.

4.56pm GMT 

FT: Rochdale 2-0 Leeds United

Rochdale bring the magic of the Cup to America! A deserved home win over Leeds 
puts the League Two team into the fourth round!

4.54pm GMT 

Kidderminster and Macclesfield are in the hat!

Both non-league teams will be in the Fourth Round draw after earning draws 
against Peterborough and Sheffield Wednesday respectively. It's finished
Brighton 1-0 Reading,while Bristol City have earned a replay against Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> - it finished 1-1.

4.52pm GMT 

GOAL! Grimsby 2-3 Huddersfield (Thomas OG)

Heartbreak on the North East coast - an own goal from Aswad Thomas turns it 
around for Huddersfield, who now look set to squeak into the fourth round!

4.50pm GMT 

Goalageddon

It's Bristol City 1-1 Watford after a quick exchange of goals, Southend 3-1 
Millwall at Roots Hall, Everton 4-0 QPR through Seamus Coleman, Southampton 4-3 
Burnley in a humdinger on the South Coast, and holders Wigan 3-3 MK Dons.

Meanwhile, JR from Illinois sums up the mood of an enraptured nation:

This game at Spotland is hella bangin'.

4.47pm GMT 

GOAL! Grimsby 2-2 Huddersfield (Paterson)

Blushes potentially spared in Cleethorpes, as Martin Paterson levels for the 
Terriers with just five minutes remaining.

4.46pm GMT 

GOAL! Rochdale 2-0 Leeds (Henderson)

Rochdale have dominated Leeds today, and have surely booked their first fourth 
round appearance since 2003 now. Ian Henderson, unmarked in the box, volleys 
the ball home and America's team are home and hosed.

Updated at 5.05pm GMT

4.44pm GMT 

GOAL! Aston Villa 1-2 Sheffield United (Flynn)

The visitors lead again through Ryan Flynn. A shocker of an afternoon for the 
Villans.

Meanwhile, this from Marie Meyer in New Mexico:

Plucky little Rochdale are winning new fans all across America! Where can I 
get my 80p shirt?

Updated at 4.44pm GMT

4.41pm GMT 

More goals from around the grounds

Leicester aren't giving it up at Stoke - it's now Stoke 2-1 Leicester, 
courtesy of David Nugent. It's alsoÂ Everton 3-0 QPR and Southend 3-0 Millwall. 
Apparently puddles are now forming on the Roots Hall turf. This is Millwall's 
year, I'm telling you.

Updated at 5.06pm GMT

4.39pm GMT 

GOAL! Newcastle 1-2 Cardiff (Campbell)

OGS could be off to a flyer as Cardiff boss! Frazier Campbell, brought on by 
the Norwegian powers in a header, and Newcastle are facing a traditional early 
Cup exit.

4.37pm GMT 

GOAL! Aston Villa 1-1 Sheffield United (Helenius)

Nicklas Helenius puts a relieved Villa level. He was previously only known for 
having a shot at goalafter having his shorts pulled down 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qRMo1pJ9y3E> - but he's pulled his team back 
into the game today.

4.35pm GMT 

GOAL! Southampton 4-2 Burnley (Lallana)

Adam Lallana sticks it to Mark Clattenburg, restoring a two-goal cushion for 
Southampton with a fine finish.

4.34pm GMT 

GOAL! Newcastle 1-1 Cardiff (Noone)

Cardiff are back level at St. James' Park, courtesy of a mid-range zipper from 
Craig Noone. Meanwhile, it'sDoncaster 1-2 Stevenage.

4.32pm GMT 

GOAL! Macclesfield 1-1 Sheffield Wednesday (Williams)

There have been calls from readers to reinstate the FA Cup Magic-o-Meter. 
Frankly, by now it would be broken. There's magic all over the shop, not least 
at the Moss Rose, where Steve Williams has given proud, potlessMacclesfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/macclesfield> a deserved equaliser 
against Sheffield Wednesday.

4.29pm GMT 

GOAL! Southampton 3-2 Burnley (Rodriguez)

Burnley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> old boy Jay Rodriguez, 
on for the injured Rickie Lambert, puts the hosts back ahead, and presumably
celebrates wildly trots back to the centre circle glumly.

4.28pm GMT 

GOAL! Doncaster 0-2 Stevenage (Hartley)

Peter Hartley has put the visitors two goals up at Doncaster.

Meanwhile, this from Joshua Reynolds in Baltimore:

I learned from reading the MBM that Leyton Orient is known as the "O's". Here 
in Baltimore, our baseball team, the Orioles are also known as "The O's".

Lovely to see lower league football making waves across the pond. The 
Johnstone's Paint Trophy - the new Super Bowl?

4.25pm GMT 

It's all happening

MK Dons miss a penalty at the DW - and pay for it immediately! Callum 
McManaman tucks away from an Espinoza through ball, and it'sWigan 3-2 MK Dons. 
Meanwhile it'sMiddlesbrough 0-2 Hull, Aaron McLean with both goals. Yeovil put 
the hurt onLeyton Orient - James Hayter's second makes it 3-0. Grimsby, 
Rochdale and Sheffield United all still lead.

4.22pm GMT 

GOAL! THE MAGIC RETURNS TO CLEETHORPES! Grimsby 2-1 Huddersfield

Is Craig Disley's name about to be added to the annals of Cup history? His 
header puts the Conference team back in front. The shock is back on!

4.21pm GMT 

GOAL! Newcastle 1-0 Cardiff (Cisse)

Papiss Cisse gives Newcastle the lead against Cardiff, finishing well after a 
Sissoko shot is blocked. Somewhere, Vincent Tan is booing.

4.20pm GMT 

GOAL! Southampton 2-2 Burnley (Ings)

Danny Ings cuts inside, chips Kelvin Davis, and revives a Cup tie that looked 
all over at half time. I hope Pochettino's interpreter knows a few swear words.

4.19pm GMT 

4.17pm GMT 

GOAL! Southend 2-0 Millwall (Atkinson)

A resolutely awful afternoon for Millwall - they go two behind in a monsoon at 
Roots Hall on the stroke of half-time. Their only hope of avoiding humiliation 
surely lies with the dodgy floodlights currently illuminating them.

4.15pm GMT 

More goals are flying in...

Charlie Adam's first ever FA Cup goal has made it Stoke 2-0 Leicester, while 
Sam Vokes has put Burnley back in the game - it's nowSouthampton 2-1 Burnley. 
Jermaine Beckford, whose goal for Leeds put Manchester United out at this stage 
in 2010, has made itBolton 2-1 Blackpool. An upset also awaits in Doncaster, 
though perhaps not one to trouble the Richter Scale - it'sDoncaster Rovers 0-1 
Stevenage.

4.12pm GMT 

GOAL! Grimsby 1-1 Huddersfield (Norwood)

The Championship side are back level at Blundell Park, Oliver Norwood with a 
25-yard free kick to deflate the hosts.

4.10pm GMT 
 Ross Hannah celebrates after giving non-league Grimsby the lead against 
Huddersfield. Photograph: John Rushworth/Action Images 
4.08pm GMT 

GOAL! Yeovil 2-0 Leyton Orient (Grant)

The O's look like they can concentrate on their promotion push after today - 
Joel Grant has volleyed the hosts into a two-goal lead.

4.06pm GMT 

Red card at Roots Hall...

The lights are back on in Southend, but Millwall's Jermaine Easter is straight 
back to the dressing room. Given that Millwall have the worst defensive record 
in the Football League, he might want to try tinkering with the floodlights if 
the Lions are to avoid a mauling.

4.01pm GMT 

Half-time scores

Plenty of the FA Cup's patented magic dust in the air this afternoon - 
Sheffield United lead at Villa Park, Grimsby are a goal up against 
Huddersfield, and League Two's Rochdale are ahead against Leeds. Here's all the 
half times:

Aston Villa 0-1 Sheffield United

Barnsley 1-0 Coventry

Bolton 1-1 Blackpool - Blackpool with an equaliser on the stroke of half-time

Brighton 1-0 Reading

Bristol City 0-0 Watford

Doncaster 0-0 Stevenage

Everton 2-0 QPR <https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr>

Grimsby 1-0 Huddersfield

Ipswich 1-1 Preston

Kidderminster 0-0 Peterborough

Macclesfield 0-1 Sheffield Wednesday

Middlesbrough 0-1 Hull

Newcastle 0-0 Cardiff

Norwich 1-1 Fulham

Rochdale 1-0 Leeds

Southampton 2-0 Burnley

Southend 1-0 Millwall (play suspended - floodlight knack)

Stoke 1-0 Leicester

West Brom 0-1 Crystal Palace

Wigan 2-2 MK Dons

Yeovil 1-0 Leyton Orient

3.56pm GMT 

GOAL! Everton 2-0 QPR (Jelavic)

Nikica Jelavic may be off to Loftus Road in the near future, but he may have 
ended the Hoops' cup dream for another year. A cool finish from the Croatian, 
belying the fact it's only his second in 31 appearances, has made it 2-0 to 
them Toffees.

3.54pm GMT 

While we're on the subject...

Here's some more facts for our American readers on Rochdale, all submitted by 
you lovely people, and completely unverified by myself:

â¢ They are one of only two fourth tier sides to appear in a domestic cup final
â¢ They hold the record for most seasons without being promoted or relegated
â¢ The town has given us Lisa Stansfield, the Co-op and Bill Oddie

Meanwhile, here's a tale from Mark Jelbert which captures what lower league 
football support is really all about:

A guy I knew at university was the only one of us going on a "lads' holiday" 
who wasn't a football fan, and he decided you can't be an Englishman abroad 
without a football shirt. So he trawled the charity shops of Reading and found 
a Rochdale shirt for about 80p in Oxfam. He then turned into their biggest fan 
for two weeks, frequently shouting "up the Dale!" at bemused French families. 
Then forgot about them again.

3.51pm GMT 

GOAL! Rochdale 1-0 Leeds United (Hogan)

Another shock is on the cards at Spotland. The Dale bring Cup magic into 
American homes with a glancing header from their leading scorer, Scott Hogan.

3.49pm GMT 

GOALS! Wigan 2-2 MK Dons (Ben Reeves with two in a minute)

The holders' grip on the cup is slipping! MK Dons' Ben Reeves has scored two 
in quick succession before half-time.

3.48pm GMT 

GOAL! Norwich 1-1 Fulham (Snodgrass)

A stooping header from Robert Snodgrass means it'll be all square at half-time.

3.46pm GMT 

GOAL! Everton 1-0 QPR (Barkley)

Everton take the lead through Ross Barkley, who notches his first FA Cup goal 
with a finish from fifteen yards after twisting the blood of a couple of 
Rangers defenders.

3.44pm GMT 

GOAL! Ipswich 1-1 Preston (Davies)

I feel personally responsible for this one - Preston North End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/preston> have equalised through Kevin 
Davies, who was controversially played onside by an injured Ipswich defender.

3.43pm GMT 

GOAL! Norwich 0-1 Fulham (Bent)

Darren Bent opens the scoring for Fulham with a header! With their ageing 
squad and precarious league position, Fulham must be relishing the thought of a 
lengthy cup run.

3.41pm GMT 

GOAL! Ipswich 1-0 Preston (McGoldrick)

David McGoldrick gives the Tractor Boys the lead, scoring from the rebound 
after his penalty was saved. At this early stage, I'd say with that kind of 
luck, their name's on the Cup.

3.40pm GMT 

A momentary lull. Everton and QPR are still goalless after kicking off at ten 
past four. Kidderminster have had a chance cleared off the line as they 
continue to exert heat on poor Peterborough.

Meanwhile, here's David Hilmy with a comprehensive guide to Rochdale's shirt 
sponsors:

The Dale have had sponsored shirts since 1983 includingÂ Carcraft, the 
All-in-One Garden Centre, Smith Metals, the Hare and Hounds on Bury Rd, and the 
Horse and Jockey on Well I'Th Lane (and yeah, the name of that street is 
correct and speaks volumes 'bout Rochdale too!)

3.36pm GMT 

GOAL! Brighton 1-0 Reading (Crofts)

A lead for Brighton in this all Championship team, who were a Gordon Smith 
miss from winning the competition in 1983. Andrew Crofts isn't so wasteful 
today, slotting the Seagulls ahead.

3.34pm GMT 

GOAL! Wigan 2-0 MK Dons (Gomez)

It's two for Wigan, courtesy of a left footed strike from Jordi Gomez. The 
holders halfway into the hat for the fourth round, if that's possible.

Meanwhile, it could be lights out, all out at Roots Hall - two of the four 
floodlights have gone out, and the game is suspended, with Southend leading 1-0.

3.32pm GMT 

GOAL! Southampton 2-0 Burnley (Lambert)

Not a great dress rehearsal for promotion-chasing Burnley so far - they've 
been comfortably bested by a strong Saints team, and Rickie Lambert has doubled 
their lead.

3.30pm GMT 

GOAL! Grimsby 1-0 Huddersfield (Hannah)

Put your foil cups in the air - Ross Hannah has put the non-league Mariners 
ahead! Grimsby have beaten all three league teams they've played in the Cup 
since they fell out of the Football League - could there be a fourth victory 
for them today?

3.28pm GMT 

GOALS, GOALS, GOALS!

It's Barnsley 1-0 Coventry, Jim O'Brien giving the hosts the lead in a battle 
of two former winners... meanwhile,Sheffield Wednesday's feathers are unruffled 
byMacclesfield's motivational message - they lead 1-0 through Reda Johnson. 
Finally, it's League TwoSouthend 1-0 Millwall, through Barry Corr.

3.26pm GMT 

GOAL! Southampton 1-0 Burnley (Clyne)

Right back Nathaniel Clyne scores a belter from the edge of the box to give 
Southampton the lead against Burnley! The home fans, and presumably the 
Accrington fans in attendance, are loving it.

3.24pm GMT 

GOAL! West Brom 0-1 Crystal Palace (Gayle)

It's a good start for the revitalised Crystal Pulis at the Hawthorns - they've 
bagged the opening goal through Dwight Gayle.

3.23pm GMT 

GOAL! Wigan 1-0 MK Dons (Espinoza)

The holders take the lead at the DW through Honduran midfielder Roger 
Espinoza. They're going for the repeat.

3.21pm GMT 

GOAL! Aston Villa 0-1 Sheffield United (Murphy)

Now we've started! League One Sheffield United lead at Villa Park, courtesy of 
a deflected effort from Jamie Murphy.

3.20pm GMT 

Goalless at Carrow Road, with Norwich debutant Josh Murphy the standout 
performer thus far. Meanwhile, here's Mike Kowal:

Fox Sports here in the US decided to televise Rochdale vs Leeds to warm us up 
for Spurs/Arsenal. Had never heard of Rochdale before today but have already 
learned from the broadcast that they are famous for never doing much really. 
Anything else I should know about Rochdale or does that sum it up?

Would anyone like to enlighten Mike, and indeed America as a whole, on 
Rochdale (the team or the town)?

3.17pm GMT 

GOAL! Stoke 1-0 Leicester (Jones)

Today is the day for out of form strikers - Kenwyne Jones giving the Potters 
the lead after good work from Assaidi. So far, no surprises.

3.16pm GMT 

GOAL! Yeovil 1-0 Leyton Orient (Hayter)

Yeovil, second bottom in the Championship, lead League One's third placed 
side. If this result stays the same, does it qualify as an upset?

3.14pm GMT 
 Motivation, Macclesfield style. Photograph: Dave Thompson/PA 
3.13pm GMT 

Bolton 1-0 Blackpool (Ngog)

A good day so far for strikers you might have forgotten existed - David Ngog 
gives the Trotters the lead with a 25 yard belter.

3.11pm GMT 

GOAL! Middlesbrough 0-1 Hull City

Aaron McLean pokes the ball home after winning a foot race with the Boro 
goalkeeper - the Premier League side are set fair already.

3.08pm GMT 

No goals yet - but Kidderminster have rattled the bar against Peterborough! 
Meanwhile at St James' Park, Newcastle have had the better of the opening 
stages.

3.03pm GMT 

State of the game department

68 changes for the top flight teams taking part in the 3pm kick offs. For 
every change, a tinfoil cup somewhere melts into oblivion.

3.02pm GMT 

We're off!

Cup Magic in short supply in the opening 30 seconds. Here's Kari Tulinius, who 
is all for the knockout format:

Hello Niall,
I think all right-minded people love a knockout tournament. I wish there were 
more of them. I don't understand why it isn't considered a serious proposal to 
turn the Europa League into a knockout Europa Cup. It would make the whole 
thing fun and if a manager desperately wants to get out of it then it's only 
one extra game on the calendar.

I'm all for that proposal - over to you, UEFA.

2.54pm GMT 

It's finished Blackburn 1-1 Manchester City. A replay it is, then.

Around five minutes until kick off - except on Merseyside, where Everton v QPR 
will kick off at 3.10pm due to a bout ofCup fever traffic congestion around 
Goodison Park.

Apologies if I didn't get round to your club in the team news round up - you 
can see all the teams, plus updates from all today's games at home and abroad,
right here <https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>.

Updated at 2.55pm GMT

2.51pm GMT 

2.45pm GMT 

West Brom v Crystal Palace

West Brom: Foster, Lugano, McAuley, Dawson, Popov, Morrison, Yacob, Gera, 
Berahino, Vydra, Long.

Subs: Myhill, Brunt, Ridgewell, Sinclair, Sessegnon, Thorne, Amalfitano.

Palace: Speroni, Parr, Delaney, Gabbidon, Mariappa, Dikgacoi, Boateng, Jonny 
Williams, Bolasie, Bannan, Gayle.

Subs: Price, Moxey, McCarthy, O'Keefe, Dobbie, Puncheon, Chamakh

Middlesbrough v Hull City

Middlesbrough: Konstantopoulos, Whitehead, Emnes, Varga, Ledesma, Leadbitter, 
Williams R, Friend, Williams L, Gibson, Main

Subs: Ripley, Richardson, Butterfield, Adomah, Hines, Jutkiewicz, Smallwood

Hull: Harper, Rosenior, Faye, McShane, Figueroa, Boyd, Meyler, Quinn, Gedo, 
Fryatt, Mclean

Subs: Jakupovic, Chester, Sagbo, Elmohamady, Fletcher, Jahraldo-Martin, 
Proschwitz

Yeovil v Leyton Orient

Yeovil: Stech, Ayling, Webster, Duffy, Davis, Dawson, Edwards, Lundstram, 
Foley, Hayter, Grant.

Subs: McAllister, Upson, Moore, Jones, Dunn, Nana Ofori-Twumasi, Morgan.

Leyton Orient: Larkins, Omozusi, Cuthbert, Clarke, Sawyer, Odubajo, James, 
Ness, Baudry, Cox, Lasimant.

Subs: Coulthirst, Lisbie, Lee, Gorman, Finney, Ling, Grainger.

2.36pm GMT 

The teams continue to trickle in

Newcastle v Cardiff

Ole Gunnar Solskjaer has picked his first Cardiff side and it's a strong 
looking one. Â£7.5m summer singingVincent Tan Andreas Cornelius will start up 
top.

Newcastle: Elliot, Santon, Steven Taylor, Yanga-Mbiwa, Haidara, Sissoko, 
Tiote, Anita, Gouffran, Ben Arfa, Cisse.

Subs: Williamson, Remy, Shola Ameobi, Obertan, Sammy Ameobi, Dummett, Alnwick. 

Cardiff: Marshall, McNaughton, Hudson, Turner, John, Cowie, 
Gunnarsson, Kim, Whittingham, Odemwingie, Cornelius.

Subs: Caulker, Campbell, Brayford, Smith, Noone, Conway, Lewis.

Brighton v Reading

Brighton: Brezovan, Calderon, Greer, El-Abd, Chicksen, Crofts, 
Andrews, Agustien, March, Barnes, Forster-Caskey.

Subs: Dunk, Orlandi, Ankergren, Ward, Ulloa, LuaLua, Ince.

Reading: Federici, Gunter, Kelly, Pearce, Gorkss, Guthrie, 
Jake Taylor, Obita, Blackman, Le Fondre, McCleary.

Subs: Pogrebnyak, Drenthe, McCarthy, Williams, Tanner, Sweeney, Long.

Barnsley v Coventry

Barnsley: Steele, Cranie, Ramage, Mvoto, Kennedy, O'Brien, 
Dawson, Perkins, Cywka, Mellis, O'Grady.

Subs: Nyatanga, Scotland, Pedersen, Etuhu, Dibble, McCourt, Jennings. 

Coventry: Murphy, Christie, Webster, Willis, Adams, Baker, 
Fleck, Daniels, Moussa, Leon Clarke, Slager.

Subs: Burge, Barton, Phillips, Urquhart, Garner, Haynes, Maund.

2.31pm GMT 

Stoke v Leicester

Stoke: Butland, Cameron, Shawcross, Wilson, Pieters, Whelan, Nzonzi, 
Arnautovic, Adam, Assaidi, Jones.

Subs: Muniesa, Palacios, Walters, Crouch, Etherington, Shotton, Bachmann.

Leicester: Schmeichel, De Laet, Wasilewski, Miquel, Konchesky, James, Hammond, 
King, Knockaert, Vardy, Schlupp.

Subs: Morgan, Dyer, Waghorn, Moore, Bakayogo, Logan, Nugent.

Rochdale v Leeds

Rochdale: Lillis, Bennett, Cavanagh, Lancashire, O'Connell, 
Done, Vincenti, Hogan, Lund, Bunney, Henderson.

Subs: Rafferty, Eastham, Donnelly, Thomson, Allen, Cummins, Dicker.

Leeds: Kenny, Peltier, Pearce, Wootton, Zaliukas, McCormack, 
Murphy, Austin, Pugh, Smith, Byram.

Subs: Lees, Hunt, Brown, Tonge, Poleon, Ariyibi, Cairns.

Grimsby v Huddersfield

Grimsby: McKeown, Bignot, Pearson, Doig, Thomas, Thanoj, Disley, Colbeck, 
Neilson, Cook, Hannah.

Subs: Hedge, Hatton, Southwell, Humble, Rodman, Winfarrah, McLaughlin.

Huddersfield: Smithies, Wallace, Gerrard, Smith, Dixon, Hogg, Clayton, 
Norwood, Hammill, Paterson, Ward.

Subs: Woods, Scannell, Gobern, Bennett, Lopez, Sinnott, Holmes.

2.25pm GMT 

More team news...

Â Aston Villa v Sheff Utd
Aston Villa: Steer, Lowton, Clark, Baker, Luna, Bacuna, 
Westwood, Delph, Albrighton, Benteke, Weimann.

Subs: Donacien, 
Guzan, El Ahmadi, Helenius, Sylla, Bowery, Tonev. 

Sheff Utd: Long, McMahon, Collins, Maguire, Hill, Murphy, 
McGinn, Baxter, Doyle, Flynn, Porter.

Subs: Howard, Miller, 
Cuvelier, Coady, Brandy, Kennedy, Calvert-Lewin.

And here's the actual team sheet for Southampton v Burnley:

2.20pm GMT 

Team news from Carrow Road

Norwich: Bunn; Whittaker, Martin, R Bennett, Olsson; Fox, Snodgrass, Garrido; 
Elmander, Josh Murphy, van Wolfswinkel
Subs: Ruddy, Hooper, Becchio, Redmond, Jacob Murphy, Hall-Johnson, Gafaiti

Fulham: Stockdale; Zverotic, Burn, Hughes, Amorebieta; David, Boateng; 
KaÄanikliÄ, Dempsey, Kasami; Bent.
Subs: Joronen, Riise, Vigen Christensen, Plumain, Dejagah, Rodallega and 
Dembele.

And Goodison Park, where Nikica Jelavic starts for Everton despite a 
potentially imminent move to today's opponents, QPR:

Everton: Robles, Coleman, Alcaraz, Stones, Oviedo, McCarthy, Barry, Naismith, 
Barkley, Osman, Jelavic.

Subs: Hibbert, Heitinga, Mirallas, Lukaku, Pienaar, Howard, Vellios.

QPR: Julio Cesar, Simpson, Hill, Onuoha, Assou-Ekotto, 
Phillips, O'Neil, Henry, Barton, Traore, Austin.

Subs: Dunne, Johnson, Onyewu, Kranjcar, Zamora, Murphy, Benayoun.

Updated at 2.58pm GMT

2.08pm GMT 

Bournemouth v Burton is OFF

We're down to 21 fixtures, with the clash at the Goldsands off due to a 
waterlogged pitch.

2.06pm GMT 

Team news will be coming up in the next hour as we approach 3pm. At Ewood 
Park, it's Blackburn 1-1 Man City after a Scott Dann equaliser. Follow the 
final half hour with Simon Burntonhere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/04/blackburn-rovers-manchester-city-live-mbm>

Here's a tale to warm the cockles - Accrington's League 2 game at Portsmouth 
was called off yesterday, so Stanley boss James Beattie provided the travelling 
fans with tickets for Southampton's Cup tie against Burnley. A lovely gesture 
from Beatts, although rumour has it that the travelling army may have only 
amounted to single figures.

1.39pm GMT 

While you're waiting...

There's a veritable bevy of Cup flavoured delights on our website today. For 
starters, here'sSimon Burnton's minute-by-minute report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/04/blackburn-rovers-manchester-city-live-mbm>
 on today's early Cup kick off between two former Premier League champions - 
it'sBlackburn 0-1 Manchester City at half time.

Elsewhere, there's a potted history of Arsenal v Spurs in the Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/03/arsenal-tottenham-north-london-derby-fa-cup>
, in anticipation of this evening's North London derby, and Barry Glendenning 
writes onthe Cup's lowest ranked contender, Macclesfield Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/03/macclesfield-town-sheffield-wednesday-fa-cup>
, who face three-time winners Sheffield Wednesday today.

And finally, from the vault, here's a report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/03/vault-sutton-united-coventry-city-fa-cup-1989-giantkilling>
 on the last time a non-league side beat top-flight opposition in the third 
round - January 1989, when Sutton United overcame Coventry City at Gander Green 
Lane.

Updated at 1.59pm GMT

1.28pm GMT 

Preamble

Good afternoon, and a very warm welcome to an enduring highlight of the 
football calendar. It's FA Cup third round day, the moment when the residents 
of the football pyramid's top two divisions make their first appearance, thrown 
in at random with the lower tier and non-league teams that have progressed from 
the early rounds. While the shiny silver baubles and Europa League places 
aren't handed out until May, this wet, wild January afternoon may provide the 
enduring memories from this season's competition.

For this correspondent, today marks the pinnacle of what this battered old Cup 
is all about. If you're asking me for my FA Cup heroes, I wouldn't say 
Matthews, Villa, Cantona - I'd say Radford, Thomas, Buzaglo.Beckford. The 
world's finest knockout competition may have passed its peak, but beyond the 
sometimes shoddy attendances, maddening squad rotation and clunky connections 
to flavourless American lager, it still has the power to delight and torment 
football fans in equal measure. Look me in the eye and tell me a competition 
whose last final finishedWigan Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wiganathletic> 1-0 Manchester City has 
lost its sparkle. Can't do it, can you? You can't do it.

There's 22 third round ties kicking off at 3pm - from a minimum of 22 hardy 
souls partaking in each, a new FA Cup hero for the ages will surely emerge 
somewhere . The most likely locations for said heroism include Blundell Park, 
whereVauxhall Conference Skrill Premier promotion chasers Grimsby Town host 
five-time Cup finalists Huddersfield. Two other Skrill sides host league 
opposition - Kidderminster entertain League One Peterborough, while at the Moss 
Rose, it's Macclesfield against Championship strugglers Sheffield Wednesday.

Elsewhere, there are three all-Premier League ties, for those of you who don't 
get enough of that sort of thing every other week. Ole Gunnar Solskjaer makes 
his bow as Cardiff manager away to Newcastle, while Norwich host Fulham, and 
West Brom play Crystal Palace. If potential Premier League games are more your 
thing, three Championship contenders - QPR, Leicester and Burnley - travel to 
top flight grounds to test their mettle. They go to Goodison Park, the 
Britannia and St. Mary's respectively.

Elsewhere, there's some tasty traditional fare on show. Aston Villa and 
Sheffield United - two divisions apart but with 11 FA Cups between them - face 
off, while Blackpool will look to recreate the Matthews final away to Bolton. 
Holders Wigan begin their Cup defence at home to MK Dons, and the only Premier 
League club travelling to lower league opposition for a 3pm start,Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hullcity>, make the short hop to 
Middlesbrough, in a game that may not be spectacularly well attended.

Here's the full set of 3pm kick-offs:

Aston Villa v Sheffield United

Barnsley v Coventry

Bolton v Blackpool

Bournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> v Burton

Brighton v Reading

Bristol City v Watford

Doncaster v Stevenage

Everton v QPR

Grimsby v Huddersfield

Ipswich v Preston

Kidderminster v Peterborough

Macclesfield v Sheffield Wednesday

Middlesbrough v Hull

Newcastle v Cardiff

Norwich v Fulham

Rochdale v Leeds

Southampton v Burnley

Southend v Millwall

Stoke v Leicester

West Brom v Crystal Palace

Wigan v MK Dons

Yeovil v Leyton Orient

It's also worth mentioning, for any Oxford fans wandering around SE7 who have 
stumbled upon this clockwatch, that their tie at Charlton has been called off 
on account of a waterlogged pitch. Feel free to stick around though, guys - 
coverage of all the other games gets underway at 2pm sharp.
 