
1) Terry’s dramatic revelation may not be the final word

There was a whiff of political manoeuvring to John Terry’s post-match 
announcement that Chelsea had opted against offering him new terms for the 
summer. It was the way in which the captain laboured his point, while also 
suggesting the hierarchy had “said that, when the new manager comes in, things 
might change but it’s a ‘no’ at the minute.”. There, unmistakeably, was his 
get-out should this tale take another twist. At present, anything feels 
possible. Maybe an offer is on the table, most likely from the Chinese Super 
League who appear so intent upon plundering the Premier League this winter, 
which Terry hopes Chelsea will come close to matching. Perhaps, now he has 
entered the final six months of his contract at Stamford Bridge and is 
permitted to negotiate a summer Bosman move to a foreign club, this is all a 
lavish game to coax a reaction from the club where he has spent the last 18 
years as a professional. Certainly the timing felt rather odd. ThatChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> were compelled to issue their 
own statement late on Sunday night suggested they too had been taken by 
surprise by the centre-back’s outburst, with damage limitation underway given 
the reception that might await at Watford on Wednesday night. By the end of 
Sunday that instinctive reading of Terry’s comments – all anguished regret and 
resignation that his time at this club is drawing to a close – did not seem 
quite so clear-cut. Doubt is already creeping in – a parting of the ways may 
not be inevitable – fuelled by hints a new manager might want a say on whether 
a player with 700 career club games to his name should be discarded. The key 
now is the speed with which either party makes their next move: does Terry sign 
elsewhere, do the club stick or twist?Dominic Fifield

• Terry to leave Chelsea at end of season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/chelsea-john-terry-not-renew-contract>
• Oscar scores hat-trick in Chelsea rout of sorry MK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/mk-dons-chelsea-fa-cup-match-report>
• MK Dons leave themselves wide open to Oscar in thrashing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/31/karl-robinson-mk-dons-chelsea>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-weekend-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce06109c72bcd669d0c0c6d2c23f087e6ffbd920%2F0_106_1889_1133%2F1889.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fourth%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-weekend-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fourth%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-weekend-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce06109c72bcd669d0c0c6d2c23f087e6ffbd920%2F0_106_1889_1133%2F1889.jpg>
 John Terry is set to leave Chelsea at the end of the season. Photograph: 
Darren Staples/Reuters 
2) Arsenal’s repeat against Hull City equals relief

Arsène Wenger had simply offered up a prayer with regard to the FA Cup draw in 
the immediate aftermath of Saturday’s 2-1 home win over Burnley. The Arsenal 
manager was well aware that after the fifth-round weekend his team play 
Barcelona on Tuesday, 23 February, in the Champions League last 16, first leg. 
His prayers were answered when his club pulled the Championship leaders, Hull 
City, at home. It will be the third season in succession Arsenal have faced 
Hull and they have won each of the previous meetings – most famously, the 2014 
final, which was an extra-time thriller. It did, though, raise the general 
question about Arsenal’s ability to fight on three fronts and Wenger, who is 
now without only three players – Danny Welbeck, Jack Wilshere and Santi Cazorla 
– was bullish. “If we can keep everybody fit, we can do it,” he said. “Against
Burnley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley>, I rested Monreal, 
Bellerin, Ramsey, Walcott, Özil, Mertesacker of course [who was suspended]. 
Barcelona will play as well on the weekend before the tie.”David Hytner

• Chelsea draw Manchester City and Arsenal meet Hull in FA Cup fifth round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/chelsea-manchester-city-fa-cup-fifth-round-draw>
• Sánchez on target as Arsenal punish Burnley in FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/arsenal-burnley-fa-cup-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-weekend-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0116c6bc49e99a4cb027239e5745ff4e6e49190%2F0_242_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fourth%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-weekend-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fourth%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-weekend-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0116c6bc49e99a4cb027239e5745ff4e6e49190%2F0_242_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Kelechi Iheanacho of Manchester City performs an overhead kick Photograph: 
Michael Steele/Getty Images 
3) Garde was probably right to focus on the league

Many would say Aston Villa are down already and watching their listless 
display against Manchester City students of body language would find it hard to 
disagree. Yet Rémi Garde admitted afterwards he had made a few changes with the 
next couple of league games in mind, and looking at the fixture list it is not 
difficult to see why. Villa’s fate could be determined this week. They have a 
home game against West Ham on Tuesday and a visit to Norwich at the weekend. 
They need to win both. If they do they can at least stay in touch with the 
other relegation candidates; if they don’t their crisis of confidence will 
continue into a difficult run of opponents that include Liverpool, Everton, 
Stoke,Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> and 
Tottenham. So, Villans, no pressure or anything but this is the week to get 
going. Points from anywhere else are likely to arrive too late.Paul Wilson

• Saturday Sundae: Villa Park venom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/saturday-sundae-villa-park-snakes-plymouth>
• Manchester City thrash Aston Villa as Iheanacho hits hat-trick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/aston-villa-manchester-city-fa-cup-match-report>
• Read all the fourth round FA Cup match reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup+tone/matchreports>

4) Liverpool’s armband rotation allows Klopp to show faith

Liverpool’s goalless draw against West Ham was notable only for young players 
overshadowing more experienced team-mates, Darren Randolph’s commanding display 
in the visitors’ goal and more complaints from Jürgen Klopp about replays and 
the fixture list. It did, however, provide another example of the Liverpool 
manager’s belief that responsibility should be accepted throughout the squad as 
Joe Allen became the seventh player to captain the side during Klopp’s 26 
matches in charge. Brendan Rodgers frequently bemoaned an absence of leadership 
in his team, often justifiably so, but – as with his trust in young players to 
handle Premier League opposition at home in the FA Cup – Klopp has given his 
players an opportunity to address that concern. For Allen, who is out of 
contract at the end of next season, the armband was a timely show of faith from 
his manager. In answer to the inevitable question Klopp’s otherLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> captains have been Jordan 
Henderson, James Milner, Lucas Leiva, Kolo Touré, Christian Benteke and José 
Enrique.Andy Hunter 

• West Ham stand firm at Liverpool to earn FA Cup fourth-round replay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/liverpool-west-ham-united-fa-cup-match-report>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fgoalless-draw-forces-liverpool-and-west-ham-into-fa-cup-replay-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F31%2F1454240816136%2FKP_1597864_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Goalless%20draw%20forces%20Liverpool%20and%20West%20Ham%20into%20FA%20Cup%20replay%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fgoalless-draw-forces-liverpool-and-west-ham-into-fa-cup-replay-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Goalless%20draw%20forces%20Liverpool%20and%20West%20Ham%20into%20FA%20Cup%20replay%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fgoalless-draw-forces-liverpool-and-west-ham-into-fa-cup-replay-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F31%2F1454240816136%2FKP_1597864_crop_640x480.jpg>
5) Iturbe can learn from Howe history lesson

Juan Iturbe’s move from Roma to Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> on loan was one of the more 
eye-catching deals of the transfer window. A £16m purchase from Verona in June 
2014 the 22-year-old, who has played one friendly for Paraguay but has since 
declared his allegiance to his homeland Argentina, made a promising start in 
the Italian capital but quickly drifted to the fringes. Iturbe showed glimpses 
of his quality amidst the huff and puff of the victory against Portsmouth, 
particularly with a powerful shot that Ryan Fulton did brilliantly to tip on to 
the post in the first half, but his manager knows there is potentially plenty 
more to come. “The first half wasn’t something he was maybe used to. Juan’s 
talent is not in doubt, he’s an outstanding player. I still feel there’s an 
adjustment from our perspective to get the best out of him.” That’s not all 
Howe will do to make him feel at home. Bournemouth’s captain, Tommy Elphick, 
revealed new signings are given a club history lesson by the manager when they 
join. Since Howe has spent almost half of his life at the club, Iturbe would do 
well to listen. Ed Aarons

• Harry Arter: ‘Every single game now I go out to play for her’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/29/harry-arter-bournemouth-interview-loss-daughter>
• Bournemouth have Pugh to thank after late show sinks Portsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/portsmouth-bournemouth-fa-cup-match-report>

6) Colchester’s excellent youth system poses questions

If, as seems increasingly likely, Colchester United are a League Two side next 
season they stand to be the only club in the bottom tier with a Category Two 
academy. The club have invested sizeable sums in their youth operation, largely 
at the expense of their first-team budget, and the results are obvious both in 
a visit to their training ground and a look at the squad that facedTottenham 
Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur>. Alex Gilbey, 
an imposing central midfielder who looks cut out for a move higher up the 
leagues, caught the eye in particular and it is heartening to see another 
lower-division club follow the development model that Crewe Alexandra continue 
to embrace so wholeheartedly. It is getting harder and harder: a Category Two 
operation costs little short of seven figures annually – that is a commitment 
beyond most below the Championship and some in it. It is easy to understand the 
concerns many clubs share that, for all the rhetoric about benefiting the 
English game, the Elite Player Performance Plan has turned out to be little 
more than a carve-up designed to garland a select few. Colchester are 
exceptional at what they do and the hope is that they will reap the rewards 
further down the line; they seem a more logical starting point for a young 
player than many of the serial hoarders further up the chain and it is just a 
shame that the system makes it so difficult for other clubs of their standing, 
many of which have impressive histories of youth development, to work similarly.
Nick Ames

• Chadli’s goals inspire Spurs to comfortable win over Colchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/colchester-tottenham-hotspur-fa-cup>
• Fulham call off Moussa Dembélé move to Tottenham over loan-back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/fulham-call-off-moussa-dembeles-6m-move-to-tottenham-over-loan-back>

7) Proximity of goals’ target can help Rooney and United

Manchester United have developed a habit of pulling out a result or two 
whenever a full-blown crisis appears to be developing and that was certainly 
the thought after what turned into a comfortable win over Derby. United were 
good value for the win and it cannot go unnoticed that Wayne Rooney, whose 
excellent first-half goal was his sixth in as many games, seems to be growing 
in confidence by the week. Rooney, now six goals short of Bobby Charlton’s club 
record, has scored 13 goals in a difficult campaign. United have, away from 
home at least, shown a few signs of packing a greater punch this month and a 
revitalised Rooney can only bring out the best in team-mates such as Anthony 
Martial and Juan Mata, both of whom put in encouraging performances at the iPro 
Stadium. There are greater tests to come but perhaps the proximity of bettering 
Charlton’s tally will – consciously or not – give Rooney that extra impetus to 
pull United round. Nick Ames

• Paul Wilson: Van Gaal still has time to find the old Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/30/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united>
• Rooney eyes record after Manchester United break free in FA Cup  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/wayne-rooney-manchester-united-fa-cup>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-weekend-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0adcee7e9154bd7e581b7ba614f8c9bb88845239%2F0_241_3000_1798%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fourth%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-weekend-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fourth%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-weekend-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0adcee7e9154bd7e581b7ba614f8c9bb88845239%2F0_241_3000_1798%2F3000.jpg>
 Wayne Rooney of Manchester United celebrates scoring his side’s first goal. 
Photograph: Matthew Peters/Man Utd via Getty Images 
8) Can Suárez live up to his namesake’s reputation?

Completion of the signing of Mario Suárez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/watford-sign-mario-suarez-fiorentina>
, following that of Nordin Amrabat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/18/watford-nordin-amrabat-malaga>
 andCostel Pantilimon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/costel-pantilimon-watford-sunderland-sam-allardyce>
, means Watford’s supporters can be quietly pleased with the business done 
during the January transfer window. If rumours are to be believed they missed 
out on Andros Townsendbut the £12m paid by Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/27/andros-townsend-joins-newcastle-united-spurs>
 for the former Spurs winger represents questionable value, certainly in 
comparison to the total of £10m paid for Amrabat and Suárez. According to 
Watford’s manager, Quique Sánchez Flores, Suárez turned down an offer from 
Valencia to sign a four-and-a-half-year deal at Vicarage Road, and it seems 
clear their relationship dating from a year together at Atlético Madrid was a 
key factor. Flores described Suárez as a “pivot” and if he can, as he put it, 
“recuperate” the player, the midfielder will join the likes of his namesake 
Luis as one of those January signings who prove outstanding business can be 
done in mid-season.Richard Rae

• Ighalo strikes late to end Nottingham Forest Cup dream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/nottingham-forest-watford-fa-cup-match-report>

9) Pitch quality is no longer the great leveller

Graham Westley has an interesting theory about why there are fewer victories 
for underdogs compared to previous eras: the lack of bad pitches. “One of the 
things that has changed from years gone by is pitches are no longer the 
levelling aspect,” he said after Peterborough’s 2-2 draw at West Brom. “Pitches 
at all levels are better and therefore quality gets more time to shine. When 
Wrexham beatArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> [in 1992], 
you look at the pitch that day and it made it difficult for highly technical 
players to get a result. Technical players have a chance to shine wherever and 
perhaps that’s a factor. Top-level players are top-level players for a reason. 
Lower-level players are lower-level players for a reason.” Westley was keen to 
stress his team are no ordinary bunch of lower-league players, though. “The 
only difference with us is that we have young players who are recruited because 
they are the best young players in the lower leagues and go on to higher 
levels. Our players cannot be underestimated”Alan Smith

• Berahino bags brace but Posh secure replay with late equaliser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/west-brom-peterborough-fa-cup-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-weekend-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f7cc25eded9d5feffcc44c32a421726947e299a%2F297_327_2903_1743%2F2903.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fourth%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-weekend-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20fourth%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Ffa-cup-talking-points-weekend-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f7cc25eded9d5feffcc44c32a421726947e299a%2F297_327_2903_1743%2F2903.jpg>
 Jon Taylor of Peterborough United celebrates scoring his team’s second goal 
with manager Graham Westley. Photograph: Stu Forster/Getty Images 
10) Oxford deserve every success in attempts to provide closure

Named after the former club chairman Firoz Kassam, who still owns it, there is 
something slightly odd about the Kassam Stadium, home ofOxford United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/oxford-united> since they moved from the 
Manor Ground in 2001. Odd in the fact that it is home to as impressive a statue 
of a muscular bronze ox as you’re ever likely to see, but nobody appears to 
have noticed that they’re missing a fourth stand. The upshot? Well, quite apart 
from the fact that it leaves the windscreens of cars parked too near one end 
susceptible to damage from wayward shots, the absence of that all-important 
“fourth wall”, while to be encouraged in theatre circles, just makes an 
otherwise fine stadium look downright unfinished and a little bit weird. In a 
match that generated few talking points, let’s not pretend this is one of 
extreme urgency, but under Michael Appleton Oxford appear to be a team that is 
going places. Should they ascend to the Championship in the next few seasons, 
as is his stated intention, here’s hoping they can buy the stadium from its 
current owner, overcome any legal difficulties involving the local council and 
achieve closure in every sense of the word.Barry Glendenning

• Blackburn’s FA Cup run continues as Ben Marshall double sinks Oxford  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/oxford-united-blackburn-rovers-fa-cup-ben-marshall>

11) One incident should not obscure a special occasion


League Two Carlisle United’s 3-0 fourth round defeat to Everton should be 
remembered for the indomitable effort of those Cumbrians who somehow, and 
against all odds,enabled the club to get this game on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/24/carlisle-reborn-in-wake-of-floods>
 in the wake of the devastation inflicted on Brunton Park and the surrounding 
area by December’s floods. Then there wasa wonderful performance from Everton’s 
Ross Barkley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/carlisle-everton-fa-cup-match-report>
 and the beautiful, elegant, simplicity of Roberto Martínez’s team’s football. 
Most of the headlinesconcentrated on an isolated incident of alleged racist 
abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/everton-kone-pienaar-alleged-racial-abuse-carlisle>
 directed towards Arouna Koné and Steven Pienaar after Koné scored the opening 
goal. It is right there should be zero tolerance towards such behaviour and 
Carlisle dealt with the matter very well, issuing a public address announcement 
stressing this was not on. It should not be allowed to obscure the generally 
generous spirited atmosphere of the home crowd who offered Barkley a splendid 
standing ovation when he was substituted. As Martínez put it: “Carlisle United 
deserve incredible credit for getting the game on. They’ve given us all a 
lesson of how to face adversity in life and football.”

• Match report: Barkley wraps up Everton’s FA Cup stroll in the park at 
Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/carlisle-everton-fa-cup-match-report>
• Koné and Pienaar suffer alleged racial abuse at Carlisle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/31/everton-kone-pienaar-alleged-racial-abuse-carlisle>
 