
Scunthorpe United will travel to Chelsea in the third round of the FA Cup 
after easing to a 3-0 home victory overLeyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient> in a replay while Salford 
City went down 2-0 to Hartlepool.

The Iron last played at Stamford Bridge in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2005/jan/10/match.sport11> when they took 
a surprise lead before going on to lose 3-1.

On Tuesday night the League One side opened the scoring early in the second 
half when a Neal Bishop shot was turned past his own goalkeeper by the Orient 
defender Jean-Yves M’voto.

They doubled their advantage shortly afterwards when Jack King bundled home 
his second goal in as many games from a Luke Williams corner.

Mark Robins’s men sealed a comfortable victory over their League Two opponents 
late on through Hakeeb Adelakun’s simple finish after good build-up play by 
Williams and Paddy Madden. The first game finished 0-0.

Salford of the Evo-Stik Northern Premier League, owned by the class of ‘92 of 
former Manchester United players, held Hartlepool in check until extra time 
when Scott Fenwick headed the home side from League Two in front. Michael 
Mandron’s volley in the closing seconds ended the Salford dream of a 
third-round tie against Derby County on 9 January.The first game had ended 1-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/salford-city-hartlepool-fa-cup-second-round-match-report>
.

Shrewsbury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> of League One 
needed a stoppage-time strike from Abu Ogogo to see off the Vanarama Premier 
side Grimsby and set up a trip to Cardiff City. The initial game finished 0-0.

Walsall and Chesterfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> 
could not score in 120 minutes, after a 1-1 draw in the first game, but Walsall 
held their nerve to win 5-3 on penalties and now travel to Brentford.

Whitehawk and Dagenham and Redbridge play on Wednesday for the right to travel 
to Everton in the third round.
 