
A sports writer has called on the Football Association to intervene over the 
persistent problem of clubs either banning journalists or enforcing 
restrictions on them.

It’s a sensible idea, so I think all newspapers - national, regional and local 
- need to support the plea by Will Watt of theBlackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> Gazette for the FA to step in.

His newspaper has been subjected to a temporary ban on speaking to players and 
staff at Blackpool FC. And last month his colleague, Steve Simpson, was barred 
from a press conference called to announce the appointment of the club’s new 
manager.

HoldTheFrontPage has listed some of the latest clubs to impose bans 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2015/news/daily-football-writer-calls-for-fa-to-outlaw-club-media-bans/>
. They include Swindon Town, Rotherham United, Newcastle United, Southampton 
and Port Vale.

Watt wrote in his paper 
<http://www.blackpoolgazette.co.uk/sport/blackpool-fc/it-s-good-to-talk-blackpool-fc-should-try-it-1-7357230>
: “Maybe the FA should follow the lead of the NFL in America, which outlaws the 
practice of clubs banning the media”.

He also warned against another innovation that threatens press freedom - the 
forging by clubs of partnerships with select media outlets, usually due to 
commercial tie-ups, which gives them exclusive access.

Blackpool and Newcastle have formed such links. And it doesn’t take a moment 
to realise which broadcaster is never rebuffed by football clubs. Step forward 
Sky TV.

As Watt rightly says: “Open and honest reporting is at risk.” The control 
exercised by clubs for a variety of reasons, whether it be their dislike of 
critical reporting or their belief that commerce should dictate who they should 
speak to, is unaceptable.

I don’t expect the FA to do anything unless there is sufficient pressure on 
the organisation. Sounds like a job for the News Media Association, the trade 
body that represents the vast majority of Britain’s newspapers, and the Society 
of Editors.

Sport remains the reason that many people buy newspapers or read their online 
output. The industry needs to stop this anti-democratic nonsense of clubs 
treating journalists like football hooligans.

Source:  
<http://www.blackpoolgazette.co.uk/sport/blackpool-fc/it-s-good-to-talk-blackpool-fc-should-try-it-1-7357230>
Blackpool Gazette 
<http://www.blackpoolgazette.co.uk/sport/blackpool-fc/it-s-good-to-talk-blackpool-fc-should-try-it-1-7357230>
. Hat tip: HoldTheFrontPage 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2015/news/daily-football-writer-calls-for-fa-to-outlaw-club-media-bans/>
 