
The Football Association has set up an internal review into what clubs knew 
about Barry Bennell and allegations of child sexual abuse in football. The 
governing body will also investigate what information it was aware of at the 
time of the alleged offences.

Four players have so far made public allegations against the former Crewe 
Alexandra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/sexual-abuse-football-andy-woodward-football-association>
 youth coach Bennell, who was also involved with Manchester City and Stoke, 
including Andy Woodward,whose account in The Guardian  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward>has prompted a 
string of other footballers to come forward with claims. The chief executive of 
the Professional Footballers’ Association, Gordon Taylor,has said that 20 
players have come forward but have not made their cases public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/leeds-blackpool-gordon-taylor-child-sex-abuse-scandal>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%20could%20be%20worse%20than%20Jimmy%20Savile%20case%2C%20says%20Andy%20Woodward%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%20could%20be%20worse%20than%20Jimmy%20Savile%20case%2C%20says%20Andy%20Woodward%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video&media=>
Football sexual abuse scandal could be worse than Jimmy Savile case, says Andy 
Woodward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/23/football-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video>
When I started talking to Barry Bennell’s victims, I had no idea how deep 
abuse ran in football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/barry-bennell-victims-football-paedophile-interviews>
The FA has instructed Kate Gallafent QC to assist it with its review into the 
abuse cases. It has said the internal review will look into what information 
the bodywas aware of at the relevant times around the issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/crewe-barry-bennell-former-board-member>
, what clubs were aware of, and what action was or should have been taken. It 
suggested a fully-fledged inquiry may follow.

Gallafent will also make recommendations to seek to ensure these situations 
can never be repeated.

“At this time, with acknowledgement that a wide-ranging inquiry may be 
required in time, we are working closely with the police to support their lead 
investigations and must ensure we do not do anything to interfere with or 
jeopardise the criminal process,” said the FA.

The development comes a day after Crewe announced it will launch its own 
independent investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/crewe-independent-review-handling-child-abuse-allegations>
 into how it has dealt with the allegations concerning Bennell.

A statement released by Crewe on Saturday, 10 days after the Guardian first 
published Woodward’s testimony, said they were “determined a thorough 
investigation” should be launched at the earliest opportunity. It added that 
the Cheshire club “believes an independent review, to be conducted via the 
appointment of external legal counsel, is the correct way forward in the 
circumstances”.
 