
Dario Gradi is to be quizzed by a team of investigators working on behalf of 
the Football Association after claims that he visited the parents of a Chelsea 
youth-team player to “smooth over” a complaint of sexual assault against Eddie 
Heath, the chief scout who has been identified as a repeat offender in the 
1970s.

Gradi, currently the director of football at Crewe Alexandra after more than 
30 years in senior roles with the club, will be asked for his version of events 
after being identified as the man Chelsea sent to deal with a complaint that 
Heath had indecently assaulted the boy, then 15.

FA appoints Clive Sheldon QC to lead sex abuse scandal review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/football-association-appoint-clive-sheldon-qc-child-sex-abuse-review>
Gradi, then in his early-30s, was assistant manager at Chelsea at the time and 
is said to have told the victim’s family that he knew Heath was “closer” to 
boys than he should have been. Chelsea never took any action against Heath and 
the FA’s independent inquiry, among a wide-ranging investigation expected to 
take many months, wants to interview Gradi about what the club knew, what they 
did about it and whether there was a cover-up.

That investigation will be led by a newly appointed QC, Clive Sheldon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/football-association-appoint-clive-sheldon-qc-child-sex-abuse-review>
, who is in the process of appointing a back-up team to go through what has 
been described as a “tidal wave” of calls since Andy Woodward’s interview in 
the Guardian instigated what the FA’s chairman, Greg Clarke, has described as 
the worst crisis he can remember in the sport.

Heath will feature prominently in the investigation after Chelsea admitted 
they paid£50,000 hush money to one of their former players, Gary Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/gary-johnson-says-chelsea-paid-him-50000-for-silence-about-abuse>
, to spare themselves any damaging publicity about a scout who died in the 
late-1980s.

In the case said to have led to Gradi’s intervention, the player had been at 
Chelsea for two seasons when Heath, known as “the Star Maker” because of his 
work in the club’s junior set-up, is said to have begun touching him 
inappropriately. “He would put his hands up your shorts, touch your genitals 
and laugh,” the man, now 59,told the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/dario-gradi-chelsea-sex-abuse-youth-player-complaint-crewe-alexandra-smoothed-over-claims-a7453151.html>
 last week. “Sometimes you would be able to fend him off. Other times he would 
catch you unawares.”

The incident that led to the boy telling his parents what happened in 1974 and 
they immediately telephoned Chelsea to report their employee. Gradi is said to 
have arrived at the house in the following days and, despite the serious nature 
of the claims, Heath remained at the club for another five years.

“He [Gradi] came to visit my parents and me to smooth it over,” the former 
player said. “I remember him saying something like: ‘[With] Eddie, [football] 
is his life and he gets a bit close to the boys. I’m sorry if he’s overstepped 
the mark in his fondness this time.’ He [Gradi] was told about this incident, 
that Eddie Heath had interfered with me several times and that I was fed up 
with it. He stayed for about an hour. He talked about how good this youth team 
was at the time and that he had a good crop of players. The conversation went 
off at tangents.”

Gary Johnson says Chelsea paid him £50,000 for silence about abuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/gary-johnson-says-chelsea-paid-him-50000-for-silence-about-abuse>
Gradi, now 75, responded on Friday with a statement that did not refer to the 
specific allegations. “Aside from denying any wrongdoing, it would be 
inappropriate and unfair on all parties to comment piecemeal through the media 
at this time in connection with historic allegations. Suffice to say, I will do 
everything within my power to assist all investigatory authorities into what is 
becoming a wide-ranging and important enquiry into historic sexual abuse.” A 
spokesman for Crewe followed that up on Tuesday by saying Gradi would “fully 
co-operate with the FA”.

Hundreds of other former players have been in contact with the police since 
Woodward, formerly of Crewe, Bury and Sheffield United, waived his anonymity to 
speak to the Guardian, and the FA is promising there will be full disclosure of 
its findings, subject to legal restrictions. “The overriding objectives of the 
review are to ensure that any possible failings by the FA and clubs at the 
relevant time are brought to light and to ensure that lessons are learned so 
any identified failings are not repeated,” the FA said in a statement.

At least 18 different police forces are involved in their own inquiries, with 
thelast confirmed figure being that around 350 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/fa-punish-clubs-cover-up-martin-glenn>
 had initiated complaints and the distinct probability, coming up for a week 
later, that the figure is considerably higher now. Steve Walters, another 
former player who waived his anonymity to tell his story to the Guardian, has 
said he alone has been contacted by 50 former professionals. Walters also said 
he was disappointed that the police had yet to take an official statement from 
him.
 