
Allegations of racist chanting by a group of Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> fans during their League 
One fixture against Bradford on Monday are to be investigated by the Football 
Association.

United’s 3-1 win was tarnished by claims of racist chanting towards the away 
supporters at Bramall Lane after travelling fans reported abuse from a small 
minority.

Sheffield United to investigate ‘inappropriate behaviour’ by fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/30/sheffield-united-investigate-inappropriate-behaviour-fans-bradford-city>
According to the Yorkshire Post 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/sport/football/sheffield-united/sheffield-united-and-football-association-to-investigate-claims-of-isis-chants-during-derby-clash-against-bradford-city-1-7649135>
: “A few hundred Sheffield United fans near the away terrace allegedly sang 
‘You’re just a town full of Isis’ towards the 4,000 travelling support from 
Bradford.”

The Blades announced they had launched an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/30/sheffield-united-investigate-inappropriate-behaviour-fans-bradford-city>
 into allegations of “inappropriate behaviour” and on Thursday the FA confirmed 
it would look into the matter too.

The FA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa> said it would ask both clubs 
for their observations on the matter and study video footage before deciding if 
punishment was necessary.

United are also understood to have taken steps to identify the alleged 
offenders. Anyone who is deemed to have taken part in the chanting could face 
criminal proceedings.

United, who are currently eighth in League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>, issued the following 
statement on Wednesday: “The club has received complaints about both sets of 
fans from the fixture – including a number of contradictory reports.

“The Blades will take every step to track down and deal with those responsible 
for any inappropriate actions, which ruin the matchday experience for other 
supporters.

“Sheffield United is an inclusive family and community orientated club where 
everyone is made to feel welcome and it endeavours to improve on this principle 
year on year.”

The United striker Billy Sharp claimed a number of Bradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> fans threw coins at him during 
the match.

He later appeared to make light of the incident when he said on Twitter: 
“Cheers Bradford for the coins.”
 