
Barrow: Andrew Casson

The son of Barrow’s owner, Paul Casson, he oversees the club’s commercial and 
financial operations

Although I was born in Texas, my father had been brought up in Barrow before 
moving to the States. Our family always followed English football and returned 
to Cumbria for holidays a couple of times a year, so theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> was a big part of my childhood. I 
grew up as a Newcastle United supporter and, much as I can’t wait for Saturday 
and Rochdale to arrive at a sold-out Holker Street, my dream was to be drawn 
away at St James’ Park. Now I’m hoping that will happen in the fourth round!

FA Cup photo essay – a look at Woking v Accrington Stanley in the second round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ng-interactive/2017/jan/06/fa-cup-photo-essay-a-look-at-woking-v-accrington-stanley-in-the-second-round>
My first memories of the FA Cup are getting into a few fights with my brother, 
a Manchester United fan, and my dad, a Liverpool supporter, over Newcastle’s 
lack of success, so it’s a dream to think the FA Cup trophy will physically be 
with us here at Barrow on Saturday and the BBC will be broadcasting much of its 
coverage including Football Focus from our ground. It is the first time we’ve 
sold out since my father bought the club in 2014 and we’re hoping that some of 
the newcomers in the 4,400 crowd will stick with us, realise we’re worth 
watching and help cheer us back into the Football League.

While there’s no doubt this tie against Rochdale is the highlight of our time 
at Barrow, we hope it won’t be the biggest moment of 2017 as our longer-term 
aim is to get this club back into the Football League for the first time in 45 
years. Under our manager, Paul Cox, we’d been on a 26-game unbeaten run until 
our 4-1 New Year’s Eve defeat at Gateshead and we’re sixth in the National 
League. Going unbeaten for so long means the atmosphere and energy around the 
club is absolutely incredible. To get to the third round we’ve already beaten 
Tranmere, Taunton and Bristol Rovers so we can’t wait for Rochdale – and then 
maybe Rafael Benítez and Newcastle away next time.”LT
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfd5585fd0640b7265c81f7cf02a4e90a87aac0b%2F48_442_2748_1648%2F2748.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Faces%20behind%20the%20FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%20%E2%80%98At%20this%20level%20these%20are%20the%20days%20you%20live%20for%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Faces%20behind%20the%20FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%20%E2%80%98At%20this%20level%20these%20are%20the%20days%20you%20live%20for%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfd5585fd0640b7265c81f7cf02a4e90a87aac0b%2F48_442_2748_1648%2F2748.jpg>
 Andrew Casson is the son of Barrow owner Paul Casson, whose side’s lengthy 
unbeaten run ended on New Year’s Eve at 26 matches. Photograph: Barrow FC 
Stourbridge: Gary Hackett

Locally born 54-year-old former Stoke and West Brom winger has been the club’s 
manager since 2003. Stourbridge are the lowest-ranked team left in the FA Cup

Wycombe is by far the biggest game in the club’s history. To have been in the 
third-round draw with the likes of Manchester United and Arsenal was amazing – 
it’s so exciting for everyone at the club, the town and all our fans. It’s a 
massive achievement and, as a local boy, I feel very proud. The club was 
founded in 1876 so to get to the third round for the first time is a 
magnificent achievement. We’re taking 2,200 fans toWycombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe> and I’m sure the atmosphere will 
surprise their supporters. When I see my family in the ground I’ll have to 
pinch myself that it’s actually happening. Hopefully it’ll be a day for my 
children to always remember.

Our squad includes bank managers, teachers and personal trainers and the day 
jobs mean we’re all very busy – I run a chemical distribution business dealing 
largely with the food industry and being my own boss helps but it’s still a lot 
of work – so, unusually, we’re staying in a hotel near Marlow on Friday night. 
Wycombe are doing very well in League Two but we beat League One Northampton in 
the second round and it will be very interesting to see how my players do. 
There are quite a lot of semi-professionals who are good enough to have had 
professional careers but don’t want to risk giving up good jobs or seeing their 
income drop, so the gap between non-league and league can sometimes be 
exaggerated.

This week has all felt a bit unreal – in between dealing with my business 
clients and training we’ve been talking to BBC, ITV, Sky and various national 
newspapers. I could moan about it but when I’m back to my weekly phonecall with 
the Stourbridge News I’ll remember how fantastic it all was. But, before that 
happens, I hope we’ll play West Brom at The Hawthorns in the fourth round.LT

Sutton United: Bobby Childs

First-team sports therapist and business development manager at the National 
League club with special responsibility for the revenue stream from the club’s 
3G pitch

We've got a hardcore of around 120 fans who follow us everywhere – this is one 
of those days that makes it worthwhile

Someone once said that, in non-league football, 90% of the time things can be 
a bit rubbish but you put up with it because the other 10% is absolutely 
brilliant. At this level these are the days you live for. Our fans who followed 
us to Boreham Wood in late November, saw us lose and, due to a train strike, 
didn’t get back home until around 2.30am, will know the feeling so let’s hope 
it’s going to be a great day. We’re sold out and we’ll have a 5,000-plus crowd 
at Gander Green Lane againstAFC Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon> but we’ve got a hardcore 
of around 120 fans who follow us everywhere away, rain or shine and this is one 
of those days that makes it all worthwhile for them.

One thing is certain: the three bars we’ve got at the club are all going to be 
exceptionally busy and aiming for record takings; the only problems are fitting 
everyone who wants a drink into the small spaces – and whether our staff will 
be able to pull pints quickly enough to keep up with the demand.

Fortunately the physio side of things hasn’t been too overworked; we’ve only 
got one injury and I get a lot of support from my assistant and fellow sports 
therapist Catherine Chambers, who is also the club’s massage therapist. Players 
at this level are much more knowledgable about their bodies and managing 
injuries than they used to be and look after themselves a lot better than in 
the past; that really helps us.

Saturday will bring back memories of the 1988-89 season when we beat Coventry 
City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/03/vault-sutton-united-coventry-city-fa-cup-1989-giantkilling>
 [then in the top tier and FA Cup winners 18 months earlier] 2-1 here. Micky 
Stephens, who is still with us as assistant to our manager Paul Doswell, played 
in that game and, even though AFC Wimbledon are doing very well in League One, 
we want to have another great day. Then I’d like Tottenham.LT

Eastleigh: Martin Allen

Eastleigh’s manager since the start of December, he returns to Brentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford>, whom he led to the fifth 
round of the FA Cup in 2005 and 2006
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc078f5faccbce24eb7a9d71d8b50bbe1be617b3f%2F257_346_1982_1190%2F1982.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Faces%20behind%20the%20FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%20%E2%80%98At%20this%20level%20these%20are%20the%20days%20you%20live%20for%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Faces%20behind%20the%20FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%20%E2%80%98At%20this%20level%20these%20are%20the%20days%20you%20live%20for%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc078f5faccbce24eb7a9d71d8b50bbe1be617b3f%2F257_346_1982_1190%2F1982.jpg>
 Martin Allen, the Eastleigh manager, is the cousin of FA Cup finalists Clive 
Allen and Paul Allen. Photograph: Pete Burns/ProSports/Rex/Shutterstock 
The FA Cup will always be special to me: I watched my cousin Paul Allen become 
the youngest player to play in an FA Cup final at Wembley, turning out for West 
Ham in 1980. I saw my cousin Clive play for QPR against Tottenham at Wembley in 
1982. To see both my cousins doing that, it whet my appetite but increased the 
pressure on me to succeed.

It’s the first time I’ve been back to Griffin Park with a team and I think 
it’s going to be pretty special. The crowd used to be very supportive – we had 
a fantastic rapport. They are working-class supporters at Brentford, they’re 
certainly not your prawn sandwiches lot. They are more burger and a pint, more 
my kind of people. My time there as manager, from 2004-06, was, without a 
shadow of a doubt, the best two years of my career.

It’s going to be a 1,600 sellout in the Eastleigh end. The growth at the club 
in the last three years has been unbelievable. For my players Saturday is an 
opportunity to play at a Championship club, and they know nothing about my past 
and my special times at Brentford. I never have talked to them about what I 
used to do, because I used to lack discipline, I used to abuse referees, I used 
to kick opponents and I used to do everything I don’t want my players to do now.

I went to watch Brentford last weekend and thought: “Oh my God, how we going 
to get anything from here?” They are top-quality, international players. I’m 
just hoping and praying they sell Scott Hogan. We’ve got 15 available players, 
four substitutes. We’ve got five players cup-tied, six out injured. We’ll give 
it our best shot – as we know in football, especially in the FA Cup, strange 
things can happen.MB

Fleetwood Town: Devante Cole

The striker is the son of the former England striker Andy Cole
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d8d8555c8299f5610eacfadd89238ca618d7149%2F77_131_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Faces%20behind%20the%20FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%20%E2%80%98At%20this%20level%20these%20are%20the%20days%20you%20live%20for%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Faces%20behind%20the%20FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%20%E2%80%98At%20this%20level%20these%20are%20the%20days%20you%20live%20for%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d8d8555c8299f5610eacfadd89238ca618d7149%2F77_131_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
 Devante Cole and his team-mates at League One Fleetwood are looking forward to 
taking on the Championship club Bristol City. Photograph: Richard 
Martin-Roberts/CameraSport via Getty Images 
My dad won the FA Cup in 1996 and 1999 with Manchester United, but in 1996 I 
was only a year old, so they’re only distant memories for me. He’s obviously 
talked to me about the FA Cup and what a huge competition it is, and how 
important it was to him, but I don’t think his achievements have any bearing on 
me. What I achieve is what I achieve.

We’re on a good unbeaten run of 11 games at the moment, and we’ve got into the 
play-off places for the first time, but the Cup isn’t something that is going 
to interrupt our league campaign. On my personal list of priorities the FA Cup 
is very high – like anyone else you grow up watching the FA Cup and you want to 
do well in it, but the league, getting into the play-offs and getting promoted 
is always going to be the most important thing right now, as anyone will tell 
you. But all the lads are buzzing for it. It’s a big game where we can show 
what we can do. Everyone looks for the draw and hopes to get a big team. We’re 
playingBristol City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity>, which 
is where my dad played for a couple of years before I was born, but it’s just a 
little link.

I scored two goals in the second round to get us here, and working with Uwe 
Rösler has been a big help. He coached me in the youth team at Manchester City, 
so he knows my game and what I’m all about. When we’re in training sessions he 
says things that make me think: “Yeah, he used to be a striker.” That sort of 
thing definitely helps a lot.NM

Blackpool: Bloomfield Bear

Club mascot
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19fb8e127b99396057c25085878967678905e7ca%2F140_0_2266_2832%2F2266.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Faces%20behind%20the%20FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%20%E2%80%98At%20this%20level%20these%20are%20the%20days%20you%20live%20for%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Faces%20behind%20the%20FA%20Cup%20third%20round%3A%20%E2%80%98At%20this%20level%20these%20are%20the%20days%20you%20live%20for%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19fb8e127b99396057c25085878967678905e7ca%2F140_0_2266_2832%2F2266.jpg>
 The Blackpool mascot Photograph: John Rushworth/Action Images 
My dad was the mascot before me, and then I took over a few years ago. So the 
suit has been in family for about 12 years and I’ve been doing it for the last 
three. I’m the fastest mascot in the north-west, after winning a race at 
Lancashire Cricket Club. They have a national mascot race as well at Wetherby 
racecourse. My dad did it once but he’s a bit older than me, so he didn’t win 
it.

Outside of racing them, I rarely clash with other mascots. I had a silly scrap 
with the Fleetwood mascot last year. But before me and my dad did it, the 
Bloomfield Bear once had its shoes ripped off and lobbed into the crowd by the 
Oldham mascot.

This season Gary Bowyer has come in as manager and done quite a good job – I 
think the fans appreciate what he is doing. He’s signed some experienced 
players like Danny Pugh, and Kyle Vassell is scoring goals. Hopefully we’ll 
push for the play-offs in League Two. We haven’t had an FA Cup run for a while. 
No disrespect toBarnsley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> but 
it’s not Manchester United, and it’s more about the league at the moment.

The Blackpool mascot does have history with the FA Cup. Back in 1953, when we 
won the thing, our mascot was a real live duck called Douglas. Despite advice 
from Stanley Matthews, the founder of the original supporters’ group The Atomic 
Boys – Syd Bevers – smuggled Douglas into Wembley for the final and even drove 
to Downing Street afterwards, wearing a bright tangerine cloak and FA Cup 
headdress, to give Winston Churchill someBlackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> rock! Later, in 1961, before 
an FA Cup tie, a Scunthorpe United fan dressed as a butcher stole our duck [the 
successor to Douglas, named Puskas] and threatened to lop his head off, 
although Syd got him back in time.MB
 