
“Oh my God, we’ve got scobies coming out of our ears,” says Clare Lattin, 
shutting the fridge door and placing two bottles of glowingkombucha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/30/kombucha-beer-hybrid-los-alamos-new-mexico>
 on her vast kitchen table. For the uninitiated, a scoby is a symbiotic colony 
of bacteria and yeast used to produce fermented, effervescent tea. “Come by the 
restaurant and we’ll vac-pac one for you,” she offers.

The restaurant could be one of two. Lattin is the co-founder of the diminutive 
European gastro-chicDucksoup <http://ducksoupsoho.co.uk/> in Soho, and Rawduck 
<http://www.rawduckhackney.co.uk/> in Hackney. A third venue with a focus on 
pickles and ferments is in the making. She also co-owns the food and drink PR 
company EightyFour (the client list includes the Hix restaurant group and the 
Chiltern Firehouse). Finally there’s a ceramics line,Vessel & Time 
<http://www.vesselsandtime.co.uk/welcome/#about>, for which she sketches 
designs that are then produced by a potter in Dorset. She also finds time to 
handbuild her own ceramics. A board of clay vessels sits drying on the floor of 
her apartment. “One day, the dream is to just design and make jugs,” she says.

Lattin’s apartment is on the ground floor of a converted factory in Hackney 
Wick. The building was turned into studios by a community of artists in the 
1990s. “I came to a party here about 15 years ago, so I knew the community 
existed,” explains Lattin. “Then, four years ago, my friend [the artistSue 
Webster <http://www.timnobleandsuewebster.com/>] heard an apartment was coming 
up for private sale. I came to view it and that was that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Ffactory-fresh-fabrics-and-character-in-a-converted-victorian-building%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F787b797247807038d4fa896931509400fc5efce9%2F0_743_5744_3447%2F5744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Factory%20fresh%3A%20fabrics%20and%20character%20in%20a%20converted%20Victorian%20building&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Ffactory-fresh-fabrics-and-character-in-a-converted-victorian-building%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Factory%20fresh%3A%20fabrics%20and%20character%20in%20a%20converted%20Victorian%20building&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Ffactory-fresh-fabrics-and-character-in-a-converted-victorian-building%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F787b797247807038d4fa896931509400fc5efce9%2F0_743_5744_3447%2F5744.jpg>
 The book-lined sitting room with a large faded rug. Photograph: Kristin Perers 
When I visit, the Crittall <https://www.crittall-windows.co.uk/> front door is 
left permanently open. Delivery men come and go, and over the course of the 
day, a small pile of brown packages amasses at the front door, including a box 
addressed to Mr Reason and Mr Squalor (akathe Chapman brothers 
<http://jakeanddinoschapman.com/>, whose studio is a few doors down).

I’m curious about how people congregate. I love creating corners of different 
experience

“It was very masculine when I moved in,” says Lattin of the cavernous 
apartment. Slowly, she has transformed the space, opening up the spare bedroom 
to create an office, adding internal French windows to the one remaining 
bedroom, and replacing the bathroom and kitchen. The industrial proportions of 
the property have been softened and apportioned with hanging fabric fromCaravane
 <http://www.caravane.fr/en/>and Linen Works <http://www.thelinenworks.co.uk/> 
. By the front door, Lattin has stitched offcuts of vintage Berber skirts from
The Cloth Shop <http://www.theclothshop.net/> on to a plain linen panel. “I 
love hanging fabric,” says Lattin. “It’s an affordable way to divide space and 
it creates a sense of airiness that reminds me of being on holiday.”

On open shelves throughout the space are groupings of carefully collected 
objects. “I’m fairly minimalist,” says Lattin. “I look for objects with texture 
and character, but it’s really hard to find things in the UK alone – you end up 
having to pay a fortune.” She points out some of her favourite finds, including 
a pink and blue tin plate from Damascus, and a pair of cracked French 
earthenware pots. For her, the faded pink and grey rug (fromMaroc Tribal 
<http://www.maroctribal.com/>) recaptures the colours of the Nevada desert 
where she recently travelled to see the artistNancy Holt’s salt tunnels 
<https://utah.com/wendover/sun-tunnels>. “It was the most peaceful experience.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Ffactory-fresh-fabrics-and-character-in-a-converted-victorian-building%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94066d98cd677c6de0f23efea1cc26153e5283ee%2F0_2289_2804_1682%2F2804.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Factory%20fresh%3A%20fabrics%20and%20character%20in%20a%20converted%20Victorian%20building&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Ffactory-fresh-fabrics-and-character-in-a-converted-victorian-building%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Factory%20fresh%3A%20fabrics%20and%20character%20in%20a%20converted%20Victorian%20building&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Ffactory-fresh-fabrics-and-character-in-a-converted-victorian-building%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94066d98cd677c6de0f23efea1cc26153e5283ee%2F0_2289_2804_1682%2F2804.jpg>
 A board of drying clay pots in the kitchen. Photograph: Kristin Perers 
“I’m really interested in the way people sit and congregate,” says Lattin. 
“And I love the idea of creating corners of different experience.” This is 
clear in her personal space and the way different forms of seating are used 
within it. In front of a bookshelf is an unupholstered armchair with a 
nude-pink cushion, and a birch plywood occasional table and stool from the 
Shoreditch-based workshopUnto This Last <http://unto-this-last.myshopify.com/>. 
There’s an Ercol bench, vast sofa and secondhand Thonet rocking chair gathered 
around a patchwork of monochrome rugs. In the kitchen, a Windsor chair faces 
the dining table and beside the desk space is a deep, built-in daybed.

This interest also informs the spirit of her restaurants. “I wanted to open 
somewhere where you could pitch up by yourself, grab a seat at the bar and find 
good food, with good wines by the glass without paying a fortune for it or 
booking it two weeks in advance. The seating, the menu, the wine list… It’s all 
about promoting conversation in an intimate environment.” And sharing scobies, 
of course.
 