
Germany

The German political mainstream is getting increasingly nervous about the 
effect that the rise of fake news might have on federal elections next autumn. 
Fake news and Russian interference – either by influencing fake news sites, or 
by hacking or misinformation – are viewed as a serious threat to the democratic 
process, particularly since the US presidential elections.


From rumours that Merkel was in the east German secret police, the Stasi, to 
others suggesting she is Adolf Hitler’s daughter, Germans are also proving 
themselves susceptible to false information.

Suspicions are that the story was spread by Russian elements keen to undermine 
the refugee policy of Angela Merkel

The most blatant example of fake news to hit Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> so far occurred earlier this year 
over reports that a 13-year-old girl of Russian origin, known as Lisa F, had 
been raped in Berlin by refugees from the Middle East. The story received 
extensive coverage on Russian and German media who reported the allegations 
that she had been abducted on her way to school and gang-raped. The attack 
turned out to have been fabricated, as Berlin’s chief of police was quick to 
point out. According to Berlin’s public prosecutor’s office the girl had spent 
30 hours with people known to her, and a medical examination proved she had not 
been raped.

But having been shared widely on social media and through Russian news sites, 
hundreds took to the streets to protest at the “attack”, along with far right 
and anti-Islam groups. Sergey Lavrov, Russia’s foreign minister went so far as 
to accuse Merkel’s government of “sweeping the case under the carpet”, 
heightening suspicions in Berlin that the Kremlin was deliberately trying to 
cause trouble.

There are suspicions that the story was spread in the first place by Russian 
elements keen to undermine the refugee policy of Angela Merkel. She is viewed 
as a key enemy to Russia over her tough stance on Ukraine. The ultimate aim is 
said to be to destabilise her domestically just as she has said she will stand 
for a fourth term in office.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbf06fd20fe98c077c3608b314742991e88d32ce%2F0_0_3723_2234%2F3723.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fake%20news%3A%20an%20insidious%20trend%20that's%20fast%20becoming%20a%20global%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fake%20news%3A%20an%20insidious%20trend%20that%27s%20fast%20becoming%20a%20global%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbf06fd20fe98c077c3608b314742991e88d32ce%2F0_0_3723_2234%2F3723.jpg>
 Some suspect the false story of a 13-year-old’s rape by refugees was designed 
to undermine the German chancellor, Angela Merkel. Photograph: Markus 
Schreiber/AP 
In an interview with Der Spiegel magazine Hans-Georg Maaßen – the head of the 
BfV, Germany’s domestic security agency, – accused Russia of using KGB-style 
techniques of misinformation.

Addressing the Bundestag on the subject last week, Merkel said: “Today we have 
fake sites, bots, trolls – things that regenerate themselves, reinforcing 
opinions with certain algorithms, and we have to learn to deal with them.”

Fake news has also spread to neighbouring Austria and been used to discredit 
both candidates in this weekend’s presidential election. Most startling have 
been the attacks on the Green-backed independent candidate Alexander van der 
Bellen, whose opponents have attempted to spread the news that he is suffering 
from dementia and is gravely ill.

Kate Connolly

France

Over the last 10 years, France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> has 
seen a sharp increase in the readership of alternative, far-right sites, blogs 
and social media operations, referred to collectively as thefachosphère – (“
facho” is slang for fascist). Promoting views including anti-immigration, 
nativism and ultra-nationalism, these sites are run independently, rather than 
by a political party. But they feed into a mood of distrust of the traditional 
media, both on the far right and the far left.

How to solve Facebook's fake news problem: experts pitch their ideas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/29/facebook-fake-news-problem-experts-pitch-ideas-algorithms>
Samuel Laurent, head of Le Monde’s fact-checking section, Les décodeurs 
<http://www.lemonde.fr/les-decodeurs/>, said: “In France, there isn’t a wide 
presence of totally invented fake news that makes money through advertising, as 
seen in the US.” But he said France was seeing increasing cases of manipulation 
and distortion, particularly during election periods.

One example, in the recent primary race to choose the French right’s 
presidential candidate, was a campaign on thefachosphère to claim the 
centre-right candidateAlain Juppé  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/alain-juppe-france-prophet-happiness-presidential-wows-rally-crowd>
was linked to the Muslim Brotherhood. The accusation dated back to local 
elections in 2014 when distorted stories circulated on a far-right opinion 
website, accusing Juppé of wanting to build a “Mosque-Cathedral” in Bordeaux, 
where he is mayor. The story grew and was embellished during the primary 
campaigns to portray Juppé as a Muslim Brotherhood-linked “Ali Juppé”. Juppé 
said a “disgusting campaign” had been run against him.

Laurent said: “I think the French presidential election campaign [next spring] 
will be fraught with this type of thing.” In January, as the presidential 
election campaign prepares to kick off, Le Monde’s Les décodeurs will launch a 
database of questionable sites that portray themselves as information sites.

I think the French presidential election campaign will be fraught with this 
type of thing
Samuel Laurent, head fact-checker for Le Monde 
The recent Paris terrorist attacks were also subject to conspiracy theories 
and distortions, including reports this summer that gunmen who killed 90 people 
at a rock gig at the Bataclan last November had mutilated their victims. These 
reports cited partial evidence to aparliamentary inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/05/paris-attacks-inquiry-multiple-failings-french-intelligence-agencies>
 into the attacks, without adding that the inquiry also heard officials deny 
that any mutilation took place.

There is also an ongoing row over fake information websites about abortion in 
France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/french-mps-debate-plan-to-ban-abortion-websites-that-intimidate-women>
. The lower house of the French parliament has approved government plans to ban 
fake abortion information websites which masquerade as neutral, official sites 
with free-phone helpline numbers but which the government said promote 
anti-abortion propaganda and pressure women not to terminate pregnancies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facfffec654760bb3cbbed621df552af86e017f96%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fake%20news%3A%20an%20insidious%20trend%20that's%20fast%20becoming%20a%20global%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fake%20news%3A%20an%20insidious%20trend%20that%27s%20fast%20becoming%20a%20global%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facfffec654760bb3cbbed621df552af86e017f96%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 French women’s minister, Laurence Rossignol, has spoken out about fake 
abortion information sites. Photograph: Patrick Kovarik/AFP/Getty Images 
The women’s minister, Laurence Rossignol, told parliament on Thursday that 
anti-abortion groups in France were setting up sites “that appear neutral and 
objective” and copy official government information sites but were 
“deliberately seeking to trick women”.

She said these sites often had helplines run by “anti-choice activists with no 
training who want to make women feel guilty and discourage them from seeking an 
abortion.”

Angelique Chrisafis 

Myanmar

A Burmese friend recently put it like this: in the old days, people went to 
the tea shop to get their news. Now, they go toFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>.

After decades of isolation under successive military regimes, Myanmar’s 51 
million people began to come online rapidly in 2014 after telecoms reforms. 
They leapfrogged the era of dial-up and desktops, starting with mobile phones 
and social media. For many, Facebook is synonymous with the internet.

With scores of voices clamoring to be heard for the first time, it’s a 
dynamic, sometimes dangerous space.

For many in Myanmar, Facebook is synonymous with the ​internet

As well as “#foreveralone” statuses and a barrage of updates from staunchly 
Facebook-first media organizations, news feeds are crammed with fake content. 
Much of it is tinged with religious hatred. With tensions between the majority 
Buddhist and minority Muslim populations running high, many are ready to 
believe vitriolic nonsense about Islam and its followers, often propagated by 
nationalist accounts set up for the purpose.

A Muslim journalist was recently the victim of a campaign by some of these 
accounts, when a widely followed nationalist posted pictures of him juxtaposed 
with images of an unknown Rohingya Muslim militant. The post claimed he was 
involved in attacks on border police and called for his immediate arrest.

Nothing happened – the post was eventually taken down, though not before more 
than 3,000 people shared it. But the episode was a hint of the frightening 
power that fake news can have in a context likeMyanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar>.

Poppy McPherson

Italy 

In Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, the spread of propaganda 
has become such a worry for the government that a top official in prime 
minister Matteo Renzi’s circle of advisers recently filed a defamation 
complaint against a mystery Twitter account – it has since disappeared – who 
tweeted under the name “Beatrice di Maio” and routinely took aim at Renzi’s 
government.

In one example, the Twitter account showed a picture of Elena Boschi, the 
reform minister, on the phone. It suggested she was sharing insider information 
with her father, who was a top executive at Banca Etruria, a Tuscan bank. The 
bank was rescued by the Italian government in 2015 but there is no evidence 
that Boschi helped her father or committed wrongdoing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd129369462c7ddd2bb6116b43d014df987832a4%2F122_52_5476_3285%2F5476.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fake%20news%3A%20an%20insidious%20trend%20that's%20fast%20becoming%20a%20global%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fake%20news%3A%20an%20insidious%20trend%20that%27s%20fast%20becoming%20a%20global%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd129369462c7ddd2bb6116b43d014df987832a4%2F122_52_5476_3285%2F5476.jpg>
 People supporting the ‘no’ side on the upcoming constitutional referendum take 
to the streets in Rome. Photograph: Pacific Pres/Rex/Shutterstock 
In Italy the attacks against Renzi have been stepped up ahead of the critical 
4 December referendum. In some cases, news about Italy reported by Russian 
state-controlled website RT Today has been especially skewed against the prime 
minister. In one case highlighted by La Stampa, the Italian daily, the Russian 
website falsely claimed that a rally in Rome held by supporters of Renzi ahead 
of the referendum were actually his opponents. The story has since been removed.

Members of Renzi’s Democratic party have complained that “mud-slinging” 
websites controlled by the anti-establishment Five Star Movement, which abhors 
traditional political advertising, are to blame for spreading false and 
defamatory news about the government’s activities.

Stephanie Kirchgaessner

China

As reports emerged that fake news had influenced the US presidential election, 
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> trumpeted its system of a 
“internet management”, portraying freedom of speech as broken when it can 
affect the outcome of an election.

The pedlars of fake news are corroding democracy | Andrew Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/pedlars-fake-news-corroding-democracy-social-networks>
“China is on its way to strengthening internet management,” said an editorial 
in the Global Times <http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1019368.shtml#>, a 
tabloid affiliated with the Communist party mouthpiece People’s Daily. “The 
western democratic system appears to be unable to address” the problems and 
conflict unleashed by the internet, the paper added.

The fake news that spread on Facebook in the run-up to the election even 
spread to China. Articles originally posted on pro-Trump websites, including 
Breitbart, were directly translated into Chinese and shared on the country’s 
social media platforms.

Problems with fake news and fraudulent reporters have existed for over a 
decade in China, with people often presenting themselves as journalists and 
threatening companies with negative coverage in an attempt to extort money.

In one high-profile case, a journalist was paid more than $70,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/27/chinese-newspaper-apologises-journalist-confessed-corruption>
 to write negative stories about a construction equipment manufacturing 
company, sending its shares tumbling.

But the authorities have seized on the phenomenon as a justification to censor 
a wide-range of content. In 2013, the government launched a crackdown on online 
“rumour-mongering” targeting influential users on the Twitter-like website Sina 
Weibo, but it was widely seen as an attempt to stem criticism of the ruling 
Communist party.

A journalist was paid more than $70,000 to write negative stories about a 
company, sending its shares tumbling

More recently, Chinese authorities have clamped down on “fake news” they feel 
harms social cohesiveness, targeting “rumours” that affected property prices in 
Shanghai or stories the government says increase antagonism between urban and 
rural residents.

Earlier this year China’s cyberspace administration issued new rules designed 
to curb the number of stories using information culled from social media, 
stating “it is forbidden to use hearsay to create news or use conjecture and 
imagination to distort the facts”.

News outlets cannot use information posted on social media without prior 
approval, it said.

More recently a top official at the administration suggested there should be a 
database to identify internet users’ true identities so they could be “rewarded 
and punished”.

China maintains extensive control over the internet and many foreign websites, 
including Facebook, Google, Twitter and YouTube, are all blocked by a 
government program known as “the Great Firewall”.

The country’s vast censorship system that imposes media blackouts 
<http://chinadigitaltimes.net/china/directives-from-the-ministry-of-truth/> on 
topics ranging from missteps by China’s leadership to investigating corruption 
cases. A recent directive banned websites from live streaming coverage of the 
US election.

Benjamin Haas

Brazil

Brazil has a growing problem with fake news and its importance has grown as 
political opinion polarized following the close re-election victory of leftist 
president Dilma Rousseff in 2014 and hercontroversial impeachment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/31/dilma-rousseff-impeachment-brazil-what-you-need-to-know>
 in August this year.


According to a BBC Brasil report 
<http://www.bbc.com/portuguese/noticias/2016/04/160417_noticias_falsas_redes_brasil_fd>
 from April 2016, as the impeachment process that Rousseff and her supporters 
called a politically motivated coup began heating up, three out of the five 
most shared news stories on Facebook were false.

A story shared by the Pensa Brasil (Think Brasil) site that falsely said that 
federal police wanted to know why Rousseff had given 30bn reais ($9bn) to the 
giant meat company Friboi came third in the ranking with 90,150 shares.

Last year Brazilian journalist Tai Nalon left her job at the Folha de S Paulo, 
one of Brazil’s leading newspapers, to found the site Aos Fatos (To The Facts) 
– Brazil’s first fact-checking site.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44889c6d3f04878224c2a92e5c17849c02ca0229%2F0_26_3130_1878%2F3130.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fake%20news%3A%20an%20insidious%20trend%20that's%20fast%20becoming%20a%20global%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fake%20news%3A%20an%20insidious%20trend%20that%27s%20fast%20becoming%20a%20global%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44889c6d3f04878224c2a92e5c17849c02ca0229%2F0_26_3130_1878%2F3130.jpg>
 A report found three out of the five most shared stories on Facebook were 
false as the Dilma Rousseff impeachment process intensified. Photograph: Ueslei 
Marcelino/Reuters 
“There is a lot of false news,” Nalon said in an email interview, “but I would 
be cautious about saying the problem is similar to what happens in the USA”. 
Instead, she said there are politically motivated pages that reinterpret and 
distort existing stories from big news outlets and that much of what they share 
is more biased opinion than pure falsehood.

But plenty of false stories 
<http://www.bbc.com/portuguese/noticias/2016/04/160417_noticias_falsas_redes_brasil_fd>
 do circulate on Brazil’s garrulous internet.



The two-year investigation into the Petrobras scandal, called Operation Car 
Wash, was a key driver in Rousseff’s impeachment. Although she has never been 
accused of graft, many in her party have been and the scandal prompted huge 
street demonstrations calling for her removal.

BuzzFeed Brasil this month published this story 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/alexandrearagao/noticias-falsas-lava-jato-facebook?utm_term=.oh7bmdqoO#.xebjo9Vda>
 about how more false news about the operation has been published than real. 
This year, the 10 most popular false news stories about Car Wash were shared 
3.9m times, BuzzFeed said, citing Facebook data. The 10 most popular real 
stories were shared 2.7m times.

Dominic Phillips

Australia

Fake news is not a problem of any scale in Australia: the media market, 
dominated by a handful of key players serving a population of just over 21 
million people, does not seem fragmented enough.

Concerns over halal certification – often failing to completely mask rampant 
Islamophobia – flourished on Facebook

But Australia is not immune to issues with untruths spreading on Facebook. 
Over half the population (13.3 million as at end of June 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/8153.0>) is connected to the 
internet; of that number, more than half is believed to be active on Facebook.

Some issues seem to be more of a lightning rod for untruths in Australia than 
others. The link between the halal certification industry and terrorism – 
repeated by politicians despite a lack of evidence – was so persistent that an 
inquiry was held late last year.

Concerns over halal certification – often failing to completely mask rampant 
Islamophobia – flourished on Facebook, even after the inquiry found there was 
no basis to the connection.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe01cb00fab1bc8bd8e3e7d5057be9a1944a2b43c%2F0_78_2388_1433%2F2388.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fake%20news%3A%20an%20insidious%20trend%20that's%20fast%20becoming%20a%20global%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fake%20news%3A%20an%20insidious%20trend%20that%27s%20fast%20becoming%20a%20global%20problem&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe01cb00fab1bc8bd8e3e7d5057be9a1944a2b43c%2F0_78_2388_1433%2F2388.jpg>
 Parallels have been drawn between Pauline Hanson, a fringe rightwing political 
figure in Australia, and Trump’s election. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP 
The Boycott Halal in Australia group has close to 100,000 members on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/BH.Australia?fref=photo>. In November 2014, it shared 
a satirical news article 
<http://junkee.com/a-bunch-of-anti-halal-islamophobes-actually-think-muslim-water-made-someone-die-of-thirst/45910>
, apparently under the impression it was true. The post was subsequently 
deleted, but the page is a hotbed for views that have no basis in fact, as is 
the page for supporters of the Q Society, which bills itself as “Australia’s 
leading Islam-critical movement”.

Facebook’s failure: did fake news and polarized politics get Trump elected?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories>
Pauline Hanson, a fringe figure in rightwing politics who is outspoken against 
Islam, was re-elected to the senate in the federal election in July with 
support that surprised many pundits. Her One Nation party took four seats in 
the 76-strong senate this year and the party is expected to do well in the 
Queensland state elections.

Parallels have been drawn between her return to politics and Trump’s election: 
both have embraced social media, where they have significant followings, and are
similarly unfazed by evidence. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/pauline-hanson-damages-australias-standing-in-asia-penny-wong-to-warn>

In August, research showed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/18/pauline-hanson-cant-be-dismissed-this-time-one-nation-is-bigger-than-it-looks>
 62% of voters agreed with the statement: “I might not personally agree with 
everything she says but she is speaking for a lot of ordinary Australians.”

She is active on Facebook, as are many of her supporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/17/meeting-pauline-hansons-voters-silent-screamers-find-their-voice>
. She recently announced that the majority of her press releases would be 
released only on Twitter.

Elle Hunt

India

After India’s prime minister announced the introduction of a new, 2,000-rupee 
note last month, phones around the country lit up with the news the bill would 
come installed with a surveillance chip, linked to a satellite that could track 
the notes even 120 metres underground.

The claims, debunked 
<http://scroll.in/article/821078/no-the-new-rs-2000-note-will-not-have-a-nano-gps-chip-that-can-track-it-anywhere>
 by the country’s reserve bank, nonetheless spread like fire over Whatsapp – 
which has more than 50 million users in India – andmigrated into mainstream news
 
<http://zeenews.india.com/personal-finance/rs-2000-note-comes-with-micro-nano-gps-chip-to-track-exact-location-of-currency-reports_1947650.html>
.

As in the United States and elsewhere, increasing numbers of Indians are 
getting their news from social media.

But the 2,000-rupee episode illustrates the deeper impact of fake news in a 
country where media is prolific, but journalistic standards, especially in 
regional media, can still fall short.

“Mainstream media in India is more impacted by the phenomena [of fake news] 
because they broadcast these kinds of stories without verifying,” says 
Prabhakar Kumar, from the Indian media research agency, CMS.

“There is no standard policy for TV news and newspapers about the process of 
researching and publishing stories.”

Police have arrested people 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/mumbai/FIR-registered-in-connection-with-false-inflammatory-text-message-on-WhatsApp/article14624844.ece>
 accused of concocting false stories, especially when they run the risk of 
igniting communal tension. Administrators of Whatsapp groups have been warned 
theycould be held responsible 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/if-you-are-a-whatsapp-group-admin-better-be-careful/article7531350.ece>
 for the messages they oversee.

But social media has only enabled a much older reliance on rumour and 
innuendo, especially in India’s villages. Two boys in Dadri village, near 
Delhi, didn’t need Whatsapp last year to spread rumours a local man wasstoring 
beef in his freezer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/03/inside-bishari-indian-village-where-mob-killed-man-for-eating-beef>
. They broadcast from the loudspeaker at the village temple. Mohammed Akhlaq, 
the 50-year-old labourer named by the boys, was lynched.

Michael Safi
 