
Kilmarnock <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kilmarnock> survived some 
desperate late pressure to retain their Clydesdale Bank Premier League status 
and send Falkirk down following a goalless but enthralling relegation decider 
at Rugby Park.

Both sides gave everything going forward in an even first 70 minutes but 
neither goalkeeper was seriously tested andFalkirk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk> then threw men forward.

They carved out a glorious chance with three minutes remaining but Ryan Flynn 
volleyed over from 10 yards and Kilmarnock survived a penalty claim during five 
minutes of injury time.

Falkirk had survived on the final day of last season when the since departed 
Michael Higdon scored the only goal at Inverness 20 minutes from time to send 
the Highlanders down, but their five-year stay ended here in an equally 
dramatic finale.

Manager Steven Pressley had guaranteed Falkirk would stay up when he took over 
in February but he fell just short of staving off a relegation that chairman 
Martin Ritchie estimated would cost his club up to Â£2m.

Kilmarnock started on the front foot with the recalled Danny Invincibile and 
Chris Maguire up front in a 5-2-3 formation.

Kevin Kyle's flick-on threatened to release Craig Bryson but Falkirk 
right-back Brian McLean snuffed out the danger.

McLean soon diverted Manuel Pascali's header off target following one of 
several early corners from Bryson.

Falkirk settled into the game after a nervy opening 15 minutes. Scott Arfield 
embarked on a great run to the byline but Pascali's challenge stopped Colin 
Healy converting his cutback.

Tam Scobbie's flick almost set up Flynn in the goalmouth but the winger could 
not make proper contact.

Falkirk were almost caught out when Kyle laid the ball off into the path of 
the onrushing Bryson, but the midfielder's pass to the unmarked Invincibile on 
the edge of the box was too hard.

The away side wasted a decent attack in first-half injury time when McLean 
miskicked his attempted left-footed shot on the edge of the box following 
Flynn's through ball.

Kilmarnock replaced Invincibile with Conor Sammon but the Irishman almost cost 
his team when he failed to match McLean's overlapping run.

Arfield's pass perfectly fed the former Motherwell player but his ball across 
the face of goal was too far in front of his team-mates.

Kyle soon headed over Bryson's deep corner but the second period was proving 
more disjointed as tackles became even more keenly contested and nerves became 
more apparent.

Robert Olejnik made the first real save on the hour mark when he got down to 
comfortably hold Maguire's 25-yard effort.

Simon Ford replaced Pascali and the hosts carved out an opening when Jamie 
Hamill fed Bryson in the box but he was closed down by McLean.

Falkirk brought on Mark Stewart for Scobbie and moved to a 3-4-3 formation 
with Jimmy Calderwood responding by taking off Maguire for James Fowler.

The shape of the game changed going into the final quarter with Falkirk 
throwing men forward and Killie sitting deep and attempting to catch their 
visitors on the break.

They almost did so when Kyle's return ball played Sammon through but Marc 
Twaddle made an excellent last-ditch tackle.

Pressley brought on another striker, Carl Finnigan, for Healy in the 75th 
minute but the substitute's first contribution was penalised when he bundled 
Alan Combe over the line. Killie sat deeper and Arfield almost cut them open 
with a great turn and pass for Stewart but Ford diverted the forward's low 
cross behind.

Bryson's cross almost crept in at the back post as Kilmarnock relieved the 
pressure for a spell but soon every outfield player was deep inside the Killie 
half as Olejnik took a free-kick 40 yards from his goal.

The clear chance Falkirk were seeking soon came when Enoch Showunmi's header 
found Flynn unmarked 10 yards out but the young winger volleyed a yard over.

They had another more difficult chance when Finnigan volleyed towards the far 
corner from 16 yards but the ball deflected just wide off Ford with the Falkirk 
sub claiming for handball.

Falkirk forced a corner right on the 95th minute but Jack Compton's poor 
delivery spelled the end for Falkirk's SPL status and the final whistle sparked 
a mass pitch invasion from many of the home fans in the 10,662 crowd.
 