
The format of the Scottish league is outdated and should be restructured with 
a 16-team Premiership to help boost football in the country, says the chairman 
of second-tier promotion-challengersFalkirk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk>.

Speaking at the club’s AGM, Doug Henderson said the slide of Scottish 
football, from falling attendances to the poor performance of the national side 
and their top clubs in Europe, would continue unless steps were taken to change 
the current system.

Scotland were the only team from the British Isles not to qualify for next 
year’s European Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/08/scotland-poland-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
 and Celtic, Scottish champions for the past four seasons, regularly fail to 
make any impact in European competition. Scottish football’s top four tiers are 
currently organised into a 12-team Premiership with three lower divisions each 
containing 10 teams.

Celtic: fans who booed Remembrance Sunday silence are ‘not welcome’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/09/celtic-fans-booed-remembrance-sunday-not-welcome>
“Reflecting economic reality and the need for premier division full-time 
football, I believe that we must put vested interest aside and reform our 
leagues bringing about a 16-team premier division,” he said. “Our league 
structure is out of kilter with the economics of football in Scotland and I 
believe that my counterpart chairmen recognise what we have currently is 
outdated.

“Playing other clubs four times a season is not attractive to most football 
supporters – as surveys show – and there is a slippage of attendance for many 
clubs in the Premiership. Television dictates our fixtures with high revenue 
Saturday games often being moved to midweek with little consideration given to 
fans and their families, or the financial consequences for clubs like Falkirk.

“Our international side does not compete with countries like Ireland, Norway, 
Iceland, Slovakia, Slovenia, Belgium and others. Even with Celtic’s unique 
financial position, it has in recent times been incapable of competing 
effectively in Europe. Our other clubs which qualify for Europe are very 
frequently knocked out at the early stages of competition.”

He said clubs needed to consider what is best for the Scottish game in the 
longer term. “[We need] to make sensible restructuring changes which can help 
to lay a strong foundation for the future, protecting the maximum number of 
full-time clubs and securing a sustainable platform for growth in our national 
sport.”

Falkirk last played in the top flight in 2010 and are currently chasing 
promotion from theScottish Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-championship>.
 