
Families of the 56 football fans who died in the Bradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bradford> City stadium fire have said the 
service to mark the 30th anniversary of the tragedy was “humbling”.

More than 1,000 people gathered in the sunshine in Bradford’s Centenary Square 
to remember those who died and the hundreds who were injured when fire 
destroyed the main stand at the Valley Parade ground on 11 May 1985.

Many of those at the service wore the Bantams’ distinctive claret and amber 
colours as they listened in silence while the 56 names were read out to the 
tolling of the bell in the City Hall clock, which towers over the square.

Among those reading the names was John Helm, the ITV football commentator who 
famously described the unfolding chaos as flames quickly engulfed the wooden 
stand shortly before half-time at an end-of-season clash with Lincoln City.

Fifty-four Bradford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> City 
supporters lost their lives, along with two Lincoln fans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F11%2Ffamilies-bradford-city-fire-victims-anniversary-service-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431354333713%2F1e608a63-76f5-47c1-8ced-429bfa43c21b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Families%20of%20Bradford%20City%20fire%20victims%20'humbled'%20by%20anniversary%20service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F11%2Ffamilies-bradford-city-fire-victims-anniversary-service-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Families%20of%20Bradford%20City%20fire%20victims%20%27humbled%27%20by%20anniversary%20service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F11%2Ffamilies-bradford-city-fire-victims-anniversary-service-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431354333713%2F1e608a63-76f5-47c1-8ced-429bfa43c21b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 More than 1,000 people gathered in Bradford to pay their respects to the 56 
victims of the 1985 disaster. Photograph: Lynne Cameron/PA Wire 
Fans who gathered to lay wreaths after the service said the event brought back 
terrible memories but was a “wonderful” act of remembrance.

Georgie Dempsey-Moore, 46, told how she lost her father, Derek Dempsey, in the 
disaster when he was the same age as she is now. She said: “This is just 
wonderful, although it has brought everything back. It just feels like it was 
last week.

 It is really humbling to see just how wonderfully the city of Bradford is 
remembering and I know that when I’m not here any more, this will still be 
remembered and dad will live on forever.”

Dempsey-Moore, who was 16 in 1985, recalled that she would have been in the 
stand with her father but could not go to the game because she went to a youth 
club disco the night before and had not finished her homework. She said: “There 
is part of me that is still a little girl missing her dad.”

As well as the 56 people who died, more than 200 people were taken to hospital 
following the blaze, many with terrible injuries. Some of those who attended on 
Monday are still living with the injuries they suffered on that day. They 
gathered around the memorial to the dead with civic dignitaries, current and 
former players from Bradford City and Lincoln City and hundreds of other people 
who wanted to pay their respects.

As well as Helm, Bantams manager Phil Parkinson, team captain Stephen Darby 
and Shaun Harvey, the chief executive of the Football League, read out in front 
of a silent crowd the names of those who died.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F11%2Ffamilies-bradford-city-fire-victims-anniversary-service-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431354147066%2F71b9e5d6-1768-43c3-83c0-4058c07e88a7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Families%20of%20Bradford%20City%20fire%20victims%20'humbled'%20by%20anniversary%20service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F11%2Ffamilies-bradford-city-fire-victims-anniversary-service-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Families%20of%20Bradford%20City%20fire%20victims%20%27humbled%27%20by%20anniversary%20service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F11%2Ffamilies-bradford-city-fire-victims-anniversary-service-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431354147066%2F71b9e5d6-1768-43c3-83c0-4058c07e88a7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Bradford City manager Phil Parkinson (left) and the club’s co-chairman Mark 
Lawn (right) attend the memorial service. Photograph: Lynne Cameron/PA Wire 
This was followed by a minute’s silence and then a rendition of You’ll Never 
Walk Alone played by the City of Bradford Brass Band and sung by the Opera 
North soprano, Victoria Sharp. The lord mayor of Bradford, Mike Gibbons, laid a 
wreath on behalf of the city and other dignitaries also laid tributes before a 
stream of bereaved family members placed their floral memorials as Sharp sang 
Abide With Me.

Alan Stockdill, 61, described how he watched the fire break out 30 years ago 
from the neighbouring stand and then returned to help the day after as a 
special constable. He said: “Today was a beautiful service. It was wonderful 
the dignified way that the Bradford and Lincoln supporters have remembered 
this. It’s wonderful. We’re proud of being Bradfordians today. It’s quite 
emotional to come here today.”

Remembering fleeing the flames, Stockdill said: “We had to watch it coming 
towards us. The wind blew it toward us. We could see the fire above people, it 
was on the roof, and there were people looking at the fire not realising it was 
already above them. We were scrambling over the fence. We thought it was going 
to come round the corner at us.”

His brother Keith, 51, was in the paddock in front of the main stand. He said 
he was so close to the outbreak of the fire he realised what was happening and 
was one of the first group of fans to escape on to the pitch. He said: “I think 
it’s been hard. Every year there’s always been memories and the thought that it 
could have been you.” He added: “The way it’s gone today - it’s good to 
remember. It takes you back to that day.”

Mike Thompson, the chairman of the Bradford City Supporters Trust, said: “I 
think the hardest thing for people to recognise, to be honest, is just how much 
it still impacts on people today.

 As far as the people of Bradford are concerned, it’s something we will never 
forget and it’s good this year that there’s been so much support around the 
football community. It’s tremendous.”

The 1985 inquiry into the tragedy headed by Sir Oliver Popplewell concluded 
that it was an accident, probably started by a spectator dropping a cigarette 
into rubbish that had accumulated under an old timber stand.

But the buildup to Monday’s anniversary has been overshadowed by a new book by 
Martin Fletcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/15/bradford-fire-stafford-heginbotham-martin-fletcher>
, whose father, brother, uncle and grandfather died in the fire, which claims 
that the fire was was one of nine that occurred at businesses owned or linked 
to the club’s then-chairman, Stafford Heginbotham.

Martin Fletcher: ‘Maybe the reason I am here is to – finally – reveal the 
truth’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/15/bradford-fire-martin-fletcher-stafford-heginbotham>
Sir Oliver said he stood by his ruling, saying there was no evidence of arson. 
Fletcher, who was 12 at the time, escaped from the blaze but his 11-year-old 
brother was the fire’s youngest victim, while his father John, 34, uncle Peter, 
32, and grandfather Eddie, 63, also died.

The book does not make any direct allegations but Fletcher says Heginbotham’s 
history with fires warranted further investigation. Heginbotham died in 1995. 
His son James, 47, has dismissed the claims as “absolutely ridiculous”.
 