
Reflecting the Guardian's republican editorial position, unlike most other 
national papers we did not commission a theme puzzle for the Royal Wedding. 
(The paper's leading article last month, extolling the manifold virtues of the 
House of Windsor, was linked somewhat to the date of publication, 1 April.) 
However, in case you missed it, on 29 April (No25,309 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25309>) Paul sneaked in one 
clue: "Fancy lad and me tied knot! (4,9)" as an anagram for KATE MIDDLETON. 
Those who also turned to crosswords in other papers that bank holiday Friday as 
a way of killing time may have been surprised to find the same anagram in a 
very similar clue in the Daily Telegraph and perhaps jumped to the conclusion 
that Paul was supplementing his income by moonlighting for a pro-monarchy 
paper. In fact there was no link of any kind that I can establish between the 
writing of the two clues, which goes to show that in life coincidences (however 
improbable) do occur and that the minds of crossword setters quite often think 
alike when faced with writing a clue.
_____

In March, you may remember, I had a complaint that 'hypothesis' and 'theory' 
do not mean the same thing. This month (Quick No12,782 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quick/12782>, 29 April) I received a 
similar complaint about 'melt' and 'dissolve' from a retired Science teacher of 
30 years who bewailed the fact that her efforts to teach the proper meaning of 
these words still needed reinforcement. Of course we all know that to melt 
means to turn into liquid by heating and that to dissolve means to incorporate 
into a liquid to form a solution. But, equally, in non-science usage the two 
words can substitute for each other as in a sentence such as 'I 
melted/dissolved into tears'.

Not much seems to have changed in the half century since the scientist and 
novelist C.P. Snow delivered his 1959 lecture 'The Two Cultures'. As someone 
with a foot firmly in both the scientific and humanist camps he bemoaned the 
fact that those with a liberal arts background had made so little effort to 
come to terms with the scientific revolution and its language. Among other 
examples he cited 'mass' and 'acceleration' as two words for which most people 
could not provide an accurate definition. (As it happens both have appeared in 
recent Guardian puzzles, provoking protests that their clues were 'wrong'.) For 
what it is worth, I still think that crosswords can be allowed a certain 
flexibility in accepting definitions in common usage, even if they are not 
scientifically correct. But that may not placate my scientific correspondents.
_____

A number of you have complained when online (almost always on a Saturday) we 
offer only a PDF version of a puzzle for you to print out and not also the 
normal interactive screen version. This happens on the (few) occasions when the 
existing online software is unable to cope with the complexity of a particular 
puzzle. To be specific this is the case with Araucaria's alphabetical jigsaw 
puzzles and his bank holiday specials with two solution grids. It also happens 
when a setter wants to use a particular single solution in the answer to more 
than one clue. The reason is simply that the basic interactive software links a 
clue to a particular slot in a grid, which it obviously cannot do in these 
cases.

That leaves us with a choice: either to live with the occasional PDF-only 
puzzle, or to stop having such non-standard puzzles. There would be howls of 
protests from a large number of people if we restricted, say, the Araucaria 
special puzzles in this way. No doubt with limitless resources the software 
could be adapted to deal with the problem. But resources are, in practice these 
days, increasingly limited.

There is one annoying consequence of this: namely that if you look for one of 
these PDF-only puzzles by serial number using the archive search facility on 
the home page, you are at present told that no puzzle with this number exists. 
Work is in hand to correct this systematic untruth. Until the problem is 
solved, though, you can still get to these 'puzzles that don't exist' by other 
routes. On the home page, under the place to click for the cryptic or prize 
puzzle of the day, you are offered 'all puzzles'. Click there and the full list 
will appear. Incidentally, as they have different formats, the Monday to Friday 
puzzles are filed as 'cryptic' puzzles and the Saturday offerings as 'prize' 
puzzles. Or you can get to the same place via
http://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/cryptic>. You can navigate to 
the index page for the crossword type of your choice by changing the term after 
the forward slash in the web address or url. So, to see all Prize puzzles, you 
would go tohttp://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/series/prize>. Similarly, you can get 
to the past puzzles of individual setters via
http://www.theguardian.com/profile/araucaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/araucaria>. Again, change the final term 
in the url so that it matches the setter whose index page you wish to see, eg
http://www.theguardian.com/profile/paul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/paul> and 
http://www.theguardian.com/profile/rufus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rufus>
_____

April's Genius (No 94 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/java/new/0,,-26891,00.html>) by Puck 
produced slightly fewer entries than of late, 271 with 21 of them on the first 
day. The 'coding' element involved or perhaps too many bank holiday weekends in 
the month may have been the reason. This time Ian of London N14 at 01:54 beat 
Ian of London SW3 by just over an hour. Douglas of Auckland, NZ was the first 
home from overseas at 04:40.

Congratulations to Geoffrey Coates from Maidenhead, Berkshire, who is April's 
Genius winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>. For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 