
International sport has once again been thrown into controversy with 
allegations of corruption against Fifa’s Sepp Blatter and Michel Platini, who 
have been banned (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/21/sepp-blatter-michel-platini-banned-from-football-fifa>
, 22 December). International sport is now awash with money and where there is 
money and very little accountability, there will be problems. Doubts about Fifa 
have been there for some time, with very little changing at the top with the 
same old faces making decisions and patting each other on the back. Fifa’s 
credibility is all but gone as the scandals persist. International sport has 
become big business and totally corporatised, with high-back leather chairs 
accompanying it, not to mention the massive endowments given to those at the 
top. Fifa is no stranger to corruption, with allegations of competition-fixing 
for host countries and bribery on sponsorship deals for its World Cup still 
causing doubts about its legitimacy. It is unfortunate that many now see sport 
as a venal and cynical business exercise. It is an ugly and greedy mess.
Maurice Fitzgerald
Shanbally, County Cork, Ireland

• Is it asking too much to hope that next year’s BBC Sports Personality of the 
Year will be restricted to those with UK tax domicile (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/20/sports-personality-year-andy-murray-fury-bbc>
, 21 December) – and that British residents of Monaco like Chris Froome and 
Lewis Hamilton can only be considered for the overseas award?
David Nowell
New Barnet, Hertfordshire

• Could there be a clearer illustration of the rotten heart of professional 
football than a comparison of two news items recently? First, the severance pay 
of several millions for José Mourinho fromChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, who earned £250,000 a week; and 
second, the revelation that young Torquay United players were allegedly 
recruited on contracts that do not pay them the minimum wage. The former 
manager responsible has been accused of “handing out contracts that the players 
cannot survive on”.
Tom Jolliffe
Brixham, Devon

• The top three BBC TV sports personalities of 2015, as voted for by the 
public, were a tennis player, a rugby league player and an athlete. The BBC 
shortlist of 12 did not include a single male footballer. Your front-page 
headline on 22 December was “Fifa hands Blatter and Platini red cards”, and 
this article about two disgraced football officials was continued on two inside 
pages. The Journal in your main section had three pages devoted to the profile 
of an ex-football manager (The devil and José Mourinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/22/devil-and-jose-mourinho>). 
Your Sport section on the same day had six pages out of the eight available 
given over to football. Why has the Guardian decided to ignore public opinion 
and promote football to the exclusion of other sports?
Tony Hartigan
Otley, West Yorkshire

Women’s sport on an unlevel playing field | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/30/womens-sport-on-an-unlevel-playing-field>
• Your sports section on 22 December had a glaring error. On page 4, you have “
World’s top 100 footballers 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2015/dec/21/the-100-best-footballers-in-the-world-2015-interactive>
”. Surely you meant for the title to read: “World’s top male footballers 2015”? 
Given that England’s best World Cup trophy chances will come from its women’s 
team, rather its men’s, isn’t it time to stop qualifying women’s sports and 
simply indicate sports as men’s or women’s leagues? C’mon, Guardian. The 
precedent has to start somewhere.
Lisa Miller
Oxford

• Jimmy Hill’s contribution of a popular idiom to the 20th-century English 
vernacular indicated that, even in his football punditry pomp, his judgment was 
considered a lot more fallible than recent eulogies may have suggested (Obituary
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/19/jimmy-hill>, 21 December). 
In schools in the late 1970s in my part of west London, disbelief of an 
interlocutor’s words would be expressed by exclaiming “Jimmy Hill!”, while 
simultaneously stroking an imaginary beard. Over time, only “Jimmy” and then 
“Jim” was necessary and ultimately a mute single stroke of the chin (to the 
bafflement of any passing sociolinguistics forager) was enough to convey the 
listener’s judgment of “bullshit!”.
Mike Hine
Kingston on Thames, Surrey

• Previous correspondents talk of Chelsea and Manchester City (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/20/our-christmas-tree-is-a-very-special-one>
, 21 December), but surely nothing can (nor ever will again) match Northampton 
Town’s remarkable record of going from the old Fourth Division to the First 
Division, then all the way back to the Fourth in seven successive seasons 
during the late 1960s? Cobblers, indeed.
David Joss Buckley
London

• Larry Westland’s splendid headline (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/20/our-christmas-tree-is-a-very-special-one>
, 21 December) reminded me of how we used to sing the penultimate line of the 
last verse of Charlotte Elliott’s well-known hymn Just as I am, when Manchester 
City were in what was then the ecclesiastic-sounding Canon second division in 
1984-5: “Here for a season, then above.”
Fr Alec Mitchell
Manchester

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 