
Bald man with beard steps down, safe pair of hands takes over – it’s fair to 
say the fallout from Bayern Munich’s1-0 win at Hannover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/19/hannover-bayern-munich-bundesliga-match-report>
 didn’t come as a total surprise. But enough of Michael Frontzeck (out) and 
Mirko Slomka (in, probably) for the moment. The slightly bigger story of the 
weekend, as you might have heard, wasPep Guardiola’s long goodbye in Munich 
becoming official at last 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/20/pep-guardiola-leave-bayern-munich>
. The Catalan has been “something of a very good looking, very erotic but also, 
at times, totally prissy lover that you look at, next to you in bed, with pride 
each morning, even if you never know what kind of mood she’s about to wake up 
in ,” Süddeutsche Zeitung wrote in a fabulous page three feature. “FC Bayern 
have tried to be a good partner for their bridezilla … but it sadly wasn’t 
quite enough, the way they tried.”

The next man in the Säbener Strasse bed, Carlo Ancelotti, will be a little 
less erotic but, they hope, much easier to live with. And for the Bundesliga’s 
internal competitiveness, Pep leaving will certainly be seen as good news. 
Unlike the 44-year-old, who has compared league games to “pizza and hamburgers 
each day” but always retained the appetite to completely devour even the most 
moderate fare, gourmet Ancelotti clearly gets more excited by international 
haute cuisine.

Pep Guardiola: a genius with a gift for coaching and a habit of arguing | 
Raphael Honigstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/19/pep-guardiola-bayern-munich-tactical-genius>
In 20 years at top clubs in Italy, England, France and Spain, the 56-year-old 
has won as many Champions League trophies (three) as championships. Bayern will 
soon find out whether Ancelotti’s low-intensity approach in dealings with his 
superiors and the dressing room can combine domestic bliss with adequate 
performance levels.

Guardiola’s influence in Germany will continue beyond his actual presence, 
that much is certain. InBorussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund>, there’s now a second 
team playing “super football” a la Pep, with supergegenpressing, super ball 
circulation, super players and a most importantly a super, super coach, the 
proudly “out” Guardiola disciple Thomas Tuchel. His second-placed Black and 
Yellows suffered a rare defeat away to FC Köln on Saturday (2-1) but they have 
done so well and scored so many goals (84) in Tuchel’s first six months in 
charge that they could afford to see the pre-Christmas slip-up as the 
equivalent of that last, unproductive day in the office when people just wander 
about, nobody and nothing quite works, and nobody really cares either. “We all 
have deserved to go on holiday now, including myself,” Tuchel declared.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpep-guardiola-to-leave-bayern-munich-at-end-of-season-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pep%20Guardiola%20to%20leave%20Bayern%20Munich%20at%20end%20of%20season%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpep-guardiola-to-leave-bayern-munich-at-end-of-season-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pep%20Guardiola%20to%20leave%20Bayern%20Munich%20at%20end%20of%20season%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpep-guardiola-to-leave-bayern-munich-at-end-of-season-video-report&media=>
Pep Guardiola to leave Bayern Munich at end of season – video report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/dec/20/pep-guardiola-to-leave-bayern-munich-at-end-of-season-video-report>
Who could disagree? The first half of 2015-16 has shown Germany’s top flight, 
a division once ruled by alpha-male midfielders, as a manager’s league.Kicker 
named the Darmstadt supremo Dirk Schuster Man of the Year 
<http://www.kicker.de/news/fussball/bundesliga/startseite/641598/artikel_dirk-schuster---der-mann-des-jahres-2015.html>
 in Monday’s edition. A good choice in the face of the no-budget Lilies’ 
promotion and excellent start to the new season. But they could have just 
easily picked Tuchel, Pal Dardai (Hertha), André Schubert (Borussia 
Mönchengladbach), Ralph Hasenhüttl (Ingolstadt) or Markus Weinzierl (Augsburg), 
who are all working wonders with their respective teams. (Kicker could have 
also picked Guardiola, in truth. But they don’t like Guardiola, so that wasn’t 
an option).

Leverkusen’s Roger Schmidt, a man who wouldn’t look out of place as a police 
detective in a terrestrial tea-time show set in Paderborn and the Wolfsburg 
manager Dieter Hecking, who served as an actualPolizeimeister for three years 
prior to his playing career, might still, yes, cop similar praise with a bit 
more consistency after the winter break. Martin Schmidt (Mainz), Bruno Labbadia 
(HSV) and Schalke’s André Breitenreiter are doing decent jobs, too. Overall, 
the quality of coaching has been very high, from bridezilla down.

There are exceptions, of course. Victor Skripnik could well see his winter 
holiday extended indefinitely. HisWerder Bremen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/werderbremen> side lost away to Eintracht 
Frankfurt in a fashion that had the local paper Weser-Kurier anxiously staring 
into a crystal ball. “Four months to go. That’s how long Bremen are still 
allowed to play in the Bundesliga at least,” they wrote, “not a lot of time for 
a miracle. There’s not a lot to inspire hope.”

VfB Stuttgart, however, can sleep a bit easier over the next few weeks. The 
Swabians’ rousing 3-1 win over Wolfsburg lifted to them to 15th spot and 
pacified the supporters. The midfield sharpshooter Daniel Didavi scored two 
goals against the visitors, who are strongly rumoured to have agreed terms with 
him for next season. The 25-year-old ruled out a move in the winter window, 
though: “I’m staying, 100%.” So is Jürgen Kramny. The interim manager was 
promoted to coach proper the day after VfB’s fourth league win. “He and his 
staff have shown that they can get the team to function,” said the sporting 
director, Robin Dutt.

Kramny had toned down the excessive pressing game of his predecessor Alexander 
Zorniger by positioning his team deeper. The club, in their hour of need, have 
stopped the revolution and reverted to a more pragmatic programme. “First of 
all, our modus must be: winning games,” said Dutt. It’s one of the great 
ironies that Stuttgart, the birthplace of the by-now dominant footballing 
school of the same name in Germany, are yet to adapt the style successfully. 
Maybe Kramny will be a bit bolder once there are a few more points on the board.

All shall be revealed in due course. In the meantime, liebe Freunde, have a 
super, super Christmas and even super-er new year.

Results: Schalke 1-0 Hoffenheim, Hannover 0-1 Bayern, Köln 2-1 Dortmund, 
Ingolstadt 0-1 Leverkusen, Hamburg 0-1 Augsburg , Frankfurt 2-1 Bremen, 
Stuttgart 3-1 Wolfsburg, Hertha 2-0 Mainz, Gladbach 3-2 Darmstadt.
 