
Aside from its quality, there is one key reason Fawlty Towers hasn’t aged as 
badly as its contemporaries: the edits. Its producers doubled the average 
number of cuts per episode, to something approaching what’s common today. So 
rather than proceeding with the creak and tedium of, say, Bless This House, it 
whips along – despite stagey blocking, despite farce roots.

But the reason it still feels culturally distant – as testified by the repeat 
last week of the brilliant Communication Difficulties to commemorate thedeath 
of Andrew Sachs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/01/andrew-sachs-dies-after-alzheimers-aged-86>
 – is thatits primary preoccupation is class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/18/the-10-best-fawlty-towers-moments-40th-anniversary>
. Sitcoms in the 70s were fixated on the thwarted social ambitions of 
middle-aged men. Thefirst ever Fawlty Towers episode 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Touch_of_Class_(Fawlty_Towers)> in 1975 sees 
Basil hoodwinked by an upper-crust conman; two months later, in an episode of 
Rising Damp,Rigsby falls victim <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0686993/reference> 
to the exact same scam. The achilles heel of these two and numerous others was 
a desperation to rise above the riffraff.

Fawlty Towers stars John Cleese and Connie Booth salute Andrew Sachs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/02/fawlty-towers-stars-john-cleese-and-connie-booth-on-andrew-sachs>
Last Saturday saw an airing, without obvious peg, of the last ever episode of 
Dad’s Army <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F5gcgY9ab70> – immediately 
identifiable as such by the baggy pace, heady sentimentality and genuinely 
immense age of the cast (you don’t see wrinkles as distinguished as John Le 
Mesurier’s on primetime any more). That series hinged on the tension of 
Mainwaring’s attempts to assert authority over the polished public schoolboy 
Wilson. Made in 1977, the episode includes a beautifully played heart-to-heart 
in which Mainwaring explains how he himself battled snobbishness to marry the 
daughter of the Suffragan Bishop of Clegthorpe [sic], whom he’d had to 
introduce to ketchup. “Marrying you must have opened up a whole new world for 
her,” nods Wilson, winningly.

Today, class tension is not a live issue in anything like the same way. The 
departure of David Cameron has loosened the Eton stranglehold a little. The 
rage of the squeezed middle, more than the squashed poor, is credited for 
Brexit. Quietly, the inequality gaps have become about wealth itself, as well 
as gender, race and sexuality – not class. Accordingly, today’s acclaimed 
British sitcoms –Fleabag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/05/fleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives>
,Motherland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/07/motherland-review-a-terrifying-no-holds-barred-glimpse-into-parenthood>
,Mum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/14/mum-review-lesley-manville-stefan-golaszewski>
,Catastrophe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/28/catastrophe-review-channel-4-romcom-funny-postnatal-depression>
 – are not about a 50-year-old property owner failing to better himself. 
They’re about women struggling with sex, rent, men and children. And sometimes 
they’re almost as funny. Sometimes.

The dress code for Christmas


Magazines at the moment are chocka with frocks for this year’s festive dos. 
The slinkiest heels to take you from work to party to A&E, the best clutches to 
leave on the bus. Pregnancy relieves you of such concerns: whatever you wear 
you’ll just look whopping, yet people will feel the need to not be too bitchy.

But, in fact, such sartorial loopholes are available to all, for the dominant 
aesthetic of Christmas secretly conspires against the dress code dictated by 
the Sunday supplements. Turn up at a party wearing oversized pullover featuring 
gurning turkey, and people will applaud your seasonal cheer. Hair is granted a 
particularly free pass, with everyday outfits allowed to be capped with a 
bobble hat. Even at posh suppers, the wearing of a paper crown from the cracker 
is actively encouraged. If you look a tip,Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> is truly a gift.

Time’s running out for Rolex


I’ve been given a couple of nice watches for Christmas, and proved horribly 
adept at losing them. They were lovely but, I hope, not massively expensive. 
Investing an inordinate amount of money in something not only that you’re 
likely to take off a lot, but that is so conspicuous, so eminently stealable, 
has long seemed strange to me.

So it’s good to see the world’s super-wealthy are cottoning on. Not only have 
sales of Rolexes plummeted 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2016-12-12/middle-class-angst-is-depressing-swiss-watch-sales>
 this year, but the incidence of them being returned for a refund has 
skyrocketed. The credit crunch is thanked, but I think it’s more down to the 
eventual emergence of common sense. Plus, of course, nobody needs a watch any 
more.
 