
FC United of Manchester’s landmark FA Cup first-round tie at their new 
Broadhurst Park stadium against League One Chesterfield is a sell-out, but amid 
the eager anticipation,resentment still lingers about the match having been 
moved to a Monday night for television. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/20/fc-united-manchester-bbc-criticise>
 A protest is expected from some fans of FC United, for whom commercially 
driven disruption to 3pm Saturday matches was a factor in the original 2005 
decision to break away from supporting Manchester United and form their own 
club.

The FC United board was told by the FA that under competition rules it had to 
comply with the instruction to move the game to Monday night for live coverage 
by BT Sport, andregistered its displeasure with a strong statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/28/fc-united-manchester-fa-cup-kick-off-tv>
. Adam Brown, a board member since the club’s inception, told the Guardian the 
move from Saturday has “tarnished” the profound sense of achievement the club 
feel at reaching their first ever FA Cup first-round tieat the new £6.3m 
stadium they built and opened in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/26/fc-united-manchester-benfica-united-fans>
. The club said they recognise the importance of TV to football but object to 
the compulsory nature of a switch which has made it more difficult for some 
fans, particularly children and parents, to be present.

“This is another very special occasion for us, the culmination not just of the 
qualifying rounds victories, but of 10 years’ work,” Brown said. “To have anFA 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> tie in our own stadium is a 
magical thing but the FA has tarnished it.”

'Football is not a game show': FC United of Manchester criticise BBC
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/20/fc-united-manchester-bbc-criticise>
Nevertheless, the floodlights will shine on a full house of 4,400, after the 
club said onFriday that all tickets have been sold 
<http://www.fc-utd.co.uk/m_story.php?story_id=6493>. FC United will be hoping 
for a repeat of the famous bonfire night FA Cup victory five years ago, when 
the then Evo-Stik Premier Division club won3-2 at League One Rochdale with an 
injury-time winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/nov/05/rochdale-fc-united-manchester-fa-cup>
. They then drew 1-1 at Brighton in the second round, before being defeated 4-0 
in the replay.

Karl Marginson, the manager throughout FC United’s 10-year history and the 
four promotions won, including the most recent, in April,to the Conference North
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/22/fc-united-manchester-conference-north-promoted>
, is hoping his players find the Cup tie a welcome release from a poor run of 
form in the higher division this season. Tuesday’s 3-1 home defeat to AFC 
Telford United, another fan-owned club, was their sixth successive league game 
lost, leaving them 17th in the table. Marginson says Broadhurst Park is 
“brilliant”, but combined with the promotion, some have felt it as an added 
pressure rather than inspiration.

“Some players are struggling with confidence, which we are working hard to 
remedy, “ Marginson said. “The FA Cup is a real opportunity, a welcome break 
from the league, another landmark for the club; I’m telling the players to make 
sure they give their best. ObviouslyChesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> will be strong, they are 
full-time professionals, but we have reports on them, we do have a game-plan 
and we have nothing to lose.”

Marginson is proud that Chesterfield, managed by the former Liverpool and 
Wales striker Dean Saunders, feature in their squad centre back Charlie Raglan 
and midfield player Ollie Banks, who both matured as players at FC United. 
There are other links which make the meeting special: Chesterfield, who were
formed in 1866 
<http://www.chesterfield-fc.co.uk/news/article/history-the-essentials-195679.aspx>
, were also owned from 2001 by their supporters’ trust, which rescued the club 
from ruin after a brief, infamous period in control by Darren Brown, who 
subsequently went to prisonfor fraudulent trading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2005/sep/28/chesterfield>.

The trust sold its majority stake to local businessmen-supporters, then in 
2009 the Sheffield casino owner Dave Allen bought 80% of the club, since 
funding Chesterfield into a successful move totheir new Proact stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/may/09/saltergate-chesterfield>, and 
solidifying their League One status sincepromotion in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-conn-inside-sport-blog/2011/may/11/chesterfield-promotion-league-one>
. Chesterfield still have a supporter-director, John Croot, on the board, now 
chief executive of a flourishing community trust.

Phil Tooley, a director when the trust owned the club, said a bond is there 
with FC United. “When the draw was made, I really wanted this one. We’re really 
looking forward to it.”

TV: BT Sport 2 , 7:45pm kick-off
 