
Fernando Alonso <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso> has been 
given the green light to take part in the Chinese Grand Prix following his 
latest checkup in Shanghai.

The Spaniard, who missed the last race in Bahrain after sustaining fractured 
ribs inhis huge shunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/fernando-alonso-walks-away-unscathed-after-massive-formula-one-crash>
 at the season-opening Australian Grand Prix, was requested to report to the 
FIA medical team after opening practice. Following a brief examination, Formula 
One’s governing body saw no reason to stop the McLaren driver – who posted the 
12th quickest time in Friday’s opening practice – from competing in the 
remaining sessions.

A statement from the FIA said: “As a result of a medical examination 
undertaken following free practice one, the FIA F1 medical delegate, professor 
Jean-Charles Piette, and the chief medical officer of the Chinese Grand Prix, 
professor Shiyi Chen, have ruled that Fernando Alonso is fit to take part in 
all remaining sessions this weekend. However, as with this morning’s session, 
in case of any abnormal symptoms the driver has been informed that he must stop 
his car immediately. As the driver has been cleared to take part, no further 
medical checks will be undertaken unless the driver presents any abnormal 
symptom.”

Speaking on Thursday, Alonso said: “I feel good. Obviously Bahrain, I was 
mentally 100% ready to race but physically I had a lot of pain. In Bahrain I 
was ready to try and see if the pain was manageable with the broken rib. Now, 
the situation has improved a lot. I am mentally 120% now but physically 100% 
with no pain in the last couple of days.

“I have been training more or less my normal routine in the past two weeks. I 
slept OK for the past two weeks which was quite a good thing because in the 
first 10 days after Australia I could only sleep on one side and that was not 
very comfortable.”

Why is Bernie Ecclestone, of all people, criticising not defending F1?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/bernie-ecclestone-criticising-defending-f1-ceo-governs-eu>
Alonso was replaced in Bahrain by Stoffel Vandoorne, McLaren’s reserve driver, 
who out-qualified Jenson Button before scoring the team’s first point of the 
season after he crossed the line in 10th.

Nico Rosberg finished fastest in the opening practice session for Sunday’s 
race, which was overshadowed by three separate tyre failures. Felipe Massa 
encountered two problems with the rear left of his Williams, while the Renault 
of Kevin Magnussen also suffered the same issue. Pirelli, Formula One’s sole 
tyre manufacturer, insisted Massa’s problem was not a puncture, rather an issue 
with his car, while an investigation into Magnussen’s blow-out is ongoing. The 
early suggestions are that the Dane’s tyre failure, which occurred on the back 
straight of the Shanghai International Circuit where the cars approach speeds 
of up to 200mph, was caused by on-track debris.

When the action did resume, Rosberg was 0.146 seconds faster than his Mercedes 
team-mate Lewis Hamilton but the championship leader suffered his own problems 
after an engine-related issue forced him to cruise back to the pits. Hamilton, 
who will bedemoted five places on the grid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/14/lewis-hamilton-five-place-grid-penalty-chinese-grand-prix>
 for Sunday’s race after a gearbox change, did not enjoy a trouble-free session 
either after he spun at turn 11 on two occasions. The triple world champion was 
second fastest with Sebastian Vettel third for Ferrari, albeit more than half a 
second slower than Rosberg.

Lewis Hamilton regards Shanghai F1 grid penalty as ‘opportunity to rise’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/14/lewis-hamilton-shanghai-f1-grid-penalty-chinese-gp> 