
Fernando Alonso <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso> has said 
he wants to end his Formula One career at McLaren, only hours after suggesting 
he may not even be in the sport next season. Alonso’s apparent U-turn completed 
a deeply humiliating Japanese Grand Prix for McLaren, which at times bordered 
on the absurd, as conflicting messages about both Alonso and Jenson Button’s 
futures emerged.

The Spaniard described his Honda-powered McLaren as “embarrassing” and 
compared it to a GP2 car – Formula One’s feeder series – during Sunday’s race. 
Alonso finished in 11th and when asked by the BBC whether he would be competing 
inFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> next term, he 
replied: “I don’t know.”

Jenson Button and Fernando Alonso denials humiliate shambolic McLaren
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/jenson-button-fernando-alonso-mclaren-f1-ron-dennis>
But in a series of tweets, the two-time world champion then said he wants to 
see out the remaining two years of his current deal with the beleaguered 
British team.

Alonso, now 34, wrote: “We keep working hard. We all want to win and sometimes 
transmit the team radios, but it should be private chats.

“No one should have any doubt that I have three years with McLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> and my career in F1 will end with 
this team, hopefully winning everything.”

Alonso’s response via his Twitter account came after Ron Dennis, McLaren’s 
chief executive officer, said he was disappointed with the driver’s conduct 
during the Suzuka race,which was won by Mercedes’ Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/lewis-hamilton-eases-to-japanese-gp-victory-ahead-of-nico-rosberg>
.

Lewis Hamilton eases to Japanese GP victory ahead of Nico Rosberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/lewis-hamilton-eases-to-japanese-gp-victory-ahead-of-nico-rosberg>
Dennis, who overcame a virus to make it to Suzuka on Sunday, said: “I am not 
going to condone those sort of things because it does not show the 
professionalism that I would like all of our drivers to show. He is in the car. 
He is frustrated and of course his exposure is to the technical staff which is 
not particularly a constructive way to communicate with everybody at Honda.

“The way for me to deal with drivers is either through the appropriate 
management channels in Eric Boullier or in certain circumstances to talk to 
them myself. But whatever I choose to do, or however it is done, remains a team 
matter.”
 