
Fernando Alonso <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso> could miss 
the Chinese Grand Prix as well as Sunday’s race in Bahrain after it was decided 
the McLaren driver risked further injury if he returned too soon.

Alonso revealed here on Thursday he suffered broken ribs as well as a lung 
injury in hisspectacular crash in the opening race of the Formula One season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/fernando-alonso-walks-away-unscathed-after-massive-formula-one-crash>
 in Melbourne.

His withdrawal means there will be an F1 debut for McLaren’s Belgian reserve 
driver Stoffel Vandoorne. The 24-year-old has won in Bahrain in GP2 and his 
tussle withJenson Button <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jenson-button>, the 
man he could replace next season, will be one of the most fascinating aspects 
of the grand prix.

The absence of Alonso, three times a winner here, is a blow to McLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren>. The Bahrain Grand Prix is the 
team’s second “home” race because of the strong shareholding they have here.

Doctors representing the FIA, the sport’s governing body, said: “Two sets of 
chest scans were compared and it was decided on safety grounds there was 
insufficient resolution of the signs to allow him to compete.”

Alonso said: “There are some risks, the doctors think, so it is risk 
management. I understand, and to minimise everything is the logical thing. It’s 
a little bit sad but it’s the only way to go.

“Last week I was OK on Sunday – some knee pain but not big things – I had the 
green light from the doctors to leave the track and everything was OK. On 
Monday, I had a little bit of overall pain but nothing too serious. I arrive in 
Spain and the pain was similar, or a little bit more, so we decided to do a 
proper check.”

As to whether he will race in China on 17 April, he said: “It’s not 100% 
certain. There will be another test in the next eight or 10 days and after that 
the FIA will evaluate. I have been very lucky all my career. This is my 16th 
season and it is normal you have accidents here and there. It happened 
unfortunately in the last two years, two accidents that I miss a race.”

Alonso missed what would have been his McLaren debut in Australia last year 
after suffering concussion following a crashduring testing in Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/22/mclaren-fernando-alonso-crash-f1-testing-barcelona>
.

Reflecting on last week’s crash, he said: “I did not feel any risk at all in 
the middle of the accident. My only concern when I was rolling over was to 
avoid hitting the head. There have been some painful days at home. At the end 
of the day the pain is manageable, if you don’t think too much.”

Alonso lives in nearby Dubai and McLaren told him he could go home but he 
preferred to stay with the team. “I will help Stoffel, because it is a big 
opportunity for him,” he said.

Button is looking forward to racing against Vandoorne. “He is going to be busy 
over the next few days but this team is very good to new drivers. I am sure 
it’s going to be a whirlwind and he will be busy but he will be fine. I think 
he will be quick, only nobody knows how quick.”

Kevin Magnussen, the Renault driver who has raced for McLaren, thinks 
Vandoorne is capable of matching the 36-year-old Button. “He is good enough to 
be in Formula 1 so he will have a good race, I’m sure. I know he deserves to be 
here, so I’m happy to see he got a shot.”

Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel said Formula One should not feel proud of the 
decision to retain itscontroversial elimination qualifying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/f1-qualifying-universally-condemned-as-lewis-hamilton-grabs-pole>
 for Bahrain. The system made its debut in Australia and was unanimously 
criticised by the teams after the farce of Q3, in which no cars ran for four 
minutes.

Vettel said: “I am as disappointed as probably anyone I know that we didn’t go 
back. Put it this way: if you sell vanilla ice cream but everybody who comes to 
your shop is asking for chocolate ice cream and the next day you open, you 
expect to sell chocolate ice cream but instead you just sell vanilla ice cream 
again.

“Usually you do what your clients would like you to do but you are not really 
doing the job if you do the exact opposite. It’s something that we can’t be 
proud of. If everybody is against something and you still decide for it … 
qualifying is just one example that something is not right.”

Vettel, speaking on behalf of the Grand Prix Drivers’ Association, added: “We 
didn’t give any proposals [in our recent letter]. We made it clear there’s 
something not right and something has to change. I think our intention was that 
we really questioned the situation or decision-making and hopefully we can 
improve that in the future.”
 