
The former FIA president Max Mosley believes a crash like the one Fernando 
Alonso suffered in Sunday’s Australian Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/mar/21/fernando-alonso-survives-horrific-f1-crash-in-pictures>
 would have killed the driver had it happened in a previous era.

Jenson Button: F1’s halo device would have helped Fernando Alonso
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/21/f1-halo-fernando-alonso-jenson-button>
Alonso’s McLaren clipped the Haas car driven by Esteban Gutiérrez while 
travelling at close to 200mph, crashed into a trackside wall at Albert Park and 
barrel-rolled twice before Alonso crawled out of the wreckage.

Mosley’s time as head of motor sport’s governing body saw a push for increased 
safety measures, with thedeath of Ayrton Senna at Imola in 1994 helping to 
inspire that movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/apr/30/ayrton-senna-death-formula-one-20-years>
. FrenchmanJules Bianchi also died from accidents suffered in a crash at the 
2014 Japanese Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/17/f1-driver-jules-bianchi-dies-from-injuries-sustained-in-crash-at-japanese-grand-prix>
 but this time around, Mosley could afford to refer to Alonso’s crash as 
“impressive” as he paid tribute to the efforts of his former FIA chief medical 
officer Sid Watkins.

“You wouldn’t know for sure without a detailed analysis but generally speaking 
those sorts of accidents resulted in serious injury or death,” said Mosely. 
“Happily that seems to have stopped. There are still freak accidents, like 
Jules, but those sort of serious racing accidents, you do expect the driver to 
walk away. That wouldn’t have been the case 20 years ago.

“This was thanks to Sid Watkins and a team of really competent people and the 
teams themselves. It needed to be looked at scientifically and that was the big 
change after Ayrton Senna’s death at Imola in 1994.

“It’s very satisfying to see Alonso walk away. You work hard and it’s very 
satisfying when you see the results. It was quite an impressive crash.

Alonso acknowledged as much after the race when he wrote on Twitter: “I am 
aware that today I spent some of the luck remaining in life, I want to thank 
McLaren, the FIA for the safety on this cars.”

Nico Rosberg beat Mercedes team-mate Lewis Hamilton to win the season’s 
opening race in Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/mar/20/australian-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-lewis-hamilton-sebastian-vettel-in-pictures>
.
 