
There has been something approaching serenity in Mercedes’ comfortable 
dominance of the start of the Formula One season,Lewis Hamilton’s problems 
notwithstanding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/16/lewis-hamilton-f1-chinese-gp-last-on-grid-qualifying>
. But there is a red sandstorm beginning to blow up as the threat from Ferrari 
grows by the day.

It has been a disappointing start to the season for the Scuderia. Kimi 
Raikkonen failed to finish in the opening race in Melbourne last month, because 
of a problem with his turbo charger, and engine failure struck Sebastian Vettel 
when he was on his warm-up lap in the next race in Bahrain. Then, on Saturday, 
the warmth of the previous days here in Shanghai disappeared, which did not 
suit Ferrari in qualifying for Sunday’s Chinese Grand Prix – Raikkonen was 
still third,just ahead of Vettel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/19/sebastian-vettel-ferrari-mercedes-f1>
, but both drivers made mistakes on the final lap.

Raikkonen said: “It’s a shame. We had a chance to be even on the top today. 
Vettel added: “We decided to save a set of tyres. I was confident I could make 
it in the last lap but I didn’t. I wasn’t happy with it. I made a couple of 
mistakes.”

Mercedes, however, feel they might be troubled by their only real rivals this 
season, and it will be sooner rather than later. In the second practice session 
here on Friday Raikkonen and Vettel put in a one-two performance that had some 
who occupy the north end of the paddock and wear silver stroking their chins a 
little ruefully. Toto Wolff, Mercedes’ director of motorsport, was among them. 
“They are pushing us very hard,” he said, “and you have seen today that it is 
raw performance, and we have seen the performance in the last couple of races.

Nico Rosberg has the form while Lewis Hamilton has the history in China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/15/nico-rosberg-form-lewis-hamilton-history-mercedes-f1-china-grand-prix>
“Ferrari haven’t been able to pull it together because they made a big step 
from 2015 to 2016, similar to the step of 2014 to 2015, and in order to have 
the package deliver and be reliable, that isn’t an easy task. But in terms of 
sheer performance, they are really pushing us. And that it good; this is how 
the competition should be.”

Ferrari have made a step-up from last season but are still dissatisfied with 
their position. Raikkonen, who had at one stage looked likely to achieve pole 
here, was disappointed thatFerrari <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> 
had only seemed strong on the supersoft tyre the day before. “For whatever 
reason we’ve been quite struggling apart from the super-soft tyre,” he said. 
Tyres, alas, have been a talking point more than ever here, because the 
Shanghai track is a real rubber-shredder.

Vettel was also downbeat going into the pointy end of the weekend. “Overall I 
think we can still improve, but the balance is not yet where I want it to be, 
so let’s see what we can do,” he said. “The feel is OK, but OK is not good, so 
we can still improve.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fferrari-mercedes-growing-threat-sebastian-vettel-kimi-raikkonen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21546a4190e6ef026780a64b4d7b0518a0fe4fd2%2F0_4_4222_2533%2F4222.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ferrari%20offer%20growing%20threat%20to%20Mercedes%E2%80%99%20relentless%20F1%20hegemony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fferrari-mercedes-growing-threat-sebastian-vettel-kimi-raikkonen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ferrari%20offer%20growing%20threat%20to%20Mercedes%E2%80%99%20relentless%20F1%20hegemony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fferrari-mercedes-growing-threat-sebastian-vettel-kimi-raikkonen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21546a4190e6ef026780a64b4d7b0518a0fe4fd2%2F0_4_4222_2533%2F4222.jpg>
 Vettel celebrates his win in Hungary with Ferrari technical director James 
Allison, one of the team’s three wins in a2015. Photograph: Mark Thompson/Getty 
Images 
Again it was tyres that dominated discussions after qualification: that 
Ferrari would have to start the Chinese Grand Prix wearing worn super-softs was 
thought to be a possible tactical blunder. But this is something more 
fundamental than rubber. Ferrari, searching for their first victory here since 
2013, have looked at everything in the buildup to the new campaign.

Their technical director, James Allison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/16/james-allison-f1-2016-ferrari>, 
whose fingerprints are all over this SF16-H car for the first time, said in 
Melbourne they had taken a bold approach to everything – power unit, downforce, 
handling, horsepower, the lot – in an aggressive attempt to further improve on 
their 2015 model, which had been a big step up from the jalopy of 2014. And to 
support Allison, the former senior Mercedes engineer Jock Clear has moved over 
to Maranello.

Ferrari’s principal, Maurizio Arrivabene, said here: “What’s happened in 
Australia and Bahrain, we explained it very, very well and I think I don’t need 
to give further explanation.” After that, he seemed more interested in patting 
Mercedes on the back.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Ff1-chinese-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-shanghai-circuit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%20Chinese%20GP%20guide%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20the%20Shanghai%20circuit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Ff1-chinese-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-shanghai-circuit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%20Chinese%20GP%20guide%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20the%20Shanghai%20circuit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Ff1-chinese-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-shanghai-circuit-video&media=>
 F1 Chinese GP guide: everything you need to know about the Shanghai circuit 
“Concerning the expectation of the season,” he said, “I can say the Mercedes 
team of this year is the strongest one that I saw in the last 10 years. It’s 
quite a lot of years that I’m around. To be able to win against them, you have 
to work and be better than them. So, we are doing all our best to have good 
results.”

Considering Mercedes’ relentless hegemony, Ferrari did not have bad results 
last year. Three wins and second in the constructors’ championship would have 
pleased most teams, but this is Ferrari.

That even Raikkonen is fractionally more animated this season is further 
evidence that Ferrari have moved forward. But, like last year, they still look 
a team more likely to take victories off Mercedes than win the title 
themselves. Mercedes still look the team likelier to prevail in November. Most
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> watchers would be 
happy if was just a little closer.
 