
This list is a work in progress: we'll continue to add contact details here as 
more sections and teams become available on Twitter.

News sections

@guardian <http://www.twitter.com/guardian> - News, live events and big 
stories straight from our newsdesk

@guardiannews <http://www.twitter.com/guardiannews> - News

@GuardianWorld <http://twitter.com/guardianworld> - Foreign desk: the 
Guardian's foreign news editors bring you the best of our coverage

@businessdesk <http://www.twitter.com/businessdesk> - Business: Latest 
financial, market and economic news and analysis from the Guardian

@guardian_sport <http://twitter.com/guardian_sport> - Sport: Latest sport 
news, comment and results from the Guardian

@guardianedu <http://www.twitter.com/guardianedu> - Education

@guardianeco <http://www.twitter.com/guardianeco> - Environment: Breaking 
news, tweets and comment from the Guardian's environment team

@gdnpolitics <http://twitter.com/gdnpolitics> - Politics: Latest politics news 
and comment from our award-winning political reporters

@thefiver <http://twitter.com/thefiver> - The Fiver: the Guardian's tea-time 
look at the world of football

@guardianus <http://www.twitter.com/guardianus> - Guardian America: keep you 
up to date with US politics

@GdnLaw <http://twitter.com/GdnLaw> - Guardian Law: Law news, comment and 
analysis from the Guardian's legal affairs team

@mediaguardian <http://www.twitter.com/mediaguardian> - MediaGuardian: 
official Twitter account for media news and comment from the Guardian

@guardianmoney <http://www.twitter.com/guardianmoney> - Money

@guardianpda <http://twitter.com/guardianpda> - PDA: Newsfeed for the 
Guardian's digital content and culture blog

@guardianscience <http://www.twitter.com/guardianscience> - Science: News, 
comment, all that stuff from the Guardian's science, health and environment team

@societyguardian <http://www.twitter.com/societyguardian> - Society Guardian

@GuardianSXSW <http://twitter.com/#!/GuardianSXSW> - Guardian South by 
Southwest: follow all our coverage of the SXSW festival in Austin, Texas

@guardiantech <http://www.twitter.com/guardiantech> - Technology: News and 
comment from the Guardian's technology team

@guardian_plus <http://www.twitter.com/guardian_plus> - Guardian front page 
plus: There's never enough room on the front page of the Guardian's website so 
here are some excellent items you may have missed

@GuardianData <http://www.twitter.com/GuardianData> - Datablog & datastore: 
Facts you can use from the Guardian. Mash them up and tell us about it

@gdngames <http://twitter.com/gdngames> - Games: get all the latest games 
reviews and comment from the Guardian's technology team

@gdnelectionwire <http://twitter.com/gdnelectionwire> - Guardian general 
election wire: an automated news feed of all of the Guardian's general election 
2010 stories, for all the political junkies out there

@gdnpoliticswire <http://twitter.com/gdnpoliticswire> - Guardian politics 
wire: an automated news feed of all of the Guardian's politics stories, for all 
the political junkies out there

@GdnWorldCup <http://twitter.com/gdnworldcup> - Guardian World Cup: Receive 
all the latest World Cup 2010 news and stories from the Guardian website with 
this (mainly) automated feed

@GdnScotland <http://twitter.com/GdnScotland> - Guardian Scotland: get the 
latest news from the Guardian's Scotland team

@GdnNortherner <http://twitter.com/GdnNortherner> - Guardian Northerner: get 
the latest news and views from the north of England

Comment is free

@CommentisFree <http://twitter.com/commentisfree> - Jessica Reed brings you 
all the best articles and insight from the Comment is Free team

@libertycentral <http://twitter.com/libertycentral> - Natalie Hanman runs 
liberty central, the Guardian's Comment is free civil liberties and human 
rights site

@CifAmerica <http://twitter.com/CifAmerica> - To keep up to date with the best 
commentary from, on, around and about the United States, check out the tweeting 
arm of Comment is free: America

@D_Shariatmadari <http://twitter.com/D_Shariatmadari> - David helps edit the 
Guardian's religious comment blog Comment is free: belief, and looks after its 
Twitter presence

@gnews140 <http://twitter.com/gnews140> - GNews140: A brand new show all about 
Twitter, presented and written by@ArianeSherine  
<http://twitter.com/ArianeSherine>and @Graham_Nunn 
<http://twitter.com/Graham_Nunn>, airing every Friday on the Guardian website. 
It's good enough tweet.

Features, arts, culture, life & style

@guardiang2 <http://twitter.com/guardiang2> - G2: The Guardian's daily 
features section

@g2filmandmusic <https://twitter.com/#!/g2filmandmusic> - G2 Film and Music: 
The Friday G2 section in the Guardian that covers film, and music

@guideguardian <http://twitter.com/guideguardian> - Guardian Guide: twittering 
about music, telly, film and The Wire

@guardianphotos <http://twitter.com/#!/guardianphotos> - Guardian picture 
desk: the latest galleries and competitions from our team of picture editors 
and photographers

@guardianbooks <http://twitter.com/guardianbooks> - Guardian Books: Books 
news, reviews and author interviews from the Guardian

@ObsNewReview <http://twitter.com/ObsNewReview> - Observer New Review: The 
best in arts, politics, science and culture, published with the Observer every 
Sunday

@ObsMagazine <http://twitter.com/#!/ObsMagazine> - Observer Magazine: The best 
features, fashion and food articles, published with the Observer every Sunday

@cannes_film <http://twitter.com/cannes_film> - Guardian at Cannes: All the 
coverage of the 2009 Cannes Film Festival from guardian.co.uk/film

@guardianfilm <http://twitter.com/guardianfilm> - Film: Latest film news, 
reviews, podcasts and video from the Guardian

@guardianfood <http://www.twitter.com/guardianfood> - Word of Mouth: News, 
blog posts, reviews and comment about food and eating tweeted by Susan Smillie, 
editor of Word of Mouth and the Guardian's online food content

@ObsFood <http://twitter.com/ObsFood> - Observer Food Monthly: Tweets from 
Gareth Grundy, deputy editor of the Observer's award-winning food magazine

@guardianguardens <http://twitter.com/guardiangardens> - Gardening news, 
comment and advice from the Guardian

@guardianhay <http://twitter.com/guardianhay> - The Guardian at Hay: News, 
interviews, comment, video and podcasts from the Guardian website at the 
Guardian Hay festival

@lifeandstyle <http://www.twitter.com/lifeandstyle> - Life and style: the 
Guardian's site for food, fashion, fitness and other lifestyle features

@guardiangardens <http://twitter.com/guardiangardens> - Gardening: Gardening 
news, comment and advice from the Guardian

@guardianmusic <http://www.twitter.com/guardianmusic> - Music: Blogs, podcasts 
and other fun stuff from the guardian.co.uk/music team

@gmfeed <http://twitter.com/gmfeed> - An automatic feed of all the music news, 
reviews, video and podcasts from the guardian.co.uk/music team

@guardianreview <http://www.twitter.com/guardianreview> - Guardian Review: 
Books, poetry and literature features and reviews from the Guardian Review team

@GuardianTravel <http://twitter.com/guardiantravel> - Guardian Travel: The 
latest travel news, insider guides, emerging destinations, new hotels and 
travel trends from the Guardian

@GuardianWeekend <http://twitter.com/guardianweekend> - Guardian Weekend: 
Recommended features, recipes and style articles from the team behind Guardian 
Weekend, our Saturday magazine supplement

@GuardianFamily <http://twitter.com/guardianfamily> - Guardian Family: 
Features and life stories from the team behind the Guardian's Saturday Family 
supplement

@ObsTechMonthly <https://twitter.com/ObsTechMonthly> - Observer Tech Monthly: 
The Observer's monthly science and technology supplement

Podcasts & Multimedia

@GdnFocusPodcast <http://twitter.com/GdnFocusPodcast> - Guardian Focus: 
current affairs podcasts looking in depth at one issue. Each programme is 
presented by a different Guardian journalist

@mediatalkusa <http://twitter.com/mediatalkusa> - Media Talk USA: Podcast 
about the American media from the Guardian and hosted by Jeff Jarvis

@musicweeklypod <http://twitter.com/musicweeklypod> - Music Weekly: Alexis 
Petridis and Rosie Swash bring you an eclectic range of interviews and live 
tracks from new and established artists every Friday.

@scienceweekly <http://www.twitter.com/scienceweekly> - Science weekly 
podcast: The Guardian's science podcast - a weekly digest of things like 
physics, ethics, stem cells and tech

@guardiantw <http://www.twitter.com/guardiantw> - Tech weekly podcast: the 
Guardian's Technology podcast

@guardianfilms <http://twitter.com/guardianfilms> - Guardian Films: 
Documentary film unit of the Guardian and Observer newspapers set up by 
journalists and TV producers

@guardianvideo <http://www.twitter.com/guardianvideo> - Guardian Video

Other sections


@GdnZeitgeist <http://twitter.com/GdnZeitgeist> - Guardian Zeitgeist: Things 
the Guardian Zeitgeist has noticed, status updates, insights and gossip


@guardianmobile <http://twitter.com/#!/guardianmobile> - Guardian mobile: 
News, help and updates from the Guardian mobile team

@GuardianExtra <http://twitter.com/Guardianextra> - Guardian Extra: Offers, 
events, deals and news from the team behind the Guardian's membership scheme

@guardianvalues <http://twitter.com/guardianvalues> - GNM Sustainability: 
Latest news, blogs and comment from the Guardian's Sustainable Development team

@guardianjobs <http://www.twitter.com/guardianjobs> - Guardian Jobs: Find a 
job or get help and advice at GuardianJobs

@guardiangrad <http://twitter.com/#!/guardiangrad> - Guardian graduate: Giving 
you the best independent, credible & impartial advice from freshers and beyond

@guardiantalent <http://twitter.com/GuardianTalent> - Guardian talent: Tweets 
from the talent and development team at Guardian News and Media

@guardianletters <http://twitter.com/guardianletters> - Guardian letters: 
Tweets from the editors of the Guardian's letters page

@guardianlibrary <http://twitter.com/guardianlibrary> - Guardian research: 
Tweets from the Guardian & Observer research and information department

@GNM_Press <http://twitter.com/GNM_Press> - GNM Press Office: Official Twitter 
account for the Guardian News & Media Press Office, representing the Guardian, 
The Observer and the Guardian website

@GuardianStyle <http://twitter.com/guardianstyle> - Guardian Style: The 
Guardian style guide editors on language usage and abusage, and lots more

@GSoulmates <http://twitter.com/GSoulmates> - Guardian Soulmates: Tweets and 
offers from the Guardian's online dating service which has more than 130,000 
members

@guardianweekly <http://twitter.com/guardianweekly> - Guardian Weekly: The 
Guardian's weekly take on the world, with Le Monde and Washington Post

@guardianvoices <http://www.twitter.com/guardianvoices> - Guardian voices: 
highlights of the often excellent content provided by our community of users

@gnmvolunteering <https://twitter.com/GNMvolunteering> – Guardian 
volunteering: latest news on the Guardian's community programme and 
volunteering initiatives in the UK and abroad
 