
Errors got into the letter counts for 10 ac, 27 ac and 8 dn in the August 
Genius puzzle by Crucible (No98 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/genius>) 
as originally uploaded. These have now been corrected. Our apologies.
_____

The changes to the archive search facility at the right-hand side of the 
crossword home page <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords> seem to have been 
acceptable to users. (At least I have not had any volume of complaints, which 
often follow such changes.) The top half of the box allows you to search by 
type of puzzle, month and setter; the bottom half by type of puzzle and serial 
number (leaving out the comma in the number). If you select 'any' rather than 
enter a particular setter you will get a list of all the puzzles in the chosen 
month. The serial number route below this allows you to search the archive for 
past Genius puzzles and special Bank Holiday Araucaria puzzles, which was 
unhappily impossible before.

However this means that, via the archive search, you have to look for a 
favourite setter month by month, which may well be tedious. This can be 
overcome on the left-hand side of the home page where, if you click on 'all 
Cryptic puzzles' or on 'all Prize puzzles', you will be offered a menu of 
setters that will lead you respectively to all their Monday to Friday regular 
Cryptic puzzles and or their Saturday prize puzzles, going back to the start of 
the archive. (The same general principles apply to the other kinds of puzzle on 
the site.)
_____

My thanks to all those who responded to my call last month for feedback on 
Araucaria's'Printer's Devilry' Genius puzzle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/java/new/0,,-27071,00.html> for June and 
on 'non-standard' puzzles in general in the Genius slot. And I am also grateful 
to David H. for correcting my assertion that the Printer's Devilry puzzle was 
invented by Ximenes. The PD puzzle became a firm favourite of Ximenes but, as 
he says in 'Ximenes on the Art of the Crossword', it was in fact originally one 
of Afrit's creations, not his.

There was pretty general support for non-standard Genius puzzles and for the 
level of difficulty for Genius puzzles to be kept high. But I have to say that 
those who positively welcomed the PD puzzle were in a minority. The typical 
positive comment was that the puzzle looked unsolvable at first glance but 
that, after an initial breakthrough had been achieved, little by little over 
the course of the month other solutions were found. 'It was one of the most 
frustrating, irritating, infuriating and enjoyable crosswords I have ever done' 
was a typical reaction. Another was: 'Not having encountered this type of 
crossword clue before, we initially despaired of completing it. However, we did 
so ... The challenge was superb, and the triumph on finishing heady.' As I 
reported last month 152 of you submitted correct entries for the PD puzzle, 
which is a considerably higher figure than might have been expected.

The July puzzle (No 97 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/java/new/0,,-27154,00.html> by Tramp) 
brought in 334 correct entries by the deadline, 21 of those on the first day. 
Brian of Paderborn in Germany was in by 01:58, but he was just pipped to the 
post at 01:51 by the familiar figure of Tony from London W5.

Congratulations to Isobel Squire from Epsom, Surrey, who is July's Genius 
winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk>. 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>. For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 