
Khouma Babacar came on as a substitute and scored in stoppage time to give 
Fiorentina a controversial 2-1 victory over 10-manInternazionale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale> in the battle for third 
place in Serie A, while Milan boosted their bid for the final Champions League 
spot with a 2-1 win over Genoa on Sunday.

Fiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> moved up to 
third, two points above Roma and four above Inter after winning in Florence. 
Borja Valero cancelled out Marcelo Brozovic’s opening goal for Internazionale 
and Babacar scored the winner just minutes after coming on, following a harsh 
second yellow card for Inter’s Alex Telles.

Meanwhile, the Milan coach, Sinisa Mihajlovic, angrily accused some of his 
players of easing off towards the end of Sunday’s 2-1 win againstGenoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa>.

“If a player doesn’t keep running until the 94th minute, I’m not going to put 
him on the pitch again,” said Mihajlovic. “I don’t need to give names, they 
know who I’m referring to.“

But the Serb refused to comment on a suggestion that he was referring to 
striker Mario Balotelli. “I didn’t say it was him,” he said. “I’m talking about 
two or three players and they know who they are. That’s enough, let’s have 
another question.“

Milan, sixth in Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> 
and challenging for a Champions League place next season, appeared to be 
coasting until Alessio Cerci pulled one back in stoppage time and they had to 
hold on grimly for a win.

“We should have scored the third goal with the chances we had, but then we 
conceded one and risked giving the win away,” said Mihajlovic.

Balotelli, who is still not match fit after missing three months of the season 
with a groin injury, came off in the 88th minute and appeared to be limping at 
the end of the game. “Balotelli took a knock, he was limping a bit, but it’s 
just a knock,” said his manager.
 