
As much as 12.7m metric tons 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/347/6223/768> of plastic enter the 
world’s oceans each year. According to theWorld Economic Forum 
<https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/downloads/news/New-Plastics-Economy_Background-to-Key-Statistics_19022016v2.pdf>
, by 2050 there could be more plastic in the sea than fish.

It’s clear that waste ends up in marine habitats from many different sources, 
from inefficient industrial waste management toplastic microfibers washed out 
of our clothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/20/microfibers-plastic-pollution-oceans-patagonia-synthetic-clothes-microbeads>
. But it’s less clear what the end result might be for human health.

How your clothes are poisoning our oceans and food supply
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/20/microfibers-plastic-pollution-oceans-patagonia-synthetic-clothes-microbeads>
All that plastic isn’t just floating about, breaking down into increasingly 
microplastic particles and creating an unsightly mess: it’s also getting eaten 
by marine life.

Fish appear to be “stuffing themselves” on plastic 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-36435288>, which is coated in 
bacteria and algae, mimicking their natural food sources.Mistaking the small 
particles for a high energy snack, fish gobble up most small plastic particles, 
according to recent research 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/352/6290/1172>. 

Much of that plastic ends up in the guts of fish and other marine life, and 
ultimately on our dinner table.

While the actual plastic bits might be in the stomachs of fish, the chemical 
used to manufacture the plastic “may migrate into fish flesh and thus edible 
parts of seafood”, explains Rolf Halden, director of Arizona State University’s 
Center for Environmental Security.

Those chemicals that have “hitched a ride on plastics” may sometimes be found 
“in accumulated concentrations that may be harmful to humans”, says Halden.

In a study published in 2015, marine researchers bought fish at public markets 
in California and Indonesia and examined their stomach contents.Around one in 
four fish at markets in both locations had plastic particles in their guts. 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/srep14340> 

A previous study in 2014 found microplastics in the guts of oysters and 
mussels sold at supermarkets 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25005888?dopt=Abstract&holding=npg>. In the 
case of oysters and mussels, people eat the entire organism, including the gut.

Our understanding of what eating plastic-contaminated fish does to a person is 
still in its infancy 
<http://ec.europa.eu/environment/marine/good-environmental-status/descriptor-10/pdf/GESAMP_microplastics%20full%20study.pdf>
.

“We don’t know the effects,” says Chelsea Rochman, Smith Fellow in 
Conservation Biology at the University of California Davis and lead author of 
the 2015 study on microplastic contamination in fish.

“Health advisories for seafood consumption already exist for established 
contaminants such as dioxins, PCBs and mercury,” points out Halden. “Currently 
there are no similar regulations for plastics and plastic-borne pollutants, as 
the science is still young.”

While Rochman’s study looked at plastic found in the stomachs of fish, she 
says the next step would be to look at chemical contamination in the flesh of 
fish from plastic exposure to measure just how much of it leaches into the 
flesh of marine creatures.

Fatty tissue is known to store higher concentrations of contaminants, so 
fattier fish, like salmon and tuna, would be expected to have higher levels of 
contamination from plastic exposure.

Microplastics killing fish before they reach reproductive age, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/02/microplastics-killing-fish-before-they-reach-reproductive-age-study-finds>
Tuna and salmon are two of the most commonly 
<http://www.seafoodhealthfacts.org/seafood-choices/overview-us-seafood-supply> 
consumed fish in the US.

While more research is needed into human impacts, studies have already shown 
that when it comes to the health of fish, plastic already causes harm.
Researchers have found that fish raised in waters rife with microplastics are 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-36435288>“smaller, slower, and 
more stupid” than fish raised in clean water.

There are some mitigation attempts being made to plastic contamination. The US 
 banned the use of microbeads in personal care products last year 
<https://energycommerce.house.gov/news-center/press-releases/breaking-bipartisan-bill-banthebead-now-law#sthash.YJJa0C9E.dpuf>
, a law that won’t take effect until 2017.

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) also puts out advisories 
<https://www.epa.gov/choose-fish-and-shellfish-wisely/fish-and-shellfish-advisories-and-safe-eating-guidelines>
 when some form of chemical contamination that might impact seafood is 
suspected in US waters. Butthe majority of seafood eaten in the US is imported 
and never tested <http://www.gao.gov/assets/650/649010.pdf> for contamination 
by the EPA and other government agencies.

While scientists try to pin down the damage plastic pollution is causing to 
marine life and those that eat it, experts agree on one thing: the amount of 
plastic that ends up in our waterways must be reduced dramatically.

When it comes to plastic pollution, Halden says: “We can do better.”
 