
The Paris agreement has been ratified. Only one year after negotiating this 
historic treaty, it has come into force. This signals that the vast majority of 
governments around the world remain committed to fighting climate change.

12 ways environment and development sectors can collaborate to meet the SDGs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/31/12-ways-environment-development-sectors-work-together-sdgs>
Yet that was the easy part. Actually realising these commitments made at COP21 
in Paris will require concerted, concrete action for many years to come. Though 
the vast majority of countries in the world have clear goals in the form of 
nationally determined contributions (NDCs), these are not action plans, nor are 
the NDCs strong enough to actually keep global average temperature from rising 
more than 2C.

The Paris agreement is a truly global commitment, spanning developed and 
developing countries around the world. Yet for many developing and 
least-developed countries, in particular, contributing to the fight against 
climate change requires taking targeted actions while also prioritising 
economic development and poverty reduction. Here are five areas in the energy 
sector that offer such a win-win.

1 Ensure that everyone has access to energy

While energy is the foremost contributor to carbon emissions, access to it is 
also a critical enabler of human and economic development. At the same time, 
the billions who lack access have not contributed to climate change. Any 
concerns that achieving energy access for all would magnify the challenges of 
energy security or climate change are unfounded: it would only increase global 
energy demand by 1% in 2030 and CO2 emissions by 0.6%.

The latest estimates show that an estimated 1.2 billion people still do not 
have access to electricity

The latest figures, recently published in the World Energy Outlook 2016 
<http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/publications/weo-2016/>, show that an 
estimated 1.2 billion people, 16% of the global population, still do not have 
access to electricity. Access to clean cooking receives far less attention than 
electrification and in many ways is more difficult to achieve. An estimated 2.7 
billion people, or almost 40% of the global population who are concentrated in 
sub-Saharan Africa and developing Asia, still rely on the traditional use of 
biomass for cooking.

Despite the urgency of the problem, investment is falling far short of what the
International Energy Agency (IEA) <https://www.iea.org/> estimates is needed to 
achieve universal access by 2030 – around $50bn (£40bn) per year. Dedicated 
policies to promote access are essential to break the vicious cycle of energy 
poverty, in which growth in incomes and living standards are severely hindered 
by a lack of energy services. Technology can also be a major enabler of 
effective policymaking and improvement on the ground: decentralised renewable 
energy is providing an increasingly viable way to close the access gap in rural 
areas, particularly for remote settlements far from the existing grid.

2 Take steps to rapidly reduce air pollution

Around 6.5 million premature deaths worldwide are attributed each year to poor 
air quality 
<http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/weo-2016-special-report-energy-and-air-pollution.html>
, making this the world’s fourth-largest threat to human health after high 
blood pressure, dietary risks and smoking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffive-ways-to-take-action-on-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34143c73f58d940fa9385d19305b9f0902914976%2F0_0_4884_3088%2F4884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20ways%20to%20take%20action%20on%20climate%20change%20%7C%20Fatih%20Birol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffive-ways-to-take-action-on-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20ways%20to%20take%20action%20on%20climate%20change%20%7C%20Fatih%20Birol&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffive-ways-to-take-action-on-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34143c73f58d940fa9385d19305b9f0902914976%2F0_0_4884_3088%2F4884.jpg>
 Inefficient fuel cook stoves cause harmful indoor air pollution. Photograph: 
Prakash Singh/AFP/Getty Images 
This is an energy sector problem, as energy production and use, mostly from 
unregulated, poorly regulated or inefficient fuel combustion, are the most 
important sources of air pollution from human activity. The harmful effects of 
energy poverty are felt most heavily in developing countries in Asia and 
sub-Saharan Africa.

Confronting the twin challenges of CO2 emissions and air pollution means 
dispensing with short-term thinking and stop-gap solutions. IEA analysis shows 
that proven energy policies and technologies can chart a development path that 
delivers major cuts in air pollution around the world and bring health 
benefits, universal access to energy and improve sustainability.

3 Make cities energy efficient

Though the Paris agreement is a global accord between countries, much of the 
hard work will be taken in the cities of the world. Cities dominate energy 
demand, and by extension are responsible for a significant share of carbon 
emissions. As IEA’sEnergy Technology Perspectives 2016 <http://www.iea.org/etp/>
 highlighted, the world’s urban areas accounted for about 64% of global primary 
energy use and produced 70% of the planet’s CO2 emissions in 2013.

These shares will rise as cities grow and urban economic activity expands. As 
the world seeks to make more efficient use of its energy resources, increase 
energy security and meet global climate targets, cities must take a leading 
role in the energy transition.

12 ways to mobilise the money needed to stop climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/09/12-ways-to-mobilise-the-money-needed-to-stop-climate-change>
Leadership must of course start from the top; policy at the national level 
must encourage the deployment of clean energy technologies, and include 
greenhouse gas emission reduction targets, carbon pricing mechanisms, and 
investment in energy research, development and demonstration. But these targets 
must then be complemented by action at the local level through efforts 
including sustainable transportation planning, building codes and improved data 
collection.

4 Power the economy with cleaner, more efficient technologies

Unfortunately today, many of the megacities of the world, particularly those 
in Asia, are still powered by antiquated subcritical coal-fired power plants. 
These can have emissions intensities of around 1,000kg of CO2 per megawatt-hour 
(that is, the amount of carbon dioxide that is released for each unit of power 
produced). More modern, highly efficient coal-fired power plants may have an 
intensity of around 800, yet a natural gas turbine can reach about 350. A coal 
plant equipped with carbon capture and storage can release less than 150kg of 
CO2 per megawatt-hour. At the very end of the spectrum, renewable sources like 
wind and solar have zero emissions. Globally, the average intensity of power 
generation today isjust over 500kg of CO2 per megawatt-hour 
<http://www.iea.org/newsroom/news/2016/september/world-energy-investment-2016.html>
.

But, to align with the 450 Scenario in the IEA’s World Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Outlook 2016 – a scenario 
consistent with limiting the global increase in temperature to no more than 2C 
– the emissions intensity of power generation needs to fall much further and 
faster, to around 80kg of CO2 per megawatt-hour by 2040.

A path to achieving this is likely to include a combination of a more rapid 
shift to low-carbon technologies worldwide (especially wind, solar and 
hydropower), fuel switching (such as from coal to gas), efficiency improvements 
and in some markets, adoption of carbon capture and storage.

5 Finally, stop incentivising the wasteful use of fossil fuels

This low-carbon transition must take place on a level playing field. 
Fossil-fuel subsidies distort energy markets, promoting inefficient use of 
energy and increasing energy-related CO2 emissions. They are a roadblock on the 
way to a cleaner and more efficient energy future.

They have also consistently dwarfed the amounts allocated by governments to 
subsidise renewable energy. In 2014, for example, fossil fuel consumption 
subsidies of almost $500bn (£400bn) were more than three-times higher than 
renewables subsidies of some $140bn (£112bn). But there has been progress. 
World Energy Outlook 2016 reports that the value of global fossil-fuel 
consumption subsidies in 2015 was estimated at $325bn (£260bn), reflecting 
lower fossil-fuel prices but also a subsidy reform process that has gathered 
momentum in some countries.

12 ways the arts can encourage climate action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/25/12-ways-the-arts-can-encourage-climate-action>
In the case of renewables, rapidly falling costs in recent years have been 
welcome, but in many cases subsidies are still needed to level the playing 
field with fossil-fuel alternatives that emit CO2 and other pollutants. But as 
technology costs continue to come down, and hopefully the environmental impacts 
of fossil fuel use is better reflected in pricing, more and more new renewable 
energy projects will be competitive without support.

Achieving universal access to clean, modern energy services while meeting 
global climate targets is no easy task. But with the right policies, aimed at 
the right sectors, with the right technologies, the world can soon be on track 
for a sustainable energy future.



Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#Dev2030 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Dev2030&src=typd>.
 