
1 Mancini more forthright than most


While too many coaches in the modern game are too political to upset expensive 
players and their entourages, and too watchful of their own backs to consider 
making trouble for the owner, well played Manchester City'sRoberto Mancini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roberto-mancini>, who pulled no punches 
in the face of player misbehaviour. It was interesting that he felt obliged to 
immediately mention the owner's role in dealing with Carlos Tevez's grand diva 
moment. Once upon a time such matters were dealt with by the coach and coach 
alone. Was he calling upon the influence of the board because he was obliged to 
involve them? Or because he needed their support?

Whichever, Mancini showed a bit more gumption in his post-match press 
conference than the Milan coach Massimiliano Allegri, who took the opportunity 
for some shameless sucking up to the man who calls the shots at his club. 
"Tonight's win is dedicated to our president [Silvio Berlusconi], who turns 75 
tomorrow," he said sweetly. Unfortunately, there were no sick buckets in the 
vicinity to be passed the way of the poor interviewer.

2 The lilliputians are on the rise

The odds on a triple of Apoel, Basel and Trabzonspor topping their groups 
after a couple of games would have been off the scale. If this is what Michel 
Platini had in mind when he adjusted qualification to assist the smaller clubs, 
the evidence that his plan has substance is there in black and white. Apoel's 
point at Shakhtar Donetsk is arguably the result of the round. Although all 
three could only manage a draw this week, the fact that Basel andTrabzonspor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/trabzonspor> were frustrated to gain only 
a point is a giant backhanded compliment.

Trabzonspor's story is particularly stirring. They only discovered they would 
be in theChampions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>
 the day before the draw, when they benefitted from Fenerbahce's punishment for 
a match-fixing scandal. The late call has clearly suited them. They were 
nerveless in their opening fixture at Inter, winning in the San Siro, and then 
recovered from a goal down to draw 1-1 with Lille. Trabzonspor are 92nd in the 
Uefa rankings for this season (their group rivals Inter are eighth, CSKA 20th, 
Lille 53rd). Next up, Trabzonspor head to Moscow. The dream continues, although 
it is probably asking a bit much for them to do a Denmark 1992.

3 Napoli have found the animal within

So enthralled were the people of Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> to see European Cup football 
return after 21 years to Stadio San Paolo, a number of fans headed to the 
ground at lunchtime for an 8.45pm kick-off. They were rewarded with a 
comfortable win and have enjoyed an excellent start to the competition. It is 
Napoli's misfortune to be drawn in the trickiest of the groups, but they could 
hardly have a better platform from which to launch into a double header with 
the favourites Bayern Munich.

Their Swiss midfielder Gokhan Inler revealed the team's excitement at notching 
a Champions League win – a new experience for most of the team. Then he paid 
tribute to the man of the match Ezequiel Lavezzi. "He is an animal," said 
Inler. "He always wants to play, even when he isn't fit, and this is what great 
players do: they give their all to help the side and that's what is taking us 
forward. I don't know how far we can go."

4 Kaká has his mojo back

There were, as ever, some memorable goals in the Champions League this week. 
Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain merits a mention for coming up with animportant strike 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6yVhpn0RhLs> on his Arsenal debut. Roman 
Shirokov'ssecond for Zenit <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=26A4MtDSR5A&NR=1> 
was a delight. AndAndré Ayew <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCdfI-CMlMY> 
scored a scorcher for Olympique Marseille, who were so bold in their 3-0 win 
over Borussia Dortmund that Didier Deschamps confessed afterwards he might have 
to play the Champions League anthem in the dressing room before league games.

Antonio Cassano's first goal <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uiNM1fapIDQ> for 
seven years on this stage was aided by a pass from the ponytailed Zlatan 
Ibrahimovic, who was praised all round for being the difference for Milan on 
his return from injury. Another who rolled back the years was Kaká, whosefine 
strike <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WYiTR2jm7rA> capped a classy performance 
for Real Madrid. Commentators noted that the smile was back on his face after 
two demoralising seasons. "Little by little I am getting better," he said. 
"There were times here when I was playing 45 minutes and feeling spent. Now I 
feel comfortable after playing a full game." It's onwards and upwards for Kaká.

5 Barcelona's omnipotence is becoming humdrum

It would be interesting to know how many neutrals chose to watch BATE Borisov 
versus Barcelona as their match of choice on Wednesday night. Of course, 
Barcelona are always a major attraction, regardless of whether they are playing 
in aClásico or merely training amongst themselves, but it is curious to note 
how their latest victory didn't register too highly on the Champions League 
richter scale of excitement. Are Lionel Messi and friends so good that we have 
reached a point whereBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> 
winning 5-0 away from home now feels routine? Scary.
 