
Diamond system sparkles despite a few misgivings


After the high of stunning Germany, England were dragged back down to earth by 
Holland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland>. They made problems for 
themselves with some careless play, with Danny Drinkwater nervous on his debut 
and Ross Barkley too sloppy in possession; this was a reality check for Roy 
Hodgson’s developing team. Equally, though, perhaps that was to be expected 
from an experimental line-up and just when Hodgson might have been having 
second thoughts about the diamond system in midfield, his players demonstrated 
its benefits with an excellent team goal to break the deadlock. Jamie Vardy 
provided the finishing touch, but it was all about the silkiness of the move, 
John Stones playing the ball out from the back, James Milner and Adam Lallana 
combining beautifully in between the lines, and Kyle Walker providing width on 
the right.

Positive Walker could have edge on Clyne in full-back fight


Is there room for only one orthodox right-back in Hodgson’s squad? Eric Dier’s 
versatility gives theEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> 
manager flexibility - the dependable Milner can also be used at full-back in an 
emergency - and that means Nathaniel Clyne and Walker could be fighting over 
one spot. There is little between them, though Walker may have the edge at the 
moment. He has been outstanding for Tottenham Hotspur this season, playing with 
more focus and cutting out the errors from his game, and it is crucial that 
full-backs are comfortable going forward in a diamond system. While Clyne 
contributed an assist against Germany, Walker’s part in England’s opener here 
suggests that he is a touch more refined in attack. He maintained his composure 
well to tee up Vardy.

England 1-2 Holland: International friendly – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/mar/29/england-v-holland-international-friendly-live>
England’s unconvincing defence is cause for concern


For all Walker’s attacking zest, however, there was also a reminder that 
England’s defence could be vulnerable against more incisive opponents this 
summer. After conceding two preventable goals against Germany, there were early 
nerves when an attempt to imitate Spain by playing the ball out from the back 
almost ended in farce, Fraser Forster was required to make an excellent save 
when a mistake from John Stones let in Vincent Janssen just before Holland’s 
equaliser and Danny Rose had a disappointing night at left-back. Replaced by 
Clyne before the hour, the Tottenham man could easily have been punished for an 
early challenge on Joël Veltman just inside England’s area, before giving away 
the penalty that led to Janssen’s equaliser with a sloppy handball.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fengland-holland-five-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c88cb74cbc48b87b632a494535b1a602344b076%2F0_146_3279_1967%2F3279.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20England%E2%80%99s%20defeat%20to%20Holland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fengland-holland-five-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20England%E2%80%99s%20defeat%20to%20Holland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fengland-holland-five-things-we-learned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c88cb74cbc48b87b632a494535b1a602344b076%2F0_146_3279_1967%2F3279.jpg>
 The width provided by England’s full-backs is vital in the diamond system, and 
Kyle Walker impressed at Wembley. Photograph: Jordan Mansfield/The FA via Getty 
Images 
England frustrated as Luciano Narsingh goal seals Holland’s comeback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/england-holland-international-friendly-match-report>
Rooney boosted by Sturridge’s failure to take opportunity


Although there is a strong argument that Daniel Sturridge is England’s most 
talented striker, his peripheral performance must go down as the biggest 
disappointment for Hodgson. He has been deadly for Liverpool in recent weeks. 
Against Holland, however, Sturridge operated on the fringes of the contest, 
little he tried came off and it was not a surprise when he was replaced by Theo 
Walcott. The doubts over his fitness are going nowhere in the immediate future 
and he does not have much time to prove he deserves to be above Wayne Rooney in 
the pecking order. On this evidence, Vardy is the real threat to the England 
captain’s claims for a starting place. Vardy scored one and he might have added 
a second with a rasping drive after the break.

Holland’s youngsters restore pride with spirited showing


It is going to be a difficult summer for the Dutch. After failing to qualify 
for a major tournament for the first time since the 2002 World Cup, they are 
wondering when their next great generation is going to emerge. The team that 
finished third in the last World Cup has experienced quite the fall from grace 
and Danny Blind can no longer rely on players like Wesley Sneijder, Arjen 
Robben and Robin van Persie, none of whom featured at Wembley. Yet a young side 
recovered admirably after going behind. Riechedly Bazoer was assured in 
defensive midfield, Gigi Wijnaldum was a threat and Janssen was a thorn in the 
side of England’s centre-backs. Yes, Luciano Narsingh’s late winner could have 
been disallowed for a foul on Phil Jagielka, but Blind will be encouraged.
 