
1. Mercedes woe has silver lining for the sport

It may have been what their head of motorsport, Toto Wolff, called a “crappy 
day at the office” for Mercedes but, for the fans, his team’stravails in 
getting their cars off the line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/26/ferrari-sebastian-vettel-wins-hungarian-grand-prix-mercedes-lewis-hamilton>
 quickly have turned the last two races into absolute crackers.At Silverstone 
they recovered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/06/lewis-hamilton-confident-budapest-silverstone-success>
 from their mugging by Williams, but with the rain also mixing things up it 
turned into the race of the season. Or at least it did until the Hungarian 
Grand Prix on Sunday, which took that honour by a country mile. Mercedes were 
again beaten off the line, this time by the Ferraris of the race-winner, 
Sebastian Vettel, and also Kimi Raikkonen, to give the grand prix the perfect 
opening. What followed was almost too much to keep track of. Countless ballsy 
overtakes, not least by Lewis Hamilton on Felipe Massa round the outside of 
turn one, a move that partially redeemed the errors he admitted had cost him a 
higher finish. Penalties, clashes, controversy and action throughout the field. 
The sometimes unjust criticism Formula One has endured in the early part of the 
season for lacklustre action has been thoroughly dismissed by back-to-back 
thrill-fests. If all it takes to instigate the fun is for Merc to have a poor 
start fans will be eager to see how they cope when the new starting regulations 
are applied at the next round in Spa.

Sebastian Vettel dedicates Hungarian Grand Prix win to Jules Bianchi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/26/sebastian-vettel-hungarian-grand-prix-jules-bianchi>
2. Ferrari are at full throttle
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ffive-things-hungarian-grand-prix-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438005317283%2F1fa6d3c0-a883-4050-9f87-80fd696f1d8e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Hungarian%20Grand%20Prix%20%7C%20Giles%20Richards%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ffive-things-hungarian-grand-prix-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Hungarian%20Grand%20Prix%20%7C%20Giles%20Richards%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ffive-things-hungarian-grand-prix-formula-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438005317283%2F1fa6d3c0-a883-4050-9f87-80fd696f1d8e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sebastian Vettel celebrates his victory for Ferrari in Budapest. Photograph: 
Imago / Barcroft Media 
What a turnaround for the Scuderia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/28/f1-niki-lauda-ferrari-sebastian-vettel-malaysia-grand-prix>
. On Friday they had suffered badly in practice with balance and understeer 
problems. The team principal, Maurizio Arrivabene, said: “On Friday we were 
struggling a lot and at one stage James Allison [the technical director] said 
to me: ‘If I have to think about the worst day, today is the worst day in my 
career.’” In previous incarnations of the team, panic might have been the 
result. But Arrivabene has brought calm to the squad and they settled down, did 
their analysis and by Saturday had dialled in the solution. And how well it 
worked. Vettel was consistently between three- and five-tenths of a second per 
lap faster than Nico Rosberg and close to Lewis Hamilton’s fastest laps when 
the latter was running in clean air. They had looked to be going backwards into 
the clutches of a fast-improving Williams but in Hungary upped their game with 
aplomb. Arrivabene believes the speed was always there but that running behind 
other cars was masking the potential because his drivers were having to 
conserve their tyres in dirty air. “It makes a difference if you find yourself 
in clean air,” Vettel said. “When following the top two cars we either don’t 
see them for long, or in other races we are stuck behind so you can’t show the 
true pace.” Is it enough to challenge Mercedes? Not yet and the next two races, 
Spa and Monza, will suit the championship leaders. Should Ferrari be able to 
nip ahead again, though, more wins are on the cards. Raikkonen, however, might 
have some concerns post-race. His seat is yet to be confirmed for next year 
amid rumours that Williams’ Valtteri Bottas is to take over, and Vettel had 
around two-tenths on him per lap.

F1: Sebastian Vettel capitalises on poor Mercedes start to win in Hungary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/26/ferrari-sebastian-vettel-wins-hungarian-grand-prix-mercedes-lewis-hamilton>
3. Fellowship of the ring is strong
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ffive-things-hungarian-grand-prix-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438005407508%2F68372b46-935e-42b3-a7db-a64f81e00841-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Hungarian%20Grand%20Prix%20%7C%20Giles%20Richards%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ffive-things-hungarian-grand-prix-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Hungarian%20Grand%20Prix%20%7C%20Giles%20Richards%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ffive-things-hungarian-grand-prix-formula-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438005407508%2F68372b46-935e-42b3-a7db-a64f81e00841-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Drivers gather on the grid to pay tribute to Jules Bianchi. Photograph: 
Tee/LAT/Rex Shutterstock 
As a tribute to Jules Bianchi F1 could not have asked for a better race. Not 
least after what had been an emotional week for the drivers, that so many were 
investing heart and soul in their sport wassomething the Frenchman would 
doubtless have appreciated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/26/sebastian-vettel-hungarian-grand-prix-jules-bianchi>
. As Daniel Ricciardo said: “I drove inspired today.” But equally inspiring was 
the way the sport honoured Bianchi before the start. F1 can be loud and it can 
be vulgar. The financial side of the sport sometimes overshadows the racing and 
the politicking between teams and drivers, while understandable – they are in 
competition, after all – can be unedifying. The wrangling between the sport’s 
owners and the FIA is often even worse. Then there is Bernie Ecclestone, who 
attracts the ire of fans like an Andy Warhol-shaped lightning rod. But fair 
play to him this weekend. He flewthe Bianchi family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/21/jules-bianchi-funeral-nice-lewis-hamilton>
 in to Hungary on a private jet and when the drivers stood with them, arms 
clasped round one another in a circle on the grid for the minute’s silence, it 
was F1 stripped of the negatives. Drivers together as one, as human beings, 
simply honouring their colleague. F1 has a lot of faults but it handled this 
well. And Bernie? He stood alone, unobtrusively to one side, facing away from 
the cameras, just another human being paying his respects.

4. Daniel Ricciardo is smiling again
 Daniel Ricciardo celebrates his third place for Red Bull. Photograph: Imago / 
Barcroft Media 
There is nothing quite as infectious as the Australian’s beaming grin and this 
weekend he found ample reason to treat us. He has been a little out of sorts 
this season, obviously unhappy with how uncompetitive the Renault engine 
powering his Red Bull has been but also because his chassis is not offering the 
same performance as last year. “I don’t think we really know what we need right 
now or where to find it,” he said after qualifying ninth in Montreal. “We are 
trying but we are not getting much in return.” Pressure for improved 
performances from his team-mate Daniil Kvyat, who took a career-best second in 
Hungary, will not have helped either but Ricciardo seems to have rediscovered 
real joy in racing these past few days. He started with a blinding spot of 
qualifying, splitting the two Ferraris in fourth, only three-hundredths of a 
second behind Vettel, and followed it with a corking race. Hewon at the 
Hungaroring last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/27/hungarian-grand-prix-result> 
passing Hamilton and Fernando Alonso in the final laps. He was revelling in 
being back in the mix at the circuit and at the end, on the quicker soft tyres, 
had a real shot at the win when he and Rosberg clashed at turn one. The new 
front wing he required scuppered his assault but it had been a joy to watch and 
“from the team’s side, it’s been our best weekend yet”, he noted, pearly whites 
gleaming.

F1: Hungarian Grand Prix – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jul/26/f1-hungarian-grand-prix-live-lewis-hamilton>
5. McLaren need to deliver at Spa
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ffive-things-hungarian-grand-prix-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438005770676%2F42a99a05-1e4d-4703-bc13-a71584573b14-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Hungarian%20Grand%20Prix%20%7C%20Giles%20Richards%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ffive-things-hungarian-grand-prix-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Hungarian%20Grand%20Prix%20%7C%20Giles%20Richards%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Ffive-things-hungarian-grand-prix-formula-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438005770676%2F42a99a05-1e4d-4703-bc13-a71584573b14-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Eric Boullier, McLaren’s racing director, shares his relief at his team’s 
improved performance with Yasuhisa Arai, head of motorsport at Honda. 
Photograph: Tee/LAT/Rex Shutterstock 
The team’s woeful season is well-documented and it has not made pleasant 
reading or viewing for many. Well, bar those who find Ron Dennis to be the 
optimal attractor of electrical storm-based activity for their anger. But for 
general fansthere is no pleasure to be had in such a great team struggling so 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/24/mclaren-honda-f1-fernando-alonso-jenson-button>
. Getting both cars to the finish in the points for the first time this season 
and closing the gap to Sauber in ninth place (a sentence Ron would doubtless 
have believed unthinkable until recently) to five points will be seen as a 
positive but reading too much into that would be premature. The track flattered 
their car and the thrills and spills up front were what largely contributed to 
Alonso’s fifth and Jenson Button’s ninth. Which Button acknowledged.

“It was a step forward but we need another step forward if we want to repeat 
this,” he said. “It is great for us to get points but there was a lot going on. 
It was a crazy race.” What is key for the team is the next round at Spa. Both 
the racing director, Eric Boullier, and Honda’s chief officer of motorsport, 
Yasuhisa Arai, insisted the team’s goal was performance over reliability. They 
bring their upgraded engine to Belgium and it needs to deliver at least 
something. Not least because Alonso was bemoaning the current state of F1 over 
the weekend and hinting he might fancy a change. “With no testing, with these 
tyres, with these limitations, with the calendar for next year, there is the 
temptation for other categories,” he said.
 