
For almost 20 years, I have maintained my own company 
<http://www.sarabaras.com/landing.html>. It has given me the freedom to show 
the world how I feel and to learn how I can best present my flamenco 
productions. I have been able to do shows both with and without narrative, and 
to develop the work with dance and music in a very positive way. I’ve had to 
take a lot of risks – if you run your own company, you can stray from the 
familiar path to present something new.

When I’m working on a new show, I begin on my own. Gradually I start to unify 
the music and the steps, and then involve the set, lighting and costume-design 
team. The whole process normally takes three or four months.Voces 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/flamenco-festival-london-ballet-flamenco-sara-baras/#>
, which is about some of the artists who have influenced me, and which I am 
bringing to London this month, was created in an unusually short time, with the 
whole team working together in the studio.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fsara-baras-flamenco-ballet-dancer-diaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48cbe918b0c916117f33a7c9728f3c88b5beb9fd%2F0_0_2880_2880%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flamenco%20superstar%20Sara%20Baras%3A%20'If%20you%20don%E2%80%99t%20feel%20it%2C%20you%20can%E2%80%99t%20do%20it'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fsara-baras-flamenco-ballet-dancer-diaries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flamenco%20superstar%20Sara%20Baras%3A%20%27If%20you%20don%E2%80%99t%20feel%20it%2C%20you%20can%E2%80%99t%20do%20it%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fsara-baras-flamenco-ballet-dancer-diaries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48cbe918b0c916117f33a7c9728f3c88b5beb9fd%2F0_0_2880_2880%2F2880.jpg>
 Sara Baras, centre: ‘Flamenco artists often have longer careers than other 
kinds of dancers’ Photograph: Santana de Yepes 
I do not have a typical day – it is different depending on whether the company 
is on tour, whether we are based at the theatre, or if I am involved in the 
creative process of a new production. If we are working at home in Barcelona, 
my son goes to school at 9am. The school is English-speaking, so I also do an 
hour’s English class each morning.

We have a good team, very organised – we have now been working together for 
around 20 years – so that makes it possible for me to give time to both work 
and family. Once my son is at school, all of the dancers come to the studio to 
work with a trainer on an hour of warm-up and strengthening exercises. Then we 
rehearse from 10am to 5pm. After that it’s time to pick up my son and go home. 
I might do an interview or some other work – then it’s bathtime, supper, and 
everybody is ready for bed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzmsQK0TFMOs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzmsQK0TFMOs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzmsQK0TFMOs&media=>
Flamenco <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/flamenco> is a way of life. It 
takes courage, but flamenco artists often have longer careers than other kinds 
of dancers. They learn to adapt themselves to a type of exercise that develops 
extra agility and vigour. Older flamenco dancers can perform with a strength 
that you will not find in other dance genres. But the most important thing in 
flamenco is passion. It is not about technique, but about emotion – if you 
don’t feel it, you can’t do it. It’s not just a physical expression – it must 
come from the heart.

 * Ballet Flamenco Sara Baras is at Sadler’s Wells, London, 16-20 February. 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/flamenco-festival-london-ballet-flamenco-sara-baras/>
 