
“Voyage au pays de Zingaro,” says a poster in the restaurant at the Zingaro 
theatre. “Journey to Zingaro country” – it’s a phrase that sums up perfectly a 
couple of days spent in the company of Bartabas the Furious and his troupe of 
dancing horses.

Chevaux must go on: behind the scenes at a French horse theatre – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2016/feb/10/french-horse-theatre-in-pictures-bartabas-equestre-zingaro-france>
Everything about Zingaro country is strange. It occupies a large site in 
Aubervilliers, to the north-east of Paris, where the equestrian choreographer 
was in effect gifted land next to a 19th-century fort to build his circular 
wooden theatre, complete with restaurant and stables. A 50-strong community of 
riders, musicians and staff live on the site in caravans.

They perform nightly throughout the winter, then tour in the spring and 
summer. Visitors do not so much watch a two-hour show as spend an evening in 
another land, imbibing some Gypsy spirit. The 700 seats in the arena are full 
the night I attend, with the young and the old to the fore.

Bartabas has never brought his show to the UK – the latest is called On Achève 
Bien les Anges <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xJeVIZ-vaLs> (rough 
translation: They Shoot Angels, Don’t They?). But when we talk in his caravan 
the morning after the performance, the Frenchman tells me he is in negotiations 
to bring it to the 2017 Edinburgh festival. It would be a perfect fit, though 
transporting 30 horses and 19 truckloads of equipment won’t be cheap.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fflamenco-on-the-hoof-bartabas-the-furious-and-his-dancing-horses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57762e95e067a10a878788aa973317995536c3a0%2F0_243_6827_4103%2F6827.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flamenco%20on%20the%20hoof%3A%20Bartabas%20the%20Furious%20and%20his%20dancing%20horses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fflamenco-on-the-hoof-bartabas-the-furious-and-his-dancing-horses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flamenco%20on%20the%20hoof%3A%20Bartabas%20the%20Furious%20and%20his%20dancing%20horses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fflamenco-on-the-hoof-bartabas-the-furious-and-his-dancing-horses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57762e95e067a10a878788aa973317995536c3a0%2F0_243_6827_4103%2F6827.jpg>
 ‘I have to know the horse perfectly. If they get tense, they can break 
everything in the theatre’ … a scene from Bartabas’s show On Achève Bien les 
Anges. Photograph: Hugo Marty 
For the moment, the UK is being offered a more intimate side of Bartabas: a 
show at Sadler’s Wells in London next month called Golgota, in which he 
appears, on horseback of course, alongside the celebrated Spanish flamenco 
dancerAndrés Marín <http://bit.ly/20uWGLt>, recreating the rituals of Seville’s 
Holy Week in an extraordinary series of tableaux inspired by the paintings of 
17th-century Spaniard Francisco de Zurbarán. It is strange, beautiful and 
highly dramatic; the coup of having four horses (and a donkey) on stage,
performing with remarkable precision 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eqAKBXXml_0>, is itself unsettling.

“I wanted to work with Andrés,” says Bartabas. “I was very interested in 
flamenco, and was waiting for the new generation to take it beyond the tourist 
image. Now they have. They’ve cleaned it and gone to the heart of flamenco – 
the rhythm and the expression.”

Five years ago, Bartabas visited Britain with The Centaur and the Animal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q07CLR5Q-8g>; this was a collaboration with Kô 
Murobushi <http://bit.ly/1QGlc9W>, the late master of butoh, the Japanese dance 
form that mixes extreme motion and stillness to evoke raw emotion. Quite how 
you teach this to horses is beyond me. Bartabas says such pairings challenge 
him, take him out of his comfort zone – not that he strikes you as someone who 
needs such a trigger. “He is very demanding,” says one of his assistants, “very 
exact in what he wants.”

There are certainly no cliches in Golgota. The stage is covered in crumb rubber
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crumb_rubber> – to replicate the soil the 
horses are used to – so get ready for a lot of silent flamenco. “Andrés is a 
very interesting dancer,” says Bartabas. “When I say I want you to dance on 
sand without shoes – for a flamenco dancer, that seems to be taking away half 
his possibilities – he accepts it. He says: ‘I want people tosee the rhythm, 
not hear it.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fflamenco-on-the-hoof-bartabas-the-furious-and-his-dancing-horses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92cfd7c905d7fe150010428a37b93916bd6c133c%2F1874_730_3748_4182%2F3748.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flamenco%20on%20the%20hoof%3A%20Bartabas%20the%20Furious%20and%20his%20dancing%20horses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fflamenco-on-the-hoof-bartabas-the-furious-and-his-dancing-horses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flamenco%20on%20the%20hoof%3A%20Bartabas%20the%20Furious%20and%20his%20dancing%20horses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fflamenco-on-the-hoof-bartabas-the-furious-and-his-dancing-horses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92cfd7c905d7fe150010428a37b93916bd6c133c%2F1874_730_3748_4182%2F3748.jpg>
 A scene from On Achève Bien les Anges. Photograph: Hugo Marty/PR Image 
Inspiration for a piece often starts with music. Tom Waits’s wonderfully weary 
songs <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c_OkcVLBB9A> are the soundtrack to the 
Angels show; for Golgota, the starting point was the great 16th-century Spanish 
composerTomás Luis de Victoria <http://bit.ly/1nqj2iF>, whose soaring sacred 
music underpinsthe performance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FzSQfRg1yQo>. 
“I don’t believe in God,” Bartabas says, “but I do believe humans need God. 
That’s why they create gods. The celebration of God was the first theatrical 
manifestation, so I constructed Golgota like a mass. I once made a Zingaro show 
withTibetan monks <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wBwaTZuDUkg>, because I was 
fascinated by the way they used sound to put you in a position of meditation.”

A Zingaro show, he says, is like a puzzle. “Each person in the audience makes 
their own story. Proust said it is the reader, not the writer, who makes the 
book. You have to let the performance be open to their imagination.”

Since Golgota was made for theatres rather than arenas, it poses new 
challenges. “I can only do it with very old horses,” says Bartabas, “because I 
have to know the horse perfectly. There is very little space in the theatre and 
I have to work on their breathing so they are relaxed. If they get tense, they 
can break everything in the theatre. Communication is more precise on stage, 
too – you have to trust the horse totally. You see many new details. When a 
horse moves its ears, you see it.”

Is this dance, theatre or circus? “That’s very difficult,” he says. “At 
Zingaro, we call it equestrian theatre. Golgota is more contemporary dance – 
but with horses.” Although horse-lovers will come to Sadler’s Wells, he warns 
them not to expect a conventional horse show. While there are elements of 
dressage, the equestrian skills are subservient to the artistic vision.

Bartabas, a very fit-looking 58, was born Clément Marty – he renamed himself 
Bartabas the Furious early in his performing career to signal his desire to 
live the life of the artist, though he has now mellowed sufficiently to let the 
Furious slide. His father was an architect and, despite an urban childhood 
spent close to Paris, he developed an early love of horses, skipped university, 
started performing at the age of 17, and soon had his own circus troupe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fflamenco-on-the-hoof-bartabas-the-furious-and-his-dancing-horses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8844a72d5b7bf0d467c7a5c2f7a724e73ae34a6d%2F0_76_1830_1099%2F1830.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flamenco%20on%20the%20hoof%3A%20Bartabas%20the%20Furious%20and%20his%20dancing%20horses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fflamenco-on-the-hoof-bartabas-the-furious-and-his-dancing-horses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flamenco%20on%20the%20hoof%3A%20Bartabas%20the%20Furious%20and%20his%20dancing%20horses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fflamenco-on-the-hoof-bartabas-the-furious-and-his-dancing-horses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8844a72d5b7bf0d467c7a5c2f7a724e73ae34a6d%2F0_76_1830_1099%2F1830.jpg>
 ‘This is like contemporary dance – but with horses’ … Golgota, the show 
Bartabas is bringing to Sadler’s Wells in London. Photograph: Nabil Boutros 
Within 10 years, those early experiments had evolved into Zingaro. “To do this 
kind of thing,” he says, “you have to live with the horses. But at the 
beginning, I didn’t realise Zingaro would be so intense artistically. The 
public said, ‘What is that? It’s not a circus, it’s not a theatre.’ And show by 
show, we found that more was possible. Fifteen years ago, I choreographed 
Stravinsky’s Le Sacre du Printemps. I never imagined I could do that.” It 
speaks volumes about Bartabas’s standing thatPierre Boulez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pierre-boulez>, the great composer and 
conductor who died last month, agreed to conduct the Orchestre de Paris inthree 
special performances 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2000/10/13/style/13iht-stevens.t_0.html>.

The Centaur and the Animal – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/mar/02/centaur-and-the-animal-review-bartabas>
Bartabas has had many offers to work elsewhere: he made two films in the 
1990s, and opera companies have also asked him to direct. But mostly he has 
resisted, even when US producers offered him pots of money to do a circus-style 
show in Las Vegas. “They thought this Frenchman must be very stupid to say no,” 
he says, but the show would have been too big, the audience too distant, the 
horses overworked. Five shows a week is his limit.

“My power is the company. If I start to go in another direction, I would lose 
my originality. Every artist has one special thing. My originality is this, so 
I have to take care of it and renounce other things. Through your uniqueness 
you find the universal.”

His identification with Zingaro also explains why he lives in a caravan – 
admittedly, one with a classic Chrysler sports car parked outside. “I have the 
money to have a house,” he says, “but I know I will never have a house. I have 
no time to take care of it. And the idea of taking the Métro or a taxi to work 
– no. I’m living in my work. That is very important. I can say I’ve never 
worked, because I live my passion. For me it is a miracle.” There was a Mrs 
Bartabas, but they have separated. When I get a tour, I see one of their two 
sons working out in the site’s makeshift gym.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fflamenco-on-the-hoof-bartabas-the-furious-and-his-dancing-horses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61720b799ae667f96de3053c93de52d89f9bce59%2F0_108_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Flamenco%20on%20the%20hoof%3A%20Bartabas%20the%20Furious%20and%20his%20dancing%20horses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fflamenco-on-the-hoof-bartabas-the-furious-and-his-dancing-horses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Flamenco%20on%20the%20hoof%3A%20Bartabas%20the%20Furious%20and%20his%20dancing%20horses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fflamenco-on-the-hoof-bartabas-the-furious-and-his-dancing-horses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61720b799ae667f96de3053c93de52d89f9bce59%2F0_108_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Bartabas at Sadler’s Wells in 2011. Photograph: Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images 
“I never buy a horse for a performance,” he adds. “I don’t say, ‘I want to do 
that, let’s find a horse to do it.’ The horses are there because I like them or 
they are cheap. They are part of the family.” The same applies to the people. 
An elderly man has attached himself to the enterprise, becoming part of life in 
Zingaro country. Dressed in a black Russian fur hat to keep out the winter 
cold, he sits by the door of the restaurant playing a barrel organ and grunting 
incomprehensibly as theatregoers arrive. Everyone has a role.

Another delightful touch is the lighting of a bonfire close to the theatre 
after each performance. Instead of hurrying away into the night, people linger, 
buy a glass of wine, watch the flames dance against the blackness of the sky. 
The old man playing the organ, the clowns and musicians who seat the audience, 
the late-night fire are all part of the performance. Bartabas has created a 
phantasmagoric world visitors are reluctant to leave. After communing with 
angels, descending into the Métro has little appeal.

• Golgota is at Sadler’s Wells 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/bartabas-golgota>, London EC1, 14-21 
March. On Achève Bien les Anges is at theZingaro Theatre Equestre 
<http://www.bartabas.fr/fr/reservations>, Paris, until 27 February, and at the 
Parc de Penfeld 
<http://www.penfeld.com/agenda/2016/1/237-on-acheve-bien-les-anges-elegies-bartabas-theatre-equestre-zingaro>
, Brest, 26 March to 24 April.
 