
Management wanted to put Myths and Legends of King Arthur and his Knights of 
the Round Table shows on at the Albert Hall. I wanted Wembley, but as there was 
this big ice show happening a week or so later, they told me it was impossible. 
I was fuming, so I told Melody Maker I was going to perform King Arthur, at 
Wembley, on ice! They made it a big story, so there was no going back.

I put in my own money, which gave me total control, and I wanted the best. The 
skaters were flown in from around the world. We put together a huge cast. I had 
a 45-piece orchestra, 48 singers in two choirs, 50 skaters, 50 knights, a 
seven-piece band, a narrator and heaven knows what else.

It was fun, but it wasn't without its problems. One night, as soon as I walked 
on, my cape got caught on one of the elevated keyboards, and I was left hanging 
in mid-air. I had to go off, dazed, trying to negotiate the ice. Then there was 
the dry ice, which was hard to control on that scale. On the first night, it 
was hovering nicely at knight level, then we noticed it rising. No one was able 
to turn the machines off, and by the end of 'Lady of the Lake', the dancing 
Guinevere had disappeared completely. So had the lower tier of the orchestra 
and the first tier of the auditorium. It was like looking out of an aeroplane 
window.

Then there was the night the knight committed suicide. In the final battle, 
there were 25 knights opposite each other, poised to simultaneously kill each 
other and disappear into dry ice. On the last night, one of the knights was 
ill. 'Doesn't matter,' I said. 'There are loads of knights.' But, of course, 
when we finished the piece, there was one knight looking around for someone to 
kill him. The conductor looked at me helplessly. But this guy was brilliant. He 
wandered aimlessly, then had a stroke of genius and committed suicide. Pure 
entertainment! OMM
 