
It’s unusual for the text of a theatrical monologue to be republished with the 
words “now a major TV series” stamped above the title, but Fleabag is a rare 
piece, andPhoebe Waller-Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/08/phoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-britains-lena-dunham>
, its 31-year-old writer-performer, has had a remarkable year.


Her filthily funny solo show about a young single woman who responds to two 
significant deaths with frequent insignificant sex wasperformed on the 
Edinburgh fringe three years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/21/fleabag-edinburgh-festival-2013-review>
 and has had several revival runs around the UK. This latestreturn to the Soho 
theatre in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/07/phoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-to-return-to-soho-theatre>
 celebrates the success this summer of a six-part TV expansion that was 
progressively promoted from BBC3 to BBC2 and then Amazon Prime.

 Fascinatingly complex character … Fleabag. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for 
the Guardian 
Returning to the theatre piece after seeing the TV series is like hearing the 
studio demo of a classic pop track, with the difference that Waller-Bridge has 
been able to go on perfecting the original take.

She sits on a high red stool, acting out a few days in the life of the titular 
character, her nickname never explained, two years motherless and recently 
become single and friendless as well. Fleabag’s sarcastic, posh-girl voice 
interacts with an exaggeratedly loud soundtrack (footsteps, animal squeaks, 
online porn orgasms) and recorded fragments representing characters such as an 
ex-boyfriend, a job interviewer and a dead friend, Boo, with whom she ran an 
insolvent cafe.

Fans of the TV show will marvel at how a single line in the theatre piece 
reveals the seed of a long sequence on screen: a high percentage of the three 
hours of TV is embryonically present in the 60 theatrical minutes.

But although television retained the connection between performer and viewer 
through the most daring use of direct address to camera sinceHouse of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards>, the live show brings 
the extra pleasure of watching Waller-Bridge’s skill at goading and controlling 
the audience. She deliberately kills big laughs with transgressive details that 
draw appalled gasps or groans.

Her physical and expressional versatility is even more impressive in the 
flesh, as she instantaneously creates charades of the conversational style of a 
boyfriend with a very small mouth, a guinea pig defecating, or the humiliating 
gymnastics of taking a vaginal selfie.

Related: Lyn Gardner's top 10 theatre of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/06/top-10-theatre-of-2016-lyn-gardner>

Waller-Bridge has always labelled Fleabag as a play rather than standup comedy 
(or, more aptly, standup tragedy) and, under the direction ofVicky Jones 
<http://www.unitedagents.co.uk/vicky-jones>, the categorisation is justified by 
the depth of characterisation. The work of another playwright-comedian,Victoria 
Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/29/ellie-taylor-on-victoria-wood-comedy-heroes>
, comes to mind in the combination of whipping one-liners – the small-gobbed 
guy is “telling me a story like he doesn’t want the words to get out” – and 
real emotional heft. The key lines are one spoken by Fleabag – “something to 
love” – and another addressed to her: “Are you crying?” Frightened of kindness, 
haunted by a betrayal that proved fatal, having turned sexual freedom into 
another kind of cage, the character is a fascinatingly complex creation.

Fans will hope for more Fleabag on stage and screen next year, by which time 
Waller-Bridge should have completed a vertiginous but deserved journey from 
Fringe First to Bafta TV awards.

 * At Soho theatre <http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/fleabag-2016/>, 
London, until 16 December. Box office: 020-7478 0100.
 