
The Fleetwood Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fleetwood-town> 
striker David Ball is in the running to win Fifa’s Puskás Award for the best 
goal of the year but faces stiff competition from Lionel Messi, Carlos Tevez 
and Carli Lloyd.

USA captain Carli Lloyd nominated for Fifa goal of the year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/06/carli-lloyed-fifa-goal-year> 
Ball’s chip against Preston <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jmpp9GYkVbg> 
during the 1-1 draw in March has been included as one of 10 nominees to claim 
the prestigious prize,which was won last year by James Rodríguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/12/james-rodriguez-stephanie-roche-puskas-goal-award>
.

“It’s great for that goal to even be put in the same bracket as the ones which 
have been shortlisted,” Ball told the Fleetwood website. “I’m absolutely 
delighted. I’m obviously shocked to have been shortlisted and it’s a great 
thing for Fleetwood Town and myself. The likes ofCarlos Tevez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/carlos-tevez> and Lionel Messi are people 
I love watching. To be in the same category as them is something I’ll cherish 
forever.

“I remember the initial thought process of the goal and just trying it. Those 
sort of goals either do come off or they don’t come off,” Ball added. “I 
remember the scenes with the fans after I’d scored and the feeling with the 
lads too. It was just unbelievable and especially given it was a derby game as 
well. I’d love anyone to tell a friend or anyone they know to vote for the 
goal. If the supporters could help me it’d be a great achievement for myself.”

Messi, who has yet to win the award, is nominated for his brilliant solo 
effort forBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> in the 
final of the Copa del Rey in May while Tevez makes the cut for his goal for 
Juventus against Parma in November 2014.

The USA midfielder Lloyd could also be rewarded for her hat-trick goal against 
Japan from the halfway linein the Women’s World Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/05/usa-womens-world-cup-champions-japan>
, while the Milan defender Philippe Mexes gets the nod for his acrobatic volley 
against Internazionale in a pre-season friendly.

Other nominees include Real Sociedad’s Gonzalo Castro, Roma’s Alessandro 
Florenzi andMarcel Ndjeng of SC Paderborn in a pre-season friendly against 
Bolton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/jul/14/paderborn-marcel-ndjeng-40-yard-volley-bolton-wanderers-video>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fpaderborn-marcel-ndjeng-40-yard-volley-bolton-wanderers-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436883459743%2FKP_354318_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paderborn's%20Marcel%20Ndjeng%20scores%20remarkable%20volley%20against%20Bolton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fpaderborn-marcel-ndjeng-40-yard-volley-bolton-wanderers-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paderborn%27s%20Marcel%20Ndjeng%20scores%20remarkable%20volley%20against%20Bolton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fpaderborn-marcel-ndjeng-40-yard-volley-bolton-wanderers-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436883459743%2FKP_354318_crop_640x480.jpg>
Marcel Ndjeng of SC Paderborn in a pre-season friendly against Bolton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/jul/14/paderborn-marcel-ndjeng-40-yard-volley-bolton-wanderers-video>
. 
The general public are invited to vote for their favourite goal via Fifa’s 
website <http://www.fifa.com/ballon-dor/puskas-award/index.html>, with the 
shortlist being whittled down to three by the end of November. The winner will 
be revealed on the day of the Ballon d’Or gala on 11 January, 2016.

Full list of nominees:

David Ball – 29.03.2015, Fleetwood Town v Preston North End, League One 
(England)

Gonzalo Castro – 12.04.2015, Real Sociedad v Deportivo de la Coruña, La Liga 
(Spain)

Alessandro Florenzi – 16.09.2015, Roma v Barcelona, Champions League

Wendell Lira – 11.03.2015, Atletico-GO v Goianesia, Campeonato Goiano (Brazil)

Carli Lloyd – 05.07.2015, USA v Japan, Women’s World Cup final

Lionel Messi <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi> – 30.05.2015, 
Barcelona v Athletic Bilbao, Copa del Rey (Spain)

Philippe Mexes – 25.07.2015, Milan v Internazionale, friendly

Marcel Ndjeng – 13.07.2015, SC Paderborn v Bolton Wanderers, friendly

Esteban Ramírez – 02.11.2014, Herediano v Deportivo Saprissa, Primera Division 
(Costa Rica)

Carlos Tevez – 09.11.2014, Juventus v Parma, Serie A (Italy)
 