
There was plenty of atmosphere at the Fylde coast version of Highbury Stadium 
and no shortage of fish puns, though in the end the minnows ofFleetwood Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fleetwood-town> were unable to provide an 
FA Cup upset and the Cod Army had to be content with giving their Championship 
neighbours a tough first half. The second half ran away from them and Matt 
Phillips cashed in with a hat-trick, though considering this was largely the 
Blackpool team that defeated Middlesbrough by three goals last week, Fleetwood 
were not unduly embarrassed.

"I was very proud of some of the football we played," the Fleetwood manager, 
Micky Mellon, said. "You wouldn't have said there were three divisions between 
the sides, though I must admit we don't see finishing of that class too often 
at this level.Blackpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> made 
around six or seven chances and took five of them. Their finishing was top 
drawer, quite clinical, and that was the difference."

Lomana LuaLua, formerly of Newcastle, scored the first-half goal that took the 
pressure off Blackpool, his surprising turn of pace marking him out as a former 
Premier League performer on a decent playing surface. Signed on a free, 
LuaLua's pace and control presented a threat the Fleetwood back four do not see 
every week, as did Phillips's power and eye for a chance.

Watched by Charlie Adam, as a reminder that most of the visiting team were 
Premier League performers last season, Blackpool survived a few meaty exchanges 
in the opening minutes to gradually pin Fleetwood back and ease into the lead 
midway through the first half when LuaLua fastened on to Angel Mart√≠nez's 
clever through-ball to beat Scott Davies with an early shot.

Fleetwood did their best to hit back, managing to play the rest of the first 
half in Blackpool's half and requiring Mark Howard to save well from Jamie 
Vardy and Andrew Mangan, though it took a good save at the other end from 
Davies to prevent the Championship side extending their lead on the stroke of 
the interval. Davies beat away the winger's shot, with Steve McNulty bravely 
getting in the way of Phillips's attempt at a follow-up.

If that was a reprieve for the home side it lasted only a couple of minutes 
once the second half got underway, until a rising shot from Phillips, from Rob 
Harris's pass, took a slight deflection to find its way into Davies's top-left 
corner. Vardy put the ball on to the roof of the Blackpool net as Fleetwood 
once again tried to hit back immediately, though coming back from two goals 
down was always going to be a tall order and it became three just before the 
hour mark when Tom Ince turned in Neal Eardley's cross from the left.

There was clearly no coming back from that, though Fleetwood kept going and 
Mangan almost pulled a goal back with a shot that flew just the wrong side of a 
post before the impressive Vardy gave the home crowd something to shout about 
with an emphatic finish after a moment of slackness in the Blackpool defence. 
That at least ensured the final 20 minutes would pass noisily instead of 
quietly, and getting on to the scoresheet put an extra spring into Fleetwood's 
step.

Another Vardy shot brought a diving save from Howard 17 minutes from time, 
though the striker could have been more unselfish when a LuaLua mistake left 
him a chance from a narrow angle. Any hope of a Fleetwood recovery was 
extinguished 13 minutes from the end with Phillips's second goal of the 
afternoon, the forward steering the ball into an unguarded net after LuaLua and 
Ince had used their pace to hit the home side on the break. Phillips completed 
his hat-trick with a toe poke past Davies four minutes later, just as the 
Blackpool fans were beginning to amuse themselves by lighting flares behind the 
same goal, possibly something of a first for the Percy Ronson Stand. Perhaps it 
was not quite the tie to light up this year's third round, but Ian Holloway was 
pleased to put it behind him.

"Thank God for our finishing," the Blackpool manager said. "That was as tough 
a game as we've had in months and as big a banana skin as I've ever had to deal 
with in my life. I'm glad it's over, to be honest, but I wish Fleetwood all the 
best. I've no doubt they will be in the league soon. If there are better teams 
in their division I would be amazed."
 