
Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> may 
have been largely ignored during the presidential election but it will be on 
the ballot on 8 November, with Florida voters deciding on a measure backed by 
large utilities that could effectively snuff out the solar industry in the 
state.

 The measure, known as amendment 1 
<https://ballotpedia.org/Florida_Solar_Energy_Subsidies_and_Personal_Solar_Use,_Amendment_1_(2016)>
, has been criticized as “fundamentally dishonest” for superficially appearing 
to be pro-solar. However, renewable energy experts warn that it would remove 
the incentive for homeowners to get rooftop solar panels, devastating the solar 
industry in America’s sunshine state.

 The amendment would change Florida’s constitution to give consumers the right 
to have solar panels installed. But it alsostates 
<https://smartsolarfl.org/the-solar-amendment/> that the government should 
“ensure that consumers who do not choose to install solar are not required to 
subsidize the costs of backup power and electric grid access to those who do”.

 A group called Consumers for Smart Solar <https://smartsolarfl.org/>, backed 
by more than $20m in campaign funding by Florida’s large energy utilities, has 
put forward the measure, ostensibly to protect Florida residents from rip-offs. 
But critics contend that the proposal would lead the way to solar panel owners 
facing fees or a reduced price for the excess energy they put back into the 
grid, known as net metering.

The Tea Party leader taking a stand for solar energy: 'I will do what's right'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/06/debbie-dooley-tea-party-solar-energy-florida-environment>
“The utilities have been fundamentally dishonest, their behavior is incredibly 
cynical,” said David Pomerantz, executive director of pro-renewables group 
Energy and Policy Institute. “It has confused quite a few voters and that was 
by design. The large electric utilities inFlorida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida> feel extraordinarily threatened 
by customer-owned solar. Instead of trying to adapt to it, they want to kill 
rooftop solar in the cradle.”

 Pomerantz said the measure would be a major blow to a solar industry that is 
already “stunted” in Florida. Fewer than 20,000 Floridian homes have solar 
panels, despite its enormous potential for solar energy, compared with 
Massachusetts, a north-east state with a quarter of the population, which has 
163,000 homes with solar panels.

 The dismantling of net metering, one of the few incentives to get solar in 
Florida, could have a similar outcome as that seen in Nevada, where increased 
charges and reduced net metering credits saw leading solar panel installer 
SolarCity pull out of the state.

 Environmentalists have rounded on the Florida measure, with former 
vice-president Al Gore accusing the utilities of “trying to fool you” into 
killing off the solar industry. A court challenge to stop the measure was 
defeated in the Florida supreme court but Justice Barbara Pariente, in dissent, 
called the amendment a “wolf in sheep’s clothing” and an attempt to 
“constitutionalize the status quo”.

 Polling has shown strong support for amendment 1, although support has 
recently plummeted 
<http://polls.saintleo.edu/proposed-florida-constitutional-amendment-on-solar-power-facing-a-changed-landscape-among-voters-new-saint-leo-poll-finds/>
 to close to the 60% threshold needed for the proposition to pass. The drop in 
support followed theMiami Herald’s release in October 
<http://www.miamiherald.com/news/politics-government/election/article109017387.html>
 of an audio recording by Sal Nuzzo, vice-president of free market group James 
Madison Institute.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt5rc3fwJn40&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt5rc3fwJn40>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt5rc3fwJn40&media=>
 Al Gore speaks out against amendment 1 during a Hillary Clinton campaign rally 
in Florida. 
 Nuzzo told an industry conference that amendment 1 was an “incredibly savvy 
maneuver” and “political jiujitsu” that would “completely negate anything 
(pro-solar groups) would try to do legislatively or constitutionally down the 
road”.

 Consumers for Smart Solar, the utilities-backed group, has denied any 
connection to the Hames Madison Institute and insisted that the amendment would 
protect consumers from scams and from subsidizing solar companies from outside 
Florida.

 “Amendment 1 is good for the environment, it is good for consumers and it is 
good for Florida,” said Dick Batchelor, co-chair of Consumers for Smart Solar.

“However, in looking at ways to increase the amount of our energy that comes 
from the sun, it is essential that we do so in a way that safeguards consumers 
– particularly our seniors – with commonsense consumer protection rules that 
benefit every consumer, and that we have all come to expect.”

 The Florida solar measure isn’t the only climate-related item voters will 
decide on on Tuesday. Voters in Washington will decide whether the state will 
be the first in the US to introduce a carbon tax on emissions.

 The measure, called I-732 <http://yeson732.org/>, would place a $25-per-ton 
fee on carbon dioxide emissions from 2018, rising gradually over the course of 
40 years to $100. It will aim to be revenue neutral, however, because 
Washington’s sales tax will be cut by 1% and further tax rebated will be given 
to manufacturers and low-income households.

 The vote has split environment groups, some of which supported an alternative 
that would have raised money to be funneled into clean energy projects. The 
Sierra Club has said it doesn’t support I-732 because it “does not include all 
that is needed for an equitable climate policy and just transition to a clean 
energy economy”, in particular by failing to support communities of color and 
low income.

The projections put forward by Carbon Washington, the grassroots group behind 
the measure, have also been questioned. An analysis by the Washington Office of 
Financial Management found that the measure will cut the state’s revenueby $200m
 
<http://www.spokesman.com/stories/2016/oct/03/nations-first-carbon-tax-on-the-ballot-in-washingt/>
 a year.

However, the measure does retain some notable support 
<http://grist.org/election-2016/james-hansen-vs-naomi-klein-state-carbon-tax-splits-national-climate-hawks/?utm_campaign=daily-static&utm_medium=email&utm_source=edit-daily>
, including former Nasa scientist James Hansen, actor Leonardo DiCaprio and 
Steven Chu, former secretary of energy under Barack Obama. Anopen letter penned 
by 51 climate scientists 
<http://scientistsfor732.blogspot.com/2016/10/open-letter-on-i-732-from-climate.html>
 also backs I-732.

“This revenue neutral measure offers the most progressive change in our tax 
code in decades and represents a bipartisan effort that rejects ideology,” the 
letter states.

“While many interrelated social and environmental needs demand our attention, 
complex problems are best solved one step at a time. I-732 is a simple step in 
the right direction.”
 