
The Mill is perfectly positioned to profit handsomely in this post-facts era – 
and if you don’t agree, you’re just wrong – so it was with a start that we 
awoke to discover that Manchester Unitedchose a good night to bury their ... 
umm ... good news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-united-sign-paul-pogba-93-million-juventus>
 and confirmedeverything we have ever posited on these pages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/30/football-transfer-rumour-mill-manchester-city-pep-guardiola-united-chelsea-arsenal-paul-pogba>
 about their new charge.

Where does that leave us? It probably leaves us goggle-eyed over the future of 
Mauro Icardi, the most obvious remaining candidate to move for Silly Money 
after a tortuous saga over the next three weeks.Arsenal have been the 
Internazionale forward’s most committed suitors and still appear to seeOlivier 
Giroudas bait, but the wildly gesticulating, healthily coiffured figure you see 
galloping over the horizon in last-ditch pursuit is Antonio Conte withChelsea 
scheming over a £50m bid to ruin the Gunners’ summer and make themselves feel 
better after failing to landRomelu Lukaku.

Crystal Palace reject Everton’s £18m bid for Yannick Bolasie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/08/crystal-palace-everton-yannick-bolasie-reject-bid>
Not that Arsenal should put cart before Conte-saddled horse. They need a 
defender and they need one pronto, so who can they get through the door before 
this weekend? Valencia’sShkodran Mustafi remains the top pick but close behind, 
naturally, is West Brom’sJonny Evans. And they could even sign both if Gabriel 
joins Per Mertesacker on their trusty long-term-crocked list. One centre-back 
they probably won’t be signing is Benfica’sVictor Lindelof – and, whether or not
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> are interested, they’ll 
again haveChelsea to blame for that.

Who did Anderson Talisca dream of playing for when he was a boy? Wolves, duh, 
and the mere mention of Stan Cullis, Billy Wright or Steve Bull is enough to 
induce in the Benfica midfielder a deep, nostalgic reverie. In which division 
did Talisca always dream of playing? The Championship, duh, and it looks as if 
all his wishes might be coming true at once. Not for Talisca the allure of
Liverpool; he is nearing a £20m move to his spiritual home in the Black Country 
and for this he must thank Wolves’ new owners, Fosun, and their pal Jorge 
Mendes, who presumably intends Talisca to stay there a very long time. It’s not 
as if you couldn’t smell Mendes a mile off here, but don’t be put off – just 
lose yourself in the romance of it all.

Every nation now has its own Jamie Vardy – even England – and Leicester are 
about to treat themselves to the Spanish one. Deportivo’sLucas Pérez, scorer of 
17 La Liga goals last season after a mixed previous career that included spells 
in Ukraine and Greece, has been likened to the Foxes’ hot-shot and is tipped to 
be joining him at the King Power imminently.

Samir Nasri has no future at Manchester City, so the tale goes, after Pep 
Guardiola became unimpressed with his attitude. Smells like a move to, say, 
Turkey as far as the Mill is concerned – a prospect thatChristian Benteke might 
face ifBesiktas can meet Liverpool’s asking price, which currently looks pretty 
unlikely. One should, at this point, mention in passing thatChievo would like 
to RescueMario Balotelli From His Liverpool Nightmare; you’d expect the striker 
to get a move soon, buthis agent has been slightly busy lately 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/22/paul-pogba-mino-raiola-record-breaking-transfers>
.

As a newspaper close to your heart reported on Monday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/08/crystal-palace-everton-yannick-bolasie-reject-bid>
,Everton want Yannick Bolasie but will have to go some with their next offer. 
The Toffees haven’t given up on signingAshley Williams in the meantime, 
although Swanseamight not be keen to see another key player leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/08/west-ham-andre-ayew-swansea-record-signing>
.

And another knockback for Everton: they won’t be signing the Zenit St 
Petersburg and Belgium midfielderAxel Witsel, who can’t like Merseyside all 
that much because he’s rejectedLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> too – all in favour of 
replacing Paul Pogba atJuventus. As long as Pogba is involved somewhere, we’ll 
claw our way through to the end of August.



 