
The Mill just cannot work in these conditions. First we hear that West Ham 
United have told Chelsea that Dimitri Payet is not for sale at any price and 
then we hear thatLyon have told West Ham United that Alexandre Lacazette is not 
for sale at any any price after the east London club made a renewed bid of 
£32m. And all that after Romelu Lukaku effectively pledged his allegiance to 
Everton by turning in aperformance against Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/belgium-italy-euro-2016-match-report>
 that ensures no one will be buying him this summer.

Much more of this and the Mill be reduced to making up deals. Oh, by the way, 
Paris Saint-Germain are looking for a top manager to take them to the next 
level, so are hoping to open talks with Roy Hodgson or Marc Wilmots after the 
Euros. Gah, saw through that one, didn’t you? In fact, PSG have reportedly 
already begun nattering to Unai Emery.

Meanwhile, Chelsea’s new boss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/04/chelsea-antonio-conte-new-manager-three-year-deal>
,Antonio Conte, has got his people into chat overdrive: they’re sweet-talking 
Lyon in an effort to persuade the club to sellSamuel Umtiti to Chelsea, 
although that plot is being complicated by sweet counter-chat fromBarcelona. 
Conte is also thinking of getting his people to have a word with Manchester 
United aboutMatteo Darmian because the current Italy manager would never dream 
of approaching the Italy defender directly while they spend this month 
together. Rule are rules and Chelsea are sticklers for them.

Aymeric Laporte, a Manchester City target, to stay with Athletic Bilbao
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/manchester-city-athletic-bilbao-aymeric-laporte>
Borussia Dortmund <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> are 
threatening to blockPierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s mooted move to Manchester City 
if the English club bid for the FC Ufa midfielder Oleksandr Zinchenko, who is 
also a Dortmund target. And if Dortmund do land Zinchenko they could be willing 
to listen to offers forHenrikh Mkhitaryan: Arsenal are preparing to pipe up. 
Arsenal could have an extra £25m to spend if stories are true aboutLiverpool 
being willing to spend that much onTheo Walcott.

In a further blow to City, Aymeric Laporte is about to snub them and sign a 
new deal with Athletic Bilbao.

Leicester City have offered Riyad Mahrez a bumper new contract in the hope 
that he will snub everyone, too. Similarly,Napoli are offering to jack up 
Gonzalo Higuaín’s wages to convince him to resist all suitors. That could spell 
blues for Liverpool. But it is not expected to have any ramification for João 
Carlos Teixeira’s proposed switch to Porto.

Finally, West Ham are close to landing Sofiane Feghouli, whose contract at 
Valencia has expired.
 