
“I’ve said many times before we are working very hard still to get one or two 
more players in,” said Arsène Wenger afterhis side’s 4-3 home humbling by 
Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/14/arsenal-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 on Sunday, and there is some evidence that they might even succeed: Lyon’s
Alexandre Lacazette, a long-term target, has indicated that he will accept a 
big-money move to the Premier League, wowing viewers of Canal+ after his 
hat-trick against Nancy in Ligue 1’s opening weekend by coming to the 
logically-robust conclusion that “if offers come in that I cannot refuse, I 
don’t want to refuse them”. As exclusivelyrevealed by the Mill back in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/11/football-transfer-rumours-arsenal-to-splash-24m-on-granit-xhaka>
, Arsenal are also interested in the Juventus midfielderMario Lemina – he still 
belonged to Marseille then, mind – but a rumoured bid of €16m isn’t going to 
cut much mustard here, with theBianconeri expecting at least €4m more and 
Schalke also keen.

Premier League: 10 talking points from the weekend's action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/15/premier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-weekends-action>
Quique Sánchez Flores’s cunning ruse of buying Spanish footballers while at 
Watford, coaxing them to a string of terrible performances and then signing 
them for a song after getting the boot by the Hornets and moving back to his 
homeland continues to bear fruit – having already snapped up José Manuel Jurado 
for his new employers,Espanyol <https://www.theguardian.com/football/espanyol>, 
he’s apparently about to raid Hertfordshire once again, this time forMario 
Suárez – signed from Fiorentina for £4m in January and now, we’re told, 
available on a free.

Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> have been repeatedly 
linked with Internazionale’sMarcelo Brozovic of late, and the good news for 
them is that it looks like the Croatia midfielder could indeed be on his way. 
The bad news is, Inter’s Erick Thohir has stipulated that he can go anywhere 
but to Turin; Chelsea are considered a potential alternative destination. On 
his way into Inter, meanwhile, is Wolfsburg’s Luiz Gustavo, while on his way 
out of Turin is the centre-backNikola Maksimovic, whose relationship with the 
Torino manager, Sinisa Mihajlovic, appears to have broken down to such a comic 
extent that he has now fled training and returned to his native Serbia, to 
await a potential transfer to either Napoli or – them again – Chelsea. “He has 
shown a lack of respect towards the club that pays him,” roared Mihajlovic at 
this development. “He must accept responsibility for his actions and the club 
must take a hard line with him.”

The Dozen: the weekend's best Premier League photos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/aug/14/the-dozen-the-weekends-best-premier-league-photos>
Also in Italy, Sassuolo have turned down the chance to end Mario Balotelli’s 
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> misery, or 
Liverpool’s Mario Balotelli misery, whichever.

Blackburn are considering a big move for 6ft 7in Abdoul Ba, the Lens 
centre-back. Big only in terms of the size of the player involved – the Sun 
predict it will be “a bargain deal”.Bristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> are also after a 
centre-half, but their chosen target isn’t so much tall as Long – Kevin Long, 
who is on his way from Burnley for a cool half mill. Meanwhile Newcastle’s Paul 
Dummett, about whose name or height there is no obvious pun, is being chased by 
Burnley, Crystal Palace and West Brom.Wigan, too, are going shopping, eyeing up 
the Bolton striker Craig Davies and the QPR midfielder James Perch, who only 
left the DW Stadium last summer after a two-year stint.
 