
Three of Oxford’s six mascots named Chris Maguire as their favourite United 
player. After the 2-0 defeat of Swindon at the Kassam Stadium he was everyone’s 
favourite. He scored both goals, the first on half-time, the second just beyond 
the hour, to extend his side’s run of victories over their fiercest rivals to 
six, stretching back to 2002. It was their first meeting inLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>.

This was a real old-fashioned derby, kicking off at 3pm, red meat to follow the
nibbles in Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/celtic-rangers-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 andhors d’oeuvre in Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/manchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
. TV tinkering trivialises the games it tries to promote, denying fans 
travelling to their own games the chance to watch the so-called big ones live.

Michael Appleton, Oxford’s head coach, said beforehand: “This is as intense a 
derby as any in football in this country. When I came here [two years ago] 
people kept saying: ‘Just make sure you beatSwindon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swindon>.’ They weren’t even in our 
division! After the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy [a year ago, also 2-0] I get it.” 
That match might have been for a paint-stripping trophy. Saturday’s lived up to 
it.

Martin Ling earns relief for Swindon but pretty football is grounded
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2015/nov/15/martin-ling-swindon-scunthorpe-league-one>
“We know it’ll be 100mph,” John Lundstram, his captain, had said. “Hopefully 
we can get that first pass out on the turnover. If we have that, with the pace 
and talent we have up top we can cause problems.” He was right and no small 
contributor himself. Swindon’s 3-1-4-2 was overrun by Oxford’s 4-2-3-1, 
particularly by the injections of pace from all five of those in midfield.

One such burst on the left before the half-hour by Marvin Johnson, a 
deadline-day signing from Motherwell, gave Maguire a chance to test Lawrence 
Vigouroux in Swindon’s goal, who tipped it over. And in the next move Maguire’s 
run set up Lundstram. Swindon were chasing shadows.

Finally Liam Sercombe surged through on the left and veered to the centre, 
virtually along the line of the penalty area. When Swindon’s captain, Nathan 
Thompson, stalwart in defence, nipped the threat in the bud, the only argument 
was whether it was in the area. Stuart Attwell, a Premier League referee, 
followed Swindon’s players to the linesman and Andrew Fox, in front of the 
1,190 away fans, confirmed it. Maguire’s conversion needed to be as hard, high 
and precise as it was to beat Vigouroux’s dive. In a few moments Fox could 
enjoy the respite of the interval.

In the second half Simon Eastwood, in Oxford’s goal, at least saw action, 
twice solid in blocking, once elastic to his right, but the only danger to 
Oxford was their own loss of concentration rather than Swindon’s 10 men. They 
still had 11 – before Lloyd Jones saw his second yellow for a second foul – 
when Vigouroux, charging out to make a backpass look good, hacked the ball 
against Maguire and saw it fly past him into goal. Maguire came via Rotherham 
last season. Joe Rothwell, the fifth midfielder, has joined since from 
Manchester United.

Later, when Johnson broke clear, Maguire was screaming for a squared hat-trick 
pass but his team-mate shot into the side-netting. There was still time for 
Vigouroux, earlier booked for protesting, to be sent off for retaliating on 
Alex MacDonald after a 50-50 challenge comparableto Claudio Bravo’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/10/pep-guardiola-claudio-bravo-horror-show-manchester-city-united>
 and Wayne Rooney’s at Old Trafford.

The penalty was an obvious talking point but Luke Williams, who in December 
became Swindon’s fourth manager of last season, was more upset about his side’s 
performance and the “gut-wrenching” result. “We needed to dominate the ball 
more,” he said.

Both managers are first and foremost coaches and Appleton, on this day at 
least, looked ahead of Williams in shaping his team in his own dynamic midfield 
image. “The way the players went about it they deserved a bit of luck and maybe 
we got it,” he said. “We made the opposition do things they didn’t want to do. 
I’ll be surprised if many teams keep better discipline than us this season.”

He has an easy relationship with Darryl Eales, the owner and now 84% 
shareholder, who before joining fans for a pre-match drink urged respect for 
their noisome neighbours (not his words) while lamenting the extent to which 
special police measures reduced the financial benefit of a capacity crowd. 
Considering Oxford’s promotion back to League Two in 2010 was seen by 33,000 
U’s supporters, it is maddening to have a car park, still in the grip of Firoz 
Kassam, rather than a stand at one end. But the visit of Swindon (the non-U’s?) 
proved sweet for unveiling their new scoreboard.

 * The picture on this article was changed on 12 September 2016, due to 
incorrect captioning by an agency, and a now unnecessary directional was 
removed on 14 September 2016. 
Talking Points


• Garry Monk was entitled to his indignation after Leeds United lost 1-0 at 
home to Huddersfield in the Championship. It was not just that a freakishly 
fine long-distance goal by Aaron Mooy decided the match – the sort that hits a 
side when it is down. It was worse than that. Mooy, as Huddersfield’s manager, 
David Wagner, agreed, was fortunate still to be on the pitch after a challenge 
on Liam Bridcutt. Nor is the referee shy to show the red. In his three other 
games Roger East had sent off Watford’s Ben Watson for hauling down 
Southampton’s Shane Long when clear on goal. Maybe it is simply that Leeds’ 
owner, Massimo Cellino, is beyond any rub of the green. Monk might have thought 
of that before accepting the poisoned chalice.

• Where has it all gone wrong for Owen Coyle? In 2009, in his first job in 
English management, he took Burnley into the Premier League, their first spell 
in the top tier since 1976. He subsequently kept Bolton there for two seasons 
before they went down in 18th place. Wigan gave him half a season in 2013, 
after Roberto Martínez took them down to the Championship while winning the FA 
Cup. And now he is back – with Blackburn – propping up the Championship with 
two points from six games and after Saturday’s draw at QPR possibly whistling 
in the dark with remarks such as “we came here with everyone writing us off and 
we’ve taken a point when it should have been three. There we so many positives 
and so many pluses.” On Tuesday they go to Leeds (two places and two points 
better off). It looks like a battle of unexpected losers.

• On Saturday morning Scunthorpe had three of the top 13 goalscorers in League 
One – Josh Morris 5, Tom Hopper and Kevin van Veen 3 each – and they proceeded 
to put four past Southend. Morris, supposedly a midfielder, and the Dutchman 
Van Veen got another one each and Paddy Madden, scorer of 23 last season, got 
off the mark in what was only his third game of the season. Shrewsbury, their 
hosts on Saturday, had better be warned.

• While Northampton, Oxford, Bristol Rovers and AFC Wimbledon, promoted from 
League Two in May, have distributed themselves in that order through League 
One, three of the sides who went the other way, Doncaster, Colchester and 
Crewe, have quickly taken up three of the four play-off positions in League 
Two, with only Blackpool lagging in mid-table. Mangers at any level are wont to 
say “There are no easy games in this division.” Perhaps there are some if a 
club sinks low enough.

• Portsmouth, second in League Two, had a crowd of 16,262 for their 4-2 
victory over Wycombe. This beat everything in League One, where only Bolton 
(12,727) and Oxford (11,042) reached five figures, and three games in the 
Championship, where Rotherham managed 8,559 against Bristol City, Preston and 
Barnsley were watched by 11,852 and QPR v Blackburn drew 13,210. Crowds are 
supposed to be a 12th man. Pompey were in the Premier League seven seasons ago. 
What does it say about their team that they have spent the past three seasons 
failing to get out of League Two?
 