
Championship

• Huddersfield are the division’s new leaders but left it late to beat Barnsley
 2-1 as Jonathan Hogg fired an injury-time winner. They are the only team to 
win three matches, and sit two points clear. David Wagner, who was the best man 
at Jürgen Klopp’s wedding, will enjoy his Sunday more than the Liverpool 
manager.

• Walter Zenga’s Wolves are among that pack after an impressive 3-1 derby win 
atBirmingham. Joe Mason curled in an equaliser for the visitors before Danny 
Batth and Jon Bodvarsson sealed all three points. Later,Derby and Aston Villa 
played out a teatime goalless draw in a far less exciting Midlands clash.

Ten of the best non-Premier League family friendly football clubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/19/ten-of-the-best-non-premier-league-family-friendly-football-clubs>
• Fulham and Brighton are still unbeaten after both teams were involved in 2-2 
draws. Brighton were pegged back atReading, while Kevin McDonald earned Fulham 
a late point at home againstCardiff. A few miles away at Loftus Road, Preston 
pulled off the surprise result of the day, beatingQPR 2-0 to earn their first 
points of the season.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-wolves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36c29024dfc1e59924ce7181a022731f6957c621%2F0_42_2020_1212%2F2020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Wolves%20join%20chasing%20pack%20as%20Huddersfield%20go%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-wolves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Wolves%20join%20chasing%20pack%20as%20Huddersfield%20go%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-wolves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36c29024dfc1e59924ce7181a022731f6957c621%2F0_42_2020_1212%2F2020.jpg>
 Jermaine Beckford celebrates Preston’s second goal at Loftus Road. Photograph: 
Ashley Western/CameraSport via Getty Images 
• Blackburn stay bottom after a 2-2 home draw with Burton. Rovers twice took 
the lead, with Craig Conway’s long-range strike opening the scoring, but Burton 
fought back and are now the division’s top scorers. Fellow entertainers
Nottingham Forest edged Wigan in a seven-goal thriller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/nottingham-forest-wigan-athletic-championship-match-report>
 at the City Ground – Forest’s four games have seen 18 goals.

• Newcastle avoided drama this weekend, with Dwight Gayle’s well-taken goal 
enough for a routine 1-0 victory atBristol City. Rotherham won by the same 
scoreline at home toBrentford – Danny Ward’s goal moving them level with 
neighboursSheffield Wednesday, who suffered a 2-0 derby defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/sheffield-wednesday-leeds-united-championship-match-report>
 at home toLeeds.

League One

• Bolton stay top but were made to work hard for a 2-1 home win by Fleetwood, 
who led at half-time. Gary Madine and Josh Vela scored the goals to maintain 
Wanderers’ 100% record.Charlton, who dropped out of the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> with Bolton, won 2-1 at 
Walsall to move into the top six.

The best goals of the week: David Villa, Will Grigg and Nick Powell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/16/best-goals-week-david-villa-will-grigg-nick-powell>
• Scunthorpe are second after thrashing Gillingham 5-0 at Glanford Park to 
take their goal tally to 12 – three per game. Brad Barry – nephew of Gareth – 
scored the only goal asSwindon beat Port Vale, and Oldham won at Bury by the 
same score.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-wolves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F419404ebe70a6a400d6699802c8cbb8399733689%2F159_0_2482_1489%2F2482.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Wolves%20join%20chasing%20pack%20as%20Huddersfield%20go%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-wolves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Wolves%20join%20chasing%20pack%20as%20Huddersfield%20go%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-wolves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F419404ebe70a6a400d6699802c8cbb8399733689%2F159_0_2482_1489%2F2482.jpg>
 Gary Madine scores the equaliser for Bolton against Fleetwood at the Macron 
Stadium. Photograph: Chris Vaughan/CameraSport via Getty Images 
• Chris Wilder’s difficult start at Sheffield United goes on; the Blades are 
bottom after Steve Morison’s late penalty condemned them to a 2-1 defeat at
Millwall. Wilder’s former side, Northampton, drew 0-0 at home with Wimbledon, 
allowing the Dons to overtake his current club.

• Rochdale and Coventry have also dropped into the bottom four. Dale lost to a 
late Scott Wootton header atMK Dons, while the Sky Blues collapsed at 
third-placedBradford, conceding three goals – two of them penalties – and 
having Jordan Turnbull sent off in a 10-minute second-half spell.

• Shrewsbury earned their first win of the season, with Adam El-Abd’s late 
winner grabbing a 2-1 home win overChesterfield. Oxford also won 2-1 at home 
through Chris Maguire’s injury-time penalty againstPeterborough. At Roots Hall, 
Simon Cox’s late penalty earnedSouthend a 1-1 draw against Bristol Rovers.

League Two

• Perhaps the league table does lie this early in the season –the top four at 
the start of play all failed to win, withLuton crashing to a late defeat at 
their hitherto winless neighbours,Stevenage. Colchester lost to Portsmouth at 
Fratton Park,Crawley played out a draw with Barnet, and Mansfield were undone 
by a Graham Carey double atPlymouth.

• That left the door open for Morecambe, who vaulted to the top of the table 
with victory atYeovil; Kevin Ellison scored the only goal. Doncaster also won 
away by the odd goal, atCheltenham, while Leyton Orient took all three points at
Grimsby, another promoted side. Liam Kelly and Ollie Palmer got the goals as 
Orient climbed to fourth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-wolves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a4e6f6da08b04bc871a6fd10a165e7398e403b5%2F0_116_4568_2741%2F4568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Wolves%20join%20chasing%20pack%20as%20Huddersfield%20go%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-wolves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Wolves%20join%20chasing%20pack%20as%20Huddersfield%20go%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-wolves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a4e6f6da08b04bc871a6fd10a165e7398e403b5%2F0_116_4568_2741%2F4568.jpg>
 Blackpool’s Brad Potts and Wycombe’s Dan Rowe in action at a 
sparsely-populated Bloomfield Road. Photograph: CameraSport - Stephen White 
• Exeter began the day at the bottom, but fans were rewarded for travelling to 
Accrington as they won 2-1, Jake Taylor scoring the winner. Jon Stead’s goal at 
Hartlepool earned Notts County their first win of the season, leaving Cambridge 
propping up the rest after a 2-2 draw withCarlisle.

• Chelsea loanee Alex Kiwomya scored his third goal of the season as Crewe 
earned a draw atNewport, while at Bloomfield Road, Blackpool v Wycombe finished 
goalless.
 