
Despite being Wiganised to within an inch of his professional life by Roberto 
Martínez, who seemed determined to turn him into the star of a bloopers show 
narrated by Chris Kamara,John Stones remains an object of attraction for Chelsea
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> and both Manchester clubs. Not 
put off by the young defender’s erratic performances all season, the three of 
them all have their beady eyes on Stones, while Everton want him to stay put. 
Perhaps Everton can disguise Tony Hibbert as Stones and send him off to 
Stamford Bridge.

Manchester City want Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang but will have to pay £55m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/07/pierre-emerick-aubameyang-manchester-city-borussia-dortmund-transfer>
In a surprising development, José Mourinho doesn’t seem to think that Daley 
Blind has a place in Manchester United’s defence. But his distribution is so 
good! And he has such lovely hair! And he seems like such a nice young man! 
José? He’s not listening. Instead he’s closing in on the£30m signing of 
Villarreal defenderEric “Gary” Bailly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/07/eric-bailly-sign-manchester-united-villarreal-jose-mourinho>
.

United are also sniffing around Roma midfielder Miralem Pjanic. But not to be 
outdone, Manchester City have wrapped up the Premier League title already. 
They’re busy raiding Borussia Dortmund again and are close to signing£55m goal 
machinePierre-Emerick Aubameyang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/07/pierre-emerick-aubameyang-manchester-city-borussia-dortmund-transfer>
, who will represent something of an upgrade onWilfried Bony. There’s a home 
for Big Wilf in China.

Liverpool want a Southampton player. Is this news? They’re willing to pay £30m 
forSadio Mané, it says here. Southampton, meanwhile, will tell Graziano Pellè 
to do one if he rejects their offer of a new contract.

West Ham United and Sunderland want Nice full-back Jérémy Pied, whose name 
would be funny if that was an ‘s’ instead of a ‘d’. But it’s not, so it’s not.

Everton land Ronald Koeman after £5m fee is agreed with Southampton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/07/everton-manager-ronald-koeman-5m-compensation-southampton>
Tottenham Hotspur are going to provide Mauricio Pochettino with some back-up 
for Harry Kane at last. AZ Alkmaar strikerVincent Janssen is theirs for £12m.

Antonio Conte has had one look at on YouTube at Baba Rahman’s 2015/16 
highlights and, after going for a long lie-down in a dark room, decided that he 
wants to sign Juventus wing-backKwadwo Asamoah for £15m. Hibernian are gearing 
up for their games against Rangers by preparing to appointNeil Lennon as their 
new manager.

Arsenal are going to offer Héctor Bellerín a new contract in an attempt to 
fend off Barcelona’s interest. Aye, that’ll do it. If it makes them feel any 
better, Newcastle United’s relegated midfielderMoussa Sissoko has his heart set 
on joining Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/07/moussa-sissoko-wants-transfer-away-from-newcastle-relegation-arsenal>
.
 