
Championship

 * It was never supposed to be like this, but Huddersfield Town remain 
unbeaten and after six games, David Wagner’s men top the Championship. A 
pre-seasondevoid of mobile phones and good sleep in the Swedish wilderness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/09/huddersfield-david-wagner-no-electricity-no-beds-football-championship>
 clearly has had the desired effect on Wagner’s squad. Huddersfield’s fifth 
league win of the season came at Elland Road, where Aaron Mooy, the Manchester 
City loanee, scored the only goal to secure victory in the Yorkshire derby. 
 * Another team proving to be a surprise package can be found just 18 miles 
down the road.Barnsley, who won promotion via the League One play-offs last 
season, picked up a 2-1 victory on the road at Preston’s Deepdale, with on-loan 
Newcastle strikerAdam Armstrong scoring a fine winner 
<https://twitter.com/James_Dart/status/774675305722179584> on his debut. 
Speaking ofNewcastle, Rafa Benítez’s men are up to second, above the Tykes on 
goal difference, after Yoan Gouffran and DeAndre Yedlin earned victory atDerby, 
who have now won just one match in their first six. 
 * Norwich City returned to winning ways and into the Championship play-off 
picture with a 3-2 win overCardiff City at Carrow Road, while Birmingham City 
leapfroggedFulham after Clayton Donaldson eventually got the better of David 
Button from 12 yards. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/fulham-birmingham-city-championship-match-report>
 The Fulham goalkeeper saved Donaldson’s first penalty at Craven Cottage, only 
for the striker to convert his second attempt early on in the second half. And 
Scott Hogan scored twice asBrentford won 2-0 away at Brighton.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-stay-top-after-win-at-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F123027b300893e4b5d9894a32c35cd8f9d33b3b8%2F28_23_2595_1557%2F2595.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Huddersfield%20stay%20top%20after%20win%20at%20Leeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-stay-top-after-win-at-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Huddersfield%20stay%20top%20after%20win%20at%20Leeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-stay-top-after-win-at-leeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F123027b300893e4b5d9894a32c35cd8f9d33b3b8%2F28_23_2595_1557%2F2595.jpg>
 Cardiff City’s Rickie Lambert sees his header hit the crossbar against 
Norwich. Photograph: Huw Evans/REX/Shutterstock 
 * Two Chelsea loanees were on the scoresheet at the New York Stadium, where 
Bristol City came from two goals down to draw against Rotherham United. Izzy 
Brown opened the scoring after a mix-up between City goalkeeper Richard 
O’Donnell and Aden Flint, before the defender’s own goal doubled Rotherham’s 
lead. But Tammy Abraham, also on loan from Stamford Bridge, scored his sixth 
goal in eight appearances to kickstart City’s comeback, with academy graduate 
Bobby Reid equalising late on. 
 * At Hillsborough, Fernando Forestieri’s first league goal since the opening 
day of the season was enough to giveSheffield Wednesday victory over Wigan 
Athletic, after Steven Fletcher cancelled out Will Grigg’s opener on five 
minutes. Elsewhere, Sam Gallagher found the net for the second time since 
joiningBlackburn Rovers on loan from Southampton to secure a point at QPR, who 
led through Tjaronn Chery’s fourth league goal of the season. Another loanee, 
Tottenham’s Will Miller, once a child actor who starred alongside Tom Hardy in 
Oliver Twist, grabbed a point forBurton Albion at Wolves, who took the lead 
through Prince Oniangué at Molineux. 
Birmingham City’s Clayton Donaldson on the spot to halt Fulham’s streak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/fulham-birmingham-city-championship-match-report>
League One

 * League leaders Bolton Wanderers were held for the third match in a row, as 
they drew 1-1 at home withMK Dons, Ryan Colclough cancelling out Mark Beevers’s 
first-half opener. As Phil Parkinson’s side stutter after a fine start to the 
season,Scunthorpe United continue to soar. Striker Paddy Madden got the party 
started at Glanford Park, before Kevin van Veen, Josh Morris and Richie 
Smallwood completed the 4-0 rout ofSouthend. There was more good news for 
Sheffield United too, who claimed a third straight league win with a 3-2 
victory atAFC Wimbledon. Also at the top, Fleetwood Town were left frustrated 
by Lee Novak, who scored three minutes from time to secure a point forCharlton 
Athletic. 
 * There were derbies aplenty on Saturday but the A420 derby between Swindon 
Town and Oxford United might top the lot, depending on who you’re speaking to. 
The U’s secured their sixth victory in a row over their rivals, thanks to a 
Chris Maguire double. Swindon’s Lloyd Jones and Lawrence Vigoroux were both 
sent off as Town succumbed to the red-hot atmosphere at a sellout Kassam 
Stadium. Elsewhere, the feel-good factor just goes on forNorthampton, who 
extended their unbeaten league run to 31 games with a comfortable 2-0 win at 
home toWalsall, while Bradford City remain undefeated in the league after 
drawing at 10-manGillingham. 
 * At the other end of the table, Coventry City were denied their first win of 
the season atMillwall, after Aiden O’Brien cancelled out Marvin Sordell’s 
opener, butRochdale remain bottom of the pile after failing to beat Bristol 
Rovers, who twice equalised through striker Matty Taylor. Also in the third 
tier,Oldham Athletic played out a stalemate with Chesterfield and Bury beat 
Shrewsbury Town 2-1 at Gigg Lane, courtesy of Danny Mayor’s last-gasp winner.  
<> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-stay-top-after-win-at-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cf16df13e010dbd4f39cee1eb2c0ef034bfbb2a%2F206_469_2798_1678%2F2798.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Huddersfield%20stay%20top%20after%20win%20at%20Leeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-stay-top-after-win-at-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Huddersfield%20stay%20top%20after%20win%20at%20Leeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-stay-top-after-win-at-leeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cf16df13e010dbd4f39cee1eb2c0ef034bfbb2a%2F206_469_2798_1678%2F2798.jpg>
 Matty Taylor scored his third and fourth goals of the season as Bristol Rovers 
were held at home by Rochdale. Photograph: Brookman/JMP/Rex/Shutterstock 
League Two

 * Plymouth Argyle’s fifth win on the bounce saw them go top and Portsmouth 
came from behind to beatWycombe Wanderers at Fratton Park and move into second 
but in truth there really is only one place to start. James Coppinger, the 
35-year-old midfielder, capped his 500th appearance in aDoncaster Rovers shirt 
with a starring role, and goal, as Darren Ferguson’s side put five pastMorecambe
, who suffered a second successive home defeat. Elsewhere,Blackpool’s Brad 
Potts panickedColchester United hearts with a late free-kick, but Chris Porter’s
double had already secured victory. 
 * At 34 and at his fourteenth club, Newport County’s Jon Parkin is your 
archetypal journeyman striker, but Parkin, nicknamed ‘the Beast’ for obvious 
reasons, has still got it. Parkin twice equalised at Rodney Parade against Gary 
Johnson’sCheltenham Town. Also on the scoresheet again was Omar Bogle, whose 
sixth and seventh goals forGrimsby Town this term ensured victory over Luton 
Townand the striker John Akinde, who scored his fourth goal of the season in 
Barnet’swin at Mansfield. Harry Cornick’s first goal for Leyton Orient since 
signing on loan from Bournemouth was not enough to give the O’s three points at 
Carlisle United, who scored an equaliser four minutes from time, with Danny 
Grainger converting from the penalty spot.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-stay-top-after-win-at-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6364e41a59d1c23a53e072151f652c321b6e0df4%2F97_126_1381_828%2F1381.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Huddersfield%20stay%20top%20after%20win%20at%20Leeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-stay-top-after-win-at-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Huddersfield%20stay%20top%20after%20win%20at%20Leeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-stay-top-after-win-at-leeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6364e41a59d1c23a53e072151f652c321b6e0df4%2F97_126_1381_828%2F1381.jpg>
 Portsmouth’s Gary Roberts applauds supporters post-match at Fratton Park. 
Photograph: Harry Murphy/Getty Images 
 * At the bottom, Cambridge United continue to prop up the Football League 
after losing to Plymouth whileYeovil Town’s miserable run continues, as Nathan 
Thomas’s late winner forHartlepool condemned Darren Way’s men to a fifth 
straight league defeat. Elsewhere,Stevenage beat Crawley Town 2-1, Crewe 
overcameExeter City 2-0 and Accrington beat Notts County by the same scoreline.  