
Having recently caught sight of Marcos Alonso playing for Sunderland while 
watching Sky’s 2013-14 edition of Premier League Years, Antonio Conte is back 
in the market for a left-back.Yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/milan-reject-chelseas-35m-offer-for-alessio-romagnoli>
 the Mill revealed that his prime target was Milan’s Alessio Romagnoli, but
Chelsea’s well-groomed manager wants a team moulded in his image and has thus 
turned to the precise man-bun of Wolfsburg’sRicardo Rodríguez – though at the 
risk of leaving absolutely no bases uncovered, Roma, Internazionale and 
Atlético Madrid have their binoculars trained on said bun too.

Lock up your wingers, Serie A. Roma have been watching Pep-ball and while 
simpletons like the Mill spotted Sergio Agüero going spare,Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> have noticed there is not a lot of 
room for full-backs at the Etihad Stadium. They are planning swoops onBacary 
Sagna, Pablo Zabaleta and Gaël Clichy to sew up their sides in an effort to 
hunt down league rulersJuventus.

The best goals of the week: Tim Cahill, Wes Hoolahan, Isco and Pablo Escobar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/best-goals-week-cahill-hoolahan-isco-pablo-escobar-luis-suarez>
Juve have been doing some talent spotting of their own and will beat 
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> to 
the signing of Uruguay’s teenagerRodrigo Bentancur despite a £12.5m bid from 
Old Trafford thanks to a first-option clause written into the sale of Carlos 
Tevez, the sneaky so and sos. It completes a trio of snubs for José Mourinho 
after the 18-year-old mini Ander Herrera, Fran Villalba, decided to sign a new 
Valencia contract and that time Barcelona chose Pep.

In the murky managerial world, Sam Allardyce will be sentenced to two years as 
theSunderland manager following his England debacle. A Chinese consortium have 
their eye on the Wearside club and want to make Big Sam their first appointment 
after giving David Moyes the elbow. Moyes for Scotland, perhaps?

Like Moyes, the future of Liverpool’s loanee Lazar Markovic is also in doubt 
after he was booed off by Sporting Lisbon fans following their Champions League 
defeat at home to Borussia Dortmund.

But he will be cheered by the form of team-mate Gelson Martins, who is tearing 
it up by all accounts.Manchester United want to sign the 21-year-old who is 
currently in contract talks at Sporting to improve his pathetic £2,000-a-week 
deal, the sort of money the Mill earns per correctly spotted transfer. Though 
to cover all bases, his progress is being monitored by Real Madrid, Bayern 
Munich, Barcelona, plus Yeovil Town, Floridsdorfer AC, Kalamazoo Outrage, the 
Match for Peace charity XI red team, and Chelsea, probably.
 