
The day has finally arrived, the moment the Mill has been counting down to for 
weeks. Proof, at last, that English football is back on top.John Stones, the 
Future of Defending and perpetual resident of this fine column, has turned down 
the once great Barcelona. Messi? Pah. Neymar? No interest. Suárez? Could not 
care less. Instead Stones wants to roll down the M62 and join the Pep 
revolution atManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity>, turning down a basic 
salary of £90,000 a week at Camp Nou and the chance to wear double denim to 
away games.

But such is the need to overhaul City’s defence, with their only half decent 
centre-half in constant calf knack trouble, Guardiola will still try to sign
Aymeric Laporte from Athletic Bilbao regardless of the England defender’s 
potential move.Yaya Touré has shuffled slowly towards the exit at City, though, 
withnouveau riche (see who’s been learning French for the games ahead?) 
Internazionale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale> hopeful of 
bringing the Ivorian to Serie A.

Jamie Vardy is said to be 80% against joining Arsenal, which is little wonder 
considering some of the club’s fans have already professed an #obsession 
towards the striker online, with one proudly showing off how he asked for a 
Starbucks in the Leicester player’s name. That baffles the Mill because 
everyone knows other high street chains produce far better beans for your buck. 
Irrespective of Vardy’s future,Troy Deeney has told Watford he wants to join 
Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/09/watford-troy-deeney-leicester-bid>
, after the champions (nope, still feels strange saying that) saw a £20m bid 
for the striker turned down.

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> have been alerted to 
Kalidou Koulibaly’s contract talks breaking down at Napoli, but Antonio Conte 
may loseCésar Azpilicueta to Barcelona, who are looking to replace Dani Alves.

Average Joe Allen, as he likes to call himself, may be tempted back to Swansea 
City after finally proving he can play a bit to Liverpool supporters in the 
second half of last season, andJames Chester could also be heading to south 
Wales, with West Bromwich Albion interested in Brighton’sLewis Dunk if the 
27-year-old departs The Hawthorns. Of little surprise to nobody, the Baggies 
wantSaido Berahino to stay but this is such a tired tale that it barely 
warrants recognition with so many other big transfer stories to come …

Like José Mourinho wanting to bring Nani back to Old Trafford (ha!), Henrikh 
Mkhitaryan to join from Dortmund and Zlatan... OK, you’ve heard that one 
before. But the striker has been told to ease off the distractions – new 
clothing line anybody? – and focus on the Euros by the Sweden manager, Erik 
Hamren.

Ronald Koeman would like his first signing at Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> to be Graziano Pellè, of course, 
but his agent says there has also been contact from “Stoke and China”. 
Unfortunately for the latter, the striker is unable to defect from Italy. 
Somebody should probably inform them.

Norwich, meanwhile, have appointed two external agencies to shift some of 
their players on after relegation – includingNathan Redmond, Cameron Jerome and 
Robbie Brady. Not because they are unwanted, more due to them getting a decent 
fee.
 