
English Heritage has pledged to increase the number of black and Asian 
nominees for blue plaques as it prepares to unveil one in northLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> for the late footballer Laurie 
Cunningham.

The London blue plaque scheme has been running for 150 years, yet only 33 of 
the more than 900 are dedicated to black and Asian figures. That will change, 
English Heritage has said, announcing the creation of a working group to look 
back over history and find worthy candidates.

Laurie Cunningham: the dancing footballer with eternal youth | Richard Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/26/laurie-cunningham-dancing-footballer-richard-williams>
Anna Eavis, English Heritage’s curatorial director, said history was no longer 
seen as just “kings and queens, prime ministers, foreign secretaries and 
generals”. She said: “If you are looking for history to fulfil a much broader 
potential, about how we used to live or why things are the way they are, you 
have to look beyond those established and conventional sources in the 
documentation and that can be harder.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fblue-plaque-leyton-orient-laurie-cunningham-black-asian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f9c119925583622c9576cfc0924ff07363494c2%2F0_0_4096_2731%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Footballer%20Laurie%20Cunningham%20honoured%20with%20blue%20plaque&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fblue-plaque-leyton-orient-laurie-cunningham-black-asian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Footballer%20Laurie%20Cunningham%20honoured%20with%20blue%20plaque&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fblue-plaque-leyton-orient-laurie-cunningham-black-asian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f9c119925583622c9576cfc0924ff07363494c2%2F0_0_4096_2731%2F4096.jpg>
 Cunningham at Leyton Orient, prior to the 1974-75 season. Photograph: PA 
The working group will be led by the cultural historian Gus Casely-Hayford who 
said London had always been an ethnic melting pot. “We are linked through 
language, culture, political alliance and economic partnership to every part of 
the world,” he said. “And people from places that we have touched have found 
their way here to not just make London their home but to make London and this 
country what it is. We want to celebrate that rich, complex, sometimes 
difficult history through the lives of those that truly made it.”

It was not until 1954 that the first plaque honouring a notable figure of 
minority ethnic origin was installed. That wasMahatma Gandhi 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/blue-plaques/gandhi-mahatma-1869-1948-97>
. The majority since then have emerged after English Heritage took over the 
scheme in 1986 and most of those were from a push in the early 2000s. They 
include Crimean war nurse Mary Seacole and Chinese writerLao She 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/blue-plaques/she-lao-1899-1966>.

Eavis said any nominations would still have to be judged on rigorous criteria 
which included being regarded as eminent in their profession, making an 
exceptional impact and having lived in London for a significant time.

The lives of others: 150 years of London’s blue plaques
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/07/blue-plaque-150-years-english-heritage>
Cunningham ticks all those boxes and more, and a blue plaque for the 
footballer will be unveiled on Wednesday, on the exterior wall of 73 Lancaster 
Road in Stroud Green, London, the Haringey house where Cunningham grew up and 
lived in for more than a decade.

Born in 1956 to first-generation immigrants from Jamaica, Cunningham became 
the first black footballer to play for England in a competitive international 
match and was the first Englishman to play for Real Madrid when they bought him 
fromWest Bromwich Albion <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> for 
the then eye-watering sum of £950,000.

His first professional team was Leyton Orient – after turning down an offer 
from theBallet Rambert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/06/rambert-dance-company-at-90-dance-stardust>
 – but it was as part of Ron Atkinson’s successful WBA side that he became a 
true star. Uniquely for the time, the team hadthree black regular first-team 
players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/25/west-brom-three-degrees-book-extract>
: Cunningham, Cyrille Regis and Brendan Batson – or the Three Degrees as 
Atkinson nicknamed them.

Cunningham was a great footballer and true pioneer, forced to contend with 
racial prejudice and vile abuse from both fans and fellow professionals. As 
well as his artistry and grace on the ball he was admired for his innovative 
approach to training, using both yoga and dance to improve his technique and 
stamina. He also taught Peter Reid how topeel a king prawn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/26/laurie-cunningham-dancing-footballer-richard-williams>
.

Cunningham’s career reached a high in 1988 when he was a second-half 
substitute for Wimbledon’s Crazy Gang in theirsurprise FA Cup final win over 
Liverpool <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x7DD6HdN9jE>. A year later he was 
killed in a car crash near Madrid, aged just 33.
 