
Seven years have passed since Ipswich Town finished an East Anglian derby in 
the ascendancy. Before Sunday afternoon, their most recent six meetings with 
Norwich had brought five defeats; one a 5-1 embarrassment at Portman Road and 
anothergranting their rivals passage to the 2014-15 play‑off final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/16/norwich-city-ipswich-town-championship-playoff-semi-final-second-leg>
. A well-deserved draw this time did something to stop the rot but 14 years in 
the Championship have bred a slow-burning unease among their support and is a 
fact not lost on Mick McCarthy, whose side was warmly applauded off the Portman 
Road pitch.

Football League your thoughts: Wolves join chasing pack as Huddersfield go top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/aug/20/football-league-your-thoughts-huddersfield-wolves>
Objectively, McCarthy has done a fine job on straitened resources. Ipswich 
increasingly resemble an analogue operation in a fast-movingChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> that is in danger of moving 
in two distinct streams. Sixth and seventh-placed finishes in successive years 
have been more than reasonable on the face of it, but discord about the team’s 
style accompanied a sharp decline in the second half of 2015‑16 and the 
opprobrium grew louder after a limp 2-0 defeat at Brentford the previous 
Saturday.

Ipswich were neither passive nor agricultural against their local rivals and 
McCarthy was certainly forthcoming after the game when asked if their 
performance would have eased fans’ concerns.

“I get sick to death,” he said. “We play one bad half [at Brentford] and we’re 
all shit and can’t play. ‘The manager doesn’t care, get somebody who cares,’ 
I’m ‘a boring cunt’ – somebody called me that last week. I wish they would say 
it to my face on my own because his pint of lager, he’d have been wearing it.

“Let me tell you, if that’s what they think about me and my team then they are 
sadly mistaken. I’m not having that and it does hurt me. Up and down like a 
bloody fiddler’s elbow – I’m all right one week but I’m not the next.”

It is as much a wider symptom of the times than an indictment of Ipswich’s 
stasis but there was enough here to encourage the doubters. Ipswich tore into 
Norwich from the first whistle and should have been awarded a goal within two 
minutes when Jonathan Douglas stabbed a loose ball past Michael McGovern. 
Offside was given; replays suggested Douglas was level with the last defender 
and McCarthy was prepared to steer his frustration in a different direction 
upon reviewing the decision.

“If that is the case then I’ll be battering PGMOL’s door down again on Monday 
morning with a tirade of: ‘Hey, any chance of us getting a decision?’” he said 
of Professional Game Match Officials Limited. “No I won’t – I’ll be doing it 
tonight on their answering machine.”

Ipswich had been denied another legitimate-looking goal in their midweek draw 
at Wolves. Their luck appeared to be comprehensively out in the 26th minute 
when Norwich, hitherto pegged back, constructed a move that hinted at their 
residual Premier League quality. Ivo Pinto, beating Freddie Sears too easily on 
the right, cut the ball back for a quick exchange of passes between Jonny 
Howson, Wes Hoolahan and Cameron Jerome, the latter finishing crisply to 
Bartosz Bialkowski’s right from 18 yards.

The smart money at that point was on Norwich making their technical advantage 
count; they controlled possession for the rest of the first half and more of 
the same appeared likely until, with the interval looming, the Ipswich 
left-back Jonas Knudsen equalised with a fizzing low drive of his own. 
Knudsen’s right foot is generally used for little more than the proverbial; 
this time, after Norwich had failed to defend a long throw correctly, he had 
enough trust in its ability to let fly from outside the area and restore parity.

“I didn’t buy him for that,” McCarthy said. “It’s akin to my left foot. He 
does all the shitty jobs, gets up and down, so it’s nice for him to get some 
love for scoring against Norwich.”

The Ipswich substitute Teddy Bishop might have done the same towards the end 
of the tense second half, but Norwich had the clearer late chances. Their own 
replacement, Steven Whittaker, had one effort cleared off the line and struck a 
post with another; on balance nobody at Portman Road could complain and the 
visitors’ manager, Alex Neil, was of similar mind.

“I don’t think we did enough to win it,” he said. “We probably had the best 
chances, but I don’t think we moved the ball quickly enough. It’s a rubbish 
goal for us to concede, we had a chance to score a second and within 45 seconds 
it comes from a throw-in we haven’t set up for. I’m really frustrated with 
that.”

McCarthy would probably settle for Neil’s frustrations. Norwich, he believes, 
will be among the leading pack for the remainder of the season and despite 
their frayed edges here it is hard to disagree. If this morsel of encouragement 
galvanises Ipswich into a run of form, meanwhile, he should be able to enjoy a 
more consistent reception from his public.

Talking points

• If you were, to put it Jarvis Cocker’s way, fully grown in the year 2000 
then the following will make you feel decidedly old. When Ryan Sessegnon opened 
Fulham’s account against Cardiff from close range he became, at 16 years and 94 
days, the first player born in the 2000s to score in the Championship. It was a 
statistic Slavisa Jokanovic enjoyed; less palatable to the Fulham manager is 
the data analysis carried out by his colleague Craig Kline, who heads up the 
club’s recruitment model, and he did not hold back from criticising his methods 
after the 2-2 draw. “I’ve lost many players in this process in nine months,” 
Jokanovic said. “In the last two days I lost a few players who [Kline] believes 
are not good enough. I had an opinion from one of the best managers in the 
world on one of the players and he believes it is a good signing for us and I 
believe that too. Craig doesn’t believe it is a good signing for us and this 
guy is not with us.” Jokanovic may have been referring to James Wilson, who has 
joined Derby on loan from Manchester United. Regardless, battlelines appear to 
have been drawn. As analytics become increasingly focal to recruitment down the 
leagues, this kind of discord is likely to repeat itself; in the short term, 
you wonder just how long Jokanovic, whose spell at Watford suggestshe does not 
exactly pick his club owners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/30/slavisa-jokanovic-fulham-manager>
, is prepared to stand for the status quo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fipswich-norwich-east-anglian-derby-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9293ff316588026060564cc7dc75a9719e2a249%2F12_182_3629_2178%2F3629.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20Weekly%3A%20Mick%20McCarthy%20swears%20Ipswich%20have%20reason%20to%20cheer%20%7C%20Nick%20Ames&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fipswich-norwich-east-anglian-derby-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20Weekly%3A%20Mick%20McCarthy%20swears%20Ipswich%20have%20reason%20to%20cheer%20%7C%20Nick%20Ames&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fipswich-norwich-east-anglian-derby-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9293ff316588026060564cc7dc75a9719e2a249%2F12_182_3629_2178%2F3629.jpg>
 Fulham’s Ryan Sessegnon becomes the first player born after the turn of the 
millennium to score in the Championship. Photograph: Garcia/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock
• Nottingham Forest are setting themselves up as the division’s great 
entertainers. If successive 4-3 home wins against newly promoted teams bode ill 
for their stability against more practised opposition there can be little doubt 
about the early value for money provided byPhilippe Montanier’s young side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/08/montanier-nottingham-forest-championship-football-league>
. And especially the 19-year-old winger Oliver Burke, who finished clinically 
twice against Wigan and has the Premier League vultures circling. If Burke, 
with three goals to his name now this season, is smouldering then the Wigan 
striker Will Grigg is – yes – on fire. Four in four now for the Northern 
Ireland back-up striker after his pair at the City Ground; perhaps it is time 
someone thought up a song for him.

• The early-season buoyancy at Huddersfield looked like being checked slightly 
by Yorkshire rivals Barnsley as their derby entered stoppage time. Then the 
substitute Jonathan Hogg adjusted himself to score emphatically from 15 yards, 
hand them a 2-1 win that puts then top of the Championship and heighten the 
sense that under David Wagner the Terriers are on to something. Hogg was the 
fourth substitute to score an important goal for Huddersfield in four games; 
although unpolished in some respects they are super-fit and playing 
insistently, with the kind of intensityyou would expect Jürgen Klopp’s former 
right-hand man to demand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/09/huddersfield-david-wagner-borussia-dortmund>
. Can they keep it up? “It’s a picture of the quality and togetherness we have 
that everyone who starts and plays from the bench knows their job,” Wagner 
said. It feels as if they are around to stay.

• Four games, four wins for Bolton in League One and after such an execrable 
2015-16 season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/bolton-wanderers-relegated-johnny-russell-derby>
 the shoots of recovery are evident. Phil Parkinson certainly seemed a canny 
appointment for a club reacquainting itself with lower-division life and 
although it took a late Josh Vela goal to beat Fleetwood 2-1 the adjustment has 
been smoother than expected. If they need a handy example of what can go wrong 
if a decline is not addressed swiftly, they only need look down the table: 
Sheffield United, four games into their sixth campaign at this level, now sit 
bottom of it after Steve Morison’s 89th-minute penalty winner for Millwall.

• Taking a loanee from Chelsea risks becoming law for Football League clubs, 
such is thenumber of youngsters the Premier League club trains up and ships out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/sep/09/chelsea-loan-players-change-rules-wild-west-football>
. They rarely make it all the way down to League Two but one, the 20-year-old 
winger Alex Kiwomya, has made an immediate impact with Crewe and scored his 
third goal of the season in the 1-1 draw at Newport. It was a marvellous 
50-yard solo run and curled finish from Kiwomya, who will climb back up the 
divisions quickly on this evidence; there is hope that he will follow in the 
footsteps of his uncle, the former Ipswich and Arsenal striker Chris Kiwomya.
 