
At 6.55pm last Saturday, Ray Trew, the owner of Notts County, thanked Jamie 
Fullarton for his efforts, praised his professionalism and predicted he still 
has a bright future in the game. But the 69th day of Fullarton’s first 
managerial job was one to forget. A 4-1 defeat at home to Exeter City left the 
club 19th in League Two andFullarton was unemployed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/19/notts-county-sack-jamie-fullarton-manager-69-days>
, two months after replacing Ricardo Moniz.

Sometimes there is barely time to pause for thought. They moved on quickly at 
Meadow Lane and a day later Mark Cooper, sacked by Swindon Town in October, 
became County’sthird manager of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/20/notts-county-appoint-mark-cooper-manager-replace-jamie-fullarton>
. The cycle continues.

Notts County up for sale after chairman Ray Trew steps down over ‘foul abuse’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/25/notts-county-for-sale-chairman-ray-trew-foul-abuse>
It is a fragile existence, being a manager. Those who have experienced the 
pressure of having no idea where the next win is coming from are not seeking 
sympathy when they speak of the strain it can place on their family and 
friends, the sleepless nights after a defeat, the overriding feeling of relief 
rather than euphoria after a win. Most managers relish their work and the 
potential riches on offer are vast, meaning any analysis of the challenges 
facing them must be tempered by an understanding that, away from football, 
there are more demanding jobs that pay significantly less.

Yet others can discover the game they love has a nasty habit of chewing people 
up and spitting them out, and the League Managers Association is concerned that 
an endemic sacking culture is having a debilitating effect on its members’ 
profession, with clubs increasingly unforgiving during times of struggle and 
novice managers becoming particularly vulnerable.

The LMA’s statistics are cause for alarm. Its report for last season showed 
the 47 managerial sackings across the top four divisions was the most since the 
high of 53 in 2001-02; 17 first-time managers lost their jobs and the average 
tenure of a sacked manager was 1.23 years, the shortest since 1992. Those 
numbers were not an anomaly bearing in mind that out of the 40 managers who 
have been sacked this season, 29 happened before 31 December– a record – while 
a quarter of those sacked in theFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> lasted less than six 
months in their posts.

Those 29 managers had an average tenure of 1.58 years and the longest serving 
manager in England, Arsène Wenger, increasingly looks like the last of his kind 
as he approaches his 20th anniversary at Arsenal. Eleven first-time managers 
have been let go.

“The attrition rate raises some very serious concerns,” the LMA’s chief 
executive, Richard Bevan, says. “Dismissing first-time managers without 
affording them the time and opportunity to establish themselves in the game is 
hampering the development of predominantly young British managers in this 
country.”

Johnstone’s Paint to end sponsorship of Football League Trophy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/24/johnstones-paint-football-league-trophy-sponsorship>
Dave Robertson was the first manager to lose his job this season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/06/peterborough-united-sack-manager-dave-robertson>
, paying the price for Peterborough United’s poor start in League One. Like 
Fullarton, Robertson’s first job did not last long and he has since taken over 
at Sligo Rovers in the League of Ireland. Despite the bruises, they go back 
because management is an addiction.

Yet Robertson knows other first-time managers are put off by the experience. 
“Seventy percent of first-time managers don’t get the opportunity to manage 
again,” he says. “I said: ‘No way I’m going to be one of those stats’. But I 
can see how it can dampen their love for the game because of how harsh a 
feeling of responsibility it can be.”

The combination of trigger-happy chairmen, demanding supporters, rolling news 
and social media is a potent mix and the LMA’s studies have shown that “at any 
one time 40% of managers are at risk of developing serious health problems”.

For Robertson, his final days at Peterborough were tough on his family. “I had 
been at the club for 10 years before becoming manager,” he says. “We lived in 
the city, my two boys were in school inPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough>. When the pressure comes 
and the results don’t, it’s tough. I had a 12-year-old and a six-year-old at 
school in the city and people were saying: ‘Your dad’s a rubbish manager’ and 
you have to hear all the other things that are said.

“It does have an impact on you and your family. The boys went through the 
obvious frustration of feeling hurt because there were friends from school who 
were repeating those things.”

Who’d be a manager? David Weir lost too many matches when he was in charge of 
Sheffield United in 2013 and his first job ended after four months. Now he is 
Mark Warburton’s assistant atRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>. “Your family see you 
suffering,” Weir says. “You’re in the middle of it, trying to remedy it, and 
they see that. They see the worry, the phone calls, how hard you’re working to 
try to get success, and they feel disappointed as much as you do and have no 
control of it. Your closest friends and family – plus staff – feel that 
disappointment. The football industry now is so sharp and cruel.”

Peterborough on rise from their ‘rock bottom’ to leave Doncaster in mire | 
Jeremy Alexander
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/20/peterborough-rise-rock-bottom-doncaster-rovers-league-one>
Yet if clubs are acting impulsively, it is often because they are in the same 
boat as their managers, searching for the perfect formula while working to a 
tight deadline. The issue is not black and white and if a manager is not 
getting results, the outcome is inevitable. “We often make the mistake of 
portraying clubs as having the perfect way of working, but we are humans, we 
are not robots or programmed a certain way,” a figure involved in recruitment 
says. “People make mistakes. You don’t always have the time to spend weeks and 
months finding the right manager.”

Take Walsall. Dean Smith managed the League One club for almost five years 
before joining Brentford in November and he survived a long run of games 
without a win. Yet his replacement, Sean O’Driscoll, wassacked earlier this 
month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/06/walsall-part-company-sean-odriscoll-defeat>
. He appeared to be the right fit when he was appointed; but then many people 
thought Claudio Ranieri would take Leicester City down. Football is not an 
exact science. Do Walsall deserve criticism or the benefit of the doubt?

In the Premier League, it is easier for clubs to devote resources towards 
implementing a long-term structure and only five managers – Steve McClaren, 
José Mourinho, Garry Monk, Brendan Rodgers and Tim Sherwood – have been sacked 
this season. That is harder to achieve in League One and League Two, while 35 
managers have been sacked in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> in the past two seasons.

Paul Clement was sacked by fifth-placed Derby County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/09/derby-county-paul-clement-gamble-sacked>
 after one winless run. Steve Cotterill was League One’s manager of the season 
last year after leading Bristol City to the title. Yet Cotterill was shown the 
door in January and his replacement, Lee Johnson, has led them seven points 
clear of the bottom three. Job security is lowest in the Championship – the 
average tenure of the managers who were sacked last season was 0.91 years and 
1.32 years in the first half of this season.

A prominent figure at one Championship club tells the Guardian that the 
division is about instant gratification, constructed around the lure of the 
Premier League. So many clubs believe that they should go up. There are three 
promotion spots.

Most clubs will assess their position once the play-offs are out of reach. The 
decision to sack a manager is not taken lightly.

Everyone thinks twice. No reasonable owner enjoys it. Yet there is a feeling 
that keeping faith with an ailing or underachieving manager for the sake of 
continuity can be counter-productive. In continental circles, the thinking is 
that a manager who is producing losing football is wasting time and money, 
whatever the circumstances. The problem in England, perhaps, is the cult of the 
manager is still too strong, raising expectations to an unrealistic level. “On 
my pro licence [course] Rafa Benítez said: ‘When you win a game you’re a genius 
and when you lose a game everyone thinks you’re a clown’,” Robertson says.

The challenge is finding a better balance and while some managers are guilty 
of tapping into the raw emotions of supporters, want too much power and fail to 
appreciate, say, the value of a sporting director, it is impossible to achieve 
anything substantial without solid structural support. Unless clubs improve in 
that area, realising that the rush of appointing a new manager cannot obscure 
historical flaws, the chopping and changing will surely only get worsecontinue.

“That’s the chance you take, I suppose, and circumstances change,” Weir says. 
“You go into a job asking all the right questions, setting the right 
parameters, and all of a sudden the parameters change and your job changes. 
You’re judged on the job they want you to do rather than the job they wanted 
you to do. That’s not an excuse because we didn’t win enough games but the job 
was a long-term project and I very quickly realised that wasn’t going to be the 
case any more.”

Far too many managers will empathise with that tale of broken promises and 
dysfunction.
 