
José Mourinho must be thanking his lucky stars that Ángel Di María is busy 
over the other side of the pond, helping Argentinado this, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/10/lionel-messi-hat-trick-argentina-panama-copa-america>
 rather than keepMarco Verratti company in Paris this summer. Otherwise, the 
Italian midfielder may well have sought out the advice of his Argentinian 
team-mate at PSG, to ask what life is like in Manchester, as the news that one 
of the city’s clubs,Manchester United, are readying a whopping £79m offer for 
the former Pescara man, according to reports in Italy.

Since swapping Manchester for Paris, Di María hasn’t exactly waxed lyrical 
about his former club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/01/louis-van-gaal-angel-di-maria-manchester-united>
, yet Verratti, comfortably out of earshot of the left-footed Noodle and absent 
from his country’s Euro 2016 squad due to a groin injury, may not care that 
much anyway, particularly when Ed Woodward’s £130,000-a-week offer is 
reportedly on the table. But then, Verratti is quite the player, isn’t he? You 
would think that he would rather play in the Champions League with Thiago Silva 
than play in the Europa League with Marcos Rojo. It’s funny what money will 
make a man do.

With Laurent Blanc resembling an extra in 28 Days Later, PSG are themselves in 
the market for a bit of a hot transfer action of the managerial kind, and are 
poised to move forUnai Emery, who informed Sevilla of his wish to leave the 
Spanish club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/unai-emery-laurent-blanc-paris-saint-germain-sevilla>
 after winninga third consecutive Europa League title in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/liverpool-sevilla-europa-league-final-match-report>
.Jorge Sampaoli is favourite to succeed Emery at Sevilla – the Argentinian has 
been doing the square root of nothing since resigning as Chile manager in 
January, but his stock is still high after leading Alexis Sánchez and co to the 
Copa América last year.

The Leicester Mercury is worrying 0% of its readership with the story that 
Kasper Schmeichel could be subject to a bid from Everton. But then when the 
most popular article on their website is about former captainSep Smith giving 
horse meat a wide berth 
<http://www.leicestermercury.co.uk/Leicester-City-star-Sep-Smith-gave-horsemeat-wide/story-29385918-detail/story.html>
 in the 1930s, you know it’s been a slow news day.

Slightly more plausible, and no less exciting for Everton fans is the gossip 
thatGraziano Pellè might be bringing his goals, good looks and vintage Bugatti 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BAXWgqzIWwG/> to Merseyside. Ronald Koeman likes 
the cut of his considerable jib, after the 30-year-old bagged 11 goals and six 
assists in 30 Premier League last season.Southampton are loath to lose another 
star asset to Everton but may well wait until Euro 2016 in the hope that 
Pellè’s stock will rise – Italy kick-off their tournament later today against 
Belgium.

Another Italian international striker – who didn’t make the cut for France 
this summer – who is smack bang in the middle of a transfer tussle is Palermo’s
Franco Vazquez. Tottenham, AC Milan, Roma and um, West Brom are all in the hunt 
for the 27-year-old. “I’m in contact with Tottenham for Vazquez and I requested 
€25 million for him.” said Palermo president Maurizio Zamparini, whilst the 
player himself admitted that he has a taxi to the airport on standby: “When 
there will be an agreement I’ll just catch a plane and go to sign. The 
president does the price. If he does not accept it, then I will stay at 
Palermo, I have a contract until 2019. I do not think that will happen, 
however.”
 