
Championship


Those who think Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> will simply stroll back 
into the Premier League have not paid much attention to the Championship 
recently. Fortunately for the club Rafael Benítez does not appear to be among 
their number.

Premier League transfers: who has done the best business so far?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/13/premier-league-transfers-jose-mourinho-manchester-united-jamie-vardy>
Newcastle are not messing around as they look to build a squad for the rigours 
of the second tier. Premier League talent has been persuaded north by the 
prospect of working under Benítez and a not unhealthy stack of cash:Matt 
Ritchie has arrived from Bournemouth and Dwight Gayle from Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/newcastle-dwight-gayle-signs-ritchie>
, and the Belgian goalkeeper Matz Sels has also joined.

Possibly the most eye-catching arrival is Jesús Gámez, a full-back who can 
play on either flank and whose purchase was greeted with approving nods from 
Spanish observers. Others could follow Andros Townsend and Fabricio Coloccini 
out of the door but Benítez seems to be building a formidable squad to face 
this new challenge.

Also building sensibly after the gut-punch of relegation are Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>. Tommy Elphick’s move from 
Bournemouth looks the perfect move to solidify their defence, and the 
goalkeeper Pierluigi Gollini supposedly ignored interest from Juventus to join. 
Norwich have been a little more sluggish in the market but have replaced 
Southampton-bound Nathan Redmond with the Liverpool youngster Sergi Canós, 
booking a profit of around £8m in the process.

Last summer’s big Championship spenders Derby County have so far kept their 
powder dry, their attention seemingly on keeping players such as Jeff Hendrick 
(subject of a laughable £3m offer from Burnley) and Will Hughes rather than 
adding players. That may be sensible, because their squad are easily good 
enough for promotion and, now they have a proper manager in Nigel Pearson, 
spending more money perhaps is not the answer. Glenn Murray looks a handy loan 
addition for their fellow play-off losers Brighton, while Sheffield Wednesday 
also have a new centre-forward in Steven Fletcher, signed on a free after 
leaving Sunderland.

Leeds have certainly been lively in the market, their new manager, Garry Monk, 
calling in old favours to get Matt Grimes and Kyle Bartley on loan from Swansea 
and snagging the highly rated forward Kemar Roofe from Oxford and Rob Green – 
yes, that Rob Green – to offer competition in goal.

Possibly the bargain of the summer has been completed by QPR, who have 
recruited Jordan Cousins, a 22-year-old midfielder whose fine performances were 
all the more impressive considering Charlton were crumbling around him, for a 
reported fee of £1.5m. The midfielder Robert Tesche, signed on a free by 
Birmingham, may be filed under the same low-key but shrewd banner.

League One

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Ffootball-league-transfers-best-summer-deals-newcastle-united-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aad1da0bb91050c0b893a7f7685a40d45954bbd%2F0_248_3720_2232%2F3720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20transfers%3A%20who%20has%20done%20the%20best%20business%20so%20far%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Ffootball-league-transfers-best-summer-deals-newcastle-united-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20transfers%3A%20who%20has%20done%20the%20best%20business%20so%20far%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Ffootball-league-transfers-best-summer-deals-newcastle-united-leeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aad1da0bb91050c0b893a7f7685a40d45954bbd%2F0_248_3720_2232%2F3720.jpg>
 The goalkeeper Colin Doyle has moved for £1 from Blackpool to Bradford. 
Photograph: ProSports/Rex/Shutterstock 
Whisper it but Charlton, having suffered their inevitable relegation, look as 
if they are being run like a proper club under Russell Slade. It may not last 
and with Roland Duchâtelet little is ever certain but, with Nicky Ajose and Lee 
Novak through the door, they have the makings of a solid League One strike 
force, at least. Of course, without knowing who is leaving, perhaps judgment 
should be reserved.

Bolton have made maybe the best signing in League One so far, the centre-back 
Mark Beevers, who arrives on a free from Millwall after much talk that he could 
sign for a Championship club. Millwall themselves have brought in Gregg Wylde 
from Plymouth and Shaun Hutchinson from Fulham but could lose the striker Lee 
Gregory, the subject of interest from Rotherham. A word as well for Oxford, who 
have signed the midfielder Joe Rothwell from Manchester United and defender 
Curtis Nelson from Plymouth, both fine additions.

Spare a thought, though, for Oldham: they began pre-season training with no 
manager and four senior pros, although they have since appointed Steve Robinson 
and signed a further four players. They can now almost put out a team.

One of the more striking pieces of business came when Bradford bought the 
Blackpool goalkeeper Colin Doylefor exactly £1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/12/bradford-city-sign-blackpool-colin-doyle-one-pound>
. No nominal fee coyness for these guys: the amount was due to a clause in 
Doyle’s contract that allowed him to leave Blackpool for free were they 
relegated, only that Football League regulations do not let players in effect 
walk away from a contract for nothing, hence £1. One hopes Bradford emptied 
their change jar and sent it over in coppers.

League Two
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Ffootball-league-transfers-best-summer-deals-newcastle-united-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa15d7f5f0fc03827c03d7e03b105ea6b77ab9f42%2F0_76_1598_959%2F1598.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20transfers%3A%20who%20has%20done%20the%20best%20business%20so%20far%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Ffootball-league-transfers-best-summer-deals-newcastle-united-leeds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20transfers%3A%20who%20has%20done%20the%20best%20business%20so%20far%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Ffootball-league-transfers-best-summer-deals-newcastle-united-leeds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa15d7f5f0fc03827c03d7e03b105ea6b77ab9f42%2F0_76_1598_959%2F1598.jpg>
 The striker Ade Akinfenwa, here celebrating AFC Wimbeldon’s promotion in May, 
has joined Wycombe. Photograph: Andrew Matthews/PA 
Quality can wait a minute but for quantity Crawley Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crawley-town> is the place to go: they 
have recruited 14 players, the latest being Addison Garnett, a former QPR 
youngster, who joins Mitchell Beeney (on loan from Chelsea) and Alper Tursun 
(from the Turkish side Alanyaspor) among many others.

Blackpool, putting the proceeds from the Doyle sale to good use, have shied 
away from their reputation as a complete shambles by making a few handy 
recruits, notably Kyle Vassell from Peterborough and Andy Taylor from Walsall. 
Leyton Orient have made interesting additions too, such as Yvan Erichot from 
Sint-Truiden in Belgium, plus Jordan Bowery (formerly of Aston Villa) from 
Oxford. Kevin Nolan will not be at Brisbane Road next season, though: he was 
replaced as manager by Andy Hessenthaler in January and technically stayed on 
as a player but did not appear on the pitch again and has left the club.

Finally Ade Akinfenwa’s plea, live on television after helping Wimbledon to 
win the play-off final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/30/plymouth-argyle-wimbledon-league-two-play-off-match-report>
, for prospective clubs to “hit me up on WhatsApp” bore fruit this week, as he 
signed a one-year contract with Wycombe and was promptly sent off on his debut 
in a friendly against the French side Le Havre – the old fashioned 
come-and-get-me plea brought into the 21st century.
 