
1) Spurs have everything not to play for

With matches against Stoke, Hull and Everton remaining this season, Tottenham 
Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> are up against 
it in the race to avoid qualifying for next season’s Europa League. As if the 
prospect of facing two teams with nothing to play for isn’t bad enough, their 
fate is no longer in their own hands: even three consecutive defeats will not 
be enough to save them and they will still be relying on favours from the teams 
beneath them to extricate themselves from their current pickle.

Southampton (Leicester away, Aston Villa at home, Man City away) and Swansea 
(Arsenal away, Man City away andCrystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> at home) have tougher 
run-ins and it seems unlikely both will win enough points to save Spurs, who 
could end up counting on an Aston Villa FA Cup final win to keep them out of 
Europe’s second tier competition and improve their chances of breaking into the 
top four next season. Never mind the relegation battle, these are stressful 
times at White Hart Lane, where with three games of the season remaining there 
is everything to not play for.Barry Glendenning
• Messi still not better than Maradona, says Pochettino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/lionel-messi-diego-maradona-mauricio-pochettino>
• Jimmy Greaves out of intensive care following severe stroke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/jimmy-greaves-out-of-intensive-care-stroke>
2) A penny for Gerrard’s thoughts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Ffootball-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431012227501%2F9ec1445f-d1f9-4c2e-9494-04c56a666908-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Ffootball-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Ffootball-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431012227501%2F9ec1445f-d1f9-4c2e-9494-04c56a666908-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Steven Gerrard, Jose Mourinho and Brendan Rodgers will meet again at Stamford 
Bridge. Photograph: Carl Recine/Action Images 
“He [Gerrard] is a historical player for Liverpool, a historical player for the
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> and an 
opponent I have always admired and respected. We did everything to try [to sign 
him] and it was almost there. I was dreaming of [Claude] Makélélé, Gerrard and 
[Frank] Lampard in midfield. We were playing in a proper triangle without a 
No10 and playing Maka in front of the defenders. Me, Mr Abramovich and [the 
former Chelsea chief executive] Peter Kenyon at that time, we dreamed of that. 
His people were open to him joining a top side like Chelsea. But to me 
personally he never said he would come. Never. He [Gerrard] was always a red 
and I think the decision was right”– José Mourinho, January 2015

You wonder if Steven Gerrard himself will still think the decision was right 
when he lines up in the guard of honour to welcome the Premier League’s new 
champions on to the pitch on Sunday. In all likelihood, yes. It might be a 
slightly bittersweet occasion for theLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> midfielder but he has always 
insisted he never really wanted to leave the club in the summer of 2005, when 
the Reds’ rejection of a £32m bid from Chelsea led to a transfer request and 
all manner of brouhaha. But few would blame him if, even if just for a moment, 
his thoughts stray to what might have been.JA
• Sturridge to miss start of next season after hip surgery  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/daniel-sturridge-liverpool-next-season-hip-surgery>
• FA charges referee over Twitter post to daughter of Hillsborough victim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/fa-charges-referee-craig-langton-twitter-post-daughter-hillsborough-victim>
3) Can Villa put relegation fears to bed?

You have to go back to the beginning of December in search of West Ham’s last 
Premier League victory on the road, a 2-1 win over West Brom that left the 
Hammers fifth in the table and just a point outside the Champions League 
places. Since then their record away from home reads: DLDLDDLLLD, a 10-match 
sequence Tim Sherwood will be hoping to embellish with another ‘L’ in his bid 
to secure Villa’s survival as quickly as possible and focus his energies on the 
FA Cup final against Arsenal. Things to look out for? The novice West Ham 
central defender Reece Burke testing his teenage mettle against the currently 
unstoppable force that is Christian Benteke, the resurgent Tom Cleverley 
continuing to answer his many critics and a raft of monotonously predictable 
but highly amusing barbs about Tory spoofer David Cameron being pleased 
whatever the outcome.BG

• Villa valued at £150m in Tony Adams-linked takeover bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/aston-villa-takeover-150m-paul-smith>

4) Can Sunderland do for Newcastle? 
 Jermaine Defoe and Sunderland go in search of a vital victory against 
Everton. Photograph: Ian Horrocks/Sunderland AFC via Getty Images 
With Newcastle in a tailspin and apparently relying on the charity and 
ineptitude of others to keep them in the Premier League, there is a delicious 
irony in the fact that their north-east rivals Sunderland may very well be the 
club that comes up short and pulls through for them.Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> will next be pitted against 
their fellow relegation battlers Leicester (h), Arsenal (a) and Chelsea (a), so 
a win in the early Saturday afternoon fixture against Everton would catapult 
Dick Advocaat’s side four places up the table, leaving them above Newcastle for 
at least a couple of hours, if not several generations. While the six points a 
season guaranteed from matches against the Magpies would certainly be missed, 
it’s still an excellent incentive for them to triumph at Goodison Park.

Under Gus Poyet, Sunderland’s approach couldn’t have been more conservative if 
it was wearing full Bullingdon boy regalia and braying about the peasantry at a 
club social in a posh restaurant. By stark contrast, Advocaat has ordered 
full-backs Patrick van Aanholt and Billy Jones to get forward and provide 
width, while Jermain Defoe and Connor Wickham tuck in to support the lone 
centre-forward Steven Fletcher. It is an attacking collective that is unlikely 
to strike terror into the hearts of defenders who have kept clean sheets in 
their last four matches at home but might be potent enough to get a goal or two 
against a back four that shipped three againstAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> last week. A tough one to 
call this, unless you’re something other than a delusional Sunderland fan, in 
which case the obvious call is: Everton.BG
• Which three clubs will be relegated from the Premier League this season? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/premier-league-relegation-aston-villa-newcastle-leicester-hull-city-sunderland-qpr-burnley>
• Martínez: sending players on loan is better than U21 league 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/everton-roberto-martinez-under-21-premier-league>
5) Score or it’s over for Burnley

The Tigers didn’t respond well to the pressure being cranked up last weekend. 
Saturday victories for the other relegation candidates meant they went into 
their Monday game against Arsenal with the gap closing and they produced a 
timid display. They will have to cope rather better with the nerves against a
Burnley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> side who are in the last 
chance saloon. Anything other than a win relegates the Clarets.

There’s no doubt as to what has put them in this predicament. Only one team in 
the past five seasons – Norwich in 2013-14 – have scored fewer than 30 goals in 
a Premier League campaign. Burnley have thus far scored just 26. Dyche this 
week insisted that there has been nothing wrong with his side tactically, and 
that the problem has been a failure to take chances rather than create them. In 
their last nine games, they have scored just once – the only goal of the game 
againstManchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> at 
Turf Moor. If they do not break that run, it’s over.JA
• Duff free to play in relegation battle at Hull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/06/burnley-michael-duff-red-card-rescinded>
6) Can Leicester cope with a different kind of pressure?
 Leonardo Ulloa celebrates scoring against Newcastle last week. Photograph: 
Alan Walter/Action Images via Reuters 
Five wins in six have given Leicester a great chance to stay up but their work 
is far from done. They were in such dire straits before this recent surge that 
they are clear of the relegation zone by a solitary point.Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> were obliging visitors to 
Sunderland last weekend and with the Foxes making their own trip to the Stadium 
of Light next week, Nigel Pearson will be keen to seize the opportunity for a 
bit of breathing space.

It took until the 75th minute for Southampton to break Leicester down when 
they visited St Mary’s in November and that was slap-bang in the middle of 
City’s 13-match run without a win. They are a different proposition now but a 
note of caution should be sounded – all of a sudden expectations have changed. 
While before they had nothing to lose and everything to gain, now they are 
favourites to beat Southampton and the drop. And that brings a different kind 
of pressure to contend with.JA
• Ulloa continues Leicester City’s surge  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/02/leicester-city-newcastle-united-premier-league-match-report>
7) Four on the bounce for Manchester United?

Safe and sound in 12th place, Crystal Palace may not have much to play for, 
but anyone who thinks Manchester United will get an easy ride at a packed 
Selhurst Park need only cast their mind back a year when Liverpool came to town 
and saw their title hopes crumble in the face of an incredible comeback by a 
mid-table side playing as if their lives depended on avoiding defeat. Expect no 
quarter to be spared or given in a contest that pits together two teams managed 
by men with very high opinions of themselves. Desperate for the points they 
need to guarantee a top four finish,Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> travel to south-west 
London on the back of three consecutive defeats and there is every possibility 
they will depart having suffered another one. A potential Saturday evening 
humdinger and those who like a punt will surely be tempted by odds of 7-2 
against a Palace victory.BG
• Manchester United seal early deal for Memphis Depay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/manchester-united-agree-fee-memphis-depay-psv-eindhoven>
• Bale determined to stay with Real Madrid in the long term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/06/gareth-bale-determined-stay-real-madrid-manchester-united>

http://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/07/memphis-depay-manchester-united-tarzan-tattoos

Memphis Depay: a Tarzan with tattoos struts into Manchester United| Bart 
Vlietstra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/07/memphis-depay-manchester-united-tarzan-tattoos>
8) Same again from Newcastle
 Newcastle United’s captain, Fabricio Coloccini, has called on supporters to 
get behind the team. Photograph: Michael Zemanek/BPI/Rex 
Having lost eight on the spin and been roundly abused by their manager and 
fans last weekend,Fabricio Coloccini piped up on behalf of himself and his 
team-mates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/05/fabricio-coloccini-newcastle->
 (but pointedly not his manager) during the week through the risible medium of 
an open letter, pleading with supporters to give their full backing to what he 
claims is a fully committed team for the final three games of the season.

As justifiably irate at their team of non-triers’ obvious lack of effort as 
they have been in recent weeks, Newcastle supporters are a fairly easily 
pleased bunch who will rally behind their players at the first sign of fight or 
effort against West Brom. Sadly, all available evidence from recent weeks 
suggests they will be provided with little to enthuse over. Following John 
Carver’s very public shaming of his players last week, it is difficult to 
imagine them putting in a shift at his behest. Get your popcorn ready, because 
after their captain’s open letter, the reaction of up to 50,000 natives to yet 
another spineless surrender from their team could make for riveting viewing.BG
• Carver: ‘I still think I’m the best coach in the Premier League’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/newcastle-john-carver-best-coach-premier-league>
• Newcastle expand search after Steve McClaren refuses to step in  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/newcastle-john-carver-best-coach-premier-league>
9) Will the real Manchester City please stand up?

Since the turn of the year, no one has been able to guess which Manchester 
City will turn up at the weekend. Will it be the one that thumped Newcastle 5-0 
and Stoke 4-1 back in February? Or the motley crew that surrendered at Selhurst 
Park, Turf Moor and Old Trafford? The team that seemed set to cruise to victory 
against Villa for an hour? Or the one that was lucky to avoid defeat in the 
final 30 minutes?

The Manchester Evening News this week suggested that Manuel Pellegrini’s 
position has been solidified by assurances received by Carlo Ancelotti over his 
future at Real Madrid. With the futures of Yaya Touré, Pablo Zabaleta, Jesus 
Navas, Fernando, James Milner, Samir Nasri, Bacary Sagna, Martín Demichelis, 
Edin Dzeko, Gaël Clichy, Aleksandar Kolarov, and Stevan Jovetic all (according 
to various reports) uncertain and Frank Lampard finally heading off to MLS, it 
is perhaps no longer the manager whose future at the club is at stake over the 
closing weeks of season.JA
• Yaya Touré 90% certain to leave Manchester City, says agent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/yaya-toure-leave-manchester-city-agent>
• The Rumour Mill: Pogba to Manchester City for £50m? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/football-transfer-rumours-paul-pogba-manchester-city>
10) The biggest ever Old Farm derby

Games against your local rivals are the toughest ones to cope with for fans. 
There is that big, juicy carrot – the chance to get one over on your most hated 
opponents. But (and this tends to loomfar larger in most fans’ consciousness) 
there’s that huge spiky stick – the risk of the most painful of defeats. Throw 
in the drama and general high-tension of the play-offs and you have a recipe 
that will get the knees trembling on even the most stoic of supporters.

So it’s quite a big weekend in East Anglia. “It is probably going to be the 
biggest derby ever between the two clubs,” said the Norwich manager Alex Neil 
about the prospect of taking on Ipswich over two legs. He’s not wrong – the 
only tie that comes close is the Milk Cup semi-final between the teams back in 
1985. There is considerably more at stake on Saturday.
 Norwich City’s Lewis Grabban heads his side’s opening goal against Ipswich 
Town back in August. Photograph: Nigel French/PA 
Recent history suggests league position and total points is a more accurate 
predictor of play-off semi-final success than form over the final few games, 
but whichever way you view it Ipswich begin as underdogs. They were pretty 
hapless in a 3-2 defeat to Blackburn on the final day of the season, when they 
knew only a win would guarantee a place in the post-season. Fortunately for 
Mick McCarthy and his men results elsewhere – namely Derby’s capitulation at 
home to Reading – went in their favour and they scraped into the play-offs in 
the sixth and final spot.

The Canaries, on the other hand, come into the game on the back of six wins 
and a draw in their last eight fixtures and a points tally that would have seen 
them promoted automatically in five of the past eight seasons (indeed their 86 
points would have been enough to take theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> title in 2007-08 and is 
more than Paul Lambert’s City side mustered when they were promoted 
automatically in 2010-11). Alex Neil’s 22 games in charge have yielded 15 wins 
and four draws. There’s no doubt who the form horse is in this race. And 
Norwich have already done the double over the Tractor boys this season …

Elsewhere, Brentford and Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> square off on Friday 
evening in the other Championship semi-final first leg, while in League Two 
Plymouth take on Wycombe on Saturday and Stevenage face Southend on Sunday 
evening.JA
• Brentford play high-stakes game as they chase jackpot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/07/brentford-premier-league-mark-warburton>
• Byrne’s late winner hands Swindon the edge over Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/league-one-play-off-first-leg-sheffield-united-swindon-town-match-report>
• Preston take advantage after Jermaine Beckford’s early goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/league-one-play-off-first-leg-chesterfield-preston>
Lionel Messi: the genius who operates to a different set of physical rules | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/07/lionel-messi-barcelona-bayern-munich> 