
Championship

• Middlesbrough will return to the Premier League after a seven-year absence 
following a tense1-1 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/07/middlesbrough-promoted-premier-league-draw-brighton-boro>
 with Brighton in their promotion decider at the Riverside. Locked on the same 
points coming into the final weekend of the regular season, Brighton needed a 
victory to go up but fell behind on 19 minutes to Christian Stuani’s 
close-range strike. Dale Stephens’ headed equaliser created a frantic finish 
but Boro held out to win the £170m promotion prize on goal difference.

Chris Hughton’s Brighton side will have to go through the play-offs if they 
are to join Boro in the top flight next season. They will face Sheffield 
Wednesday in the semi-finals, who were beaten 2-1 at Wolves in the final game 
of the regular season, while Hull City will meet Derby County in the other tie. 
Derby ended with a 1-0 defeat by Ipswich as Hull thumped five past Rotherham.

• Burnley clinched the Championship title with a 3-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/07/charlton-athletic-burnley-championship-match-report>
 over Charlton that was as notable for the protests against the south London 
club’s owner, Roland Duchâtelet, as Burnley’s achievement. After the game the 
Charlton manager, José Riga, resigned from his role at a club which is heading 
to League One in disarray.

Having finished 19th in the Premier League last season, the Clarets’ hierarchy 
were rewarded for keeping faith in their manager, Sean Dyche, who can look 
forward to another crack at the top flight. Goals by Sam Vokes, George Boyd and 
Andre Gray helped Burnley to finish with 93 points, four clear of Middlesbrough 
and Brighton, and ensured the £6m record-singing Gray finished as the league’s 
top scorer on 25, havingpicked up the player of the season award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/18/burnleys-andre-gray-wins-championship-player-of-the-year>
 last month.

Charlton fans interrupted the game with flares thrown on to the pitch as 
another match at The Valley was marred by the toxic atmosphere surrounding the 
club. With their team already relegated, a swath of supporters gathered in 
front of the main stand after the match to call for their Belgian millionaire 
owner to sell the club – and they were joined by someBurnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> fans in a show of solidarity by 
supporters of a club whose season could not have provided a starker contrast.

Championship table. <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship/table>

League Two

• It was set up to be a dramatic day at the top of League Two and at the end 
it was Bristol Rovers who delivered.Accrington Stanley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/accringtonstanley> came into the final 
weekend of the regular season a point clear of Oxford United and two above 
Rovers but could not find the win against Stevenage that would have guaranteed 
them promotion – with the substitute Shay McCartan twice hitting the bar in the 
final minutes of the goalless draw.

Oxford took the opportunity to leapfrog Accrington with a 3-0 win at home to 
Wycombe and Rovers claimed the third and final automatic promotion spot through 
Lee Brown’s stoppage-time header to complete a 2-1 comeback and consecutive 
promotions for the south-west club, sparking celebrations at the Memorial 
Ground.

• The 521 dedicated Hartlepool fans who made the trip to Plymouth continued a 
tradition in recent years by travelling to their final away game of the season 
in fancy dress, opting this time for Star Wars Stormtrooper costumes, but were 
left on the dark side of a 5-0 thrashing by their hosts.

Argyle will meet Portsmouth in the play-off semi-finals. Portsmouth lost to 
the League Two champions, Northampton, 2-1, having rested several key players. 
The other tie will see Accrington face AFC Wimbledon, who finished their 
campaign with a 1-0 win against 22nd-placed Newport County.

• Mark Cooper left his post as Notts County manager after their 5-0 defeat at 
home to Carlisle after only 10 games in charge. Two goals by Jabo Ibehre either 
side of half-time helped the visitors on their way to a result which now leaves 
Notts searching for their seventh manager in 14 months.

League Two table. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball/table>
 