
Dele Alli signed a new five-year contract at Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> in January, and then a 
new six-year-one in September, so it could not possibly be anyone associated 
with him who has put about today’s story thatParis Saint-Germain are ready to 
offer him an enormous pay rise in order to lure him to France. But somehow the 
Daily Mirror has got wind of a plot by the Parisians to offer Spurs £50m for 
the pleasure of driving the midfielder’s wages even higher.

What is more, the Mirror say that Real Madrid are also eyeing up Alli. 
Fortunately, Alli seems a level-headed enough sort of chap to not let such 
speculation distract him, despite being unbalanced enough, when in a penalty 
area,to be knocked over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/dele-alli-dive-spurs-mauricio-pochettino-michael-owen-tottenham-england-football>
 by an imperceptible gust of wind.

Yannick Bolasie injury may be worse than stated, admits Everton’s Koeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/yannick-bolasie-injury-means-everton-need-to-sign-players-in-january-admits-ronald-koeman>
Speaking of which, Everton are contemplating making an offer to Manchester 
United forAshley Young. The loss of Yannick Bolasie to serious injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/yannick-bolasie-injury-means-everton-need-to-sign-players-in-january-admits-ronald-koeman>
 has forced Ronald Koeman to draw up a wish list of new wingers and he has 
narrowed it down to about 186 names. Young is on there, and so is his United 
team-mate Memphis Depay, along with Leicester City’s Demarai Gray and Watford’s 
Nordin Amrabat.

Eveton aren’t only hunting wingers, of course, they are also plotting a swoop 
for Napoli’sManolo Gabbiadini and keeping tabs on Monaco’s 17-year-old striking 
prodigyKylian Mbappé, who’s also being monitored by Arsenal, Manchester City, 
Manchester United. And even West Ham are watching the youngster, just in case 
they decide to deviate from the policy they tried last summer, which is 
possible, because signing mostly rubbish players hasn’t worked out.

Real Madrid have told Borussia Dortmund to let them know if they want to sell 
Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, Julian Weigl or Ousmane Dembélé. Dortmund don’t, at 
the moment.

Leicester’s Leonardo Ulloa is considering the merits of some fascinating 
project proposals from Chinese clubs. So isCarlos Tevez, who, at 32, is nearing 
the end of his time at Boca Juniors.

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, Spurs and Juventus 
have had scouts watching 19-year-old Atalanta midfielderFranck Kessié. And now 
that everyone knows that, there will be many more scouts at his next game.

Finally, Branislav Ivanovic has let it be known that he will not leave Chelsea 
in January. His recent performances, indeed, have confirmed that he is going 
nowhere fast.
 