
There was a time when Arsène Wenger would rather have donned a butler suit and 
catered to José Mourinho’s every whim than spend millions on a player about to 
turn 30, but then again, there was a time when Wenger was champion of England. 
Things change. So in an effort to become champion of England once again, Wenger 
is considering sanctioning the recruitment of theCelta Vigo forward Nolito, who 
is said to be displeased by his latest contract offer and has been given reason 
to believeArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> will pay him 
much more. That sounds like a project a player could get excited by.

There is something green and foldable about Arsenal’s project that excites 
Adrien Rabiot but there is more, too, which is why the 20-year-old is 
considering leaving Paris Saint-Germain for London, clubs permitting.

Radamel Falcao’s demise from world great to manager’s regret has been sad to 
behold. But every cloud has a silver lining, except mushroom clouds, and the 
Colombian’s embarrassing could spell good news for the MLS franchise Columbus 
Crew, who apparently believe Falcao could become a big hit in the United 
States, like Bradley Wright-Phillips, One Direction and Prozac.

Sir Alex Ferguson has aired his fears Jürgen Klopp could make Liverpool good 
again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/07/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-bastian-schweinsteiger-charge>
, and the German is preparing to reinforce those fears by makingGiuseppe Rossi 
good again. The forward, who once flopped at Manchester United, is doing fine 
at Fiorentina, and Klopp believes he could do even better at Anfield.

Swansea City are said to be believe the answer to their problems is a long, 
convoluted one with obtuse jargon and a positive emphasis on the fact the club 
is riding high one point above the team who beat the reigning champions last 
weekend. The answer, then,could be Brendan Rodgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/07/garry-monk-swansea-job-chairman-brendan-rodgers>
. Rangers’ Mark Warburton and the former Internazionale supremo Walter Mazzarri 
have also been mentioned. All of which suggests people reckon Garry Monk is on 
his bike.

Hatem Ben Arfa’s current phase of fine play is so darn convincing Inter and 
Borussia Dortmund are among the clubs queueing to offer him a contract when his 
deal atNice <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice> expires.

Troy Deeney and Odion Ighalo may be the most thrilling partnership since beans 
and toast but that doesn’t mean that simple recipe can’t be improved:Watford 
are preparing to add a tasty Lincolnshire sausage in the form, obviously, of 
Juventus and Italy strikerSimone Zaza.

Finally, Celtic want Libor Kozak, which is handy because Aston Villa seemingly 
don’t.

That was a lie. The “finally” bit, that is. Because here is the real last 
datum:Everton and Sunderland want to add to Leeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited> fans’ already considerable 
pain by takingSam Byram away from them.
 