
Luka Modric’s move from Spurs to Real Madrid in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/aug/27/luka-modric-tottenham-real-madrid>
 was followed by a strange announcement from the London club. “The club can 
announce that it has signed a partnership agreement withReal Madrid FC and 
reached agreement for the transfer of Luka Modric, subject to medical, to the 
Spanish club. The partnership agreement will see the two clubs working together 
in respect of players, coaching, best practices and commercial relationships.”

Having sold Gareth Bale to the Madrid giants a year later, and after receiving 
no players, coaches, no announcements of joint commercial ventures, Tottenham 
ended the ‘partnership’, having watched Real sell Mesut Özil to Spurs’ biggest 
rivals. But time, it appears, is a healer and just three years after that 
divorce, Real are back, baby, with cash in a wheelbarrow, and a note that reads 
“Dele Alli, por favor.” 

Manchester United reject Everton bid for Morgan Schneiderlin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/manchester-united-everton-morgan-schneiderlin-transfer-west-brom>
Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> are thought to 
favour a summer move for the England international, who earns a measly 
£60,000-a-week at the Lane. The 20-year-old signed a new contract in both 
January 2015 and September (to 2022) but has scored five times in his last 
three Premier League games. Spurs are loth to lose one of their most promising 
players but Mauricio Pochettino has valued Alli around the £50m mark and Levy 
is said to prefer any sale to a club abroad, rather than a Premier League rival.

Paulo Dybala has already told Real president Florentino Pérez that he will 
sign for them in the summer, according to the Barcelona newspaper Mundo 
Deportivo. Juventus have offered the Dybala a new contract until 2021 but that 
is still €2m shy of the salary his compatriot Gonzalo Higuaín earns in Turin.

Crystal Palace’s Christian Benteke has turned down a £40m offer from the 
Chinese sideBeijing Guoan. The striker feels settled in London after his £27m 
move from Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/crystal-palace-sign-christian-benteke-liverpool>
 and looks set to become a key part of Sam Allardyce’s plans. The Belgian grew 
up playing street football as a kid in Liège with Axel Witsel, who has just 
agreed a switch to Tianjin Quanjian worth nearly £300,000-a-week, similar to 
the Lionel Messi’s wage at Barcelona. Witsel turned down a move to Juventus, 
explaining “there was a crucial offer for my family that I couldn’t turn down. 
The leadership at Juventus have always behaved like gentlemen with me and I can 
only be grateful to them. I will cheer for Juventus and I hope they can win the 
Champions League. Then who knows, maybe one day in the future our paths will 
finally meet.”

RB Leipzig are said to be preparing a £15m offer for Brentford striker Scott 
Hogan, which would make the Englishman their record signing. The German side 
are three points off the top of the Bundesliga but are no strangers to the 
Championship’s finest, having spent £13m on Nottingham Forest teenager Oliver 
Burke in the summer. One of the speediest players in England’s second tier, 
Hogan has scored 14 times this season already, and would join a lightning-quick 
attack that includes Timo Werner and Yussuf Poulsen.


Burnley re-sign Joey Barton despite threat of suspension for misconduct
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/burnley-sign-joey-barton-despite-suspension-threat>
Cesare Prandelli has confirmed that Valencia’s failure to sign Simone Zaza was 
the reason that he resigned as head coach. The Italian manager quit just three 
months after joining Valencia, who sit in 17th in La Liga, and targeted Zaza – 
on loan at West Ham from Valencia – as a January reinforcement. “I felt 
undermined,” said Prandelli. “I arrived at a big project and left with a poor 
impression. Why is Zaza not here? I do not know. But on the 28th, the president 
told me I had 24 hours to choose between a striker and a midfielder and that 
for me was not a progressive move. I think an outside counsellor advised 
[owner] Peter Lim no to sign him.”

 Ten goals in 55 Championship appearances is apparently enough to earn you a 
move to the Premier League these days:Rudy Gestede is on the verge of sealing a 
transfer from Aston Villa toMiddlesbrough, where he will likely spend most of 
his time reminiscing about playing well with his old Blackburn Rovers mucker 
Jordan Rhodes on the Boro bench. “The two clubs have agreed a fee [thought to 
be £6m] and he’s up there for talks”, said the Villa manager Steve Bruce on 
Monday.

 * Follow your team and stay up to date with the latest rumours throughout the 
transfer window withour Facebook Messenger alerts 
<http://m.me/theguardian?ref=football_transfers>. Simply hit ‘Get started’ at 
the bottom of the screen to receive the latest alerts.  