
A football fan who ran on to a pitch topless and performed somersaults during 
anFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> match has received a 
three-year banning order.

Charlie Sumner, 20, staged a one-man invasion at Reading’s Madejski stadium 
during their quarter-final replay againstBradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> City last month. The Reading 
supporter, nicknamed Pudding, whose team were 3-0 up at the time, did four 
front flips on the pitch, landing on his back each time, before he was tackled 
by stewards.

The match on 16 March was broadcast live to millions of viewers on BBC1, while 
footage of Sumner’s antics went viral on the internet.

A banning order for three years was imposed at Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/reading> magistrates court on Thursday. He 
was also fined £265. Sumner’s solicitor entered a guilty plea on his behalf at 
an earlier hearing to one count of going on to a playing area at a football 
match under the Football Offences Act 1991.

Sumner, from Woodley in Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading>
, was also ordered to pay £85 costs and a £27 victim surcharge. He said 
afterwards that he planned to appeal against his sentence. “I think that I’ve 
been made an example of and that both the banning order and the fine are 
harsh,” he said. “I apologise to anyone I may have offended but the reason for 
going on the pitch was to celebrate. I’ve had my five minutes of fame and I 
won’t be doing it again.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIh2ThFOqNy8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIh2ThFOqNy8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIh2ThFOqNy8&media=>
Louise Attrill, prosecuting, said Sumner had attended the match with friends 
and climbed over a chain barrier on to the pitch at about 9.15pm. “He 
somersaulted three or four times before running up to the Bradford supporters, 
shaking his fist in a ‘wanker’ gesture at them. He was taken off the pitch by 
stewards and arrested.”

Attrill said while it might appear to be an isolated incident by a person of 
good character, it could have triggered more widespread disorder. She said 
Sumner had gone on to appear in articles in the press and, in one interview, 
asked if he would do it again, said: “Yeah, maybe.”

She added: “It is quite clear he enjoyed the attention he received that day.” 
He had been pictured outside the court before with his thumbs up. “It could be 
argued that this is showing disrespect to the justice system. It almost makes a 
mockery of the system, and because this is in the media, this behaviour should 
be cracked down on, he should be made an example of.

“The police are taking it very seriously and the court should take it very 
seriously. This kind of behaviour can cause a lot of disruption.”



Reading v Bradford City: FA Cup quarter-final replay – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/mar/16/reading-v-bradford-city-fa-cup-quarter-final-replay-live>
Sally Thomson, defending, said the crowd reacted in an encouraging and 
positive manner. “It seems he did have some official encouragement,” she said.

A Guardian minute-by-minute report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/mar/16/reading-v-bradford-city-fa-cup-quarter-final-replay-live#block-55074873e4b07784ec6303bf>
 of the game said circus music was turned on when he went on, and Sumner 
performed gymnastics to it.

Sumner, who works as a dry liner, is a lifelong amateur footballer, and 
represented Reading Schools in a national final in 2006. Supporting Reading on 
16 March was a one-off by Sumner, who is a Liverpool fan and not a regular 
attender at football matches, Thomson said.

The presiding magistrate, Paul Dick, told Sumner: “You understand football and 
what public order and public disorder can be all about in a situation like 
that. We have no sympathy for you at all.”
 