
Hinkley Point C, the multibillion pound nuclear deal, years in the making, is 
on the cusp of unravelling. At the last minute,the government has hit the pause 
button 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/29/hinkley-point-c-why-has-government-delayed-final-approval>
 in order to take a hard look at what Hinkley is offering in return for £37bn 
of energy consumers’ money.

The voices of opposition are growing. Even newspapers which have supported the 
nuclear industry are raising doubts.


Its supporters chant the same mantra: there is no alternative, Britain needs 
Hinkley to keep the lights on. That was the warning from the then business 
secretary,John Hutton, in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/24/edf.britishenergygroup> yet 
the lights are still on and Lord Hutton is now the chairman of the Nuclear 
Industry Association.

But the world - and the electricity landscape - has changed radically since 
2008.

Then, just 5.5% 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/228866/7686.pdf>
 of the UK’s electricity came from renewables.It’s now 25% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/24/renewable-energy-outstrips-coal-for-first-time-in-uk-electricity-mix>
. Costs have plummeted – solar photovoltaic is 50% cheaper than it was in 2011, 
onshore wind is down 43% <http://www.brightblue.org.uk/images/lightson.pdf>. 
More than 800,000 homes now have rooftop solar 
<http://www.solar-trade.org.uk/uk-reaches-1-million-solar-homes-milestone/> and 
theUK was recently ranked sixth in the world for total solar capacity - despite 
our weather. 
<http://www.iea-pvps.org/fileadmin/dam/public/report/PICS/IEA-PVPS_-__A_Snapshot_of_Global_PV_-_1992-2015_-_Final_2_02.pdf>

It is ranked first in the world for offshore wind, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/02/germany-leads-europe-in-offshore-wind-energy-growth>
 which is on course tosupply 10% of our power by 2020 
<http://www.renewableuk.com/news/291683/>, much more than Hinkley C. The cost 
for wind and solar is coming down too.


The way we increasingly get our energy is changing. The former chief executive 
of the National Grid, Steve Holliday, said that the idea that we need nuclear 
power stations to provide baseload electricityis “outdated” 
<http://www.energypost.eu/interview-steve-holliday-ceo-national-grid-idea-large-power-stations-baseload-power-outdated/>
.


Baseload is the trump card of Hinkley’s supporters: how do we keep the lights 
on when the sun isn’t shining and the wind isn’t blowing? But the National Grid 
predicts that in some scenarios by 2020, small-scale  
<http://www.powerresponsive.com/viewpoints/internet-of-things-meeting-the-uk-s-grid-balancing-needs/>
and distributed generation will represent a third of total capacity in the UK. 
The future is more local and in our control. It will also provide more jobs and 
greater energy security at increasingly lower cost.

Intermittent supply is already being tackled with interconnectors - basically, 
huge cables connecting the UK with European countries like Norway to manage 
variations in supply coming from renewables. They could be hugely expanded. But 
renewables and interconnectors are only part of the answer.

Electricity demand is not constant. At peak times, there can be up to 50% more 
demand 
<http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2015/09/21/4-ways-the-uk-can-get-almost-all-its-power-from-renewables/>
 compared to the average – typically when people get home from work in the 
early evening and prepare their evening meal, especially in winter.

This demand needs to be met with power generation which can be switched on, 
sometimes at very short notice. Hydropower does this – with reservoirs in 
places like Scotland, Wales and Sweden being filled up at a time of low demand, 
so water can be released through turbines when demand is high.

Existing gas-fired plants can also be fired up at short notice, but this comes 
with a carbon cost. The point is to use it only when back up is required and 
only until alternatives become mainstream.

The real leap forward will come with improved storage. 

You can also look at energy demand another way.


Rather than building lots of extra capacity to meet intermittent peaks, could 
those peaks be lower by shutting down demand where and when it’s not needed?

Google and Tesla are already experimenting with smart energy – managing how 
gadgets are switched on and off.

Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/energy> systems and the 
thinking behind them are changing fast. What happened in just a few years with 
telephones - where we moved from centralised exchanges and fixed landlines to 
mobile phones - is about to happen with energy systems. Hinkley is a roadblock 
in this transition.

And then there’s the Cinderella of them all - energy efficiency. The less we 
use, the easier the problem is to solve. If all street lights were switched to 
LED bulbs we could take half a GW of demand off the grid with ease.

If all homes did the same, we’d save 2.7GW of power at peak use - that’s 
nearly the equivalent of Hinkley by just changing the lightbulbs.

The UK has come a long way since 2008 – the year parliament passed the Climate 
Change Act, which committed the UK to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 80% 
by 2050 compared to 1990 levels. We are already halfway there with emissions 
down 40%.

A low-carbon future is essential. So is energy security and affordable energy. 
If we are to deliver on all three, there is a huge investment opportunity 
across renewable energy, interconnectors, energy storage, smart grids and 
energy efficiency. We mustn’t squander that money and opportunity on Hinkley 
Point C.

• We would like to publish your ideas about how to power Britain. Please send 
them tojohn.sauven@greenpeace.org <mailto:john.sauven@greenpeace.org>.

 