
Since the beginning of the year, I have been writing a series of notes each 
Monday in the Guardian's G2 section on "How to solve crosswords". This came to 
an end last month. It was intended as advice and encouragement to beginners, 
taking (or wanting to take) the cryptic plunge for the first time. But it 
attracted reaction from parts of the crosswording community that I had not 
expected to reach. One theme was that the Guardian's cryptic puzzles have 
become steadily harder over recent years.

In response to this implied criticism of my stewardship, I explained my ground 
rules. These are that each week there should be two easier, two middling and 
two harder puzzles, with one of these usually being the Saturday prize puzzle. 
(In this, the Guardian differs from the other London "broadsheets", where the 
standard of difficulty is much more uniform.) And I set out the statistics 
indicating that, over a year, the puzzles were divided roughly into these three 
categories. Unwisely, I concluded: "On this basis, I would tentatively suggest 
that, as with murder and other violent crime, the widespread perception that 
things are rapidly getting worse is not supported by the evidence."

Disgruntled Ex-Crossword Fan was the first to pounce, though why, as an 
ex-crossworder, he had read what I had written in the first place is not clear: 
"I must take issue with Hugh Stephenson. About three years ago, I could do 
enough of the daily crossword to make me feel I was getting somewhere. Now it 
is rare that I can complete more than two or three clues. In fact, I usually 
can't do any. I find it difficult to believe that I am actually getting 
mentally slower, especially as I still choose the Guardian. But now it is for 
the Sudoku!"

Let me give DE-CF the basic facts on which I based my tentative suggestion. I 
took over editing the Guardian's crosswords from John Perkin towards the end of 
1997. In this last decade, which clearly includes DE-CF's "three years", 
Araucaria has always appeared more often than anyone else. His highest annual 
score was 64 and his lowest 55. In 2005 it was 58. The second highest scorer 
over this period was Rufus (between 42 and 37 annually, 41 in 2005). If there 
has been any significant change in the level of abstruseness of these two 
setters, I have to admit candidly that I have been unaware of it. In any given 
year, we publish between 311 and 313 puzzles (the number depends on how the 
Sundays fall). On that basis, 31.7% of the puzzles in 2005 (Araucaria + Rufus) 
should not have been open to the charge that suddenly "only two or three of the 
clues" were now solvable.

Of the other 68.3% (comparing 2005 with 2002 to cover DE-CF's "three years 
ago"), only Paul's annual hit rate rose at all dramatically, doubling to 41. 
Some setters dropped out permanently or temporarily (Crispa, Fawley, Fidelity, 
Hendra, Mercury, Plodge). And there was one newcomer (Brummie), who scored 12 
in 2005. (You will note a couple of other newcomers in 2006: Brendan and 
Arachne.) So I repeat what I said in reply to DE-CF: the assertion that we are 
going to hell in a handcart does not seem to be supported by the evidence.

But, since there is a clear perception in some quarters that we are, I should 
be greatly interested in your views. Here are some possible explanations of the 
conflict between DE-CF's perception and my reality:

1 Existing setters, getting bored with their old tricks, are inventing new and 
more difficult ones. Thus, Rufus, Araucaria and the others, though producing 
roughly the same number of puzzles each year, are setting more difficult clues 
in order to keep themselves awake. For example, in reviewing my book Secrets of 
the Setters for the Oldie, Colin Dexter took me to task for blessing the modern 
practice whereby the word INDEED is now accepted by the Guardian as indicating 
that something is to be included in DEED. Older solvers may find such new 
tricks unsettling, but I must warn them that they are here to stay.

2 As with the BBC's University Challenge programmes, fewer of us over 60 can 
answer most of the questions because they are increasingly about chemistry, 
higher mathematics and modern popular culture, rather than about cricket, 
boxing and Glen Miller. (In passing I would suggest - defensively - that if 
daily cryptic crosswords are to survive and prosper, they need to shift their 
reference points in the neo-University Challenge direction.)

3 It may be unfortunate, but it is a fact that, as some of us get older, we do 
indeed get mentally slower. Speaking for myself, a decade ago I certainly 
thought I could edit a week's Guardian crosswords in less time than it takes me 
today.

Â· What do you think? Email crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk to have 
your say.
 