
On 23 March, around 300 protesters in New Orleans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-orleans> aimed to shut down a reading 
of oil company bids for 44m acres (180,000 km², the size of the entire state of 
Missouri) in the Gulf of Mexico.

At grassy Duncan Plaza near New Orleans city hall, groups from all over the 
southern US gathered for a protest called New Lease on Life. “I have really bad 
sinuses and I hate smoke,” said 18-year-old Howard Johnson. The young activist 
from Biloxi had boarded a bus and rode for hours to be in New Orleans by 
sunrise to join dozens of other members of green coalitions, local churches and 
members of the Houma Indian Nation.

Zipping all around Duncan Plaza in bright green safety vests were the 
protest’s de facto hosts, members of the Louisiana Bucket Brigade. Bucket 
Brigade founding director Anne Rolfes had writtena letter to Barack Obama 
<http://www.labucketbrigade.org/blog/letter-president-urging-action-lease-sales>
, a desperate last-minute prayer, asking him to cancel this Gulf lease sale and 
halt drilling in the Gulf, ashe had in the Arctic region 
<http://www.politicususa.com/2015/10/18/president-obamas-bold-step-stops-arctic-oil-drilling.html>
 andmore recently in the Atlantic 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2016/03/obama-halts-drilling-in-the-atlantic-ocean/473907/>
.

Her prayer unanswered, Rolfes promised me: “We will engage in civil 
disobedience at the lease sale. We’re going to try and stop the auction.”

Unfortunately for her cause, all the bids had been finalized that past 
Tuesday. Open public meetings had been held on the issue, but no protesters had 
shown up. The groups on hand at the day’s event would essentially be booing the 
movie as its credits rolled.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Foil-drilling-gulf-of-mexico-bucket-brigade-new-orleans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1feb1ae2e1dfd008982b6366c542f1d086b2957c%2F0_169_4896_2934%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=For%20sale%3A%2044m%20acres%20for%20oil%20drilling%2C%20but%20not%20if%20Louisiana's%20Bucket%20Brigade%20can%20help%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Foil-drilling-gulf-of-mexico-bucket-brigade-new-orleans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=For%20sale%3A%2044m%20acres%20for%20oil%20drilling%2C%20but%20not%20if%20Louisiana%27s%20Bucket%20Brigade%20can%20help%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Foil-drilling-gulf-of-mexico-bucket-brigade-new-orleans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1feb1ae2e1dfd008982b6366c542f1d086b2957c%2F0_169_4896_2934%2F4896.jpg>
 Protesters at the New Lease for Life protest. Photograph: Picasa/Laura Borealis
Still, they stormed into the big meeting room at the Mercedes Benz Superdome, 
and on to the stage, chanting, “It’s not for sale get off it! This Gulf is not 
for profit!” into the faces of the oil representatives they outnumbered 
two-to-one. The chants drown out the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management [BOEM]’s 
regional director Mike Solatta as he attempted to speak, pretending he wasn’t 
flanked by 300 loud environmentalists.

Although ruining the ceremonial reading of the bids would not reverse 
decisions already made, they continued chanting and cheering for almost two 
hours, until every bid had been read.

During that time though, not many of the oil reps ever stopped smirking, or 
making “hippy” jokes about granola and soap. “I don’t mind the protesters,” I 
overheard one smirking bald white man tell more than one smirking grey-haired 
white man, “just don’t stand downwind of them!” Safe in their victory, snapping 
ironic iPhone pics, few of the reps on the floor seemed even the least bit 
annoyed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Foil-drilling-gulf-of-mexico-bucket-brigade-new-orleans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8581255fbe85961bb661d7e52b18dd760bf4bdf%2F0_124_4896_2934%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=For%20sale%3A%2044m%20acres%20for%20oil%20drilling%2C%20but%20not%20if%20Louisiana's%20Bucket%20Brigade%20can%20help%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Foil-drilling-gulf-of-mexico-bucket-brigade-new-orleans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=For%20sale%3A%2044m%20acres%20for%20oil%20drilling%2C%20but%20not%20if%20Louisiana%27s%20Bucket%20Brigade%20can%20help%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Foil-drilling-gulf-of-mexico-bucket-brigade-new-orleans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8581255fbe85961bb661d7e52b18dd760bf4bdf%2F0_124_4896_2934%2F4896.jpg>
 BOEM is currently putting together their next five-year plan for drilling 
sites. Photograph: Picasa/Laura Borealis 
 Over the continuous din, I struck up some not insubstantial conversations 
with several of the oil reps, all of whom wanted nothing to do with appearing 
in my article. They chuckled at all the protest signs decrying fracking: “Do 
they realize fracking takes place on land?” One told me he’d attended oil lease 
events for dozens of years and had never experienced a real protest. And thus, 
he had as many questions for me as I for him: “Why are they protestingnow?” he 
wondered. “Don’t they know the oil industry is in a depression?”

All of them reiterated how the very low oil prices that we Americans currently 
enjoy (around $40 a barrel, still, due partly to advances in natural gas 
extraction) are hurting their wallets. It doesn’t help that theirindustry 
already has more than 23m acres under lease 
<http://www.bradenton.com/news/business/article61188067.html#storylink=cpy> in 
the Gulf of Mexico’s federal waters, with only 18% producing oil or gas, for a 
total of more than 19m unexploited acres.

“Sometimes it can take two and half hours to read all the bids,” said John 
Filostrat of BOEM, the federal organization in charge of conducting 
environmental impact studies for oil drilling projects in various areas before 
then holding lease sales. “But at the last Gulf auction in 2015, we had the 
lowest turnout since 1983, with only had a handful of companies bidding 33 
tracts,” he remembers. “And we were done in under a half hour.”

 Though the protesters made sure the latest bids took longer to read, the sale 
reported the fourth lowest bids since 1983, attracting only $156m in high bids. 
The previous Gulf lease sale boasted one single high bid of $52m, compared to a 
highest bid of $13.6m this time. Most of the new bids actually fell below 
$200,000, with some less than $100,000. The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management 
(BOEM) now has 90 days to accept or reject the bids.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Foil-drilling-gulf-of-mexico-bucket-brigade-new-orleans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7223998d21fe20d3e76ec195e78caf1ae8a0be6f%2F0_141_4089_2453%2F4089.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=For%20sale%3A%2044m%20acres%20for%20oil%20drilling%2C%20but%20not%20if%20Louisiana's%20Bucket%20Brigade%20can%20help%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Foil-drilling-gulf-of-mexico-bucket-brigade-new-orleans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=For%20sale%3A%2044m%20acres%20for%20oil%20drilling%2C%20but%20not%20if%20Louisiana%27s%20Bucket%20Brigade%20can%20help%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Foil-drilling-gulf-of-mexico-bucket-brigade-new-orleans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7223998d21fe20d3e76ec195e78caf1ae8a0be6f%2F0_141_4089_2453%2F4089.jpg>
 Protesters said they would be at the public hearings about the new five year 
plan in April. Photograph: Picasa/Laura Borealis 
Though many recent oil lease sales have been similarly slow, BOEM must still 
follow the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act of 1953 and continue offering 
leases on a schedule laid out five years in advance. This year’s oil lease 
sales were planned in 2012; BOEM is currently putting together their next 
five-year plan, covering 2017 to 2021. “When we create our five-year plans, one 
alternative we always consider is not to hold lease sales at all, usually 
because the environmental impact is too great,” claims Filostrat. “Some have 
been cancelled.”

And then Filostrat said something striking: “In the Pacific,” he said, “we 
haven’t held lease sales in decades, because [of] environmental concerns, and 
because the states are so much against them”.

Meaning, if the Gulf states were actually against drilling, it could stop. 
Louisiana’sdependence on oil jobs <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IW6TWK9OwNk> 
remains, however, and may never untangle itself from it: you cannot argue with 
jobs, especially in such a red state.

This is why the Bucket Brigade’s recent demands also included the oil industry 
creating 1,000 jobs repairing the estimated 27,000 dead oil wells that Rolfes 
says are out there.

“While the oil industry is laying off workers because of the drop in the price 
per barrel of oil, the industry in fact needs more workers to prevent ongoing 
accidents,” says Rolfes. “I grew up in Lafayette, I have relationships with a 
lot of these workers so I know these guys. I know the work is difficult and the 
problems are passed on to the workers, who are freaked out because the 
infrastructure is so weak.”

 Though the protesters could have picked a better event, Rolfes and company 
left happy just to have loudly expressed a dissenting viewpoint, and to have 
started a new ball rolling: “We sent a really clear message that we don’t want 
drilling,” she said. “We will be at the public hearings about the new five year 
plan in April, but today was awesome, and a great moment for the Gulf of Mexico:
Before, we used to let these lease sales happen without remark. And now we 
don’t.”
 