
Not every self-driving car company is a hi-tech unicorn eager to disrupt the 
status quo. The latest firm to invite journalists to experience its autonomous 
technology is the epitome of traditional car manufacturing:Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford>.

On its sprawling campus in Dearborn, Michigan, the century-old company is 
trying its hardest to look and act like a new startup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/16/ford-self-driving-cars-ride-sharing-uber-lyft>
. In March, Ford launched a subsidiary called Ford Smart Mobility (FSM) to 
develop in-car connectivity, ride-sharing and autonomous technologies. FSM is 
designed to compete like a startup, with the aim of translating Ford’s decade 
of work in autonomous systems into real products.

At its first public autonomous vehicle demos, young engineers and 
entrepreneurs were enthused about reinventing our traffic-clogged cities.

“We’re rethinking our entire business model,” said Mark Fields, Ford’s CEO. 
“It’s no longer about how many vehicles we can sell, it’s about what services 
we can provide. We understand that the world has changed from a mindset of 
owning vehicles to one of owning and sharing them.”

Ford to build 'high volume' of driverless cars for ride-sharing services
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/16/ford-self-driving-cars-ride-sharing-uber-lyft>
That has led to some quirky investments, such as Ford’s acquisition last week 
of a San Francisco-based crowdsharing shuttle bus startup called Chariot, and a 
partnership to provide the city with thousands of human-powered bikes for a 
ride-sharing scheme.

But while Ford’s car sales are fairly healthy today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/28/ford-reports-higher-quarterly-profits-due-to-strong-sales-in-us>
, Fields foresees a world transformed by driverless cars, Uber and climate 
change. “You could argue that in major cities, vehicle density will drop 
because of automated vehicles and congestion charges. Some cities might even 
outlaw personal use of vehicles.”

One of Ford’s strategies to cope with this is to accelerate its efforts 
towards a fully autonomous car. Fields now says Ford will have a completely 
self-driving car, without a steering wheel, an accelerator or pedals, in 
production by 2021. It will initially be used only for robotic taxi services in 
restricted urban areas but should be available for consumers to purchase by the 
middle of the decade.

Ford’s newfound confidence in self-driving cars comes just as the technology’s 
pioneers are struggling to mature beyond this same gee-whiz enthusiasm. 
Google’s self-driving project, perennially poised to be spun out into a 
separate company, recently lost key members, while Apple is rumoured to have 
laid off dozens of engineers and scaled back its ambitious plans to build its 
own autonomous vehicle.

But other rivals still seem years ahead of Ford. Uber is beginning a 
driverless taxi pilot in Pittsburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/18/uber-riders-self-driving-cars>
 this week (albeit with a human safety driver), and startup Nutonomy is already 
offering robotictaxi rides in Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/25/hail-progress-singapore-launches-worlds-first-self-driving-taxi-service>
. To judge by Monday’s demos, on the other hand, Ford’s self-driving Fusions 
are still spooked by bushes growing too close to the road and paralyzed with 
indecision when confronted with pedestrians who may or may not be about to step 
off the pavement.

Its fleet of development cars, currently just 10 strong, looks thin compared 
with Google’s dozens of cars operating across the US, or the thousands of 
autopilot-enabled Teslas gathering millions of miles of real-world data 
monthly. Ford aims to have 30 autonomous Fusions by the end of the year, and 
about 100 by the end of 2017.

But although Ford may appear to be lagging behind, it has been working quietly 
behind the scenes. Several self-driving startups, includingUber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber>, Faraday Future and Autonomous 
Stuff, are already using Ford Fusions (or its near equivalent, the Lincoln MKZ) 
to develop their own technologies.

“It’s the absolute best vehicle right now for testing self-driving,” says 
Bobby Hambrick, CEO of Autonomous Stuff, a company developing retro-fit 
automated driving kits. “There are no other carmakers that are so open to work 
through third parties like us.”

Fields also points to the multinational’s competencies in building and selling 
vehicles. “We’ve been working on autonomous vehicles for over 10 years,” he 
said. “And for 100 years, we’ve built high-volume product with quality and 
affordability.”

Fields finished his keynote address by predicting that autonomous vehicles 
will have as big an impact on society as Henry Ford’s moving assembly line did 
a century ago. He will be hoping that Ford will still be around to celebrate 
the centenary of the autonomous car.


 