
Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> has warned shareholders that 
it is pouring cash into “emerging opportunities” and expects a steep decline in 
its financial performance in 2017.

The second-largest US automaker dropped its expected pre-tax profits forecast 
from $10.8bn to $10.2bn as it announced plans to expand its self-driving and 
electric lines in the face of intense competition from Silicon Valley as well 
as traditional car firms.

Chief executive Mark Fields also said that the company was moving all of its 
small-car production to lower-cost Mexico, drawing another rebuke from 
Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump who called the decision 
“horrible”.

“We will have migrated all of our small-car production to Mexico and out of 
the United States,” over the next two to three years, Fields told Wall Street 
analysts at annual investor day presentation.

Fields reiterated plans to explore ride-sharing options for its automated 
vehicles, framing the change as an expansion into a new market. “As we expand 
to be an auto and a mobility company, we’re not moving from an ‘old’ business 
to a ‘new’ business,” Fields said. “The world is moving from simply owning 
vehicles to owning and sharing them. That’s why we are expanding to sell more 
vehicles and provide transportation services at the same time.”

The lowered guidance from Ford was also driven by old school problems as well 
as future plans. The company lowered its 2016 pre-tax profit forecast to 
$10.2bn from a minimum of $10.8bn because of an expanded a vehicle recall. 
Multiple models across multiple years were found to have door latches that 
could malfunction and cause the doors to fly open while driving, causing a 
$640m impairment charge.

The recall comes at a bad moment as Ford attempts to move forward with the 
development of nascent technology that will take years to return investment, 
notablyself-driving cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/12/ford-motors-self-driving-car-uber-google>
. The company has highly ambitious plans to enter the emerging sector as early 
as possible witha “high volume” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/16/ford-self-driving-cars-ride-sharing-uber-lyft>
 of cars available.

Ford is also pushing an unusually large number of electric vehicles and will 
invest some $4.5bn 
<https://media.ford.com/content/fordmedia/fna/us/en/news/2016/09/14/ford-outlines-growth-plan.html>
 in 13 new models that will comprise 40% of its lineup by 2020.

Ford to build 'high volume' of driverless cars for ride-sharing services
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/16/ford-self-driving-cars-ride-sharing-uber-lyft>
Driverless cars are gaining acceptance in parts of the US. Uber began a pilot 
study for automated cabs in Pittsburgh this week, although they have a human 
co-pilot for now. And California’s legislators arepushing for a relaxation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/25/california-self-driving-car-bill-google>
 in the rules governing robot cars on their roads.

Ford expects its first fully automated models to be road-ready by 2021, 
regulators permitting. Though the focus at the moment is on consumer vehicles, 
the possibility of automated commercial highway travel is also enticing. Rival 
manufacturers including Daimler and General Motors are also working on plans to 
build driverless trucks that would allow trucking companies to send shipments 
across the country.

Ford and its peers are also facing a growing challenge from technology 
companies including Apple and Google which are testing their own models, while 
high-end electric vehicle maker Tesla already produces vehicles that enable 
partial automation with its “autopilot” function, which was involved ina fatal 
accident this summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/30/tesla-autopilot-death-self-driving-car-elon-musk>
.

Caught between a rock and a hard place, Ford said it “plans to achieve cost 
efficiencies averaging $3bn annually between 2016 and 2018 and is adding new 
processes like zero-based budgeting to further its business transformation”.

“Zero-based budgeting” requires that every single budget item be individually 
approved, which bodes ill for new staplers at the Ford offices.


Beyond the simple cost of the research and development, though, there are 
serious regulatory hurdles to interstate travel in self-driving vehicles, as 
the US Congress has pushed back on automakers who believe their own standards 
are high enough: “If I asked somebody, ‘Do you think that that red light means 
stop?’ and they came back to me and said: ‘We have great respect for 
stoplights,’ I would say, ‘The answer is ‘yes’,” Senator Michael Blumenthal of 
Connecticut told General Motors’ Michael Ableson ata hearing in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/15/self-driving-cars-danger-senate-general-motors-google>
.

“The credibility of this technology is exceedingly fragile if people can’t 
trust standards,” Blumenthal said. “Not necessarily for you, but for all the 
other actors that may come into this space at this point.”
 