
In recent years, the Ford Motor Company has aggressively sought to solve 
environmental problems related to its products while reducing production costs. 
Wasted wheat straw often burned by Canadian farmershas been blended 
<https://social.ford.com/content/fordsocial/en/articles/green/re/3155-reducing-petroleum-use-by-using-wheat.html>
 into a plastic feature of the Ford Flex to reduce petroleum use. Plastic 
bottles have beenconverted into fibers 
<https://media.ford.com/content/fordmedia/fna/us/en/news/2013/11/15/driving-innovation--the-coca-cola-company-and-ford-unveil-ford-f.html>
 to cover the seats of a recent hybrid research vehicle.


Now, Ford is exploring biomimicry, the practice of solving complex human 
problems by replicating natural systems, in the hopes of continued economic and 
sustainability gains. In particular, the company hopes to derive new adhesives 
by studying the toe pads of the Tokay gecko, which allow the lizard to race 
across ceilings and glass windows, an ability that has inspireda rush of 
adhesives research over the last decade 
<https://robotics.eecs.berkeley.edu/~ronf/Gecko/gecko-history.html>.

For Ford, cracking the secret of the Tokay gecko toe could mean boosting 
recycling rates for its vehicles by a full 10%. A gecko toe-inspired adhesive 
would allow the car manufacturer to better separate the mishmash of plastics 
and foams leftover after a car is stripped of its metal insides. “If we could 
separate it, if we could identify different streams within it, we would stand a 
much better chance of being able to utilize them for higher-end applications,” 
said Debbie Mielewski, the senior technical leader for plastics and 
sustainability research atFord <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford>.

While the bulk of a typical car or truck – the steel – has obvious resale 
value and is stripped and resold fairly easily, the remaining melange of 
plastic, fiber, rubber and non-ferrous metals known collectively as “shredder 
waste” is much more difficult to reclaim and is typically landfilled.

Recently, Ford announced 
<http://biomimicry.org/looking-gecko-answers-ford-partners-biomimicry-institute/#.Vj5aVMprUbI>
 a new research partnership with Proctor & Gamble to create novel adhesives 
with assistance from theBiomimicry Institute <http://biomimicry.org/>, a 
nonprofit organization that advocates for the adoption of nature-inspired 
solutions.


While Ford is not the first big corporation to pursue bio-inspired solutions, 
the very public investment, along with the company’s size and influence, can 
only propel the philosophy and practice of seeking solutions in nature, 
according to Beth Rattner, executive director of the Biomimicry Institute.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fford-motor-company-recycling-biomimicry-proctor-gamble-nih-nsf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2880a71d764316305b3dee510b775afcb7eb048f%2F0_64_3456_2076%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ford%20looks%20to%20geckos%20to%20boost%20the%20recyclability%20of%20its%20cars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fford-motor-company-recycling-biomimicry-proctor-gamble-nih-nsf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ford%20looks%20to%20geckos%20to%20boost%20the%20recyclability%20of%20its%20cars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fford-motor-company-recycling-biomimicry-proctor-gamble-nih-nsf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2880a71d764316305b3dee510b775afcb7eb048f%2F0_64_3456_2076%2F3456.jpg>
 The Tokay gecko. Geckos have become the unofficial mascot for biomimicry ever 
since the development of new adhesives and sticky pads inspired by the 
mechanics of gecko feet. Photograph: TRAFFIC/AFP/Getty Images 
“For all of biomimicry’s successes, we don’t have a big Ford story. We don’t 
have a Tesla story,” she said. “I think it’s critical that someone like Ford 
say, ‘We’re putting our efforts into this not just because we think it’s 
better, more sustainability design, but so people will pay more attention to 
the natural organism in the process’.”

Geckoes have become something of an unofficial mascot for the field of 
biomimicry. TrumpetedGeckskin adhesives 
<http://www.triplepundit.com/2012/03/geckskin-device-biomimicry/> were 
developed by researchers at the University of Massachusetts Amherst in 2012, 
while a team at Stanford University created gecko-inspired sticky pads that 
enabled one brave graduate student toclimb the outside of a glass wall 
<http://www.technologyreview.com/news/532626/an-artificial-adhesive-outgrips-the-gecko/>
.


The secret is in the gecko’s remarkable toe folds, which harbor billions of 
miniature tips that generate weak molecular attractions, a feature that 
theoretically would allow the lizard to support hundreds of pounds of weight.

Geckos aren’t the only lifeform to have inspired innovation and discovery. 
Leonardo da Vinci’s papers are full of illustrations of birds in flight, while 
Alexander Graham Bell based his work on what would become the telephone 
receiver on models of the human ear.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fford-motor-company-recycling-biomimicry-proctor-gamble-nih-nsf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb874c67597390f8a004fb5f5d07a8afde4a49f7a%2F0_515_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ford%20looks%20to%20geckos%20to%20boost%20the%20recyclability%20of%20its%20cars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fford-motor-company-recycling-biomimicry-proctor-gamble-nih-nsf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ford%20looks%20to%20geckos%20to%20boost%20the%20recyclability%20of%20its%20cars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fford-motor-company-recycling-biomimicry-proctor-gamble-nih-nsf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb874c67597390f8a004fb5f5d07a8afde4a49f7a%2F0_515_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 The BDML Lab at Stanford demonstrated a hand-sized gecko-inspired adhesive 
device that allows a human to climb a glass wall like a gecko. The results show 
that gecko-inspired adhesives can be scaled from laboratory-scale tests to 
real-life, human-scale applications with little decrease in performance. 
Photograph: Biomimetics and Dexterous Manipulation Laboratory, Stanford 
University 
In recent years, the field of nature-inspired design has been grown 
exponentially, according to the Fermanian Business & Economic Institute at 
Point Loma Nazarene University in San Diego (FBEI).Sea sponges are improving 
fiber optics 
<http://www.oneworldoneocean.com/blog/entry/stem-sea-sponge-fiber-optics>. 
There’s a“joining system” modeled on clams <http://www.joinlox.com/> with 
ambitions to put bolts, screws and nails out of business. The fastest train in 
the world, the 200-mph Shinkansen Bullet Train, got its current nosefrom 
examination of the Kingfisher 
<http://www.asknature.org/product/6273d963ef015b98f641fc2b67992a5e> bird, 
cutting the train’s electricity use by 15% and upping its top speed by 10%. 
There are even solar panelsoperating on the principle of photosynthesis. 
<http://www.3gsolar.com/>

An index developed by FBEI combining the number of patents, distributed grant 
monies from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and National Science 
Foundation (NSF) and the amount of published research in the subject shows a 
15% growth in “bioinspiration” efforts between 2000 and 2012,according to a 
2014 report. 
<http://www.pointloma.edu/experience/academics/centers-institutes/fermanian-business-economic-institute/forecasting-and-expert-commentary/da-vinci-index-b>
 By 2030, biomimicry efforts may account for $425bn of US GDP, and up to $1.6tn 
globally. A global index released last year by the FBEI shows the field was at 
an all-time high in 2014, boasting a seven-fold increase in activity since 2000.

“Bio-inspired design is very big and there are a lot of new players,” Rattner 
said. “We are seeing an uptick in corporate interest. A lot of companies, 
especially the ones that have sustainability profiles, are taking this up.”

Discoveries in the world of health care are piling up patents too. Porcupine 
quill-inspired sutures 
<http://www.karplab.net/portfolio-item/porcupine-inspired-needles> and 
bacteria-sloughing fabrics inspired by sharks have been developed in hopes of 
reducing the number of patients dying from hospital-acquired infections each 
year, which exceed more than 20,000 in the US alone,according to the US Centers 
for Disease Control 
<http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/threat-report-2013/pdf/ar-threats-2013-508.pdf#page=15>
. Unlike whales and ships, sharks avoid accumulation of algae and barnacles 
thanks to intricate patterns in their skin. By replicating that pattern at a 
microscopic level, researchers have been able to construct materialsto which 
bacteria cannot cling <http://sharklet.com/our-technology/sharklet-discovery/>. 
Meanwhile, in a marked display of ingratitude, humans continue to kill more 
than 100 million sharks every year (possibly  
<http://news.discovery.com/earth/oceans/100-million-sharks-killed-annually-130305.htm>
twice that number 
<http://news.discovery.com/earth/oceans/100-million-sharks-killed-annually-130305.htm>
), often simply for their fins, and threatening many species with extinction.

Speaking to this violation of the principles of biomimicry, Rattner said: 
“It’s not enough just to create the technology, we have to be conservationists 
too. Because we will absolutely miss the bigger point if we capture what we 
think are all the lessons to be gleaned and then we’re killing off the 
mentorship species.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fford-motor-company-recycling-biomimicry-proctor-gamble-nih-nsf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cc7ee208e2aa68253e3655c95d4585567a14be6%2F396_0_2528_1519%2F2528.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ford%20looks%20to%20geckos%20to%20boost%20the%20recyclability%20of%20its%20cars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fford-motor-company-recycling-biomimicry-proctor-gamble-nih-nsf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ford%20looks%20to%20geckos%20to%20boost%20the%20recyclability%20of%20its%20cars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fford-motor-company-recycling-biomimicry-proctor-gamble-nih-nsf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cc7ee208e2aa68253e3655c95d4585567a14be6%2F396_0_2528_1519%2F2528.jpg>
 The “Mobiliant” is a single-occupant vehicle design by Chinese state-owned 
SAIC Motor inspired by a simple ant’s distinctive body structure and the 
mutually beneficial relationship between ants and trumpet trees. Photograph: 
SAIC Motor 
It’s a sustainability message for all those companies beginning to integrate 
biological sciences into their design and production efforts. Ford partner 
Proctor & Gamble did not make a representative available for comment for this 
article, but Mielewski said the collaboration between the two Fortune 500 
companies would not involve shared lab space. Rather, it will involve the same 
sort of remote collaboration on display when Fordworked with Coca-Cola in 2013 
to transform the soft drink company’s plastic bottles into auto fabrics 
<http://www.plasticsnews.com/article/20131115/NEWS/131119949/ford-fusion-energi-interior-turns-greener-with-coca-cola-tie-up>
.

Car companies have long used popular psychological associations with animals. 
The Impala and Mustang connote speed, for instance, while the Stingray and 
Jaguar are named after animals that represent stealth.

In 2013, the Los Angeles Auto Show included a biomimicry challenge for 
automakers and design firms, calledBiomimicry & Mobility 2025 
<http://laautoshow.com/?post_type=news&p=1721>. BMW homed in on the schooling 
behavior of fish 
<http://www.2luxury2.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/BMW-Group-DesignworksUSA-.jpg>
, while Subaru focused on the bounding nature of the kangaroo. However, the 
winner of the competition was the Chinese state-owned SAIC Motor, whose 
single-occupant vehicle, theMobiliant 
<http://laautoshow.com/entry/saic-motor-china/>, was inspired by the 
relationship between ants and the trumpet tree.

Though the technologies behind these innovations may be a few years off, 
bringing biologists to the table is increasingly moving innovation, Mielewski 
said.

“These big overriding issues have sort of been around for so long, and 
bothered me for so long, this is just a brand new way to possibly solve them. 
We’re taking advantage of the fact that nature has had millions of years to 
optimize.”


 