
Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> has cut ties with the 
controversial lobby group Alec, joining a roster of big corporations that have 
distanced themselves from the rightwing network that promotes policies at the 
state level to counter environmental regulations.

The car giant confirmed to the watchdog the Center for Media and Democracy 
(CMD) that it had ended its membership. A company spokesman said that “we will 
not be participating in Alec in 2016”.

Ford did not specify the reason for the split other than to say that it flowed 
from an “annual budget review”.

Ford’s departure from the American Legislative Exchange Council puts it in 
league with other massive corporations that in recent months have concluded 
that association with the lobbying network is more trouble than it’s worth. 
Other big firms that have similarly broken connections include the technology 
companies Google, Facebook, eBay and Yelp, as well as the energy giantsShell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/07/royal-dutch-shell-alec-climate-change-denial>
 andBP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/mar/23/alec-bp-british-petroleum-companies-conservative-lobbyist>
.

Ford strongly publicizes 
<http://corporate.ford.com/microsites/sustainability-report-2013-14/blueprint-overview.html>
 its support for environmental sustainability, which it says it has put at the 
heart of its business model. It advocates fuel economy in its cars and says it 
is working to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Such a public stance conflicts with the work of Alec, which has used its 
muscle as match-maker between state politicians and big businesses to push back 
on environmental controls. The group operates by producing so-called “model 
bills” that are favorable to big corporations that it then disseminates in 
state assemblies across the country.

The Guardian revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/04/alec-freerider-homeowners-assault-clean-energy>
 that part of the group’s anti-green agenda was to agitate to make it more 
difficult for homeowners to install solar panels.Several of its model bills 
<https://www.alec.org/model-policy/environmental-impact-litigation-act/> aim to 
block federal efforts by the Environmental Protection Agency to cut back on 
emissions from energy creation under the Clean Power Plan.

In its model bill on research 
<https://www.alec.org/model-policy/interstate-research-commission-on-climatic-change-act/>
 on climate change, Alec says that “human activity has and will continue to 
alter the atmosphere of the planet” and that such activity may lead to warming 
of the planetary temperature. But it goes on to suggest that “such activity may 
lead to deleterious, neutral, or possibly beneficial climatic changes”.

Even more contentiously, the lobby group goes on to state that “a great deal 
of scientific uncertainty surrounds the nature of these prospective changes, 
and the cost of regulation to inhibit such changes may lead to great economic 
dislocation”.

Ford’s funding of Alec was first disclosed by CMD 
<http://www.prwatch.org/news/2015/11/12968/ford-revealed-funder-climate-denial-group-alec>
 last November. Nick Surgey, the watchdog’s director of research, said that 
“Ford appeared to be very happy to quietly fund Alec when its membership was 
secret, but now that the relationship has become public it has become a 
liability”.

Alec professed to be unflustered by the departure of Ford from its corporate 
membership. The group’s spokesman Wilhelm Meierling told the Guardian that the 
car company had made the decision to withdraw last year at a time when Alec 
gained more than 30 other private sector members.

“It’s an exciting time to be at Alec, with private sector growth in a variety 
of sectors including renewable energy,” Meierling said.
 