
Former New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> Liberal MP Tim 
Owen has repaid $50,000 in donations which the state electoral commission found 
to be illegal after an investigation triggered by the Independent Commission 
against Corruption.

The NSW Electoral Commission has now recovered $666,992 in illegal donations 
afterOperation Spicer which examined alleged developer donations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/icac-recommends-criminal-charges-against-joe-tripodi-and-chris-hartcher>
 to the NSW Liberal party.

The electoral commission revealed on Monday it found $84,137 donated to Owen’s 
campaign for the seat of Newcastle in the lead-up to the 2011 state election 
was unlawful.

It found the money came from banned donors, breached the donation cap and were 
indirect campaign contributions. However, a separate investigation found there 
was not sufficient evidence that donations to theLiberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> by Australian Water 
Holdings, Nathan Tinkler and the Gazal family breached laws that banned 
property developers donating.

Operation Spicer proves we need Icac. Any half decent government would restore 
its funding | Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/01/operation-spicer-proves-we-need-icac-any-half-decent-government-would-restore-its-funding>
Owen was elected to parliament in the 2011 election but resigned in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/12/liberal-mps-tim-owen-and-andrew-cornwell-quit-after-icac-admissions>
 after revelations from Operation Spicer about donations to his campaign. 
Donations to Owen totalled $64,047.60 while $20,000 in cash donations were made 
to his campaign director Hugh Thomson.

Owen has paid back $50,000 and Thomson has repaid $20,000 to the state of NSW.

The commission said Owen had also made a false statement on his 2011/12 
requisite declaration in attesting that he had disclosed all political 
donations but it would not be taking any further action.

The commission cleared former Liberal MPs Christopher Spence and Darren Webber 
of receiving illegal donations through sham company Eightbyfive which made 
donations to the Liberal party after receiving money from companies such as 
Australian Water Holdings and Gazcorp.

The money was purportedly for the provision of media, public relations and 
other services and advice but no proof was produced for Icac that those 
services were rendered.

The commission investigated whether Spence and Webber received money from 
Eightbfive that came from banned donors but the crown solicitor’s office 
advised there was insufficient evidence to prove the donors were property 
developers, and that payments to Spence and Webber were political donations.

The NSW Electoral Commission’s investigation into funds donated by Eightbyfive 
is now closed.
 