
Formula One’s blundering rule makers have once again failed to reach an 
agreement on how to replace the sport’sunpopular new qualifying format 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/01/f1-critical-mass-bernie-ecclestone-formula-one-baku-grand-prix>
.

Lewis Hamilton takes pole for Mercedes in F1’s Bahrain Grand Prix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/02/lewis-hamilton-pole-mercedes-f1-bahrain-grand-prix>
After a 90-minute meeting between the sport’s teams in the paddock before 
Sunday’s Bahrain Grand Prix, the FIA president, Jean Todt, and the Formula One 
Group chief executive,Bernie Ecclestone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernie-ecclestone>, a unanimous verdict on 
what direction the sport should take could not be reached.

It means the elimination-style format that flopped in Australia, and again in 
Bahrain on Saturday, could remain in place for the next race, in China in a 
fortnight’s time.

The FIA and Ecclestone tabled several new proposals in Sunday’s meeting – the 
specifics of which have not been made public – and they will be discussed again 
in another meeting on Thursday.

Toto Wolff, the Mercedes director, claimed the teams wanted to revert back to 
last year’s format, but their suggestion was blocked by Todt.

“We can understand the challenges the FIA and the commercial rights holder 
have,” Wolff said. “They said that 2015 is not acceptable for them as it was 
not good enough and we have to accept it. The main message from the team was 
‘Please, no experiments’.”

Meanwhile, the McLaren chairman, Ron Dennis, has said Fernando Alonso should 
not have been denied his spot on the grid in Bahrain. Dennis has campaigned on 
behalf of the two-times world champion,declared medically unfit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/31/fernando-alonso-miss-bahrain-grand-prix-crash-injuries-mclaren>
 by the FIA on Thursday following hisMelbourne horror crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/mar/21/fernando-alonso-survives-horrific-f1-crash-in-pictures>
, to be allowed to race.

But Formula One’s governing body is refusing to budge on its initial diagnosis 
meaning Stoffel Vandoorne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/02/stoffel-vandoorne-jenson-button-qualifying-debut-mclaren-bahrain>
, McLaren’s reserve driver, will make his grand prix bow instead.

“The question is: ‘Would Fernando have been a danger to other drivers?’” said 
Dennis on Saturday night. “And after that the question is really one of 
assessment and if you’ve got a cracked rib and you want to drive with it, it’s 
your business isn’t it?

“Virtually every team sport in the world, the fitness of the athlete, the 
football player, the ice-hockey player, the skier, is determined by the team. 
The position of the FIA, I feel, is to ensure the safety of the other drivers. 
If a driver feels a bit of pain, and wants to drive with a bit of pain, I think 
that’s the driver’s decision.”
 