
The value of investment funds committed to selling off fossil fuel assets has 
jumped to $5.2tn, doubling in just over a year.

The new total, published on Monday 
<https://www.arabellaadvisors.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Global_Divestment_Report_2016.pdf>
, was welcomed by the UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, who said: “It’s clear 
the transition to a clean energy future is inevitable, beneficial and well 
underway, and that investors have a key role to play.”

The fossil fuel divestment campaign began on university campuses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/08/fossil-fuel-divestment-a-brief-history>
 in 2011 but the new report reveals that concerns over investments in coal, oil 
and gas have now entered the financial mainstream, with more than 80% of the 
funds now committed to divest being managed by commercial investment and 
pension funds.

The report found that 688 institutions and more than 58,000 individuals across 
76 countries are now committed to divestment, including major financial 
institutions such as theworld’s biggest sovereign wealth fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/05/norways-wealth-fund-sells-out-of-73-companies-as-fossil-fears-growhttps://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/05/norways-wealth-fund-sells-out-of-73-companies-as-fossil-fears-grow>
, owned by Norway, andAllianz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/24/allianz-to-cut-investments-in-companies-using-coal-in-favour-of-renewable-energy>
 andAegon 
<http://www.aegon.com/en/Home/Investors/News-releases/2016/Aegon-strikes-coal-mining-off-its-investment-list-/>
.

Institutions worth $2.6 trillion have now pulled investments out of fossil 
fuels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/22/leonardo-dicaprio-joins-26tn-fossil-fuel-divestment-movement>
“I commend today’s announcement that a growing number of investors are backing 
a shift away from the most carbon-intensive energy sources and into safe, 
sustainable energy,” said Ban. “Investments in clean energy are the right thing 
to do and the smart way to build prosperity for all, while protecting our 
planet.”

“$5tn in five years is a stunning and unprecedented figure,” said Ellen 
Dorsey, at the philanthropic Wallace Global Fund, one of the earliest backers 
of the fossil fuel divestment movement. “It represents a growth the fossil fuel 
industry would envy.”

Lou Allstadt, a former senior executive at Mobil Oil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/oil>, said: “Divestment is speeding up 
the clock on the final accounting that will show fossil fuels are out and clean 
energy is in.”

Scientists have shown that most existing fossil fuel reserves cannot be burned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/07/much-worlds-fossil-fuel-reserve-must-stay-buried-prevent-climate-change-study-says>
 without causing dangerous climate change. Campaigners argue this makes fossil 
fuel companies – which are spending billions exploring for even more coal, oil 
and gas – bad investments on both moral and financial grounds.

If the world’s governments fulfil their pledges to tackle climate change by 
cutting carbon emissions, many fossil fuel reserves would have to be kept in 
the ground, potentiallywasting trillions of investors’ money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/25/fossil-fuel-companies-risk-wasting-2tn-paris-climate-deal>
. This risk is now being taken seriously at the highest level, including the
Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/03/bank-of-england-warns-of-financial-risk-from-fossil-fuel-investments>
,World Bank 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/speech/2014/01/23/world-bank-group-president-jim-yong-kim-remarks-at-davos-press-conference>
 and theG20’s financial stability board 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/11563768/G20-to-probe-carbon-bubble-risk-to-global-financial-system.html>
.

The new report, produced by Arabella investment advisors for the DivestInvest 
<http://divestinvest.org/> coalition, collated public pledges to sell off some 
or all fossil fuel investments and added up the overall investments managed by 
those institutions. The total was double the$2.6tn reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/22/leonardo-dicaprio-joins-26tn-fossil-fuel-divestment-movement>
 by the last analysis in September 2015.

It is often difficult to calculate the precise proportion of fossil fuel 
investments in complex funds, but about $400bn of the $5.2tn total is likely to 
be in coal, oil and gas. Asset managers controlling $1.3tn – a quarter of the 
total – have also committed to increasing their investments in clean energy to 
accelerate a transition to the low-carbon economy.

A beginner's guide to fossil fuel divestment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/23/a-beginners-guide-to-fossil-fuel-divestment>
“As the hottest year in history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/14/2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-on-record-un-says>
 comes to a close, the success of the global fossil fuel divestment movement is 
undeniable,” said May Boeve, executive director of350.org <http://350.org/>, 
the grassroots climate organisation that has played a leading role in the 
campaign. “Divestment has permeated every sector of society: fromuniversities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/fossil-fuel-divestment-soars-in-uk-universities>
 andpension funds 
<https://www.ft.com/content/4bfa92da-49c5-11e6-b387-64ab0a67014c>, to 
philanthropic and cultural institutions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/23/rockefeller-fund-divestment-fossil-fuel-companies-oil-coal-climate-change>
, tocities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/29/copenhagen-set-to-divest-from-fossil-fuels>
,faith groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/30/church-of-england-ends-investments-in-heavily-polluting-fossil-fuels>
,insurance companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/22/axa-divest-high-risk-coal-funds-due-threat-climate-change>
 and more.”

Fossil fuel divestment has been criticised as gesture politics, as the 
investments are sold on, or unrealistic due to world’s current dependence on 
fossil fuels. Bill Gates calledfossil fuel divestment a “false solution” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/14/bill-gates-calls-fossil-fuel-divestment-a-false-solution?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 in 2015, although the $40bn Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has nowsold off 
85% of its fossil fuel investments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/bill-and-melinda-gates-foundation-divests-entire-holding-in-bp>
.

Saudi Arabia’s oil minister, Ali Al-Naimi, also criticised divestment as 
“misguided” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/25/oil-industry-must-thwart-misguided-divestment-campaign-says-saudi-minister-ali-al-naimi>
 but said it could not be ignored, while Bill McNabb, chief executive of the 
investment giant Vanguard, said divestment hadno impact on company balance 
sheets <https://www.ft.com/content/a44dc59c-13ab-11e6-91da-096d89bd2173> and 
threw away the opportunity to influence the company as a share owner.

However, campaigners said divestment stigmatised companies and is having a 
real world impact on what has been an enormously powerful industry. “We are 
weakening the fossil fuel industry politically, socially and financially,” said 
Dorsey.

Mark Campanale, executive director of the Carbon Tracker Initiative, a 
thinktank that analyses the financial risks of fossil fuel investments, said: 
“The financial markets are fast losing faith in the investment case for fossil 
fuels. A technological revolution is underway in the energy and transportation 
sectors [and] financial market regulators stand ready to move from rhetoric to 
tough action on climate risk management.”

Archbishop Desmond Tutu, one of the most revered figures of South Africa’s 
anti-apartheid struggle and a key backer of the divestment campaign that helped 
end the system, was an early backer of fossil fuel divestment andsaid in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/10/desmond-tutu-anti-apartheid-style-boycott-fossil-fuel-industry>
: “People of conscience need to break their ties with corporations financing 
the injustice of climate change.”

Tutu, a Nobel peace prize-winner, joined with other Nobel laureates this week 
todemand that the $350m Nobel foundation fund divest 
<http://gofossilfree.org/europe/letter-from-nobel-prize-winners-to-nobel-foundation/>
 from fossil fuels.

A campaign by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/mar/16/keep-it-in-the-ground-guardian-climate-change-campaign>
 has called on the Gates foundation and the Wellcome Trust, the world’s largest 
medical research charity, to divest their large endowments of fossil fuels. The
Guardian itself committed to divest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/01/guardian-media-group-to-divest-its-800m-fund-from-fossil-fuels>
 from fossil fuels in April 2015.
 