
Daniel Libeskind 


Libeskind, 70, founded Studio Libeskind <http://libeskind.com/> with his wife, 
Nina, in 1989 after winning acompetition to build the Jewish Museum 
<http://www.jmberlin.de/main/EN/04-About-The-Museum/02-History-Museum/01-background.php>
 in Berlin. In 2003, his studio moved its headquarters from Berlin to New York, 
when Libeskind was selected as master planner for the World Trade Center 
redevelopment

I grew up in a dreary industrial city called Lodz, where all the greyness of 
postwar Poland, conformity and communism shaped my childhood. We lived on a 
main street in a crumbling tenement building.

When I went to see it recently, I realised what a limited environment it was. 
It had two small rooms and a kitchen, which also housed the bathtub. My parents 
slept in one room, and I slept in the living room with my sister. The only view 
we had was of the other side of the building, over a dismal little courtyard 
where people would beat their carpets. As a small boy, I’d look out of the 
window and watch the dust.

When I was 11, we moved to Israel, where I lived for three years on a kibbutz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/13/kibbutz-100-years-old-uncertain-future>
 without my parents, who had gone to Tel Aviv to find work, and later in 
downtown Tel Aviv, in a white, square building that was inspired by Bauhaus 
ideas. On the kibbutz, I shared a dormitory with kids my own age and we studied 
or worked together, picking potatoes in the fields. It was a strange experience 
for me, moving from an intimate, hidden existence in Lodz to this open, 
beautiful landscape in Israel where I had the freedom to think and be myself on 
this collectivist farm.

We emigrated to New York when I was a young teenager, and I found myself in 
the Bronx, living in one of the first social housing projects in the US. It was 
a tiny apartment with no air conditioning and everybody sat out on the fire 
escape at night. It was here that my interest in architecture began. We had a 
Formica kitchen table with curved edges and, when I started to study, I worked 
with aT-square <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T-square>; but because the table 
had a curved edge, I could never tell at precisely what point the angle was no 
longer a right angle. Perhaps this had a subliminal impact on my future 
thinking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b83bf18f5c01dea729183659b217bf611c2455a%2F9_59_1234_740%2F1234.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b83bf18f5c01dea729183659b217bf611c2455a%2F9_59_1234_740%2F1234.jpg>
 ‘All the greyness of postwar Poland shaped my childhood’: Libeskind back where 
he grew up, in Lodz. Photograph: Daniel Libeskind 
Nowadays, I live with my wife in Lower Manhattan, in an apartment that bears 
little resemblance to my childhood home. It’s on the seventh floor of a former 
bank that was built in the early 1900s. Working with architects, I’ve 
completely transformed the interior – all the walls have been removed and small 
windows replaced so we now have spectacular views of the New York skyline. 
There’s little clutter. Natural light and good acoustics are important, as is 
the flow of space.

There is only one room in the apartment with a door, and that’s my daughter’s 
bedroom: that argument I could not win. Our bedroom doesn’t have a door – it is 
not a private space. I shared a dormitory in Israel so I grew up with a 
communal sense of space. I like it; my wife is not so keen.

What I love about this apartment is that it is part of the bustle of New York. 
When I look out the window, I can see thousands of people on the streets, in 
the park and in buildings. Day and night, there’s never a quiet moment. And our 
building is right on top of the subway line, so you can feel the vibrations 
travelling up from deep inside the building. I find it one of the most 
beautiful feelings. It’s the same subway line I took to school when I was 
living in the Bronx. It’s where I live and work – a place I continue to be 
deeply connected to.

Julia Barfield 


Barfield, 63, is a director at Marks Barfield Architects 
<http://www.marksbarfield.com/#/projects/>. Her projects include the London Eye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/feb/10/how-we-made-the-london-eye-architects-david-marks-julia-barfield>
 (for which she received an MBE in 2000), theUK’s first green mosque, in 
Cambridge 
<http://www.marksbarfield.com/#/projects/cambridge-mosque/?filter=date&layout=read-more>
, and the newly openedBritish Airways i360 tower in Brighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jul/20/brighton-tower-tickets-on-sale-british-airways-i360>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98d5168c953fc89a82bbb526bb4522b5d3411a9a%2F14_202_5573_3344%2F5573.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98d5168c953fc89a82bbb526bb4522b5d3411a9a%2F14_202_5573_3344%2F5573.jpg>
 Julia Barfield at her end-of-terrace home in Stockwell, south London, which 
was built in the 1840s. Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Guardian 
I was born in Buckinghamshire and moved to London aged four, so I regard 
myself as a Londoner. Growing up, I lived with my parents and sister in a 
late-Victorian, four-bedroom mansion block flat in West Kensington. The flat 
was T-shaped and all of the rooms to the right-hand side of the central 
corridor looked out on to the street. At the end of the T was a small kitchen, 
where we held all our birthday parties and made dens. I would run up and down 
the corridor, playing with the cat. We shared the flat with two lodgers; I 
shared a room with my sister until our early teens.

I remember looking out of our bedroom window one afternoon, watching prefabs 
coming off the back of lorries and being slotted together. It was the early 
1960s, so there were still quite a lot of bomb sites in our neighbourhood. To 
watch these houses being built, with people moving in the very next week, was 
amazing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F233e10897e6ba153071c43064651db314312bd5c%2F12_25_2589_1553%2F2589.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F233e10897e6ba153071c43064651db314312bd5c%2F12_25_2589_1553%2F2589.jpg>
 ‘The fact that I grew up in a flat made me unafraid of them’: Julia Barfield 
in her parents’ kitchen, at her fifth birthday party. Photograph: Julia Barfield
The fact that I grew up in a flat made me unafraid of them. We didn’t really 
have any outdoor space, apart from balconies that my father filled with 
flowers, so we played on the street or took the bus to Holland Park, to one of 
London’s first adventure playgrounds.

My husband and I moved to our current home in south London, in the 1970s, when 
we were students. Back then, it was virtually derelict, so there was a lot of 
self-build involved. It’s an end-of-terrace built in the 1840s. In the early 
1980s it was under threat of demolition, but eventually the planners decided to 
make it a conservation area.

When we started having children, we built a shed on the side, which served as 
an office, then a playroom. But then we built the London Eye and eventually had 
enough money to transform the house. Now, it is as green as can be: highly 
insulated, with an air-source heat pump, double glazing, underfloor heating and 
two green roofs to encourage biodiversity. The kitchen is still the heart of 
the house.

Our firm hasn’t done a lot of residential work, but in 2002 we did propose a 
tower calledSkyhouse <http://www.marksbarfield.com/#/projects/skyhouse/?null>. 
It was our suggestion for solving London’s housing crisis: high-density with 
mixed tenancies, renewable energies and communal facilities. It was slightly 
ahead of its time. Towers were still associated with council blocks, so we 
never got to build it; but we put it out there as an idea. It has contributed 
to the discussion about high-density living – perhaps it’s something we will 
revisit in the future.

John Pawson 


Pawson, 67, is renowned for his minimalist buildings. They range from the Novy 
Dvur monastery in the Czech Republic 
<http://archidose.blogspot.co.uk/2006/04/novy-dvur-monastery.html> to Calvin 
Klein stores across the world, and the newDesign Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/18/design-museum-london-open-new-premises-november>
, due to open in November in the former Commonwealth Institute in London
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cd60b15924489a85a99e4531a52e7db8059dbc4%2F16_368_5577_3346%2F5577.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cd60b15924489a85a99e4531a52e7db8059dbc4%2F16_368_5577_3346%2F5577.jpg>
 ‘For me, minimalism is about clarity – trying to get to the essence of 
things’: John Pawson in his modernised 19th-century house in Notting Hill. 
Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Guardian 
Minimalism is a label that follows me. I’m not against it, but it means 
different things to different people. In my terms, minimalism doesn’t mean 
painting it white and not having any possessions; for me, it’s about clarity – 
trying to get to the essence of things.

I grew up in the house I was born in. Looking back, I can see where my 
minimalist aesthetic came from. The house was near the edge of the Yorkshire 
moors, a treeless landscape. Growing up, we were encouraged not to set much 
store by material things. Of course, that’s easy to say, coming from a 
comfortable middle-class family. And we didn’t live in a minimal place – my 
mother liked antiques, but she also promoted a very attractive modesty. She 
tended to wear one suit, but it was a Chanel suit.

My parents bought the house after the second world war. It was part 
16th-century and it incorporated a Norman arch, so it had a lot of character. 
My father was in the rag trade. He manufactured women’s dresses, so he loved 
quality. In fact, I think he built the most expensive orangery, probably ever. 
I now know where I get it from.

These days, most people want what I had when I was growing up: one room in 
which everything happened. For us it was the kitchen. It seemed there was 
always an architect laying out plans on the kitchen table, always workmen 
around, always a project.

My room was the smallest, and each time one of my sisters left home my dad 
would knock a wall down between rooms. In the end, I had a giant room with 
nothing more in it. And aside from the orangery, my father also renovated a 
cottage and the lodge on the property. At 16 or 17 I moved into the cottage 
and, of course, I changed it. I simplified it, stripped it out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3ace3c881fef70a72b22ef2e12628e581e96cd9%2F5_15_1757_1054%2F1757.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3ace3c881fef70a72b22ef2e12628e581e96cd9%2F5_15_1757_1054%2F1757.jpg>
 ‘We didn’t live in a minimal place’: Pawson’s childhood home dates back to the 
16th century. Photograph: Pawson House 
I now live in a 19th-century row house in Notting Hill, west London. My wife, 
Catherine, found it and put in an offer before I had even seen the place, 
because the setting is so unusual – there are uninterrupted views over communal 
gardens. It’s in a conservation area, so we had to keep the facade, but I 
opened up the back and redrew the floor plans. The interiors are designed 
around the way we live, with everything we need and nothing we don’t. As in my 
parents’ house, the kitchen table is the main gathering place – it’s where we 
talk, eat, work and sit down with family and friends. Whatever else is 
different, I like to think my parents would recognise the atmosphere of the 
place, and feel at home.

I never intended to be an architect. I came to the profession late, after 
working for my father for six years. I remember him saying: “Why don’t you just 
hire an architect? Why would you want to be one?” But I think he knew that it 
was where I found pleasure.

I’ve spent the past few years working on London’s new Design Museum. The 
existing building is fairly iconic from the outside; I wanted to slightly calm 
it down so that the objects become more potent than my work inside the building.

People say I am uncompromising and detail-orientated, and I am – qualities I 
definitely got from my father. And I tend to attract clients who are even more 
so – they are happy to push me up a mountain if necessary.

Adam Willis 


Willis, 29, is a founding member of Assemble <http://assemblestudio.co.uk/>, a 
collaborative practice of young artists, designers and architects based in 
London. Current projects include a new public art gallery for Goldsmiths 
University, the refurbishment of 10 houses in Toxteth, Liverpool (for which 
Assemble was awarded the Turner Prize in 2015), and therefurbishment of an 
artists’ wharf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/05/mary-fedden-julian-trevelyan-auction-henry-moore-pablo-picasso-durham-wharf>
 in London
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59568c8681d78db488a9f2350f362ad7dd7c2699%2F0_38_753_452%2F753.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59568c8681d78db488a9f2350f362ad7dd7c2699%2F0_38_753_452%2F753.jpg>
 Adam Willis’s 17th-century childhood home in Herefordshire. Photograph: Adam 
Willis 
I grew up at the foot of the Malvern Hills in Whiteleaved Oak, a rural hamlet 
in Herefordshire where my parents still live. The oldest part of the house was 
a cottage that dates back to the early 1600s. There is a more recent, 
19th-century, timber-framed structure that was badly adapted before my parents 
bought the house in the early 1980s. They erected new timbers, replaced the 
roof and built a small extension and a studio for my dad to work in. I grew up 
around building work.

My father is a sculptor, so he was hands-on with the work around the house – 
and you can see his involvement. The floor is intricately laid, for example: 
it’s made from different widths and lengths of elm notched together. I have 
strong memories of my father laying and oiling those boards.

Building was an early obsession. I used to ask my mum to make me packed 
lunches so I could eat lunch with the builders on site. By the age of about 14, 
I had become obsessed with woodwork. I was given some wood for my birthday, 
which I used to build a workbench that is still in the studio – I go back and 
use it.

At 18, I built a modern timber and glass extension with my dad. The house now 
shows a progression of timber-framed construction: from the old cottage at one 
end to that extension at the other.

The home I am currently living in couldn’t be more different. I’m renting a 
flat on the 31st floor of a tower block in the Barbican, in the City of London, 
with three other architects and a fashion designer. We’ve been here for two 
years, and it’s an incredibly uplifting place to live.

The flat has most of its original features: the kitchen, cupboards and 
fittings. I’ve made a few pieces of furniture, such as a simple elm dining 
table. The bedrooms are arranged along one side and each opens out on to a 
balcony that wraps around the entire flat. It has generous proportions, with a 
large, open-plan living and dining room that overlooks north and east London. 
There’s a solidity to everything that is satisfying. And being up so high is an 
amazing experience in itself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc56f2395c4d1684c703169903f647c5725461276%2F25_303_5569_3341%2F5569.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc56f2395c4d1684c703169903f647c5725461276%2F25_303_5569_3341%2F5569.jpg>
 ‘It’s an incredibly uplifting place to live’: Adam Willis at his flat at the 
Barbican, London – his block is identical to the one he overlooks here. 
Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Guardian 
What’s striking is that the singular vision of the architect is apparent 
throughout the estate, from the master-planning right through to the kitchen 
taps. The complexity and variety of spaces within the project – realised with 
such coherence and integrity – is quite extraordinary.

The luxury of space that I enjoyed when I was growing up is obviously 
impossible to replicate in London, so you have to start looking at 
alternatives. I’m interested in the potential of co-housing, or models of 
communal living where people can benefit from sharing resources, such as a 
workshop or greenhouse, say, or from a generosity of common space.

Wherever I end up, there will be an element of self-build: like my dad, I’ll 
always have the urge to be hands-on.

Sarah Wigglesworth 


Founder of Sarah Wigglesworth Architects <http://www.swarch.co.uk/>, and 
professor of architecture atSheffield University 
<https://www.sheffield.ac.uk/architecture/people/academic/sarah-wigglesworth/index>
, Wigglesworth, 59, was awarded an MBE in 2003. She is leading theDwell 
<http://dwell.group.shef.ac.uk/> (Designing for Wellbeing in Environments for 
Later Life) research project on creating housing for older people
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55a1549ad3530421b3d178237d8eecb95c11b7f5%2F0_461_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55a1549ad3530421b3d178237d8eecb95c11b7f5%2F0_461_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Sarah Wigglesworth at home in the Straw House, north London. Photograph: 
Antonio Olmos for the Guardian 
I was brought up in a semi-detached Victorian villa in north London, where my 
parents lived for about 50 years. They bought it in 1955 for £2,500. They were 
the first generation of gentrifiers to move to Islington. The house they bought 
in Canonbury had been a rooming house. Every room had a Yale lock on it and 
there were stoves on the landing. They turned it back into a family home.

My father, Gordon, was an architect. He combined the main living rooms into 
one enormous room, replacing the central main wall on the ground floor with two 
amazingpitch pine <http://www.wood-database.com/pitch-pine/> columns that were 
beautiful. He ripped out the fireplaces, installed a downstairs toilet and 
replaced the florid, Victorian cornices in the main living room with a sleek 
and simple design of his own. There was a sense of modernising it and adapting 
it to suit the needs of a growing family, but keeping elements of its period.

He also designed and built us a second home in Hampshire, inspired by the 
early work ofFrank Lloyd Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/20/frank-lloyd-wright-and-the-zombie-building-boom>
. It was a brick box surrounded by courtyard gardens. It was open plan, with 
exposed brick walls, flat roofed and low lying in the landscape. It was built 
when I was about eight, and we went there every summer. My father talked about 
it obsessively.

I loved that building, but we lost interest in the house when we were 
teenagers, so my parents sold it. It has been added to, so it has lost that 
essence of being a simple holiday house. Likewise, when we sold the London 
house, my friend saw my father’s pine pillars in a skip – the new owners had 
stripped them out. I was upset to hear that.

In a way, the two homes are combined in the Straw House, in London, where I 
live and work. We’ve got the open-plan living space that my father created in 
my childhood home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F515bc39bd0072335b38ba7837136feaad1d3ec6d%2F84_174_5335_3201%2F5335.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F515bc39bd0072335b38ba7837136feaad1d3ec6d%2F84_174_5335_3201%2F5335.jpg>
 ‘I loved that building’: the Frank Lloyd Wright-inspired home where 
Wigglesworth spent many of her childhood summers. Photograph: Sarah Wigglesworth
Growing up, one thing I enjoyed about my home was its hybridity. It was an 
early Victorian building altered to suit modern family life. Buildings ought to 
be adaptable, flexible and forgiving. I don’t believe in the preciousness of 
“the beautiful concept”. Longevity is given by a building’s ability to adapt.

Sunand Prasad 


Prasad, 66, co-founded Penoyre & Prasad <http://www.penoyreprasad.com/> in 
1988 with Greg Penoyre. The practice specialises in the sustainable 
architecture of health, education and civic buildings. Prasad is chair of
Article 25 <http://www.article-25.org/>, a charity helping communities to build 
resilient buildings, especially after disasters
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75855915687ea99505788920d6396500b7db2283%2F29_296_5561_3336%2F5561.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75855915687ea99505788920d6396500b7db2283%2F29_296_5561_3336%2F5561.jpg>
 Sunand Prasad at his flat in Highgate. Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the 
Guardian 
I grew up in central India in a community founded by Mahatma Gandhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mahatma-gandhi> in 1937. It was a village 
with utopian ambitions; a vision of what rural India could look like after 
independence. People from all over the world came through the village, drawn by 
Gandhi’s legacy. Education was at its heart.

My father was an art teacher and my mother a nurse. The house we lived in was 
a simple, symmetrical structure with a deep veranda, two good-sized rooms, and 
a bathroom and kitchen. On summer days, we closed the windows and hung dampened 
vetiver mats over the doorways, so the hot winds turned into a cool, scented 
breeze that filled the house.

On summer nights, we would sleep out in the open. I have a fond memory of my 
mum pointing out the constellations before we fell asleep. In the winter it was 
the other way round – taking the sun in the day and sleeping inside at night.

The walls were made of wattle and daub, and we had timber-trussed roofs, plain 
interlocking tiles and wide eaves. The house was raised off the ground to keep 
it dry during the monsoons. These, and the summer heat, took their toll on the 
house, so every spring there was a celebratory redecoration. The walls were 
coated with a slurry of mud and a sterile cow dung derivative, which repelled 
insects.

The house sat in the middle of a rose garden surrounded by fields. Seasonally, 
there would be sweet potatoes and bananas on one side and an orange grove on 
the other. There was also agulmohar tree 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delonix_regia>, which had fern-like branches and 
beautiful red flowers.

The community thrived in the mid-50s and our house was very much in the middle 
of that. My father built an art school next door – his passion. One of my first 
memories is pointing the flagstones in the veranda when I was four; I was given 
a little trowel. It’s nice to think that this was the beginning of my 
architectural career, further encouraged by the Meccano set my father found in 
a junk shop.
 ‘On summer days the hot winds turned into a cool, scented breeze’: the house 
where Sunand Prasad grew up, in rural India. Photograph: Sunand Prasad 
Looking back, it was a truly sustainable lifestyle: simple, enjoyable and 
stylish. All those things were influential to me.

Of the places I have lived in, the most comparable since was a home friends 
and I built in east London using recycled materials, as part of a housing 
co-operative. We raised our children there. It linked with other houses across 
back gardens and had a sense of community reminiscent of my childhood. I would 
love one day to build a house that is as regenerative as nature, wasting 
nothing.

Terry Farrell 


Farrell, 78, founded his own practice <http://farrells.com/> in 1980. His 
projects include London’s Charing Cross station, theTV-am building 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2015/08/26/postmodern-architecture-tv-am-television-studios-camden-london-terry-farrell/>
,MI6 headquarters <http://farrells.com/projects/vauxhall-cross/>, and recently, 
in east Asia,KK100 <http://farrells.com/projects/kk100-development/> in 
Shenzhen, the tallest tower realised by a British architect
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03ff2fefc7ef920d881f6fc429cc3472cd8a9d30%2F14_220_5580_3348%2F5580.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03ff2fefc7ef920d881f6fc429cc3472cd8a9d30%2F14_220_5580_3348%2F5580.jpg>
 Terry Farrell’s home is a converted factory. Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the 
Guardian 
I believe in a pluralist approach to taste, which is probably affected by my 
emerging from a working class. I grew up the child of a postman and then went 
to grammar school, so I was part of that transition.

I was born on the outskirts of Manchester. When I was eight, we moved to the 
Grange council estate three miles north of Newcastle upon Tyne. We lived there 
from 1946 to 1954 in a prefab and a brick house. The prefab was well-designed: 
a lightweight aluminium frame clad in asbestos. It had an image problem, 
though. After four years, we moved into a brick house on the other side of the 
estate. It was handcrafted rather than factory-made, but it had smaller windows 
and the kitchen wasn’t as functional.

I still live in the middle of a housing estate. Thirty years ago, I bought a 
disused factory in a deprived ward in Westminster. It was built in the 1920s 
and requisitioned during the second world war by a tyre and aeroworks company. 
I bought it for £10 a square foot.

My offices occupy the ground and first floors, and for the past 15 years I 
have lived with my wife in the roof. It’s a steel-framed, rough-and-ready space 
of 3,500 sq ft with no separate bedroom or study. I’ve never adjusted to a 
desk, study or studio – my home is my workplace.

Although it is industrial, there are lots of plants and trees inside, and on 
my roof terrace. I was immersed in nature as a child – the estate was 
surrounded by countryside.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F688e046c0beeea70a090b4403e249a5b2e5f32fc%2F12_224_3222_1933%2F3222.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foundation%20stone%3A%20leading%20architects%20on%20the%20homes%20that%20shaped%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Ffoundation-stone-leading-architects-homes-shaped-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F688e046c0beeea70a090b4403e249a5b2e5f32fc%2F12_224_3222_1933%2F3222.jpg>
 ‘I feel a sense of social justice about what I do’: Terry Farrell as a baby in 
Manchester, with his older brother, Tony, and their father. Photograph: Terry 
Farrell 
I was influenced by a remark my father made when we lived on the estate. He 
was conscious that every door should be painted green. He said, “If it belongs 
to everyone, it belongs to no one.” I feel that same sense of social justice 
about what I do.
 