
Here’s one thing we don’t often want to admit: it is too late to stop many of 
the harshest and most destructive aspects of climate change from materialising. 
We’re out of time. Superstorms, droughts, floods, disappearing islands, 
coastlines and lost species are already here.

Weakening Hurricane Matthew brings flooding to south-eastern US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/09/hurricane-matthew-weakening-flooding-south-east-us-atlantic>
We need to face the fact that the climate crisis is upon us, and that the 
greenhouse gases we’ve already emitted have locked in even worse that’s yet to 
come. The mass deaths in Haiti and the evacuation of 1.5 million people from 
the Florida coast in the wake ofHurricane Matthew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/09/hurricane-matthew-weakening-flooding-south-east-us-atlantic>
 is just the kind of weather-related event that we can expect to happen more 
frequently in a warmer world.

So what do we need to do? Run and cower in the corner? Accept futile 
half-measures? No, courage is what the movement fighting climate change and 
fossil fuels needs most now. Lack of courage by western governments is having 
devastating consequences, and in the case of America, one of them is fracking. 
This is the unacceptable “solution” to the climate crisis that the US has been 
pushing all across the world. The decision by the British government last week 
tooverturn Lancashire’s rejection of fracking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/07/tory-localism-fracking-lancashire-sajid-javid-drilling>
 shows that the UK, too, seems to be falling for it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Ffracking-climate-change-denial-fight-fossil-fuel-madness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b6de6af8cecc95c40d2219308103592fd02660a%2F0_310_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fracking%20is%20a%20form%20of%20climate-change%20denial%20%7C%20Josh%20Fox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Ffracking-climate-change-denial-fight-fossil-fuel-madness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fracking%20is%20a%20form%20of%20climate-change%20denial%20%7C%20Josh%20Fox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Ffracking-climate-change-denial-fight-fossil-fuel-madness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b6de6af8cecc95c40d2219308103592fd02660a%2F0_310_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Fracking sites in northwestern Colorado. Photograph: Susan Heller/Flickr Vision
Our movement and our scientists, by contrast, do have the courage to identify 
what needs to be done.Bill McKibben <http://www.billmckibben.com/>, founder of 
350.org <https://350.org/>, estimates that we have 17 years to replace all 
fossil fuel infrastructure with renewable energy. That means no new fossil fuel 
projects. Period. We burn down what we have, and we build renewable 
energy sources as fast as we can. That means no new pipelines, no new fracking 
fields, no new offshore drilling, no new tar sands or coal mines.

That would mean no new fracking in the US or the UK. You cannot be a climate 
leader and support fracking: it is a new form of climate denialism. One only 
has to look at the brave stand people all across the world are taking to fight 
fossil fuel developments to see the kind of courage our governments lack but 
that the future will demand. Britain has seen protests inBalcombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jan/23/fracking-balcombe-site-cuadrilla>
 in West Sussex, and in Blackpool, while in the US we have had brave pipeline 
fighters in Nebraska andStanding Rock reservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/18/north-dakota-pipeline-activists-bakken-oil-fields>
, North Dakota.

The neoliberal promise that we can both prevent catastrophic warming and allow 
energy companies to get rich extracting and burning more fossil fuels, 
including shale gas, is a fallacy. We can’t. Yet the US State Department’s 
shale gas initiative is seeking to expand fracking to other countries, even 
when their citizens don’t want it. The UK’s Institute ofGas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gas> Engineers and Managers, IGEM, 
cites it as a model for the world, and now Britain is seeking to import its own 
US-style fracking boom.

The world Obama is referring to is something else, in which fossil fuel 
lobbyists obscure the will of the people

The Lancashire decision will have to be fought off with passion, enthusiasm 
and courage. This means putting ourselves and, yes, sometimes our bodies on the 
line to stop this march of fossil fuel madness.

Last week, even as superstorm Matthew bore down on America’s east coast, 
Barack Obama said at the premiere ofLeonardo DiCaprio’s new climate change film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/01/leonardo-dicaprio-climate-change-film-before-the-flood-barack-obama>
 that keeping fossil fuels in the ground isn’t practical, and that we have to 
accept fracking as a way to cut emissions because “we have to live in the real 
world”.

The real world, I assume, is the one that science is describing – that says we 
cannot develop more fossil fuels. The world Obama is referring to is something 
else – a bubble – in which fossil fuel lobbyists obscure the will of the people 
under their superstorm of campaign cash and political influence.

What price Tory localism when fracking’s on offer in Lancashire? | Jennifer 
Mein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/07/tory-localism-fracking-lancashire-sajid-javid-drilling>
We can’t afford to dig up the fossil fuel deposits we’ve already developed, 
let alone develop new ones, especially shale gas. Some peer-reviewed research 
finds that shale gas is worse for the climate than coal or oil, because 
fracking and transporting it emits massive quantities of methane, which is over 
80 timesmore powerful 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/global-warming/issues/natural-gas/> a warming 
agent than carbon dioxide over 20 years.

Those are the same 20 years in which we must replace our fossil fuel 
infrastructure with renewables to have a fighting chance against catastrophic 
warming. I recently filmed activists in China risking their freedom to speak 
out against coal; indigenous people deep in the Amazon confronting the ravages 
of oil companies;Pacific Climate Warriors 
<http://350pacific.org/pacific-climate-warriors/> blockading coal tankers with 
canoes, chanting: “We are not drowning – we are fighting!” We all need their 
courage and inventiveness now. The climate movement can prevail against the 
odds if it has enough bravery, community resilience, creativity, awareness of 
rights, and love. Luckily these are the things climate can’t change.
 