
There was a time when I innocently thought that it should always be possible 
to turn confidently to Chambers or Collins (or, if my back was definitely to 
the wall, to the full OED) to settle a disputed crossword point. But my faith 
has been sorely tested of late.

At the end of last year we had the "laser" problem. Your many responses have 
been informative and helpful and, if I am still confused, it is at a much 
higher level. In January we hit more science and technology stumbling blocks. 
The first was MAINFRAME, clued in the Quick for January 16 as: "Computer's 
central processing unit". From all parts of the world came messages of 
sympathy, tinged with contempt, for the fact that we clearly did not know a 
mega-computer from a laptop, or a UNIVAC from an Intel Pentium 4.

It is undeniable that the definition usually associated with "mainframe" is 
for a computer just below the supercomputer in power, but with the flexible 
advantage that it can simultaneously support a number of different programs. If 
you Google, that is the answer you will get. But why, then, does Collins lead 
us astray with a second definition: the central processing unit of a computer? 
And why does Chambers give as its first definition: the central processing unit 
and storage unit of a computer?

Worse was to come. The Quick for January 28 had "Positive terminal of a 
primary cell" for CATHODE. The wires were hot with messages implying shock that 
the Guardian should be so ignorant of elementary physics as not to know that a 
positive terminal is, of course, an anode. At this point, Chambers was not much 
help because neither of its definitions for anode and cathode is written in 
terms of polarity, concentrating instead on the positively charged ions coming 
from a cathode and on the current coming from an anode (which in itself is 
confusing to the lay person as each seems to be the source of an outflow).

By contrast, Collins appears to come down heavily on both sides of the fence 
at once. It has cathode firmly as a negative electrode (though of an 
electrolytic cell). But it then also has it as the positive terminal of a 
primary cell. I am hesitant to expose myself to more obloquy by admitting that 
I am not 100% sure that I know the difference between an electrolytic and a 
primary cell, but in telling the readers' editor that I did not think that the 
paper needed to carry a correction I clung blindly to Collins, definition 2.

_____

A domestic, rather than a natural, science issue of a slightly different kind 
arose with PAVLOVA CAKE in the Quick for January 12. The dispute here was 
whether the high calorie item is a pavlova cake, or just a plain pavlova. My 
OED has no entry for either. But both Chambers and Collins are clear: no "cake"!

The odd thing here is the evidence that what we are talking about started out 
as a "pavlova cake" and was probably still two words at least as late as the 
1960s. The evidence for this is that the puzzle's setter has in his possession 
a 1961 Mrs Beeton cook book with a recipe for "pavlova cake". As all domestic 
scientists know, there is a historical dispute as to both the origin of this 
recipe and its proper name.

Both Australia and New Zealand lay claim to its invention. The West Australian 
chef Herbert Sachse claimed to have invented the "pavlova cake" in 1935. New 
Zealand does not acknowledge a single creator, but the name pavlova was 
certainly in use in menus there before 1935. (My source for this slightly 
esoteric information is "The Pavlova Cake: the Evolution of a National Dish", 
by Helen M Leach in "Food on the Move: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on 
Food and Cookery", ed. Harlan Walker: Prospect Books, 1996.) BBC2's current 
series Balderdash & Piffle tries to persuade the OED to accept the earliest 
authenticated date for the appearance of a new word or meaning. The great 
"pavlova cake" debate suggests the possibility of a follow-up series on when 
words or parts of phrases disappeared.

_____

The good news this month is the changes to your online crosswords homepage. 
The weekly Azed puzzle in the Observer has been available via the Archive 
facility in the bottom right-hand corner for some weeks. But the puzzle is now 
fully bedded in and the puzzles have been added to the "easy click" list of 
current puzzles on the right-hand side of the page. Second, for those of you 
who download the Saturday prize cryptic and submit entries by fax, the week's 
winners will now be put up each Monday morning on the home page.

Â· Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian crossword editor
 