
Hugo Lloris described Euro 2016 as having been “strange from the beginning 
until the end,” as he reflected onPortugal’s extra time victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 over his France team in Sunday night’s final.

Euro 2016: Guardian writers pick their highs and lows from France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/11/euro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows>
The France captain and some of his team-mates clearly felt that they had done 
enough to have won over the 90 minutes and, equally, it was not lost on them 
thatPortugal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> had advanced to 
the knockout rounds after finishing third in their group, behind Hungary and 
Iceland.

Lloris was asked whether he found it odd that a team which had finished in 
third place at the group stage could reach the final. “This tournament was 
strange from the beginning until the end,” replied the Tottenham Hotspur 
goalkeeper. “The one thing we can say about Portugal is that it’s about their 
mental strength and their spirit. When you see them winning three games after 
extra time, it means that there is something strong and special inside the team.

“It’s difficult to find the words [to explain the defeat]. It’s true that we 
are all very disappointed. We tried our best and we missed, maybe, a bit of 
luck – the luck of the champion. We played all the games to win this game. It 
was a bit different for Portugal. They were more waiting for a mistake, waiting 
for a counterattack or set-pieces. But they played in this way all the 
competition and, at the end, they won. It’s football.”

France were the more attacking team at the Stade de France on Sunday and 
created the chances to have won in 90 minutes. Antoine Griezmann headed over 
when gloriously placed on 66 minutes and the substitute, André-Pierre Gignac, 
hit the post in stoppage time. The Portugal goalkeeper, Rui Patrício, was fully 
extended on four occasions. And yetFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> did not score and nor did they 
truly convince with their performance.

Portugal beat France to win Euro 2016 final with Éder’s extra-time goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
“It’s a massive, massive, massive disappointment,” Bacary Sagna, the 
full-back, said. “Everyone was thinking about winning the cup, everyone was so 
focused and everyone was very confident. And we lose. The way it happened – 
it’s a bad feeling.

“We have to accept that Portugal won the cup, even though we were the better 
team – we gave a lot and we were a bit unlucky. So congratulations to them and 
tomorrow is another day. Everyone keeps saying that we had a great tournament 
but I can’t take that. I can’t take that, because we lost. So, to me, it’s more 
of a disappointment than a success.”

Lloris lamented the lack of a clinical edge up front while he also felt the 
extra day of preparation that Portugal had enjoyed had helped them in extra 
time. “We maybe had a lack of freshness,” the 29-year-old said. “When you are a 
player at this stage of the competition, one day is very important and can 
make, maybe, the difference. Maybe it made the difference. But this is 
football. We have no excuses.

“We did our best and the most important thing is what we have created during 
the competition – between us, inside the team and the emotions that we’ve 
shared with all of the fans. This is one of the good memories and I think we 
can build up something strong for the next few years. We have a young 
generation and I think the future has to be bright.”
 