
The France striker Olivier Giroud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/olivier-giroud> has revealed why he 
snubbed a move to Chelsea in favour of joining Arsenal. Giroud completed his 
£13m transfer from Montpellier on Tuesday after rejecting the chance to sign 
for the Champions League winners.

The 25-year-old said he prefers the setup at Arsenal, including its French 
influence, and suspected the Chelsea managerRoberto Di Matteo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roberto-di-matteo> knew little about him.

"Why did I choose Arsenal rather than Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>?" Giroud told French newspaper 
L'Equipe. "Because it is a club I love and I thought it would be easier for my 
adaptation.

"Arsenal is a great club, the facilities are wonderful, but I feel it is a 
club that takes big care before signing a player, notably considering human 
values.

"There are French players. There is also Arsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> [the manager] who let me 
understand he really wanted me. Chelsea is very nice, it is a great club, but I 
am not convinced Di Matteo knows who I am."

Giroud denies he has been bought by Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> as a replacement for Robin van 
Persie, who is stalling over agreeing a new contract and has been strongly 
linked with a move to Manchester City.

"When you make the decision to join a great club, you know there is already a 
great forward. I know what to expect," Giroud said. "Van Persie is a fantastic 
player who was outstanding last season.

"He has been at Arsenal for eight years and I hope I will have time to adapt 
and improve. Anyway, I don't go there to take his place."
 