
For Frank de Boer, Tuesday’s edition of the Gazzetta dello Sport would not 
have made comfortable reading. Fresh fromthe home defeat against Cagliari on 
Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/mauro-icardi-v-inters-ultras-an-unhappy-chapter-in-his-ongoing-san-siro-saga>
 that left Internazionale marooned in mid-table,the famous pink paper reported 
<http://www.gazzetta.it/Calcio/Serie-A/Inter/17-10-2016/de-boer-rischia-inter-allenatore-170478435944.shtml?refresh_ce-cp>
 that the Dutchman’s future at San Siro is already under major scrutiny from 
the club’s new Chinese owners just overtwo months after he was appointed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/internazionale-appoint-frank-de-boer-roberto-mancini-serie-a>
.

“Many of the Suning society cannot wait any longer,” read the editorial. 
“De Boer is under examination and it is time to show that he deserves to be on 
theNerazzurri bench.”

Mauro Icardi v Inter's Ultras: an unhappy chapter in his ongoing San Siro saga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/mauro-icardi-v-inters-ultras-an-unhappy-chapter-in-his-ongoing-san-siro-saga>
The Suning Group is used to getting results. The founder, Zhang Jindong, 
opened his first shop selling air‑conditioning in Nanjing – the capital of 
Jiangsu province – in 1990 and within 15 years the business had become one of 
China’s largest retailers.

Zhang’s son Steven is now one of the directors at Inter after they agreed a 
deal worth around €270m (£240m) in June topurchase a majority 68.5% stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/06/internazionale--chinese-ownership-suning-holdings-serie-a>
 in the three-time European champions from the Indonesian businessman Erick 
Thohir. He was not present at a hastily arranged summit between De Boer, the 
vice-president, Javier Zanetti, the sporting director, Piero Ausilio, and the 
director general, Giovanni Gardini, at the club’s training ground on Monday but 
the man who won 112 caps for Holland will know he will not get too many more 
chances.

Sandwiched between two matches against Southampton in the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> – the first of which 
takes place on Thursday night – Inter face trips to Atalanta and Sampdoria and 
host Torino in a sequence of fixtures that could determine De Boer’s future.

Five defeats in his first 11 matches, including successive losses in the 
Europa League against Hapoel Be’er Sheva and Sparta Prague, and rumbles of 
discontent over his handling of an expensively assembled squad who appeared out 
on their feet as they conceded twice in the final 20 minutes on Sunday, have 
raised the possibility of a third manager being appointed by Inter before the 
end of the year.

Having dominated the Eredivisie for four seasons up to 2014, De Boer saw his 
Ajax sidebeaten to the title once again in May by PSV Eindhoven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/08/psv-eindhoven-clinch-eredivisie-title-ajax-fail-to-win>
. At that stage, it appeared Roberto Mancini would be given an opportunity to 
build on last season’s fourth-placed finish with Inter before a 6-1 thrashing 
by Tottenham Hotspur in a pre-season friendly led to the former Manchester City 
manager losing his job less than two weeks before the start of the season amid 
rumours of a major fallout with Suning.

De Boer was immediately parachuted in, with Inter insisting it had all been 
part of the plan. But an opening-day defeat at Chievo was an indication of the 
challenge the new man faced and, despite some encouraging away wins against 
Pescara and Empoli either side of beating the champions Juventus 2-1 at San 
Siro, the gloom has now set in.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Ffrank-de-boer-inter-era-europa-league-southampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33d4991c38b67705f6f80161b9d777f8efec28cb%2F0_286_3348_2009%2F3348.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frank%20de%20Boer%20feeling%20the%20heat%20at%20Inter%20as%20new%20era%20falls%20flat%20%7C%20Ed%20Aarons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Ffrank-de-boer-inter-era-europa-league-southampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frank%20de%20Boer%20feeling%20the%20heat%20at%20Inter%20as%20new%20era%20falls%20flat%20%7C%20Ed%20Aarons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Ffrank-de-boer-inter-era-europa-league-southampton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33d4991c38b67705f6f80161b9d777f8efec28cb%2F0_286_3348_2009%2F3348.jpg>
 Frank de Boer shows his frustration during Inter’s defeat to Sparta Prague. 
Photograph: Petr David Josek/AP 
De Boer’s struggles have certainly not been helped by comments made by the 
captain and top scorer, Mauro Icardi, in his recent book – the Argentina 
international is involved in anongoing war of words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/mauro-icardi-v-inters-ultras-an-unhappy-chapter-in-his-ongoing-san-siro-saga>
 with Inter’s Ultras – yet the decision to freeze out the talented midfielders 
Geoffrey Kondogbia and Marcelo Brozovic for disciplinary reasons were of his 
own making. The latter could make a return against Southampton.

With a top-three finish and qualification for the Champions League firmly 
established as Suning’s major priority for this season, Southampton will fancy 
their chances against a squad which does not include either Gabriel “Gabigol” 
Barbosa or João Mário – signed for a combined €70m this summer but excluded 
from the Europa League due to Financial Fair Play regulations. Yet De Boer will 
surely be feeling the pressure given that the Suning Group sacked Dan Petrescu 
as Jiangsu Suning manager in June despite him winning the Chinese Cup the 
previous season.

The rumour mill in Italy suggests that the Dutchman could just be keeping the 
seat warm until Diego Simeone is ready to leave Atlético Madrid and return to 
the club he helped win the Uefa Cup in 1998. However, having missed out on the 
posts at Everton and Southampton in the summer, De Boer will be desperate to 
prove he is the man to revive one of Italy’s most famous clubs. A win on 
Thursday night against Southampton would be an important step towards keeping 
his job.
 