
The Eternal City has hosted some of the game’s all-time greats – among them 
Bruno Conti, Falcão, Giuseppe Signori and Giorgio Chinaglia – but none of them 
are greater than Roma’s current captain and symbol, Francesco Totti: a man who 
was born in 1976, joined the club in 1989, made his debut in 1993, has been 
their captain since 1998 and last scored for them on Sunday. He has been one of 
European football’s greatest talents and, on skill alone, Totti is one of the 
finest players in the history of the sport.

What he has brought to Roma is unique and will be everlasting but, strangely 
enough, that romance may never have blossomed. Totti’s mother turned down a 
lucrative offer from Milan so that he could join his hometown club, a dream 
that was realised in 1989. As Totti puts it: “When you are a kid in Rome, there 
are only two possible choices: You are either red or blue. ASRoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> or Lazio. But in our family, there 
was only one possible choice.” Silvio Berlusconi and Adriano Galliani saw Totti 
as one for the future – a player who would go on to join Fabio Capello’s 
invincible Milan team of the early 1990s – but they were left to wonder what 
might have been.

Like so many geniuses, his career is flawed: blotted by moments of madness. 
Controversy has followedIl Bimbo d’Oro (the Golden Boy) and his psyche remains 
one of the most intriguing and unpredictable in the game. But he’s still here: 
still giving match-winning performances and scoring memorable goals, still 
bringing hope to a city besieged with socio-economic and cultural challenges, 
still giving hope to the thousands of children who dream of becoming the next 
monument in Italian football, still keeping alive the romantic dream of the 
classicfantasista. He still relies on technique, vision and precision – much 
like he did on 28 March 1993, when he made his debut as a 16-year-old in an 
unremarkable 2-0 away victory against Brescia.

His genius lies in his three unrivalled skills: the ability to create 
something from nothing off either foot, his supreme, deadly finishing – which 
has brought him 306 Serie A goals – and his confidence (who can forgethis 
Panenka against Holland at Euro 2000 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v0VtO7cwfDk>). His feet are natural – touching 
a ball and striking it perfectly with ease is second nature – but his mind is 
what separates him from the rest. He thinks ahead. He’s the enigma who has 
carried his hometown club for over two decades and won a World Cup along the 
way.

Some managers have tried to negate his influence. Luis Enrique notably paid 
the price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/dec/14/guardian-sport-network-luis-enrique>
. Not necessarily because he lost his job, but because Roma lacked invention, 
skill and unpredictability. Perhaps Fabio Capello best laid the blueprint on 
how to use Totti back in 2001: don’t stop using him. Make him the focal point 
of every attacking move and let him carry the burden.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Ffrancesco-totti-40-roma-italy-eternal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F119a78401490fffe9a65ed21d1e71ffa5d1f88af%2F0_61_3600_2298%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Francesco%20Totti%20at%2040%3A%20the%20eternal%20man&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Ffrancesco-totti-40-roma-italy-eternal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Francesco%20Totti%20at%2040%3A%20the%20eternal%20man&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Ffrancesco-totti-40-roma-italy-eternal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F119a78401490fffe9a65ed21d1e71ffa5d1f88af%2F0_61_3600_2298%2F3600.jpg>
 Francesco Totti celebrates after scoring against Torino on Sunday. Photograph: 
Marco Bertorello/AFP/Getty Images 
His statistics are sublime: Totti has played more than half of his footballing 
career as a classictrequartista and yet he has managed to outscore great 
forwards such as Alessandro Del Piero, Roberto Baggio and Gabriel Batistuta. He 
scored his 250th goal inSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> on Sunday – only Silvio 
Piola has more and he retired in 1954.

Who can forget Totti’s 113th strike, against Inter at the San Siro in 2005, 
when his majestic chip from outside the boxsailed over a stranded Francesco 
Toldo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QxQWxNNHDuE>? That goal, one of his 
personal favourites, is one of the greatest chips scored in calcio history. 
Sadly, having suffered a career-threatening injury a few months later, many 
thought they had seen the last of Totti at the very top of the game.

But his love for football helped him recuperate in time to be selected by 
Marcello Lippi for the 2006 World Cup in Germany, where he played every match 
and – having contributed four assists and the crucial last-minute penalty 
against Australia in the second round – was one of the protagonists in the 
victoriousAzzurri side. That was some comeback and his will to continue playing 
a decade later deserves nothing but respect.

At 40, he can’t drift around like he used to, especially in the channels, but 
his ability to find space in key areas ensures he remains one of the game’s 
most dangerous players. For a man who many considered to be past his best when 
Luis Enrique took charge in 2011, he has grown yet again.

People spend plenty of time asking Totti why he never left Roma in search of 
trophies?He replies 
<http://www.theplayerstribune.com/francesco-totti-as-roma-english/>: “Rome is 
my family, my friends, the people that I love. Rome is the sea, the mountains, 
the monuments. This club, this city, has been my life.”

But why would he ever move? He is the soul of Roma, lauded as their saviour 
and afforded hero status – and he loves the adulation. Roma was the ideal foil 
for him to find his way to superstardom. The relationship is of mutual benefit. 
Roma need their captain to galvanise the team and Totti needs a major stage to 
shine on – it’s not difficult to see why he remains motivated and hungry to 
carry on. Thankfully for the world of football, Totti’s mother made the right 
decision to turn Milan down when he was a child. He hasn’t looked back since.

He’s had offers. Real Madrid came and were politely ushered away. Manchester 
United tried their luck in 1999 and 2000 as Alex Ferguson spoke openly of his 
admiration for Totti’s talent. Perhaps his desire to turn away suitors and 
remain in Rome is what leaves some quarters of the English media from truly 
understanding him. But Totti will ultimately judge his career on what he’s 
given back to the Romans, who he calls “his people”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Ffrancesco-totti-40-roma-italy-eternal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F314c682b3a581e34cf98970fac48d5bab627ee12%2F0_268_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Francesco%20Totti%20at%2040%3A%20the%20eternal%20man&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Ffrancesco-totti-40-roma-italy-eternal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Francesco%20Totti%20at%2040%3A%20the%20eternal%20man&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Ffrancesco-totti-40-roma-italy-eternal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F314c682b3a581e34cf98970fac48d5bab627ee12%2F0_268_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Roma fans greet their hero. Photograph: Gabriel Bouys/AFP/Getty Images 
Trophies are a bonus and the 2001 Scudetto will surely sit proudly alongside 
his European Golden Shoe in 2007 and World Cup winner’s medal. Factor in his 
five Italian Player of the Year awards and he will no doubt sleep easy.

The definition of success is subjective. Ask Alan Hansen and he’ll tell you 
it’s about the number of trophies you have in your cabinet. Ask Paolo Maldini 
or Steven Gerrard, however, and they might factor in the achievement of 
supporting, loving and playing for a great club for decades.

Totti has given more back to the people of Rome than any trophy can. He’s 
given them loyalty and hope – he has become a “monument”, as Lippi calls him. 
He’s given them the chance to live each game through a man who wandered the 
same streets as they did as boy. Most importantly, he’s kept their identity 
alive.

In an Italy where identity and social segregation has become an increasingly 
prominent and contentious topic, he’s united the people of various clubs and 
groups through his undoubted talent and application. And as he celebrates 
turning 40, he offers a wonderful glimpse into a bygone era of success at Roma 
and for the wider Italian game.

• This article is from These Football Times <http://thesefootballtimes.co/>
• Follow These Football Times <https://twitter.com/thesefootytimes> and Omar 
Saleem <https://twitter.com/omar_saleem> on Twitter
 