
Patience is a virtue in the Eternal City. Nobody, though, enjoys being kept in 
limbo. As a violent storm assaulted the Stadio Olimpico on Sunday afternoon, 
fans huddled together and waited to find out whether the football match they 
had been watching was ever going to resume. And then they waited some more.

Joe Hart makes costly error to gift Atalanta equaliser on Torino debut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/11/joe-hart-torino-error-on-debut-atalanta-serie-a>
Rain had begun to fall during the first half, but only after Roma and 
Sampdoria’s players trudged off for the interval did the situation escalate. It 
was barely four in the afternoon, but the skies turned so dark that it might as 
well have been evening. Sheets of waterrolled down off the roof 
<https://twitter.com/NaomiOhReally/status/775012351967920128>, causing lower 
levels of the stadium to flood 
<https://twitter.com/ASRomaEN/status/774974394221330432>, before giving way to 
hail so noisy that it was hard to hear the stadium PA.

Indecision reigned. Would the match be called off? Official guidance handed 
down by the Italian Referees’ Association recommends that: “In the event of 
meteorological impediments thought to be temporary, the referee can stop the 
match for as long as they consider opportune.”

In this instance, 80 minutes was deemed an acceptable pause. Only in the last 
10 were players told for definite that the match would resume. The referee 
Piero Giacomelli had been out several times during the break to test playing 
conditions but repeatedly delayed a decision. Unlike some other parts of the 
venue, the pitch at the Stadio Olimpico boasts excellent drainage and seemed to 
be holding up well.

And yet, some 300 miles away to the north, Genoa’s match against Fiorentina 
was abandoned on Sunday after similar weather conditions had interrupted play 
midway through the first half. This discrepancy was widely noted, with the 
former refereeing designator Paolo Casarin using a column in Corriere della 
Sera to rail against “a clear deficiency in the rules” that had left too much 
discretion to each individual match official.

One man unfazed by it all was Francesco Totti. When you’ve been playing 
top-flight football for a quarter of a century, you could hardly get too worked 
up about the odd hour lost here or there. Besides, he had started this game on 
the bench, so half-time meant a chance to get up and do some exercise.

There was something iconic about the image of Totti performing his stretches 
<https://twitter.com/CB_Ignoranza/status/774977012293337088> on Sunday, all 
alone in the pouring rain. Two weeks away from his 40th birthday, his love for 
the game of football remains as intense as it ever was. And he has lost none of 
his capacity to steal a show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Ffrancesco-totti-roma-sampdoria-rain-seria-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26cacfc7992938dfdb13e3107f1e90767afbf9e2%2F0_175_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Francesco%20Totti%20emerges%20from%20Roma%20rain%20to%20cast%20more%20sunshine%20on%20career%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Ffrancesco-totti-roma-sampdoria-rain-seria-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Francesco%20Totti%20emerges%20from%20Roma%20rain%20to%20cast%20more%20sunshine%20on%20career%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Ffrancesco-totti-roma-sampdoria-rain-seria-a%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26cacfc7992938dfdb13e3107f1e90767afbf9e2%2F0_175_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
 Heavy rain over the Stadio Olimpico forced the match between Roma and 
Sampdoria to be suspended for 80 minutes. Photograph: Angelo Carconi/EPA 
Roma were losing 2-1 at the start of their extended interval, and had been 
outplayed by an enterprisingSampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> side. But the introductions of 
Totti and Edin Dzeko for the start of the delayed second half seemed to turn 
the tide. Within moments of play resuming, Kevin Strootman drew a fantastic 
save from Emiliano Viviano and Radja Nainggolan flashed a shot over.

Totti then released Dzeko through on goal, only for the Samp keeper to thwart 
him. No matter. In the 61st minute Totti picked out the Bosnian again with a 
scandalous first-time pass from the left flank. The ball sailed 30 yards and 
over the heads of two defenders before landing softly on the boot of Dzeko, who 
swerved past Viviano to prod home.

Roma should have won easily from there. Only the brilliance of Viviano – who 
denied Mohamed Salah, Dzeko, then Salah again – kept things level at 2-2. But 
all his efforts were for nought. In injury timeRoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> won a penalty, as Milan Skriniar 
(just about) caught Dzeko in the box. Totti stepped up to take it.

He would later admit to having felt nervous, “for the first time ever”, as he 
stood over the ball. “I was afraid of messing up,” confessed Totti, “because to 
crown this match with a goal and an assist would be ideal. But then I knew I 
could not mess up underneath the Curva, and in front of my people.”

So it proved. Totti buried his penalty into the bottom right corner before 
rushing towards the stands. He had joked to his team-mates, when they came out 
to join him on the pitch at half-time, that they should thank him for coaxing 
the sun back out. By full time, one or two observers were struggling to 
separate the facts from the fiction.

Football transfer rumours: Watford's Troy Deeney to Everton?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/12/football-transfer-rumours-watford-troy-deeney-to-everton>
“Totti builds the ark, drives away the clouds, creates a rainbow and scores 
the penalty,” gushed Maurizio Crosetti in La Repubblica. “Superstar and 
demiurge, and now a meteorologist, theologian and philosopher as well. Yes, the 
hurricane will end. Yes, there is life beyond life. Yes, immortality exists.”

There is no need for such hyperbole when the cold facts of Totti’s career have 
become so extraordinary. This is his 25th season inSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> – matching a record held 
by Paolo Maldini. He is the first player in Italy ever to find the net in 23 
consecutive top-flight campaigns.

Rather than slowing down, he has carried his excellent form from the latter 
part of 2015-16 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/21/francesco-totti-italian-football-roy-of-rovers-roma>
 into this new season. Over his last eight Serie A appearances, Totti has 
scored five goals and provided the assist on three more. This despite not 
playing more than 45 minutes in any one of those games.

As he stood joking with his eldest son, Cristian – 10 years old and a member 
of Roma’s youth set-up – at full-time on Sunday, it was half-tempting to 
imagine them one day turning out for theGiallorossi together. It has been 
presumed that Totti Sr will finally retire at the end of this season, but he 
teased reporters on Sunday with the question: “If I’m playing like this, then 
why should I stop?”

Why, indeed? Neither age, nor hailstorms have been able to discourage him thus 
far.

Talking points

• So, Joe Hart. As you might have heard, things did not go ideally well 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/11/joe-hart-torino-error-on-debut-atalanta-serie-a>
 for Manchester City’s exiled goalkeeper on his Torino debut. Having been named
as “John Hart” on the teamsheet 
<https://twitter.com/SquawkaNews/status/774947753512370176> (John is, to be 
fair, one of his middle names), he then flapped at a cornerto help tee up 
Atalanta’s equalising goal 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/774978883183599617?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
. Torino, who had led 1-0, wound up losing 2-1. Hart scored 5/10 across the 
board in Monday morning’s newspaperpagelle, but if anything I’d say that the 
Italian press have been more forgiving in their reactions to his performance 
than the English thus far – at least noting that he did also make a good save 
from Franck Kessié in the first half.

• It’s high time that I stopped to acknowledge Kessié’s start to this season – 
as he’s now scored four goals in three games (five in four if you count the 
Coppa Italia win over Cremonese) from midfield. Still just 19 years old, the 
Ivorian joined Atalanta last year but was immediately packed off for a 
season-long loan at Cesena in Serie B. Previously a central defender, he was 
converted during his stint there into a more advanced role and has thrived 
since. He will not maintain his present rate of scoring, but his energy and 
commitment will continue to make him an asset regardless.

• Someone who probably will keep on scoring is Gonzalo Higuaín, who made his 
first start for Juventus on Saturday and struck twice in the 3-1 victory over 
Sassuolo. The Argentinian is visibly leanerthan he was in pre-season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/22/gonzalo-higuain-juventus-serie-a-fiorentina>
, and La Stampa report that he has lost 5kg since August. Better yet for 
Juventus, he looked instantly comfortable alongside Paulo Dybala – who set up 
his first goal. Oh, and Miralem Pjanic marked his debut with an excellent 
performance, and goal, of his own.

• If it still hurts Napoli fans to see Higuaín lining up for their rivals, 
then at least they still have one familiar idol to hang on to. Marek Hamsik 
grabbed the first goal as they won 3-0 away to Palermo, moving past Diego 
Maradona and up into second place on the list of the club’s all-time leading 
goalscorers in Serie A matches.

• The billboards beside the pitch might lead you to believe that Pescara still 
think they’re playing Serie B 
<https://twitter.com/CB_Ignoranza/status/775049972484075520>, but the Delfini 
very nearly took points off Inter this Sunday, just as they had at home to 
Napoli on the opening weekend. The 22-year-old Valerio Verre has caught the eye 
from his position just behind the attack, but more than anything this team’s 
performances feel like a testament to manager Massimo Oddo, who has them 
playing as more than the sum of their parts. What they don’t have, sadly, is a 
player like Mauro Icardi, whose two goals inside the final quarter of an hour 
salvaged a win that Inter probably deserved, but hadn’t looked all that likely 
to get.

• Milan, by contrast, contrived to lose a game against Udinese which had 
seemed to be drifting towards a 0-0 final scoreline. The winning goal was well 
taken by the former Chelsea man Stipe Perica, who is somehow still just 21 
years old.

Results: Atalanta 2-1 Torino, Bologna 2-1 Cagliari, Chievo 1-1 Lazio, Juventus 
3-1 Sassuolo, Milan 0-1 Udinese, Palermo 0-3 Napoli, Pescara 1-2 
Internazionale, Roma 3-2 Sampdoria
 