
At the final whistle in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
, as Portugal’s players danced and hugged, a team of real heart and craft, the 
image of Michel Platini appeared on the huge screen attached to the Stade de 
France’s halo-like roof.

“Merci pour tout, Michel,” scrolled the message underneath as the French crowd 
suddenly broke into a chorus of whistles at the man who awarded France this 
tournament, who as a skinny-legged creative conductor helped define these 
modern championships, but who is nowbanned from all football-related activities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/09/michel-platini-cas-appeal-ban-football>
.

Portugal beat France to win Euro 2016 final with Éder’s extra-time goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
In which case Platini would have been fine with long stretches of this match. 
This wasn’t the final, or the winning team, most people will have wanted. It 
was, though, a match that revealed both France’s limitations, and the qualities 
of the new European champions asPortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> dug their gnarled fingernails 
into this final from the start and France simply congealed in the lights.

It has been an oddly nuanced four weeks for the hosts as these championships 
have rolled on. The team had begun to grow into their role as hosts and 
front-runners. But the country was, it seemed, never quite gripped, always 
willing but slightly wary hosts. Paris had finally stirred a little on the day 
of the final, the quiet Sunday streets dotted with flags and face-paint and 
horn-parping flâneurs. And yet in the endFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> produced a performance in keeping 
with the tournament generally: cagey, room temperature and lacking in peaks of 
extreme quality. Their most celebrated players failed to make any mark on this 
game. Paul Pogba was a huge disappointment, not least to himself. He passed 
neatly, but seemed a little lost, all his best qualities subsumed into an eager 
but slightly unconvincing impression of a passing central midfielder.

Here Pogba spent the last half-hour in a state of visible distress. Stabbing 
the ball out for a corner after a series of pointless jinks, he let out an huge 
roar and slapped himself on the cheek. In the aftermath of Portugal’s winning 
goal he screamed at his team-mates, communicating only panic. Pogba had a poor 
match, but he was also in a role that seemed to dull his one really outstanding 
quality, the ability to surge and play with abandon. France had the players to 
win this match, but not the style, with a clogged and knotted midfield that has 
never been properly untangled by Didier Deschamps.
Paul Pogba 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Paul%20Pogba&team=France&isSimple=true>
The game’s only goal was a lovely moment. Éder scored it, a 28-year old with 
six goals last season and three in 28 games over a seven-year international 
career before this. And yet it was Éder, not Pierre‑André Gignac or Olivier 
Giroud, who played without fear here, an eager, gangling goal-octopus putting 
himself about with real aggression.

Deep into extra time Éder took the ball 25 yards out, draw back his slender 
right leg and spanked a low shot into the corner past Hugo Lloris, a 
brilliantly sweet connection. Portugal’s entire staff and players came hurtling 
out to bob and huddle on the pitch like a giant woodlouse, shedding bibs and 
bits of kit, the wonderfully stern Fernando Santos dancing wildly, gripped with 
an impossible joy.

France’s inability to stutter up out of second gear will demand an inquest. 
Here’s one: they just weren’t good enough. At times it almost felt as though 
Cristiano Ronaldo going off had sucked the urgency out of them rather than 
Portugal, France assuming the game was going to simply collapse into their arms 
in his absence.

Portugal 1-0 France: five talking points from the Euro 2016 final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/10/portugal-france-five-talking-points-euro-2016-final>
Instead Ronaldo was an oddly effective absence. With eight minutes gone he had 
his left knee jarred by a bruising challenge from Payet, more over-eagerness 
than malice, but thumping into Ronaldo’s planted foot. Ronaldo struggled on 
then struggled off.

At which point France simply failed to ignite. Antoine Griezmann was expertly 
covered by Pepe. France had no other spark to turn to. For a while Moussa 
Sissoko was in bullocking form, three times lifting his head and simply 
stampeding through the challenges towards goal in rugby league style, hands 
grappling helplessly at his shirt, nudges and niggles brushed aside. But he is, 
in the end, still Moussa Sissoko.

Above all France seemed to have no real attacking pattern, no idea of how 
exactly to stretch that thick red membrane. Dimitri Payet has been marginalised 
in the last few games, but then charge forward and ask questions later isn’t 
really Payet’s game. Again here he chased, waited for a pass, tried to tap his 
beefier colleagues on the shoulder now and then.

Finals are there to be won, not nagged away at or taken by default. Here 
France sat and waited and came up short. At the end Platini seemed an apt if 
unwelcome intrusion, his disgrace just another strand in the ragged, inglorious 
buildup to this tournament. It had been generally assumed a France win would 
make emotional sense, might provide some kind of catharsis for the struggles of 
the last eight months.

Sport, though, often has its own idea what the story is. And the fact is 
Portugal were worthy winners, and indeed uplifting ones too, a genuine underdog 
tale for this nation of 10 million people. The idea this team are a one-man 
Ronaldo-vehicle, some vanity project for the world’s best-paid sporting 
yacht-lurker, has always been a little bizarre. Portugal’s one outstanding 
quality is not their captain but their spirit, which came into the light here, 
a fitting and indeed quietly admirable end.
 