
Welcome to the crossword email update from theguardian.com.

The new Genius is now available at theguardian.com/crossword/genius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/genius>.

The solutions to last month's puzzle can be viewed at 
theguardian.com/crossword/solutions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/solutions>. Congratulations to Simon 
Parsons from Birmingham who is July's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any comments or queries, 
please send them tocrossword@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword@theguardian.com>.

---------------------

As you should by now have been informed, access to all the Guardian and 
Observer puzzles online will be free from September 1. The unexpired part of 
your subscription will be automatically refunded to the bank account from which 
you originally paid. Anyone who took a subscription out this month should get 
the full Â£25 back. If for any reason this automatic refund proves not to work 
in an individual case, the money can be given by the Guardian to a charity. I 
hope that this all goes smoothly, but there will inevitably be hiccups with so 
many transactions involved. Could I implore you not to raise any such problems 
with me, because I would have no idea what to do about them? Please write 
direct tosubshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com>.

Otherwise, what the crossword site now offers you (and from September 1 anyone 
else who logs on totheguardian.com/crossword 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword>) will remain unchanged: all the regular 
puzzles for both papers, plus a weekly Quiptic, a monthly Genius and access to 
the full archive. Since several people have been kind enough to say that they 
hope this will not mean the end of my monthly newsletter, you will also 
continue to get a regular serving of my inconsequential thoughts on the world 
of crosswords. I shall no longer, though, be able to counter complaints about 
the service with my line that it is not bad value for the less than 50p a week 
that it costs!

_____

The Mob and rabbits have been my bane in this last month. The Quick crossword 
for July 18 had: "Criminal network". To fit, the answer had to be MAFFIA. The 
general tone of comment was a mixture of derision and pity that such a howler 
should have been allowed in the Guardian. Both the setter and I should go to 
the bottom of the class for some remedial spelling since no dictionary had the 
word with two f's in the middle of it. Not for one moment would I deny that 
most people spell it MAFIA most of the time. But, since Chambers and Collins 
give both MAFIA and MAFFIA as equally valid spellings, I am not sure on what 
grounds it can be called a mistake. The first use of either spelling listed in 
the OED is from the Times of October 11 1866: "Indeed, the Maffia, a secret 
society is said to include among its members many persons of an elevated class."

It was the Quick crossword again (August 1) that caused the second furore. 
"Furry rodent" for RABBIT united grammarians, zoologists and pet lovers in a 
wave of indignation. Zoology is one of my many weak suits, so I had carefully 
consulted the books before letting the clue through, picking my way as best I 
could through the genera, families, orders and other classifications of the 
animal kingdom. Obviously, a rabbit and a rat are not members of the same 
family, the first being any of several genera of the family Leporidae and the 
second being a member of the genus Rattus.

But what of rodents? Here all the main dictionaries give similar definitions 
on the lines of "a mammal of the order Rodentia". It is more difficult easily 
to find a definition of the order Rodentia; but, for example, Webster's gives 
the following: "An order of mammals having two (rarely four) large incisor 
teeth in each jaw, distant from the molar teeth. The rats, squirrels, rabbits, 
marmots, and beavers belong to this order." If a rodent is a mammal of the 
order Rodentia and if the order Rodentia includes rabbits, is not the rabbit 
(with its large incisor teeth) a rodent? However, what is certain is that, 
despite Webster's, many well-informed people believe that the answer to this 
question is "no".

_____

Time and again in the world of crosswords (as in others) astonishing 
coincidences occur. The same solution with the same or a very similar clue 
appears in two different papers on the same day; or in the same paper within 
days of each other. People write to point this out, usually coupled with the 
accusation that setters must be in cahoots and/or plagiarists. I do my best 
convincingly to explain that crossword setters, being scattered right round the 
country and even as far afield as California and Queensland, Australia have 
almost no contact of any kind with each other. When, for example, UKRAINE 
recently appeared as a solution with almost the same clue in the same week in 
the Guardian, this was a coincidence. I can say this with certainty because I 
know that the two setters in question have not met or spoken to each other in 
the last ten years and that the two puzzles had been maturing in what passes 
for my filing system for over two years and about six months respectively. It 
was a genuine coincidence generated by the fact that I must have had a senior 
moment and not registered that the two clues were to be published so close to 
each other because I edited one at the beginning of a week and the other at the 
end. But I could sense that, though I set all this out to the complainant in 
full, he was clearly not convinced that I was telling the truth.

I was delighted, therefore, by another coincidence involving the crossword 
last month, because I hope that I can use it in future to show how the most 
apparently unlikely things can happen by accident. Araucaria's Saturday puzzle 
for July 5 was one of his alphabetical jigsaws. The clue for Z was: "Some 
grumbles coming up during last years of vintners' science (7)"*. Bang next to 
it in the adjoining column was the paper's Saturday feature "Wordplay", where 
you decide which of four meanings is the right one for the selected word(s). 
Top of the list that day was ZYMURGY, with fermentation as the right answer. [* 
Z/Y(grum)Y]

_____

The July Genius produced 157 correct entries. (I wonder what will happen to 
the numbers after September 1.) The first entry was logged in at 1133 on the 
first day from Elancourt in France.
 