
The French nuclear industry is in its “worst situation ever” because of a 
spate of plant closures in France and the complexities it faces with the UK’s
Hinkley Point C <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c> power 
station, according to a former Électricité de France director.

Gérard Magnin, who called Hinkley “very risky” when he resigned as a board 
member over the project in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/28/resignation-edf-director-hinkley-point-gerard-magnin>
, told the Guardian that with more than a dozen French reactors closed over 
safety checks and routine maintenance, circumstances for the state-owned EDF 
had deteriorated since he stepped down.

The closures have seen Britain this week exporting electricity to France for 
the first time in four years 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/business/french-demand-for-electricity-drives-up-uk-prices-pv7qs7770>
. Anindustry report 
<https://www.entsoe.eu/news-events/announcements/announcements-archive/Pages/News/ENTSO-E-Winter-Outlook-201617-possible-tight-supply-situation-in-France-due-to-reduced-availability-of-nuclear-power-plants.aspx>
 on Tuesday also warned that the offline reactors could lead to a “tense 
situation” for energy supply in France, in the event of a cold snap this winter.

Let the people lighten energy load with citizen-owned schemes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/29/let-people-lighten-load-citizen-owned-energy-schemes>
The situation is likely to be exacerbated by damage during Storm Angus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/storm-angus-floods-hit-south-west-england-with-more-rain-to-come>
 to the main cable that carries electricity back and forth between the UK and 
France. It is believed a boat dropping anchor during the storm may have been 
responsible but National Grid is investigating the cause and working to repair 
the Interconnexion France-Angleterre, which is buried in the seabed and heavily 
armoured.

The operator said that four of the eight cables in the interconnector had been 
damaged, reducing its capacity from 2,000MW to 1,000MW until February next 
year. It added that due to the French reactor closures, it had already factored 
in a reduction in energy supplies fromFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> this winter.

Magnin said that instead of backing new nuclear, the UK and France should 
capitalise on falling wind and solar power costs and help individuals and 
communities to build and run their own renewable energy projects. He foundedan 
association of cities switching to green energy <http://www.energy-cities.eu/>, 
joined the EDF board in 2014, and is now director of a renewable energy co-op 
in France.


“The most surprising [thing] for me is the attitude of the UK government which 
accepts the higher cost of electricity ... in a time where the costs of 
renewables is decreasing dramatically,” he said. “In 10 years [whenHinkley 
Point C <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c> is due to be 
completed], the cost of renewables will have fallen again a lot.”

Of the Hinkley C design, known as the European Pressurised Reactor (EPR), 
Magnin said: “A lot of people in EDF have known for a long time the EPR has no 
future – too sophisticated, too expensive – but they assume their commitments 
and try to save the face of France.”

The UK’s business department conceded in September 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/556917/3_-_Value_for_Money_Assessment.pdf>
 that by the time Hinkley is operational the price of electricity guaranteed to 
EDF will be above the comparable costs for large-scale solar and onshore 
windfarms. Officials argued that using renewables instead would cost more in 
grid upgrades and balancing the intermittent nature of wind and solar.

Solar and wind 'cheaper than new nuclear' by the time Hinkley is built
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/11/solar-and-wind-cheaper-than-new-nuclear-by-the-time-hinkley-is-built>
But in a comment article for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/29/let-people-lighten-load-citizen-owned-energy-schemes>
, Magnin said renewables would still be able to match new nuclear. “Renewable 
energies are becoming competitive with fossil fuels and new nuclear, such as 
Hinkley Point, where EDF will try to build the most expensive reactors in the 
world and provide electricity at an unprecedented cost,” he wrote.

A spokesman for EDF said the company was confident its reactors in France 
would restart soon after tests were complete.

He added: “EDF has full confidence in the EPR design which is why we and our 
Chinese partners CGN have invested £18bn (£14.4bn) in our project at Hinkley 
Point C. Final testing is underway for our EPR unit in Taishan in China which 
is due to be operational next year. As our chairman Jean-Bernard Lévy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/29/edf-boss-confident-hinkley-point-c-nuclear-plant-will-be-built>
 said recently, the EPR is a technology of the future, combining performance, 
safety and predictability.”


On Wednesday the European commission is due to publish plans on how it will 
support an increasing amount of renewable energy on Europe’s grids, and how it 
will meet its climate change commitments underthe Paris Agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-key-points>
. Approximately seven or eight draft pieces of legislation are expected in the 
“winter package”, plus funding for cleaner energy, butgreen groups fear 
renewables will lose the priority they get on electricity grids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/01/renewables-could-lose-european-power-grid-priority-documents-reveal>
.

Magnin said that the EU’s climate targets are used in France as a way to 
maintain a status quo which sees nuclear – a low-carbon power source – provide 
around three quarters of the country’s electricity. “Climate change issues are 
used as arguments to maintain the current system,” he said.


Wind and solar provide less than 4% of France’s electricity, but Magnin said 
the European commission and governments should support community-owned green 
energy projects to grow that share. Such an approach would overcome opposition 
to renewable power sources, and secure funding, he said.

Separately on Tuesday, the EU association of national grids issued a warning 
that France was faced with its lowest supply of power from nuclear in a decade 
because of plants being taken offline for safety checks.

Entsoe <https://www.entsoe.eu/Pages/default.aspx> (the European Network of 
Transmission System Operators for Electricity) said that further reactors would 
be taken offline, potentially leaving France dependent on imports in December 
and February, depending on how cold the weather is. But it said that Europe as 
a whole had sufficient power plants to cope with normal and severe conditions 
over the winter.

“Identifying the problems facing France and the UK this winter only goes to 
highlight the importance of investing in new capacity. Events across the 
Channel have shown that relying on old capacity is risky, with France’s nuclear 
plants proving as unreliable as our coal-fired ones,” said Dr Jonathan 
Marshall, an energy analyst at theEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and Climate Intelligence Unit, 
a UK-based thinktank.

“At home, turning to old and dirty coal plants is not a long-term solution, so 
encouraging investment in new lower-carbon kit – solar, wind and a small amount 
of new gas capacity – should be at the top of the government’s list of 
priorities.”
 