
Officials from Bahrain’s prison torture inspection panel were allowed secretly 
to visit Yarl’s Wood, Britain’s most controversial immigration detention centre 
for women, raising fresh questions over the nature of the relationship between 
the UK and the Gulf state.

In June 2013, delegates from Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain>, where allegations of torture in 
police custody and in prisons are widespread, were given permission to access 
the centre in Bedfordshire accompanied by members of the UK prison watchdog.

The visit is fresh evidence of the growing and often secret relationship 
between security officials in the two countries that has developed despite 
repeated allegations of torture in Bahraini detention centres.

And it follows repeated claims of ill treatment at Yarl’s Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/yarls-wood-demonstration-brexit-vote>
. It also came shortly before an official UN inspector investigating state-run 
detention centres for womenwas banned by the Home Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/03/yarls-wood-un-special-rapporteur-censure>
 from entering Yarl’s Wood, which houses about 400 women.

On Friday, it emerged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/13/human-rights-abuses-bahrain-cast-shadow-over-2m-uk-aid-support>
 that a controversial multimillion-pound programme of support for Bahrain’s 
security and justice system was being bolstered by a further £2m of British 
funding, despite the Gulf state reversing reforms to an intelligence agency 
accused of torture.

On Saturday the families of three men on death row expressed fears that their 
executions were imminent, which would make them the first in the Gulf kingdom 
since 2010. Officials from Bahrain’s death-row prison called the men’s families 
to tell them to visit the prison but refused to explain why. Campaigners noted 
that several unofficial pro-government Twitter accounts had tweeted about 
possible executions.
 Death-row prisoner Mohammed Ramadan, pictured in prison in Bahrain with his 
son, was allegedly tortured. Photograph: Via Reprieve 
Meanwhile, documents obtained by the legal charity Reprieve reveal that 
officials from Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Prisons visited Bahrain and helped 
prepare for an official inspection of the country’s most notorious police 
station, where a number of inmates have alleged ill treatment.

The inspection of Bahrain’s CID building took place on 24-25 December 2014, 
leading toa report 
<http://www.pdrc.bh/mcms-store/pdf/c0c77248-5000-4f98-832d-d3ac3c60b1ae_Investigation%20-%206.pdf>
 that ran to only six pages and failed to mention several high-profile 
allegations of torture.

Now it has emerged that HMIP staff visited Bahrain a fortnight before the 
inspection, from 7-9 December, “to help PDRC [Prisoners and Detainees Rights 
Commission] do detailed planning for police custody inspections, finalise a 
police custody detainees interview questionnaire”. Reprieve said it was 
concerned by the failure of the subsequent report to mention high-profile 
allegations of torture, citing the experiences of a death-row prisoner,Mohammed 
Ramadan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/bahrain-torture-foreign-office-criticised>
, a father of three. He was tortured for four days at the CID building in March 
2014, ultimately making a false confession that was used as the basis of his 
death sentence. The PDRC inspection report does not mention the allegations 
despite Ramadan’s jailers being accused of beating him.

British lawyers are also aware of three other death-row inmates who were 
sentenced to death on the basis of false confessions made under torture at the 
CID building in March 2014.

Maya Foa, a director of Reprieve, said: “It is scandalous to discover that the 
HMIP helped plan a police custody inspection which failed to address well-known 
torture cases at Bahrain’s most brutal police station. Five men have been 
sentenced to death on the basis of false confessions extracted under torture in 
the CID building. Many of these allegations were public at the time of this 
inspection, so why on earth did the report fail to even mention them?”

An HMIP spokeswoman said the tour of Yarl’s Wood was designed to help their 
Bahrain counterparts become better inspectors. She said: “They accompanied us 
on some inspections in England so that they could see how we conduct 
independent investigations and in particular how we listen in great detail to 
what we are told by detainees.”

She said HMIP had encouraged the development of an inspection mechanism in 
Bahrain to help prevent torture, adding they had not conducted any inspections 
there and had made no financial gain. “We are well aware that there have been 
allegations of serious abuse in all forms of custody in Bahrain, including 
police custody, and have urged the PDRC to focus on three key priorities in 
inspections and reports: examining the response to allegations of torture; 
including the detainee voice in all reports; and producing well structured 
reports with clear judgments.

“We have, in private, provided detailed feedback to the PDRC on their work and 
will continue to support them as long as they maintain a commitment to 
progress. We keep our decision on future involvement in the project under 
review on this basis. We have done no recent work with the PDRC.”
 