
It came as a shocking realisation to Tamara Rojo <http://www.tamara-rojo.com/> 
that, during her long career as a ballerina, she’d never once performed in a 
work created by a woman. Even in the 21st century, most of the world’s ballet 
repertory is choreographed by men. Now that Rojo is artistic director of 
English National Ballet, she’s determined to change the landscape. Her latest 
commission, She Said, is a programme of new one-act ballets all choreographed 
by women.

The Tamara Rojo revolution: bringing ballet into the 21st century
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/17/the-tamara-rojo-revolution-english-national-ballet>
The suppression of women’s voices throughout history was a theme uppermost in 
Rojo’s mind when she met to discuss the programme with her three contributing 
choreographers,Aszure Barton <http://www.aszurebarton.com/about/>, Yabin Wang 
<http://www.east-man.be/en/people/1008/> and Annabelle Lopez Ochoa 
<http://www.annabellelopezochoa.com>. The theme struck a special chord for 
Lopez Ochoa because for years she had been looking for an opportunity to make a 
ballet aboutFrida Kahlo <http://www.frida-kahlo-foundation.org/biography.html>, 
the extraordinary Mexican painter whose talent was only recognised 
internationally after her death.

“I was partly drawn to Frida by the Latin connection,” says Lopez Ochoa, who 
is part Colombian, part Belgian. “But she was an amazing woman. For a long time 
I’d been fascinated by these strange portraits that she painted of herself but 
I hadn’t really understood them. Then about 10 years ago I saw a movie about 
her life and it made me appreciate how she’d been able to transform her sorrows 
and her pain into art. It was inspiring: I wanted to be like Frida and use my 
own experience more directly in my work, and I wanted to be able to share her 
story with an audience.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Ffrida-kahlo-tamara-rojo-she-said-sadlers-wells-english-national-ballet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe825c6042fcd041f5713c839b248debab7f21617%2F0_0_4774_2866%2F4774.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frida%20Kahlo's%20brush%20with%20ballet%3A%20Tamara%20Rojo%20dances%20the%20artist's%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Ffrida-kahlo-tamara-rojo-she-said-sadlers-wells-english-national-ballet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frida%20Kahlo%27s%20brush%20with%20ballet%3A%20Tamara%20Rojo%20dances%20the%20artist%27s%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Ffrida-kahlo-tamara-rojo-she-said-sadlers-wells-english-national-ballet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe825c6042fcd041f5713c839b248debab7f21617%2F0_0_4774_2866%2F4774.jpg>
 Tamara Rojo and dancers in rehearsal for Broken Wings, part of She Said at 
Sadler’s Wells. Photograph: Laurent Liotardo 
On paper, it’s a story that might seem better left to film. Kahlo’s embrace of 
Mexican culture, her involvement with revolutionary politics and her emotional 
and professional quarrels with her swaggeringly entitled husband,Diego Rivera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/diego-rivera>, are complicated issues 
for a wordless art form such as dance to navigate. The fact that Kahlo was 
disabled, after sustaining injuries in a bus accident when she was 18, makes 
her an even more unlikely candidate for a ballet heroine.

Lopez Ochoa, however, was clear that she only wanted to tell the basic facts 
of Kahlo’s life before letting her choreography loose into a more abstract, 
surreal treatment. She also knew that she wanted the input ofNancy Meckler 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0575361/> – formerly joint director of the theatre 
groupShared Experience <http://www.sharedexperience.org.uk/company.html> – with 
whom she had previously, and very successfully, collaborated on adance 
adaptation of A Streetcar Named Desire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/01/streetcar-named-desire-sadlers-wells-scottish-ballet-review>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df5-1p4yNbFk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df5-1p4yNbFk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df5-1p4yNbFk&media=>
 Watch an interview with Annabelle Lopez Ochoa 
When I talk to the two women at ENB’s base in west London, it’s clear how well 
they operate as a team. Meckler tends to measure her words, Lopez Ochoa to 
spill them out; often they complete each other’s sentences and there’s a lot of 
laughter in between. It wasAshley Page, then director of Scottish Ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/20/ashley-page-two-techno>, who 
brought them together for the Streetcar project. “He’d always wanted to 
experiment with a theatre director leading the creation of a new ballet,” says 
Meckler. “Annabelle and I were really thrown together, but we discovered that 
we shared a very similar aesthetic, we both like to tell stories in an 
impressionistic rather than a naturalistic way.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Ffrida-kahlo-tamara-rojo-she-said-sadlers-wells-english-national-ballet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c7e3f151f6327bb32d9f167ae5b247376b82f7b%2F0_0_5906_7359%2F5906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frida%20Kahlo's%20brush%20with%20ballet%3A%20Tamara%20Rojo%20dances%20the%20artist's%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Ffrida-kahlo-tamara-rojo-she-said-sadlers-wells-english-national-ballet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frida%20Kahlo%27s%20brush%20with%20ballet%3A%20Tamara%20Rojo%20dances%20the%20artist%27s%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Ffrida-kahlo-tamara-rojo-she-said-sadlers-wells-english-national-ballet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c7e3f151f6327bb32d9f167ae5b247376b82f7b%2F0_0_5906_7359%2F5906.jpg>
 Jeanette Kakareka in rehearsal for She Said. Photograph: Perry Curties 
Reunited for the Kahlo ballet, entitled Broken Wings, the two women read 
widely around their subject, brainstormed ideas and constructed a meticulously 
detailed scenario from which composerPeter Salem <http://petersalem.co.uk> 
could begin writing the score. It was a rigorous process: “With every element 
we made ourselves think: ‘Do we need this, what part does it actually play?’” 
says Meckler. “We knew that we needed to see Frida starting to paint, but we 
didn’t need to see her father actually give her a paintbrush. We needed to show 
the accident, but we didn’t need the bus.”

They also had to consider how they would deal with Kahlo’s physical 
restrictions. Lopez Ochoa had a clear visual idea of transforming Kahlo’s bed – 
where she spent months after the accident – into a cube in which the dance 
character could be enclosed yet free to move. For her, the essence of Kahlo’s 
character was the power and joy that the painter gained from transcending her 
life through her art.

 Casting the ballet proved interesting. Lopez Ochoa had not expected that 
Rojo, as ENB’s director, would be available to perform, but during a discussion 
about who might play Frida she found herself saying: “I need a petite, Hispanic 
dancer and I keep looking at you, Tamara.” Rojo agreed instantly (it’s since 
proved disconcerting to them how much Rojo actually knows about Kahlo). And it 
was Rojo who also came up with the idea of castingIrek Mukhamedov 
<http://www.ballet.org.uk/the-company/staff/irek-mukhamedov/>, former star of 
the Bolshoi and the Royal Ballet, in the role ofRivera 
<http://www.diegorivera.org/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Ffrida-kahlo-tamara-rojo-she-said-sadlers-wells-english-national-ballet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe0e7edee951ebdbb9edac2522088347ae85ed32%2F0_204_4793_3027%2F4793.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frida%20Kahlo's%20brush%20with%20ballet%3A%20Tamara%20Rojo%20dances%20the%20artist's%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Ffrida-kahlo-tamara-rojo-she-said-sadlers-wells-english-national-ballet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frida%20Kahlo%27s%20brush%20with%20ballet%3A%20Tamara%20Rojo%20dances%20the%20artist%27s%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Ffrida-kahlo-tamara-rojo-she-said-sadlers-wells-english-national-ballet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe0e7edee951ebdbb9edac2522088347ae85ed32%2F0_204_4793_3027%2F4793.jpg>
 English National Ballet in rehearsal for Broken Wings. Photograph: Laurent 
Liotardo 
At 56, he’s perfect for Lopez Ochoa’s choreography – old enough to inspire her 
to a movement vocabulary appropriate to the ageing, bulky Rivera, but fit 
enough to hold his own with a stageful of younger dancers.

 While the choreography is created in the studio, Meckler’s role is to provide 
an outside eye on the material and to work on character and motivation with 
members of the cast. Ever since her first experience of ballet dancers with 
Streetcar, she’s has nothing but respect for them. “Because of the way they 
work, some ballet dancers may not have been exposed to a lot of culture, but 
they have so much emotional depth, perhaps because so many of them have had 
quite a hard life. And their concentration! I can give an actor a note 10 times 
and they’ll still forget it. Dancers never forget a thing that you tell them.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWSWPa0EDlDg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWSWPa0EDlDg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWSWPa0EDlDg&media=>
 Watch a trailer for A Streetcar Named Desire 
Both women have been impressed by the dancers’ “beautiful openness” of 
attitude, their keenness to experiment with a different style of movement, both 
in Broken Wings and in the two other works that complete the programme. They’re 
equally impressed by Rojo’s boldness in initiating the experiment of She Said. 
“She’s fearless,” says Lopez Ochoa, “and other companies are becoming very 
interested in what she’s doing. I’m proud of being part of this. I don’t really 
feel I have to make a political statement about my own career, I like the way 
it has gone. But I have seen so many opportunities go to men who are younger 
and less experienced than me. And I know a lot of women suffer from the feeling 
that they aren’t good enough. If I can open things up for younger female 
choreographers, if I can inspire a dancer to believe she can start 
choreographing, then I’m really glad to take on that role.”

• English National Ballet’s She Said is at Sadler’s Wells, London 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/english-national-ballet-she-said/>, 
13-16 April. Box office: 020-7863 8000.
 