
Friends of the Earth has agreed not to reproduce an anti-fracking leaflet 
after the advertising watchdog upheld complaints made by the energy firm
Cuadrilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/fracking-gas-uk-better-importing-cuadrilla-boss-francis-egan>
.

Cuadrilla, which in October was given government permission for plans to frack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-fracking-given-go-ahead-as-lancashire-council-rejection-is-overturned>
 after appealing two rejections by Lancashire council, made a string of 
complaints about the leaflet which made claims that chemicals involved in 
fracking can cause cancer.


The leaflet also included a photo of Grasmere in the Lake District, despite 
there being no plans for fracking in the area.


No fracking, drilling or digging: it’s the only way to save life on Earth | 
George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/fracking-digging-drilling-paris-agreement-fossil-fuels>
Other claims made in the ad, entitled “Pat saved her home from fracking. You 
can save yours too”, included that there would be “plummeting house prices” and 
that drinking water would likely be contaminated.


Friends of the Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/friends-of-the-earth>, which had said 
that it “would not be silenced” by Cuadrilla, has now agreed not to repeat the 
claims it made in the leaflet.


The Advertising Standards Authority <https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> 
“informally resolved” the case between Cuadrilla and Friends of the Earth. This 
means that the ad watchdog did not launch a full investigation into the 
complaints as Friends of the Earth agreed not to repeat the claims after being 
approached by the ASA about the issues raised by Cuadrilla.


“We approached Friends of the Earth with the concerns that had been raised 
about its ad,” said a spokesman for the ASA. “The advertiser agreed not to 
repeat the claims, or claims that had the same meaning. On that basis we closed 
the case informally. The ad must not appear again in its current form.”


The ASA said that it has told FoE not to make claims about the likely effects 
of fracking on the health of local populations, drinking water, orproperty 
prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/25/government-accused-of-dirty-tricks-over-controversial-fracking-report>
 “in the absence of adequate evidence”.


“After many attempts by Friends of the Earth to delay this decision, the 
charity’s admission that all of the claims it made, that we complained about, 
were false should hopefully put a stop to it misleading the UK public on 
fracking,” said Francis Egan, chief executive of Cuadrilla.

Government accused of 'dirty tricks' over controversial fracking report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/25/government-accused-of-dirty-tricks-over-controversial-fracking-report>
“Friends of the Earth’s repeated falsehoods have been exposed as nothing more 
than scaremongering designed to frighten the public into giving it money. It is 
the unacceptable face of the charity sector.”


Cuadrilla has itself fallen foul of the UK advertising watchdog for making 
unsupported marketing claims in the past. In 2013, the ASAcensured Cuadrilla 
<http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/24/caudrilla-censured-fracking-safety-claims>
 for claiming that it uses “proven, safe technologies”.

Donna Hume, a Friends of the Earth senior campaigner, said: “No ruling has 
been made against us. The ASA offered to drop the case without ruling after we 
confirmed that a particular leaflet was no longer being used.

“We continue to campaign against fracking because burning fossil fuels is 
dangerous for the climate. As well as that, the process of exploring for and 
extracting shale gas is inherently risky for the environment, this is why 
fracking is banned or put on hold in so many countries.”
 