
Enes Unal 17

Turkey and Bursaspor

A surprise inclusion by the Turkey manager, Fatih Terim, Unal is still to 
start a league match this season. The centre-forward was picked on his 
performances for the U19s and U21s as well as on pure potential. He is no 
stranger to scouts, as this two-footed, physically imposing front man has 
broken goalscoring records at academy level and is widely seen as the most 
talented No9 to come out ofTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/football/turkey> 
since Hakan Sukur.

Hakan Calhanoglu 21

Turkey and Bayer Leverkusen

From scoring the winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/25/bayer-leverkusen-atletico-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
 in the first leg of the Champions League knockout tie against Atlético Madrid 
toproducing a poor, poor penalty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/17/atletico-madrid-bayer-leverkusen-champions-league-match-report>
 in the shootout of the return leg last week, it has been a rollercoaster spell 
for the Germany-born attacking midfielder, crowned by his return to playing for 
his country following a brief but controversial absence. The elegant, 
high-scoring midfielder has the quality that Turkey have sorely missed since 
the wonderful generation that reached the World Cup semi-finals in 2002.

Danilo 23

Brazil and Porto
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fdanilo-lacazette-youngsters-watch-international-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427243091503%2Fc1ca7f38-c7ac-4fd9-8fb5-7a0c0e562edd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Danilo%20to%20Lacazette%3A%20youngsters%20to%20watch%20this%20international%20week%20%7C%20Tor-Kristian%20Karlsen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fdanilo-lacazette-youngsters-watch-international-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Danilo%20to%20Lacazette%3A%20youngsters%20to%20watch%20this%20international%20week%20%7C%20Tor-Kristian%20Karlsen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fdanilo-lacazette-youngsters-watch-international-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427243091503%2Fc1ca7f38-c7ac-4fd9-8fb5-7a0c0e562edd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Brazil’s Danilo chases after the ball in a friendly against Turkey in November 
2014. Photograph: Ozan Kose/AFP/Getty Images 
Friendlies against high-quality opposition such as France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> and Chile will offer top European 
clubs an opportunity to assess the Porto right-back before the summer transfer 
window. Dani Alves’sSeleçao successor is said to be wanted by Real Madrid, 
Barcelona and Manchester United, meaning Porto are once again likely to cash in 
heavily on a South American import. Impressive going forward, excellent in the 
air and equipped with tremendous physical attributes, Danilo – who still has 
room for improvement – is already considered as one of the best in his position.

Alen Halilovic 18
Croatia and Barcelona B

While Sunday’s clásico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/22/barcelona-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
 featured one sublime Croatian playmaker per side, the 18-year-old, who signed 
for Barça from Dinamo Zagreb last summer, also has the ability to one day 
dictate the proceedings of the biggest game in the world. Perhaps closer to 
Luka Modric than Ivan Rakitic in playing style, Halilovic is blessed with the 
same intelligence, vision, balance and ball control that make his two 
countrymen stand out at the highest level.

Silvan Widmer 22

Switzerland and Udinese

Not only is the defender emerging as the eventual long-term replacement for 
Stephan Lichtsteiner at right-back but the robust, tireless runner is also 
becoming a hot property on the transfer market. With high-class right-backs 
hard to find, Premier League as well as Bundesliga clubs are keeping a careful 
eye on the attack-minded Swiss, who has also featured as a wing-back in Serie A 
this season.

Alexandre Lacazette 23

France and Lyon

Immense in Ligue 1, though still to find the net for his country, the Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> forward is currently just about the 
most sought-after name in European football. Without the opportunity to show 
his talent in the Champions League, a good run for France may convince the big 
guns to trigger a bidding war for the opportunistic, quick striker in the 
summer. In terms of his playing style – full of movement and clever runs – he 
provides an excellent complement to Karim Benzema and Olivier Giroud in the 
France squad.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fdanilo-lacazette-youngsters-watch-international-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427376173938%2F2e63a565-4d4f-4f20-a2f1-55c19451b99f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Danilo%20to%20Lacazette%3A%20youngsters%20to%20watch%20this%20international%20week%20%7C%20Tor-Kristian%20Karlsen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fdanilo-lacazette-youngsters-watch-international-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Danilo%20to%20Lacazette%3A%20youngsters%20to%20watch%20this%20international%20week%20%7C%20Tor-Kristian%20Karlsen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fdanilo-lacazette-youngsters-watch-international-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F26%2F1427376173938%2F2e63a565-4d4f-4f20-a2f1-55c19451b99f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alexandre Lacazette in action for France against Sweden. Photograph: Manuel 
Blondeau/Corbis 
Yannick Ferreira Carrasco 21

Belgium and Monaco

Another product of what seems an endless line of first-class Belgian talent, 
theMonaco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> forward has taken every 
challenge in his stride since marking his club debut with a wonderful free-kick 
goal in 2012. If given the chance, he will be hoping to make a similar impact 
on his debut for his country. An unpredictable second striker or winger, he is 
hard to read and exceptionally quick with the ball at his feet.

Davy Klaassen 22

Holland and Ajax

The supremely talented attacking midfielder is in line for his second cap 
after impressing forAjax <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> in 
domestic as well as European competition. With his silky touch, excellent 
finishing and wonderfully timed attacking runs, Klaassen very much fits the 
description of the archetypical Dutch midfielder. Likely to follow his manager 
Frank de Boer to wherever he might move next.

Havard Nielsen 21

Norway and Eintracht Braunschweig

While the 16-year-old Real Madrid wonderkid Martin Odegaard – who is also in 
the squad to faceCroatia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/croatia> – has 
been grabbing all the headlines, this versatile front man is turning into the 
most influential player of Norway’s Euro 2016 campaign. The left-footed 
forward, who is built like a centre-forward but has long favoured playing out 
wide, is still being monitored by Premier League clubs eager to observe whether 
he can make the final step to the very top level. With his finishing skills 
especially showing signs of improvement, there is every chance he can.

Rafael Borré 19

Colombia and Deportivo Cali

The Colombian hotshot earned his first call-up to the senior side following an 
impressive South American U20 championship last month and by scoring six goals 
in four starts for Deportivo Cali since the restart of the league. A 
temperamental striker with a direct approach to his game, thanks to quick legs 
and equally quick thinking, he is good at finding and exploiting space behind 
opposing defences.

Jonathan Rodríguez 21

Uruguay and Benfica 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fdanilo-lacazette-youngsters-watch-international-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427243319992%2Fb5168cf0-b494-4d40-8166-e09d26231b13-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Danilo%20to%20Lacazette%3A%20youngsters%20to%20watch%20this%20international%20week%20%7C%20Tor-Kristian%20Karlsen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fdanilo-lacazette-youngsters-watch-international-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Danilo%20to%20Lacazette%3A%20youngsters%20to%20watch%20this%20international%20week%20%7C%20Tor-Kristian%20Karlsen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fdanilo-lacazette-youngsters-watch-international-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427243319992%2Fb5168cf0-b494-4d40-8166-e09d26231b13-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jonathan Rodríguez celebrates after scoring for Peñarol. Photograph: Prensa 
Uruguay 
Only weeks after joining Benfica from Peñarol, the Uruguayan has made a huge 
impact playing for Benfica’s B team and is certain to assume a key role for the 
first team. Another trademark passionate South American forward whose rugged 
physique and determination to score goals make him a nightmare for opposing 
defenders, he is likely to be the next South American striker to be sold on from
Benfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> for huge profit.

Jürgen Damm 21

Mexico and Pachuca

The Mexican-born winger with a German grandfather – he also possesses a German 
passport – earns his first national team call-up for the friendly fixtures 
against Ecuador and Paraguay. Mexican fans have grown accustomed to the 
somewhat bemusing sight of such a tall wide player – who is still a little 
unpolished tactically and physically – charging down the right-hand flank for 
Pachuca and will be hoping that he can transfer his fine form in the domestic 
league to the international scene.
 