
Those unacquainted with the lyrics to David Bowie’s Life on Mars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/nov/04/david-bowie-life-on-mars-watch-reworked-video-mick-rock>
 might mistakenly assume this one-man show to be a travelogue. Instead, it 
follows Martin, a bullied, isolated teenager withmental-health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mental-health> issues, who lives with his 
alcoholic mother in a Northamptonshire town. Only his twin obsessions with the 
Bowie-loving father who abandoned him, and theThin White Duke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2016/aug/25/david-bowie-tour-thin-white-duke-photos>
 himself, keep him going. On his 18th birthday his mother gives him a letter 
from his dad which leads Martin on an odyssey through London in the footsteps 
of both his father and Bowie. Is Martin on a treasure hunt or merely a wild 
goose chase? To be honest the ending is sufficiently oblique that I’m not 
entirely sure.
 Alex Walton in From Ibiza to the Norfolk Broads. Photograph: Ben Hopper 
Written and directed by Adrian Berry, and performed by Alex Walton, this is an 
oddity but is at times oddly compelling. The pleasures along the way include 
tantalising snippets (but not nearly enough) of Bowie’s music, and some sharply 
observed scenes including one in an ailing Croydon karaoke bar, once the 
Greyhound pub where Bowie performed live in 1972.

 There are undernourished and sometimes over-laboured themes here about 
creativity and the different forms it might take, including perhaps fandom. But 
this lament for the world’s misfits is given real clout by Walton, who plays a 
range of characters with impressive conviction but makes Martin so touchingly 
believable that you want to reach out a helping hand to stop him falling.

 * At the Arts Centre, Swindon, 17 January 
<https://swindontheatres.co.uk/online/default.asp?doWork::WScontent::loadArticle=Load&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::article_id=3C844C33-EFA8-4A95-A224-B250FF238CA3>
. Box office: 01793 524481.At the Met, Bury 
<http://themet.biz/event/From+Ibiza+to+the+Norfolk+Broads/2577/>, 19 January. 
Box office: 0161-761 2216. Thentouring to 27 February 
<http://www.fromibiza.net/tour>.
 