
As a young Frenchman visiting New York in the 1970s, Jean-Luc Choplin sat 
through the Broadway revival of the Leonard Bernstein comedic operetta Candide 
and was “utterly enchanted”.


When the curtains fell he found himself walking the streets of New York 
singing numbers from the show. Choplin vowed to himself that one day, when he 
had his own theatre, he would stage the musical adaptation of Voltaire’s 
satirical novel.


Three decades on, Choplin took over Paris’s imperial Théâtre 
<http://chatelet-theatre.com/en> du Châtelet <http://chatelet-theatre.com/en>, 
and made Candide his first production. Since then, the French director has been 
on a mission to bring Broadway to the boulevards in the original English. In 
2007, Candide was followed by West Side Story, and now every year he brings 
another musical classic, including The Sound of Music, My Fair Lady, Sweeney 
Todd, The King and I and, later this month for the second time this year, 
Singin’ in the Rain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/16/singin-in-the-rain-theatre-du-chatelet-paris-review>
.

Paris’s theatregoers who once turned their noses up at the Anglo-Saxon comédie 
musicale, as a popular and thus lower genre, snap up tickets so hungrily that 
the shows are often sold out before they have opened.

“When I started, people accused me of destroying the Châtelet, and said they 
wouldn’t ever come again. But then they saw a show and they’d be positively 
astonished to see something so completely different,” Choplin said. “It was as 
if they’d been struck by lightning and completely shaken out of their certainty 
about what they liked at the theatre and what they didn’t.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fbroadway-france-boulevards-paris-musicals-jean-luc-choplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F433072c92268ae3d40bc48f9181d442bdfb45cd2%2F163_10_3624_2172%2F3624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Broadway%20to%20France's%20boulevards%3A%20how%20Paris%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20musicals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fbroadway-france-boulevards-paris-musicals-jean-luc-choplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Broadway%20to%20France%27s%20boulevards%3A%20how%20Paris%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20musicals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fbroadway-france-boulevards-paris-musicals-jean-luc-choplin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F433072c92268ae3d40bc48f9181d442bdfb45cd2%2F163_10_3624_2172%2F3624.jpg>
 Jean-Luc Choplin, whose first production was Candide. Photograph: Bertrand 
Guay/AFP/Getty Images 
Choplin says when he became director of the theatre, a grand building on the 
right bank of the river Seine built on the orders of Napoleon III’s chief 
architect, Baron Haussmann, he decided to drag into the 21st century. “It was 
another opera house in a city that already had several opera houses. I decided 
to change its DNA: I wanted it to be a place of music that was sophisticated 
but also popular, less elitist, and that put on theatre that was 
international,” he said.

Not everyone was as enthusiastic. The Châtelet had been a venue for some of 
the classical world’s most celebrated dancers and musicians, including Vaslav 
Nijinsky, Anna Pavlova, Debussy, Ravel, Satie, Tchaikovsky, Mahler and Richard 
Strauss. “People were horrified. They said ‘you cannot do musicals, this will 
be a complete catastrophe’, and they pointed out that others had tried before 
and it had always been a flop. It was a risk, but I felt I had to try,” Choplin 
said.

“Musicals were considered popular and Anglo-Saxon and there was a strong 
anti-Americanism back then inFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, 
which has only recently come to an end.” Choplin recalls his insistence on 
putting on American musicals led one guest at a polite Parisian dinner party to 
accuse him of working for the CIA.

The French had operetta, a precursor to musical theatre, but the distinction 
between the genres is blurred. The most simple definition is that operetta is 
light opera with acting, while musical theatre is plays with singing and 
dancing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fbroadway-france-boulevards-paris-musicals-jean-luc-choplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e818dd8fdbe7884b6e71ce946bb20daf4df186d%2F0_391_4170_2503%2F4170.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Broadway%20to%20France's%20boulevards%3A%20how%20Paris%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20musicals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fbroadway-france-boulevards-paris-musicals-jean-luc-choplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Broadway%20to%20France%27s%20boulevards%3A%20how%20Paris%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20musicals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fbroadway-france-boulevards-paris-musicals-jean-luc-choplin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e818dd8fdbe7884b6e71ce946bb20daf4df186d%2F0_391_4170_2503%2F4170.jpg>
 ‘Musicals were considered popular and Anglo-Saxon and there was a strong 
anti-Americanism back then in France,’ Choplin says. Photograph: Jacques 
Demarthon/AFP/Getty Images 
Choplin is passionate about the so-called golden age of musicals on Broadway 
between the 1930s and 60s, an era that produced Cole Porter, Irving Berlin,
Rodgers and Hammerstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/rodgers-and-hammerstein>, George and Ira 
Gershwin, Leonard Bernstein and Stephen Sondheim. “I wanted to show that 
Bernstein, Sondheim, Rogers and Hammerstein were also great composers who had 
their place in a theatre that wanted to open its doors to a wider public,” he 
said.

Surprisingly, at Châtelet musicals about 90% of the audiences are not expats 
or visiting tourists, but French. Surtitles – above the stage as opposed to 
subtitles below – help those who need it with the language. “We have to make 
sure we don’t send the surtitles through too quickly or the audience is 
laughing at the jokes before the actors have delivered the lines,” Choplin 
added.

“But we’ve become expert at this. In all the time I’ve been here I haven’t had 
one single complaint about the performances being in English. The children who 
come to shows like The Sound of Music already know the songs in French so it’s 
not only entertainment, it’s an excellent English lesson.”

Singin’ in the Rain, directed by the Canadian-born Robert Carsen, a graduate 
of the Old Vic theatre school in Bristol, presents additional challenges. Gene 
Kelly may have made it look easy in the classic 1952 film, but Choplin says it 
is harder than it seems: “We have to produce good rain that is wet, but warm 
enough so nobody catches a cold, make sure the orchestra doesn’t get a soaking 
and prevent the wet stage becoming slippery.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fbroadway-france-boulevards-paris-musicals-jean-luc-choplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5442050a02dd4539ae3efca9887a15182eef2e6d%2F0_23_4752_2851%2F4752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Broadway%20to%20France's%20boulevards%3A%20how%20Paris%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20musicals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fbroadway-france-boulevards-paris-musicals-jean-luc-choplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Broadway%20to%20France%27s%20boulevards%3A%20how%20Paris%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20musicals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Fbroadway-france-boulevards-paris-musicals-jean-luc-choplin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5442050a02dd4539ae3efca9887a15182eef2e6d%2F0_23_4752_2851%2F4752.jpg>
 Choplin remains passionate about musicals on Broadway staged between the 1930s 
and 60s. Photograph: Jacques Demarthon/AFP/Getty Images 
Following the Châtelet’s success, several other theatres in Paris are now 
staging musicals. Cats, Flashdance,Dirty Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dirty-dancing> and the Legend of King Arthur 
are just a few running in the French capital.

The Châtelet, the only major venue putting on musicals in English with a full 
symphony orchestra, believes it is still unique. In February it will stage its 
first Cole Porter musical withKiss me, Kate 
<http://chatelet-theatre.com/fr/event/kiss-me-kate>.

“It’s important the shows are in the original English. If you take something 
like Sondheim, the words are so directly and intrinsically linked to the 
musical notes, that it just doesn’t work in another language, “ Choplin said. 
“Children here sing a French version of ‘Doe, a deer, a female deer’ but it 
loses the original charm, and can be, frankly, ridiculous.”

And as he and his team discovered with My Fair Lady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/dec/04/my-fair-lady-paris-english-version-chatelet>
: “the rain in Spain falls mainly on the plain” confounds the most expert 
translator.


Singin’ in the Rain 
<http://chatelet-theatre.com/fr/event/singin-in-the-rain-1516> will be at the 
Châtelet theatre in Paris from 27 November to 15 January.
 