
1) Samuel Umtiti (France)

Umtiti gained his call-up to the French squad at this tournament only after 
injuries ruled out Raphael Varane and Jérémy Mathieu, with Mamadou Sakho 
banned, and he was uncapped until Adil Rami’s suspension prompted involvement 
against Iceland. Those opponents actually ruffled his feathers on debut, 
particularly in the second half, with their direct, aggressive approach. Yet 
the 22‑year‑old showed enough assurance in possession to retain his place 
against Germany when his second‑half display, under pressure, was outstanding. 
The world champions did not muster a shot on target from midway through the 
first half until stoppage time at the end, with the Frenchman’s ability on the 
ball an indication as towhy Barcelona have just paid £24.6m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/29/barcelona-lyon-samuel-umtiti-agree-deal>
 to prise him from Lyon. “He’s so sure of his ability,” said Hugo Lloris. “He’s 
strong in the challenge, very good at playing the ball out from the back which 
marks him out, and at his age, at this level, he’s achieving something great.”

Euro 2016: Guardian writers pick their highs and lows from France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/11/euro-2016-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows>
2) João Mário (Portugal)

Cristiano Ronaldo hogs the limelight and Renato Sanches, at 18, has shown just 
why Bayern Munich have paid relatively huge money to lure him to the 
Bundesliga. YetJoão Mário, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/09/portugal-euro-2016-team-guide>
 in a more understated way, has seized this European Championship tournament as 
an opportunity to prove his pedigree with the seniors. The Sporting Lisbon 
player was capped 77 times at youth levels, and excelled in the European 
Under-21s Championship in the Czech Republic last summer, when the Portuguese 
lost against Sweden in the final. Stocky but clever on the ball, the playmaker 
had made his debut at this level in a friendly at the Stade de France in 
October 2014. Now heavily linked with a move to Internazionale, he was back at 
that venue to play his part in the final of Euro 2016. His rise may not stop 
there.

3) Aaron Ramsey (Wales)

Frustration with Ramsey has been a regular complaint among Arsenal supporters 
over recent years, a player with clear and obvious talent having influenced key 
contests so rarely. Yet, with Wales, he was integral. His tireless work rate 
and energy, even in the group game defeat against England, marked him out but 
it was the quality he supplied from his midfield brief that set him apart. 
Gareth Bale thrived in his presence, benefiting from his vision, and there was 
a goal and four assists to enjoy en route. His display against Belgium was 
arguably the most influential of his career. “Before the tournament, I was 
really keen to do well and stand up and be noticed,” Ramsey said. “I feel that 
I’ve done that. It helps playing in this team, as well, but I wanted to 
personally do my best and I think I have.”Arsenal will be hoping to benefit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/07/aaron-ramsey-fears-he-will-not-be-fit-for-start-of-arsenal-season-premier-league-wales-euro-2016>
 from more of the same back in the Premier League.

4) Ivan Perisic (Croatia)

Perisic had illuminated his country’s qualification campaign with those now 
familiar surges down the left flank, scoring six in nine matches and convincing 
Internazionale to pluck him from Wolfsburg.The son of a chicken farmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/06/ivan-perisic-croatia-chicken-farm>
 maintained that form at the tournament itself as Croatia excelled in their 
group, tormenting his markers against Turkey and the Czech Republic, and then 
Juanfran in the victory against Spain. It was his cross which led to Nikola 
Kalinic forcing Croatia level, and the 27-year-old’s shot inside David de Gea’s 
near‑post which secured the victory. Quick, skilful and versatile, he may be 
ready to leave Italy after only a season. Certainly he will be desperate to 
play in the Champions League next season.
Ivan Perisic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Ivan%20Peri%C5%A1i%C4%87&team=Croatia&isSimple=true>
5) Moussa Sissoko (France)

The cynics back on Tyneside must wonder whether Sissoko has used Euro 2016 as 
a means of earning a swift return to the Premier League. A player who looked 
diminished and even uninterested far too often over last season’s doomed 
struggle by Newcastle United against relegation – contributing a solitary goal 
en route to the Championship – was the man trusted by Didier Deschamps to 
replace N’Golo Kanté against Iceland, and then against the World Cup holders in 
the semi-final. Only six members of the hosts’ squad boast more experience at 
this level than the 26-year-old born in the Paris suburbs, and his display 
against Iceland was actually marked by as many tackles and interceptions as 
muscular forward surges. He is France’s ultimate team player, a supplier of 
aggressive energy and a figure willing to track back in support of Paul Pogba 
or Blaise Matuidi.For Newcastle, he must be unrecognisable. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/09/moussa-sissoko-future-newcastle-united-uncertain-france>
 