
Cardiff’s FA Cup tie against Fulham today kicks off at 11.30am? Whose idea was 
that?

BBC Wales. It’s a hard sell for the BBC – marketing the FA Cup’s fan-led magic 
and tradition at the same time as moving a game to late morning. It meansFulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> fans have the choice of one train 
on Sunday, which arrives in the city centre 31 minutes before kick-off.

How has that gone down? 

The Fulham fans’ trust called it “insulting to supporters who are the 
lifeblood of the game”, and added: “The third round was once a special weekend 
for football supporters up and down the country, but this decision highlights 
just how little ‘magic of the Cup’ remains … [and] just how low down in the 
game’s priority list match‑going supporters now feature.”

So is this the earliest big match ever? 

Not quite. Back in 2009 the Cardiff versus Swansea south Wales derby started 
half an hour earlier, at 11am – a plan to avoid crowd violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/apr/05/cardiff-city-swansea-violence-championship>
. It could have worked, too, had local pubs not opened at 8am. And in the top 
flight, a 1993 Manchester derby at Maine Road also began at 11am, for the same 
reason.

Championship: Cardiff City 2-2 Swansea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/apr/05/cardiff-city-swansea-violence-championship>
What about moves just for TV? 

A 2005 Manchester City v Everton game kicked-off at 11.15am because both clubs 
wanted the TV money and Sky had no other slots. The City defender Richard Dunne 
wasn’t happy: “I was talking to my dad about it, he couldn’t believe we were 
playing so early on a Sunday morning. We reckoned the last time I had to do 
that was aged 12. What you have to bear in mind is that most footballers are 
superstitious about their pre-match meal. I just have toast but some people are 
going to have to have chicken and pasta for breakfast at half past seven.” It 
could be worse, though.

Worse than pasta for breakfast?

Yes, spare a thought for Singers FC (now Coventry City). In 1892 they were 
drawn against Burton Swifts in theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>. Burton, as the higher-ranked 
side, were given the chance to arrange the game for whenever they felt it would 
cause least disruption to their league campaign. It kicked off at 8am.
 