
I was single, straight and female. When I turned 30, I imagined my sex life 
ending in a terminus of monogamy. Then I split up with someone I had been in 
love with for two years and – after sleeping with a couple of men and ending up 
in a clap clinic being tested forchlamydia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/chlamydia> – I decided that, based 
entirely on my own experience, the whole way we approach relationships had 
undergone a seismic shift in the past five years. In need of even greater 
solipsism, I moved to San Francisco to write a book about it.

On reaching the west coast, I signed up for the internet-dating site OkCupid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/28/seven-secrets-of-dating-from-the-experts-at-okcupid>
. After a couple of dates, however, I began to feel an underlying malaise. 
While the internet offered countless opportunities to meet people, it was no 
guide to their suitability. AsSimone de Beauvoir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/19/polyamorous-women-simone-de-beauvoir-open-relationship-jean-paul-sartre>
 wrote in her 1949 classicThe Second Sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/07/10-books-that-shaped-the-world>: 
“I live in fear that someone will invent the internet, as it’s hard enough 
trying to stop Jean-Paul shagging women as it is.” So it was that I stopped 
going on OkCupid: the men I met bore little or no relation to their picture or 
descriptions.


Walking through the Mission area one day, I saw an advert for an organisation 
calledOneTaste <http://onetaste.us/> that offered Orgasmic Meditation 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pYohBt5AVmA&list=PLAD7D3B69B6CEDF75>. This 
seemed like something that would make a chapter so I signed up. At my first 
meeting, I was welcomed by a woman called Daedone, who explained how orgasmic 
meditation worked. “You basically strip off and let a man rub your clitoris for 
15 minutes,” she said. Intrigued, I decided to give it a go with a man called 
Jose. It was quite enjoyable but I didn’t experience orgasm. On another 
occasion I did, so then I stopped going.


Next on my to do list was internet porn. Although my research – Gloria 
Steinem’s seminal work,Revolution from Within 
<https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/95612-revolution-from-within-a-book-of-self-esteem>
 – had suggested that it was mainly men who consumed pornography, many of my 
women friends who were working at Google said they found pornography 
liberating. So I decided to go along to a hardcore film set to experience it 
for myself as a feminist. After spending 20 pages writing a potted history of 
the porn industry, I spent a long time chatting to female porn stars who were 
all fascinated to talk to me and who all told me how much they enjoyed their 
work, though after some reflection I decided this was not a line of work I 
would want to pursue for myself.

In Virginia, a woman wearing a panda head was live-streaming herself while 
performing various sex acts on herself in response to men who were watching her 
online. I decided to get in contact with her. “Have you read Andrea Dworkin’s 
seminal work,Pornography: Men Possessing Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/apr/15/gender.politicsphilosophyandsociety>
?” I asked. “No,” she replied. “That’s odd,” I said. “I could have sworn you 
must have done.” We then talked for a little while more about her work and then 
the conversation rather petered out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffuture-sex-a-new-kind-of-free-love-by-emily-witt-digested-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3dedd95a79f80619afb721b78d190137163b7b9%2F0_0_687_1000%2F687.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Future%20Sex%3A%20A%20New%20Kind%20of%20Free%20Love%20by%20Emily%20Witt%20%E2%80%93%20digested%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffuture-sex-a-new-kind-of-free-love-by-emily-witt-digested-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Future%20Sex%3A%20A%20New%20Kind%20of%20Free%20Love%20by%20Emily%20Witt%20%E2%80%93%20digested%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Ffuture-sex-a-new-kind-of-free-love-by-emily-witt-digested-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3dedd95a79f80619afb721b78d190137163b7b9%2F0_0_687_1000%2F687.jpg>
 Future Sex by Emily Witt (Faber, £12.99) 
Next came Elizabeth, who worked at Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>. She was looking for a 
relationship but did not want to restrict herself to having sex with just one 
partner. Brian also worked at Google and was also looking for an open 
relationship. Elizabeth and Brian compiled a Google document spreadsheet that 
provided the framework for whom they would be shagging at any point in the day 
and at what time they might be free to shag one another. Then Elizabeth met 
Chris, who worked at Facebook. Elizabeth quite fancied Chris but Chris fancied 
Brian more, which turned out to be a bit of a problem – since Brian didn’t mind 
kissing Chris, but didn’t want to have sex with him.

From then on, Elizabeth and Chris decided they would only sleep with other 
people who worked at Google. To celebrate, they held a party at which everyone 
at Google would shag one another. I upgraded my browser to Google Chrome Plus 
and went along with some trepidation. I can’t quite remember if I slept with 
anyone else or not though, as I was a bit out of it.

“Why don’t you come to the Burning Man festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/burning-man-festival>?” said a man called 
Adam. “Everyone from Google will be there.” Man, it was awesome. To see so many 
nerds acting like space cadets was literally mind-blowing. At one point, I was 
in this tent having amazing sex with someone on MDMA, and the next I was 
smoking too much weed and having sex with someone else. This really did feel 
like the future of sex.

When I came down and got back to New York, I did vaguely wonder if this really 
was the future of sex after all. Maybe all I’d done was immerse myself in a 
Google west coast subculture, but at least I’d finished my book. Anyway, it had 
been a blast and who knows if I will have a baby one day or not?

Digested read, digested: Much the same as the old sex.

 