
As the advance into Germany continues and more and more of the devastation 
wrought by the Allied bombing planes is laid bare, there are three comments 
that almost every observer finds himself making. The first is: 'The people at 
home have no conception of this.' The second is, 'It's a miracle that they've 
gone on fighting.' And the third is, 'Just think of the work of building this 
all up again!'

It is quite true that the scale of the Allied blitzing of Germany is even now 
not realised in this country, and its share in the breaking-down of German 
resistance is probably much underrated. It is difficult to give actuality to 
reports of air warfare and the man in the street can be forgiven if he imagines 
that what we have done to Germany over the past four years is merely the same 
kind of thing they did to us in 1940.

But this error, which must be even commoner in the United States, has in it a 
potential danger, and the many protests against indiscriminate bombing which 
have been uttered by pacifists and humanitarians have merely confused the issue.

Bombing is not especially inhumane. War itself is inhumane and the bombing 
plane, which is used to paralyse industry and transport, is a relatively 
civilised weapon. 'Normal' or 'legitimate' warfare is just as destructive of 
inanimate objects and enormously so of human lives.

Moreover, a bomb kills a casual cross-section of the population, whereas the 
men killed in battle are exactly the ones that the community can least afford 
to lose. The people of Britain have never felt easy about the bombing of 
civilians and no doubt they will be ready enough to pity the Germans as soon as 
they have definitely defeated them; but what they still have not grasped - 
thanks to their own comparative immunity - is the frightful destructiveness of 
modern war and the long period of impoverishment that now lies ahead of the 
world as a whole.

To walk through the ruined cities of Germany is to feel an actual doubt about 
the continuity of civilisation. For one has to remember that it is not only 
Germany that has been blitzed. The same desolation extends, at any rate in 
considerable patches, all the way from Brussels to Stalingrad. And where there 
has been ground fighting, the destruction is even more thorough. In the 300 
miles or so between the Marne and the Rhine there is not such a thing as a 
bridge or a viaduct that has not been blown up.

Even in England we are aware that we need three million houses, and that the 
chances of getting them within measurable time seem rather slender. But how 
many houses will Germany need, or Poland or the USSR, or Italy? When one thinks 
of the stupendous task of rebuilding hundreds of European cities, one realises 
that a long period must elapse before even the standards of living of 1939 can 
be re-established.

We do not yet know the full extent of the damage that has been done to Germany 
but judging from the areas that have been overrun hitherto, it is difficult to 
believe in the power of the Germans to pay any kind of reparations, either in 
goods or in labour. Simply to re-house the German people, to set the shattered 
factories working, and to keep German agriculture from collapsing after the 
foreign workers have been liberated, will use up all the labour that the 
Germans are likely to dispose of.

If, as is planned, millions of them are to be deported for reconstruction 
work, the recovery of Germany itself will be all the slower. After the last 
war, the impossibility of obtaining substantial money reparations was finally 
grasped, but it was less generally realised that the impoverishment of any one 
country reacts unfavourably on the world as a whole. It would be no advantage 
to turn Germany into a kind of rural slum.
 