
To me, the best thing about growing your own fruit and veg is that it opens up 
a vast array of flavours that just aren’t sold by the supermarkets – and 
nowhere is this truer than when it comes to berries. Gooseberries, currants and 
many of the weird and wonderful bramble hybrids that were once commonplace in 
the British diet have become increasingly rarer finds in the bland uniformity 
of flavourless commercial offerings. Fortunately, they also happen to be the 
easiest of all fruit to grow and now is the perfect time to plant the delicious 
boysenberry – my favourite of all.

A few years ago I was lucky enough to get special permission to do a massive 
sampling of dozens of hybrid berries at theRHS Garden at Wisley 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/gardens/wisley?utm_medium=cpc&gclid=COXbntPhmdACFY8W0wod7XQMtA&gclsrc=aw.ds>
, Surrey and at theNational Fruit Collection 
<http://www.nationalfruitcollection.org.uk/> at Brogdale in Kent. Munching my 
way through all manner of varieties, from some of the oldest Victorian 
favourites to modern varieties so new they had only breeding codes for names, 
the one which really blew me away was the boysenberry. Originating in northern 
California in the early 20th century, this berry is a complex hybrid between a 
raspberry, blackberry, American dewberry and loganberry. It has a flavour as 
rich and multifaceted as its genetics. Its sky-high sugar content conspires 
with intense aroma to create berries that taste like a cross between raspberry 
jam and bramble jelly.

Funnily enough for a relatively modern cultivar, the boysenberry is often also 
thought of in the UK as a heritage crop, and was once widely cultivated here 
for the production of jams and jellies and turned into mass-market tinned pie 
fillings right up until the 1980s. It is still hugely popular in New Zealand, 
now the world’s largest producer, but has sadly seen a precipitous decline in 
both Britain and even its native North America. Its soft, succulent berries 
have too short a shelf life compared to ones engineered for durability over 
flavour, while its lower vigour and disease resistance make it slower to return 
financial investment. Despite its incredible flavour, it is a berry at risk of 
becoming commercially extinct in the next few decades.

Yet some of the traits that make the boysenberry rubbish as a crop for farmers 
make it a great choice for home growers. Its lack of world-dominating vigour 
means that, unlike many other brambles, it won’t require constant attention to 
keep in check, making a break for it as soon as your back is turned. This makes 
it perfect for small gardens. I have successfully grown them even in an 
average-sized patio pot.

There are thornless forms, too, which make for super-easy training and 
picking, versus the impenetrable thickets of vicious barbs some varieties have. 
In short, it’s the perfect berry for beginner growers.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 