
A Gareth Bale header and a Cristiano Ronaldo penalty gave Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> a much-needed 2-0 victory 
over Eibar in La Liga on Sunday, following their hammering by the leaders, 
Barcelona, and put them six points off the top of the standings.

The Welshman notched his first goal since the end of August when he nodded in 
a Luka Modric cross two minutes before half-time against the small Basque club 
who have surprised this season and went into the game with one defeat from 
eight matches.

Real were made to work hard but Ronaldo secured the win with a penalty after 
82 minutes following a foul by Dani García on Lucas Vázquez.

The win eases the pressure on the coach Rafael Benítez following defeats in La 
Liga against Sevilla andin the ‘clásico’ last Saturday, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/23/barcelona-clasico-destruction-real-madrid-on-their-knees-sid-lowe>
 when they lost 4-0.

Barcelona’s clásico destruction leaves Real Madrid on their knees | Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/23/barcelona-clasico-destruction-real-madrid-on-their-knees-sid-lowe>
Third-placed Real now have 27 points from 13 games, two behind Atlético 
Madrid, while Barça have 33 points. “We have been through a difficult moment, 
it has been hard for all of us and we all have to improve,” the Real goalkeeper 
Keylor Navas said. “These three points are important to help us fight for what 
we want, which is titles, and now we need to keep improving.”

Real had a makeshift defence with Sergio Ramos, Raphael Varane and Marcelo all 
out injured and so Pepe and Nacho were in the centre with Danilo on the left.

It was a clash between clubs from different ends of the football spectrum, 
with Real the richest in the world by income againstEibar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/eibar> who have a budget this season of 
€32m, but on the pitch the difference was slim.

Eibar employed their typical pressing game, looking to prevent Real from 
settling and pouncing on the counter.

Ronaldo broke the offside trap but Asier Riesgo stood tall and blocked his 
shot after 15 minutes, and then Mateo Kovacic blazed the rebound over the 
crossbar.

A near-post header from Bale put Real in front and he was close to adding to 
the lead when he pulled down a long ball but his shot when stretching was 
blocked by Riesgo.

Eibar went close with Sergi Enrich and Aleksandar Pantic both heading narrowly 
over the crossbar while Ronaldo had another excellent chance to score when he 
shot wide inside the area after 72 minutes.

He got his goal 10 minutes later by sending Asier the wrong way from the spot.
 