
Eighteen years have passed and Gareth Farrelly has been through the wringer 
since, but he can still recall the “weird and surreal” day he keptEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> in the Premier League with vivid 
detail. It was the final afternoon of the 1997‑98 season and Howard Kendall’s 
team required at least a point against Coventry to survive. The boyhood 
Evertonian was not known for finding the net but he was there when his team’s 
needs were at their greatest, scoring his only league goal for the club in a 
1-1 draw to keep them up and send Bolton down.

Yet such is the remarkable nature of Farrelly’s story that the significance of 
that one shot, the type of moment many players would declare to be their 
greatest, is a minor segment. The six-times Republic of Ireland international 
became a manager at 28 not too long after falling out with Sam Allardyce at 
Bolton, whom he helped to promotion having earlier relegated them, and a couple 
of years later prompted a change in Fifa’s transfer rules.

Daniel Amokachi: ‘Football in Finland is too nice – I want to change that’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/25/daniel-amokachi-football-finland-too-nice-nigeria-everton>
The 41-year-old is now a trainee solicitor with Peters & Peters in central 
London, no mean feat for someone who left school at 16 to joinAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>. But the most striking 
chapter of all was what led to his career change: surviving a condition that 
has a 90% mortality rate. “Everybody has their own story,” he says. “I was 
very, very lucky.”

On 30 April 2008, his daughter’s birthday, Farrelly was driving to Bournemouth 
to meet a friend when he took quite ill on the M40. He pulled in and began 
vomiting blood but was able to call an ambulance. As he battled to stay 
conscious, the emergency services had him at Warwick hospital in 15 minutes.

The initial diagnosis was not promising: a lump was found and he was 
transferred to Coventry, where a CT scan showed an aneurysm of the splenic 
artery. Immediate, critical surgery was required to remove it, plus 20% of his 
stomach, 40% of his pancreas, part of his colon and his entire spleen.

“It’s eight and half years ago and I still think all the time that I am part 
of the 10% that live,” Farrelly says. “I don’t get up, open the curtains and 
smell the roses every day or anything like that but when you’re having a bad 
day it is nice to reflect on it.”

It took nine months to fully recover, having spent the first four days 
post-surgery in intensive care. He lost 10kg in weight and the road back was 
tough but he is eternally thankful to the NHS and all the staff at Coventry’s 
Walsgrave hospital for the “immaculate” care he received.

“My kids were incredibly young and you don’t want to think about what could 
have happened. I met amazing people from the moment I phoned an ambulance to 
when I left the hospital to do my rehabilitation. I’m only here because of them.

I played eight minutes football for Everton after that. I went from being a 
hero to playing eight minutes in 18 months

“It was a horrendous, difficult recovery. I sat there thinking: ‘What if I can 
never play football again?’ Any player will tell you that they are incredibly 
resilient in the face of adversity but I had to think about what I was going to 
do in life if I couldn’t play again. I had the management experience at the 
time but that’s now become even more competitive than before, so I thought 
about my interest in law.”

Farrelly completed his rehab at Preston and made a brief comeback for Sammy 
McIlroy at Morecambe, yet when the choice came full-time education won. His 15 
years as a professional footballer were at an end, though he looks back on a 
tumultuous career now with nothing but fondness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fgareth-farrelly-everton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0b0580bc0dd39586a11413b3754c6bc05431d11%2F0_135_1651_990%2F1651.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gareth%20Farrelly%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20think%20all%20the%20time%20that%20I%20am%20part%20of%20the%2010%25%20that%20live%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fgareth-farrelly-everton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gareth%20Farrelly%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20think%20all%20the%20time%20that%20I%20am%20part%20of%20the%2010%25%20that%20live%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fgareth-farrelly-everton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0b0580bc0dd39586a11413b3754c6bc05431d11%2F0_135_1651_990%2F1651.jpg>
 Gareth Farrelly is mobbed by Everton team-mates after scoring the goal against 
Coventry that proved decisive in Everton’s fight against the drop in 1998. 
Photograph: Shaun Botterill/Allsport 
A product of the successful Home Farm academy in Dublin, Farrelly grew up as 
an Evertonian because “all my friends supported Liverpool or Manchester United, 
with a bit of Celtic thrown in”.

At 17 he joined Villa, who at the time were enjoying a spell of success under 
Brian Little, but, with game time not exactly plentiful and his heart ruling 
his head, he moved to Merseyside in 1997. “I was coming from a situation at 
Villa where the team was doing very well but I had a toxic relationship with 
one of the coaches there. Then joining Everton, they weren’t doing very well at 
all,” he says.

Results were poor, aside from winning four from five around Christmas, and he 
recalls being jeered in their penultimate home game when missing a good chance 
in defeat to Sheffield Wednesday. The following week Everton were battered 4-0 
at Arsenal, who became champions.

So it all led to Goodison on the final afternoon, when a defeat would send 
them down. “It was a weird day,” Farrelly recalls. “Everybody has their own 
particular version but, for me, what was really interesting was a couple of 
hours before the game, there were thousands inside and outside the ground 
already.

“The women’s team had won their cup and were out on the pitch beforehand. The 
youth team had won their cup, too, and were out there. So there was a sense of 
pressure for us and expectation mixed with the reality of what would happen if 
the day didn’t go well.”

For Evertonians it must not bear thinking about. Perhaps Farrelly’s greatest 
trait as a player was the strength of his left foot but he scored with his 
right after chesting down Duncan Ferguson’s header just outside the penalty arc 
with only six minutes on the clock. Coventry would fight back and equalise late 
on, in effect meaning the Dubliner’s strike kept Everton up at Bolton’s expense.

Kendall would still be fired, though, and the midfielder soon learned he was 
not part of Walter Smith’s plans the following season. “I played eight minutes 
football for Everton after that, so for me to go through such a difficult 
season and have an outcome like that, it shows the reality of football,” he 
says. “I went from being a hero to playing eight minutes in 18 months.”

Having sent Bolton down, Farrelly then became Allardyce’s first signing, 
initially on loan, and was chided for having relegated his new club. But when 
Wanderers needed someone to stand up again, he was there, scoring the opener in 
the 2001 play-off final win over Preston with the same right foot and from a 
similar distance. Once again, however, a hurdle was not too far away. A 
personality clash with Allardyce spelled the end and he went on three loans in 
a year before an unusual offer for a 28-year-old.

Back in Dublin, Bohemians were searching for a new manager. “I got to the 
point where I had good managers and bad managers and had this opportunity. I 
had a strong plan about what I wanted to do and the irony is that I met John 
Giles shortly after resigning from there. If I had spoken to him before I took 
the job, I probably would never have done it.”

Off the pitch Bohs were having difficulties. The club had speculated hugely 
with their budget and failed but Farrelly did well in the circumstances despite 
there being “a legal matter nearly every week”. After that he joined Blackpool, 
playing only once at Bloomfield Road before returning to Ireland with Cork in 
February 2007.

Inevitably there was a problem. He could not play because of Fifa’s three-club 
rule, which meant he and his team-mate Colin Healy would have to wait until 
1 July before appearing, midway through the March-October campaign.

That gave Farrelly another taste of the law – an appeal was turned down by the 
court of arbitration for sport, a week before their ban was to end. “We did the 
classic fighting Irish thing, put up a great argument and lost,” he says. Fifa, 
though, was pressured into altering the rule a couple of months later.

At the beginning of the following season he picked up a knee injury and when 
visiting his family, who were still living in England, during treatment the 
illness took hold. To compound matters Cork were placed in examinership –a 
process in Irish law where the protection of the court is obtained to assist 
the survival of a company – and because of the illness he was in effect sacked 
and bumped down the list of creditors when it came to wages owed. He later won 
a case for unfair dismissal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fgareth-farrelly-everton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8353f005b2aa3702fcc00f79d712d0b31f59d29b%2F32_62_2092_1255%2F2092.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gareth%20Farrelly%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20think%20all%20the%20time%20that%20I%20am%20part%20of%20the%2010%25%20that%20live%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fgareth-farrelly-everton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gareth%20Farrelly%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20still%20think%20all%20the%20time%20that%20I%20am%20part%20of%20the%2010%25%20that%20live%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fgareth-farrelly-everton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8353f005b2aa3702fcc00f79d712d0b31f59d29b%2F32_62_2092_1255%2F2092.jpg>
 Gareth Farrelly in action for Bolton, whom he had helped to promotion in 2001, 
against Sunderland in 2002. Photograph: Michael Regan/Action Images 
Farrelly says he would not have become a solicitor were it not for the illness 
but initially he found a route in hard to come by. One university in Liverpool 
turned him away immediately before he went to Edge Hill and was placed on a 
fast-track course. The head of the law department, Franco Rizzuto, put him on 
an intense six-week programme and said if he passed there would be a place on 
its law degree course.

He stuck his head in the books while playing on a noncontract basis for 
Morecambe. “The new season started, I was enjoying it and I was fitter than 
ever. Then Morecambe went to Exeter one weekend. It was a six-and-a-half-hour 
journey, like a transatlantic flight, and at the same time I got a letter to 
say I had a place on the degree. I knew I was never going to play in the 
Premier League or Championship again and had made peace with that.

Everton’s Idrissa Gueye: ‘I am a perfectionist. I don’t like losing the ball – 
ever’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/everton-idrissa-gueye-i-am-a-perfectionist>
“I didn’t want to be away from my wife and kids for two days to play 10 
minutes against Exeter and the next week I went in to see Sammy. A more 
standard talk would have been: ‘Why aren’t you playing me? I’m better than so 
and so,’ but instead I went in and said: ‘Thanks for everything but I’m 
finishing on Friday.’ I started university on the following Monday.”

It is some achievement, defying popular conventions about footballers leaving 
education early, and while it would also be understandable for Farrelly to look 
back and feel some hurt about the harsh treatment he received at certain points 
of his career, his love for the game is still strong.

“The most interesting thing about football for me now is that I have a 
nine‑year-old son and we’ve started going to some of the games. It’s nice to 
see his excitement.”

Everton go about it quietly but they treat their former players very well and 
Farrelly returns quite often. Those of a certain age are unlikely to ever 
forget the moment he was their saviour because without his goal things could 
have gone very differently.

“The club have not been in that position since,” he says. “They have gotten 
stronger and stronger.”
 