
Carlo Ancelotti will take action if he sees any sign of selfishness among his 
Real Madrid players after Gareth Bale was jeered by fans for not passing to
Cristiano Ronaldo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo>.

Ancelotti appeared to find no fault with the striker who came in for criticism 
from Real fans at the Bernabéu on Saturday after shooting wide when clean 
through against Espanyol rather than squaring the ball to Ronaldo alongside 
him. Ronaldo also appeared to be angry at not being given what would have been 
a tap-in for him following the breakaway in the second half ofthe 3-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/10/real-madrid-espanyol-la-liga-match-report>
.

The incident came a week after Bale was also criticised for going for goal 
instead of passing to Karim Benzema during the2-1 defeat at Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/04/valencia-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
 – a result that ended Real’s winning streak on 22 matches.

When asked about the subject, Ancelotti said selflessness was an important 
part of his side’s play but he did not criticise Bale, who scored Real’s second 
goal with a superb free-kick. The manager said: “Bale has played a very good 
game. He’s played with intensity and he’s scored.

“It could be that at that moment the fans have asked for a pass to Cristiano, 
which hasn’t happened and, like all strikers who are in front of goal, he tried 
to score.

“Altruism is a very important component of the team. If there is any play 
which seems selfish we’ll clearly fix it. We have fans who demand a lot. Bale 
is a fundamental player like Cristiano and for that the fans demand much more 
than of others.”

The Real defender Nacho – who scored the third goal against Espanyol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/espanyol> following first-half strikes by 
James Rodríguez and Bale – insists the relationship between Bale and Ronaldo is 
“fantastic”. He said in AS: “Their relationship is fantastic. We’re a group, we 
all get on amazingly.”
 