
A first-half double from Gareth Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-bale> helped Real Madrid cement 
their position at the top of La Liga with a 3-0 win at home to Leganés.

Real Madrid 3-0 Leganés: La Liga – as it happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/06/real-madrid-v-leganes-la-liga-live>
Reeling from a chaotic midweek 3-3 draw at Legia Warsaw in the Champions League
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/legia-warsaw-real-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
, Real got off to a slow start against their neighbours Leganés but Bale put 
them in charge in the 38th minute. The Wales international, who netted a 
sensational half volley against Legia, raced on to a through ball from Isco 
that split the visiting defence and rounded goalkeeper Jon Serantes to tuck the 
ball inside the near post from a tight angle.

Bale then cashed in on poor defending from a free-kick to hit the second on 
the stroke of half-time, just beating Serantes to the loose ball from close 
range. Real’s Spain striker Álvaro Morata, standing in for the injured Karim 
Benzema, rounded off the win in the 76th minute.

Cristiano Ronaldo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> had a quiet 
game and strayed offside frequently but nearly set up a third for Bale, who was 
denied by Serantes, who leapt to his left to claw away the Welshman’s header.

The Real Madrid coach, Zinedine Zidane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/zinedine-zidane>, said there was nothing 
wrong with Ronaldo, who has not scored in five home games, his longest run 
without a goal in front of Real’s fans since joining the club in 2009.

Ronaldo has scored seven goals in the league and Champions League this term 
and made amends for his worst start to a season since joining Real by hitting a 
hat-trick in last month’s 4-1 win at Alavés.

“Nothing is up with Cristiano, we always want him to score and at Alavés he 
scored three and that’s that,” Zidane said. “He always wants to score but it 
doesn’t matter if he doesn’t once in a while. I think he’s playing well, 
working hard for the team. He obviously always wants to score but I think he’s 
relaxed about it.”

Despite the player’s current inconsistency, Zidane expressed his delight at 
the possibility of Ronaldo extending his stay at the club – before it was 
announced the 31-year-old hadextended his stay until 2021 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/cristiano-ronaldo-signs-new-five-year-real-madrid-contract>
. “I’m happy because he’s the type of player who deserves to finish his career 
at Real Madrid,” said Zidane, who saw out his playing days at the Bernabéu. 
“He’s unique. His dream is to retire here, wearing this great white shirt, just 
like I did.”

During the game there was more good feeling when Luka Modric received a 
rapturous reception from the Bernabéu crowd when the midfielder came on in the 
second half to mark his return from injury after more than a month out.

Morata further pleased supporters by latching on to a Toni Kroos pass to score 
the third goal, moving ahead of Bale and Ronaldo as Real’s top scorer this 
season on eight goals in all competitions.

Real top the standings on 27 points, five clear of champions Barcelona, who 
visit fourth-placed Sevilla later on Sunday.
 