
The “sold out” signs have been dug out and dusted down as Leeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited> prepare for a first full 
house in six years.

A capacity 38,000 crowd is expected to pack Elland Road on Sunday when Rafael 
Benítez’s Championship-toppingNewcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> aim to extend an 
eight-game winning streak and Garry Monk’s sixth-placed Leeds United hope to 
emphasise their play-off credentials.

The two managers, by succeeding where several predecessors failed and managing 
to exercise varying degrees of control over two of the game’s more 
idiosyncratic club owners in Massimo Cellino and Mike Ashley, have already 
achieved the unexpected but Monk can cast only covetous eyes at Benítez’s 
budget.

Tammy Abraham, Pontus Jansson and the Championship’s most eye-catching players 
| Nick Miller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/tammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players>
“Newcastle’s squad is high calibre for this league so we’re going to be tested 
but my players are ready,” he says, sitting behind his desk at the slightly 
run-down Leeds training base near Wetherby once patrolled by, among others, 
George Graham, David O’Leary and Terry Venables. “Newcastle are where they 
deserve to be but they’re also where they’re expected to be, so there’s big 
pressure on them.

“On paper they should win every game but football’s not like that. Let’s hope 
it’s one of those days when it doesn’t work out for them.

“It’s going to be difficult – in my old Swansea midfielder Jonjo Shelvey 
they’ve got a fantastic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/newcastle-jonjo-shelvey-pleads-not-guilty-fa-charge-racist-language>
 talent and a dangerous player who loves the big stage – but we know we have 
enough in the dressing room to make it difficult for them. We’re unbeaten in 
seven games at Elland Road and we want to make it eight.”

As with Benítez’s players, the Leeds squad have spent this season slowly 
repairing frayed bonds with their supporters and, following a slightly sticky 
start, mutual trust seems to be returning.

“I’ve got a very young squad and apprehension among the players contributed to 
early results,” says Monk, who arrived in West Yorkshire in June and is seeing 
a series of solid summer signings, most notably theimpressive Swedish defender 
Pontus Jansson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/tammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players>
, proving their worth.

“Elland Road can be a difficult place for us as well as the away team but 
we’ve been rebuilding our relationship with the fans and they’re buying into 
what we’re trying to do. The fans and the players are starting to respond to 
each other. We want regular full houses. We want to make Elland Road our 
fortress again.”

It seems an awful long time since the match planners pinned on the training 
ground walls detailed the Champions League adventures of 2000-01 under O’Leary, 
let alone 1991-92 when Gary Speed shone in the Leeds midfield as Howard 
Wilkinson’s side took the title. Speed later became a stalwart at Newcastleand 
his death in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jan/30/gary-speed-taking-life-inquest>
hit both clubs hard, so it seems thoroughly appropriate that, with Sunday’s 
match falling close to the fifth anniversary of it on 27 November, the entire 
ground will stage a special tribute.

In the 11th minute both sets of supporters will remember their much missed 
No11 by breaking into a minute’s applause. “That’s vitally important; Gary was 
a legend for both clubs but I know the Leeds fans regard him as one of their 
own,” Monk says as sleet begins falling from leaden skies outside.

“The day it happened I was playing for Swansea at home to Aston Villa and I 
couldn’t really believe it was true. I was alongside Ashley Williams – who’d 
been part of Gary’s Wales squad – in defence and I had to really nurse him 
through the game. It was a strange feeling.”

Speed would surely have appreciated the renaissances under way at his former 
clubs, not to mention the mutual respect between their two managers.It is 
almost three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/20/swansea-napoli-europa-league-match-report>
 since Benítez and Monk first crossed swords when Swansea faced Napoli in the 
Europa League, with the Welsh side losing 3-1 on aggregate.

“I’d only just become Swansea manager and Rafa was brilliant with me,” Monk 
recalls. “Afterwards we had a really good chat. It wasn’t one where he just 
shook hands and said he had to get on the bus. He sat down and talked for a 
long time, offering me advice and recalling his experiences as a young manager. 
I’ve got the highest respect for Rafa. His career’s been second to none so it’s 
great to come up against him, pit my wits against his tactics and try and win.”

Monk, like Benítez, is essentially a football romantic who wants his teams to 
play pure passing football but, like the Spaniard, he has learnt to be 
pragmatic when necessary. “I’ve probably sacrificed a bit of what I truly 
believe in but, since I changed the style a little bit, results have improved,” 
he concedes. “That’s been a lesson to me.”
 