
The goalkeeper Gary Sprake, who has died aged 71, was a foundation stone of 
the greatLeeds United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited> side 
of the late 1960s and early 70s under its legendary managerDon Revie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/nov/25/football.newsstory>. An 
ever-present in the football team that took the First Division championship in 
1968/69, he also won two Fairs Cup medals in Europe with Leeds during a highly 
successful 11-year career at Elland Road, and was a mainstay forWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales>, with whom he won 37 caps between 
1963 and 1974.

Strong, agile, well-built and craggy of face, Sprake looked as much like a 
rugged mountaineer as a goalkeeper. Although there were bigger names in that 
dominant and robust Leeds side, he was more integral to the success of the 
Revie era than many gave him credit for. During the championship winning season 
of 1968/69 – the first top flight title forLeeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds> – he played in all 42 league matches and 
kept clean sheets in more than half of them.

As is the lot of many goalkeepers – even the best – Sprake was sometimes 
remembered more for hismistakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/mar/18/joy-of-six-goalkeeping-calamities>
 than his regular brilliance. Thanks to anoutbreak of blunders 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qHUmQqA8ZTk> – one of which involved him 
throwing the ball into his own net in front of the Kop when playing against 
Liverpool in 1967 – he was often referred to on the terraces as “careless 
hands”. Nonetheless he was widely acknowledged, even by jeering opposition 
fans, to be one of the outstanding goalkeepers of his time.

Former Leeds and Wales goalkeeper Gary Sprake dies aged 71
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/gary-sprake-leeds-birmingham-wales-dies>
Born in Winch Wen, a suburb of Swansea, Sprake was spotted by Leeds when 
playing for Swansea schoolboys and, after joining as an apprentice in 1960, 
made his debut in the Second Division in 1962. Within 18 months he had won his 
first international cap, at the age of 18 – the youngest keeper to play forWales
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales>.

Quickly establishing himself as a regular under Revie, he helped Leeds to 
promotion in 1963/64, after which they immediately forged themselves into 
perennial First Division championship contenders. Sprake won a League Cup 
winners’ medal in 1968 when Leeds beat Arsenal 1-0 at Wembley, and was 
outstanding in the two-legged final of the Fairs Cup (a forerunner of the Uefa 
Cup) against the Hungarian side Ferencváros later that year, making a series of 
reflex saves as Leeds won 1-0 on aggregate. After the First Division 
championship in 1968/69, he picked up another Fairs Cup winners’ medal in 1971, 
in victory against Juventus on away goals after a 3-3 aggregate draw.

By the following season, however, Revie was beginning to turn to a new 
goalkeeper,David Harvey 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/sport/where-are-they-now-david-harvey-1578102.html>
, and Sprake did not play when Leeds won the 1972 FA Cup final against Arsenal. 
In 1973, after 380 league appearances for the club, he was transferred for 
£100,000 – then a world record fee for a goalkeeper – to First Division 
Birmingham City, where a serious back injury forced him to retire at the age of 
30, in 1975.

Three years later Sprake jumped back into the headlines when he made 
allegations in the Daily Mirror that Revie had consistently tried to fix 
matches and bribe opposition players across his career. No criminal or FA 
charges ever arose from the accusations, for which Sprake was paid a 
considerable sum of money by the Mirror, andhis whistleblowing efforts earned 
him the deep opprobrium <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wS-lLLjUIbg> both of 
his former teammates – most of whom refused to speak to him again – and many 
Leeds fans.

However, Sprake stuck to his guns and settled down to live with the 
consequences. “I said something wrong about the great man, even though I still 
think he was a great manager,” he told the BBC in 2012. “I broke ranks and I’ve 
lived with it for more than 30 years now. It doesn’t really bother me.”

After lengthy treatment for longstanding back problems, which never fully 
receded <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2000/aug/12/football.vivekchaudhary2>, 
Sprake had no desire to remain in football, and worked first as a salesman and 
then for many years training business and information technology students in 
Solihull in the West Midlands.

In 2006 he provided support for a biography 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/405631/> written by 
his nephew Stuart Sprake and Tim Johnson, self-deprecatingly agreeing to its 
title, Careless Hands.

• Gary Sprake, footballer, born 3 April 1945; died 18 October 2016

 * This article was amended on 23 November 2016. The biography of Gary Sprake, 
Careless Hands, was written not only by Stuart Sprake, but also by Tim Johnson.  