
Gary Neville will adopt a typically nerveless approach on his managerial debut 
in the Valencia dugout on Wednesday The 40-year-old, who has worked alongside 
Roy Hodgson as an assistant coach with England and as a television pundit since 
retiring in 2011, will be aiming to secure the three points against Lyon that 
may keep his new club’sChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> campaign alive.

The match will be a tough baptism for the eight-times Premier League winner, 
but Neville, whose first training session was watched by thousands of fans, is 
unconcerned by the challenge.

“I don’t know if it’s dangerous but I don’t feel anxious at all,” he said. 
“Maybe that’s good, maybe that’s bad. I don’t know as I’ve never been in this 
position before.

“I’ve been a coach with England and I don’t feel anxious before England games 
either. Maybe I did as a player a little bit, but as a coach I’ve never felt 
that way working under Roy with England and I don’t feel that way today,” said 
the former right-back, who won two Champions League medals with Manchester 
United.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvalencia-gary-neville-training-session-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Valencia%20players%20welcome%20Gary%20Neville%20to%20first%20training%20session%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvalencia-gary-neville-training-session-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Valencia%20players%20welcome%20Gary%20Neville%20to%20first%20training%20session%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fvalencia-gary-neville-training-session-video&media=>
Valencia players welcome Gary Neville to first training session. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/dec/08/valencia-gary-neville-training-session-video>
Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> trail Ghent by a 
point with one game remaining in the group stages, leaving Neville hoping his 
team can achieve a better result than that of the Belgians in their match with 
Zenit St Petersburg, who have booked their place in the next round as Group H 
winners with a 100% record. The La Liga side won their earlier meeting with the 
French club, who are bottom of the standings and eliminated, 1-0.

“What we do control is our match and we have to focus on that,” Neville said. 
“If, after that match we haven’t got the result that we want in the other game, 
then that’s life. The most important thing is concentrating on our direct 
opponent and not focusing on what’s going on elsewhere.”

Neville was in the stands of the sold-out Mestalla on Saturday when his team 
secured a point against Barcelona amid the kind of atmosphere the new coach 
craves at the historic old ground.

“ It was against a fantastic opponent – Barcelona are one of the best teams in 
Europe – but I think the players set themselves a standard of what they’re 
capable of in terms of the hard work, the organisation, the spirit, the 
endurance, to keep going,” he said. “I said I wanted the Mestalla to be a 
horrible place for opponents to play and I think that for Barcelona on 
Saturday, for part of that game, it was uncomfortable.”
 