
Aritz Aduriz scored late in the second half to send Athletic Bilbao into the 
quarter-finals of theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> on away goals, 
despite a 2-1 defeat by their Spanish rivalsValencia on Thursday.

Sparta Prague, who secured a superb 3-0 away win at Lazio, and Villarreal, who 
went through 2-0 on aggregate after a goalless draw atBayer Leverkusen, will 
join them in the last eight.

The Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> manager, Gary 
Neville, has had little to celebrate since joining the club in December but 
looked on course for some rare joy when his side scored twice in the first half 
against Bilbao.

Santi Mina scored on the rebound to put Valencia ahead after 13 minutes and 
the Brazilian defender Aderlan Santos doubled the advantage eight minutes 
before the break with a superb header from José Gayà’s cross.

Elation turned to disappointment, however, when Aduriz poked home his eighth 
Europa League goal this season after 76 minutes following a brilliant flick 
from Raúl García, giving Athletic a crucial away goal to add to their 1-0 win 
in the first leg.

Despite their victory on the night, the result was another blow for Valencia, 
who had lost their previous three matches in all competitions and havestruggled 
for the majority of Neville’s spell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/10/gary-neville-valencia-hernan-crespo-almost-happy>
 in charge.

There was no late drama in Italy where Lazio were comprehensively taken apart 
bySparta Prague <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spartaprague>, who scored 
three times in the first half to complete a 4-1 aggregate victory.

Sparta, who held on for a 1-1 draw in the home leg last week, scored twice in 
quick succession through Borek Dockal after 10 minutes and Ladislav Krejci two 
minutes later. The tie was to all intents done and dusted when Lukas Julis 
hooked in a third a minute before the break.

Braga turned the tables on eight-man Fenerbahce with a 4-1 victory.

Trailing 1-0 from the first leg, Braga faced an uphill task when Alper Potuk 
cancelled out Ahmed Hassan’s opener just before half-time. But the 67th-minute 
dismissal of Mehmet Topal proved the turning point.

Josué netted the 69th-minute penalty and five minutes later Nikola 
Stojiljkovic put the Portuguese side ahead in the tie for the first time and 
Rafa Silva added a fine fourth goal.

There was still time for Fenerbahce to implode as Potuk and Volkan Sen were 
also sent off.

Eduardo’s stoppage-time goal earned Shakhtar Donetsk a 1-0 second-leg win to 
round off a comfortable progression pastAnderlecht, 4-1 on aggregate.

Both sides finished with 10 men as Oleksandr Kucher for Shakhtar and Kara 
Mbodji forAnderlecht <https://www.theguardian.com/football/anderlecht> were 
sent off within two minutes of each other as tempers flared in the closing 
stages.

Premier League increasingly a wealthy couch potato on the European stage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/17/premier-league-couch-potato-european-stage> 