
Australia’s gas companies have manufactured a myth that there is a gas 
shortage, an economist with the Institute forEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Economics & Financial 
Analysis, Bruce Robertson, said.

The idea that onshore coal seam gas exploration would ease pain for 
manufacturers by bringing down high local gas prices in a low-price global 
environment “goes against basic economic theory”, he said.

Related: Victoria to permanently ban fracking and coal seam gas exploration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/30/victoria-to-permanently-ban-fracking-and-coal-seam-gas-exploration>

Robertson made the comments in response to Shell Australia’s chairman Andrew 
Smith,who told Fairfax 
<http://www.afr.com/business/energy/gas/shell-blames-vic-govt-for-rising-gas-price-20170110-gtp815>
 that Victorian manufacturers should direct their anger about the gas supply 
shortage towards the Victorian government and the premier, Daniel Andrews.

“It is the Andrews government’s ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/30/victoria-to-permanently-ban-fracking-and-coal-seam-gas-exploration>
 on onshore gas production that will lead to price hikes to Victorian 
manufacturers – and this will cost jobs in Victorian factories,” Smith said. 
“All Victorian gas customers will be paying the price of gas in Queensland plus 
the hefty expense of pipeline access to transport the gas more than 1,000 
kilometres south.

But Robertson told Guardian Australia the comments revealed Smith’s 
“geographical ignorance”. “Smith mustn’t realise that Victoria is located next 
door to the Bass Strait,” he said.

The gas consumed by Victorians comes from the Bass Strait and the industry is 
trying to make Victorians believe they will have to pay to transport gas from 
Queensland, Robertson said.

“There is plenty of gas available in the Bass Strait and on the east coast of 
Australia. “The manufacturers have a right to be angry, but that anger should 
be directed at the producers.”

In October BHP’s president of assets, Geraldine Slattery, described the Bass 
Strait as “our highest producer by volume and carries significant, high-return 
undeveloped resource, yet to be monetised”.

“We expect to see the Bass Strait gas plateau extending well into the next 
decade,” she saidduring a company briefing 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/mining-energy/bhp-to-lift-bass-strait-gas-production/news-story/aa0321e3fdd7979c908047eb9b297bc5>
.

Related: Australian gas 40% cheaper in Japan than in Australia despite export 
costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/16/australian-gas-40-cheaper-japan-than-australia-despite-export-costs>

Robertson said the idea that Victoria’s permanent ban on coal seam gas 
exploration and fracking was influencing prices, and that allowing fracking 
would bring prices down, made no sense.

Onshore coal seam gas was a high-cost industry, he said. “Producing high-cost 
gas is no way to bring down Australian prices in what is a low-price gas 
environment globally,” Roberts said. “If anyone could explain how opening up 
high cost fields would bring down the cost of a product, I’m all ears. It 
should be mind-numbingly clear that you can’t bring down the cost of something 
by producing it at a high price.”

While gas prices for manufacturers was a major problem, Robertson said gas 
companies has “manufactured” the cause.

Victoria’s acting resources minister, Philip Dalidakis, said there were no 
proven or probable unconventional onshore reserves in Victoria, so the ban 
implemented by his government would not have any impact on gas supply.

“We will continue to encourage development of Victoria’s offshore gas 
resources and gas storage, to assist future supply and help mitigate price 
increases,” he said.

Related: In vast swaths of rural New South Wales, there's only one election 
issue: coal seam gas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/26/in-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas>

The domestic gas market is competing against Liquefied Natural Gas export 
markets to Asia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/16/australian-gas-40-cheaper-japan-than-australia-despite-export-costs>
, making it difficult for local gas users to secure new or longer-term 
contracts.

Coal seam gas exploration is causing concern across the country. It was a key 
issue for voters in theNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> 2015 election, and 
the South Australian Liberal party announced a 10-year moratorium on fracking 
in the state’s south-east as one of the key policy platforms on which it will 
contest next year’s election. A moratorium on fracking commenced in the 
Northern Territory in September. In Western Australia, Labor announced it would 
make the Perth, Peel and South West regions “frack-free zones” if elected come 
March.

The environment and energy minister, Josh Frydenberg, believes proposals for 
new gas exploration and development should be reviewed on a case-by-case basis, 
after an ACCC report into coal seam gas exploration on the east coast 
recommended against a blanket ban.

It is an approach that is being followed in NSW. The NSW minister for 
industry, resources and energy, Anthony Roberts, said his government would be 
releasing its new Strategic Release Framework for Coal and Petroleum 
Exploration within the first half of the year.

Related: Fears Australia losing billions in liquefied natural gas tax sparks 
calls for inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/11/fears-australia-losing-billions-in-liquefied-natural-gas-tax-sparks-calls-for-inquiry>

“This is a new approach to how coal and gas titles will be issued,” he told 
Guardian Australia. “Economic, environmental and social factors will be 
examined, with community consultation conducted upfront, before a potential 
area is released through an expression of interest process.”

Roberts said the Eastern Australian gas market was facing a period of 
significant change in both supply and demand dynamics. NSW led calls for 
further reforms to ensure transparency and openness in the national gas market, 
he added. “NSW will not put in place a ban”.

But National Farmers Federation president Fiona Simson said the moratoriums 
various governments had in place were “symptomatic of the lack of confidence 
the community has in the development of the gas industry and concerns about a 
lack of regulation nationally”.


“The federation’s view is that we do think demand for gas is likely to 
outstrip supply as we move away from coal,” she said. “Assuming we do move 
towards renewables there would still be a gap needs to fill. Farming is an 
energy-hungry sector.

“But we only support coal seam gas if governments can get the regulatory 
regime right and ensure water and agriculture can be protected, and if the 
industry proves it can operate responsibly and safely.”
 