
The American tycoon Gene Haas has revealed that he will be bidding for the 
assets of thecollapsed Marussia Formula One team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/07/marussia-go-out-of-business-f1> 
when they are put up for auction on Tuesday at its former factory in Banbury.

The team closed their doors in November and missed the last three races of the 
season. To pay their bills, administrators are selling nearly 1,000 items 
including steering wheels, gearboxes, race suits and even the 2013 chassis.

It is of particular interest to Haas as he is launching an F1 team in 2016. 
After revealing that he is considering locating it in Abingdon, Oxfordshire, he 
said: “We have got the Marussia auction list so I think we will be bidders for 
some of that stuff.”

Marussia is the second F1 team to hit the wall in the past two months. 
Caterham only managed to race at last month’s season-enderafter raising £2.4m 
through crowd-funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/14/caterham-will-race-abu-dhabi-grand-prix-f1>
.

Haas is not deterred by their failure as he believes both teams had a flawed 
business model. “If we did it the way Caterham and Marussia did it we would 
have the same result so I think we are going to do it differently,” he said. 
Key to this approach is taking advantage of a new regulation that will allow 
Haas to reduce start-up costs by buying more parts from established F1 marques. 
“A lot of the teams in the UK build everything themselves. They seem to have 
this English mentality that this is the way it has to be done and that is just 
not our business model at all.”

Unlike all existing F1 teams, the design division of Haas F1 will be split 
from the race operation. Design will be based in North Carolina, alongside the
Nascar <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nascar> stock car team which Haas 
co-owns, while the F1 team is on track to employ around 250 staff in the UK. 
“We looked at a place in Abingdon and there are several available in that area. 
I guess it might be a possibility to take a look at the Marussia HQ too.”
 