
I’ll never forget the first time Gene walked into my house. My God, I thought, 
it’s Willy Wonka! Gene was working with my then husband, Victor [Drai, a film 
producer], adapting a French film,Pardon Mon Affaire, which became The Woman in 
Red <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0088414/> (1984). It was my first film. I 
always say I got the role because I was sleeping with the producer! Gene was 
the director and the star – and a different, shyer character off camera.

He’d had a tough early life, he’d been abused, and his mother was ill 
throughout his childhood. He’d always been told to be quiet, sensitive, to make 
his mother smile. That’s where his gentleness and patience came from. There was 
nothing sexual to our relationship – he was like a father to me. He encouraged 
me when I was nervous on stage, and supported me off it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgene-wilder-remembered-by-kelly-lebrock-film-actor-friend-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c6fc2b17c01afb491ae967d421305357f5b4557%2F0_22_4331_2599%2F4331.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gene%20Wilder%20remembered%20by%20Kelly%20Le%20Brock&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgene-wilder-remembered-by-kelly-lebrock-film-actor-friend-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gene%20Wilder%20remembered%20by%20Kelly%20Le%20Brock&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fgene-wilder-remembered-by-kelly-lebrock-film-actor-friend-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c6fc2b17c01afb491ae967d421305357f5b4557%2F0_22_4331_2599%2F4331.jpg>
 Gene Wilder and Kelly Le Brock in a publicity portrait for The Woman in Red, 
1984. Photograph: Getty 
He and his wife, Gilda, who was also in the film, got to know my family too. I 
have a lovely memory of us all being out at dinner in France during the promo 
tour, with my mother telling a filthy joke at the table, her laughing harder as 
she told it, and Gene laughing harder as she laughed. He was a very private, 
introverted individual in many ways, but if he was telling a story, he’d get 
loud and colourful. And God, he loved humour. When I did my famous scene 
walking over the grate, wearing my red dress which had to blow up in the air, 
it wasn’t working. The fans wouldn’t lift the dress; we even put strings on it. 
So to lessen my nerves filming that scene, I put something in the front of my 
knickers – a rather large, pink thing. When the skirt finally blew up and Gene 
saw it, he just lost it completely.

Gene Wilder: a life in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2016/aug/29/gene-wilder-life-in-pictures>
We kept in touch over the years with phone calls, letters and emails. He was 
heartbroken when Gilda died [of ovarian cancer in 1989, aged 42], but found 
happiness again with his next wife, Karen, who looked after him so well towards 
the end. I last saw him four years ago, completely by chance, by coincidence on 
a plane to Bermuda. And I was wearing red! Trousers, underwear, everything – 
the first time I had in 10,000 years. He looked so frail and fragile, and it 
broke my heart. But I held his hand, and there was still all that warmth there.

He deserved more recognition as an actor. As well as all the Mel Brooks roles 
he’s known for, and his extraordinary Willy Wonka, you see him in something 
like [1970’s]Quackser Fortune Has a Cousin in the Bronx 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0066266/>, when he’s just collecting manure in a 
wheelbarrow, and he’s hilarious. There’s no category for his kind of delicate, 
thoughtful style, which is still incredibly funny. I’ll remember him for his 
comic genius, his big blue eyes and the loveliness of his whole being.

Main photograph by Elisa Leonelli/Rex/Shutterstock
 