
Stadium: Stadio Luigi Ferraris, 1911, capacity 35,536

Also known as the Marassi, the Stadio Luigi Ferraris is one of the oldest in 
Italy. Built in 1911, the stadium was originally property ofGenoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa> and was the stage of their early 
titles won during Serie A's primitive years.

The stadium is a daunting place. With the crowd close to the pitch, it gives 
the players the feeling they are enveloped in a wall of noise and fire. One of 
the best examples of the atmosphere in the ground is evident during thederby 
della lanterna in which Sampdoria take on Genoa. Arguably one of the most 
passionate derbies on the Peninsula, it transforms the stadium into a cauldron.

Marcello Lippi has claimed that the game is "the most special in Italy". In 
these matches Genoa hold theCurva Nord with their Ultra groups such as the 
Fossa dei Griffoni, while Sampdoria take the Curva Sud with their Ultra groups, 
which include theUltras Tito Tito Cucchiaroni.

The last derby was one of the games of the season and the atmosphere and 
choreography were breathtaking. The stadium had been updated for the 1990 World 
Cup and you may remember it from the second-round penalty shoot-out between 
Ireland and Romania. It still is one of the best stadiums inSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>.
 The Stadio Luigi Ferraris. Photograph: Valerio Pennicino/Getty Images 
The Ultras

Key Ultra Groups: Fossa dei Grifoni (Griffins Den), Via Armenia 5r (5r Armenia 
Street),Ottavio Barbiera, Vecchi Orsi (Old Bears).

Other fangroups: Brigata Speloncia (Speloncia Brigade), Figgi do Zena (Sons of 
Genoa),Ragazzi Certosa (Certosa boys), Ragazze Certosa (Certosa Girls), South 
Group, Old Block,Sette Setembre (September 7), Vecchia Sestri (Old Sestri), 
Superbi Zena (Pride of Genova)

In the 1990s, during the derby della lanterna (the derby of the lighthouse), 
the red and blue half of the Stadio Luigi Ferraris unveiled a banner reading 
"We are Genoa". It was a banner of mammoth proportions engulfing all the 
supporters in Genoa'sGradinata Nord â€“ a flight of steps resembling the end of 
an English stadium rather than an orthodox ItalianCurva. 

That the Luigi Ferraris appears anglicised and the banner itself was in 
English is entirely appropriate. It was a declaration of pride in the club's 
long history, which started in 1893 when British Consular officials set up the 
Genoa Cricket and Football Club. It also served as a mocking reminder to their 
opponents and city rivals Sampdoria, born 53 years later in 1946, thay Genoa 
was the club with the prestigious footballing past, both as the oldest team in 
Italy and as the beating heart of the city.
 Genoa fans show off their creative side in a match against local rivals 
Sampdoria at the Stadio Luigi Ferraris in February 2014. Photograph: Tullio M 
Puglia/Getty Images 
Wedged between the Ligurian Sea and the Apennine Mountains, the city of Genoa 
is a sight to behold. Steeped in history and cultural splendour, the Genovese 
take fierce pride in their city, hence its nickname "La Superba". 

They are also known to be tough, resourceful and reserved. However, when the 
weekend arrives and theGrifoni (Griffins) grace the Luigi Ferraris, this 
reticence is lost in a tumultuous atmosphere that can produce some of the most 
spectaculartifo (fandom) Italy has to offer. As journalist Marco Liguori puts 
it: "If you speak about trophies in Italy, the teams that have become legend 
are Juventus, Inter and Milan, but if you speak instead about fandom, it is the
Gradinata Nord of the Marassi that is legend."

The history of Genoa's support is inextricably linked with the formation of 
their first Ultra groupFossa dei Grifoni (FdG) (Griffins Den) in 1973. Fossa 
was part of the supporters group Ottavio Barbieri, which was named after the 
former Genoa player. Both groups were born out of a dark era in the club's 
history, when they languished in Serie C. FdG embodied the soul and ancestry of 
Genoa, combining British characteristics of sustained organised chanting with 
the breathtaking choreographies of Italian fandom.

Having established a real sense of unity, the Ultras' heyday came in the late 
1980s to early 1990s, when coach Osvaldo Bagnoli led theRossoblu to a 
fourth-place finish in Serie A and European qualification. Genoa's trip to face 
Liverpool in the quarter-final of the Uefa Cup in 1992 is fondly remembered for 
the vociferous and powerful support at Anfield. The Genoa fans were applauded 
by the Liverpool supporters at the final whistle.

In 1993, protests against the then-president Aldo Spinelli as well as strained 
relationships with the local press and police led to the disbanding of the FdG. 
Former members dispersed and joined groups such as Ottavio Barbieri, while 
others created splinter groups likeVecchi Orsi (Old Bears). Now Via Armenia 5r 
(5r Armenia Street), who are accompanied by the banner "You'll never walk 
alone" are the vanguard of theGradinata Nord. I Figgi do Zena (Sons of Genoa) 
also produce some impressive choreography, having taken their place in a 
section of the ground which traditionally had a more serene atmosphere.

Unfortunately this zealous fanaticism can lead to ignominious acts of 
violence. On 29 January 1995, a match between Genoa and AC Milan was marred by 
tragedy after Genoa supporter Vincenzo Claudio Spagnolo was fatally stabbed. 
The culprit, Simone Brasaglia, was a member of AC Milan's notoriously violent 
fringe Ultra group, the Barbour Gang (a reference to the British styled coats 
they wore). When news of the stabbing spread, the game was cancelled at half 
time and riots broke out around the Marassi, withGenoani seeking vengeance. 

Calcio reeled and the following week's league fixtures were postponed. The 
incident sparked the first ever national Ultra gathering in which groups 
pleaded for an end to the use of knives and mindless attacks. Brasaglia was 
sentenced to 16 years in prison and a monument in memory of Spagnolo was 
subsequently erected outside the Marassi. Political backlash was also swift. A 
new anti-violence decree was implemented that attempted to subjugate organised 
fans; however this didn't stymie their considerable power inside the stadiums.

On 22 April 2012, Genoa hosted fellow relegation strugglers Siena. What 
unfolded was truly unfathomable. With theGrifoni trailing 4-0 early in the 
second half, a group ofGenoani launched flares on to the pitch and clambered up 
on to the tunnel and fences towards the locker room. The players were 
effectively held hostage and the referee was forced to abandon the game.

The Rossoblu captain, Marco Rossi, attempted to negotiate but was met with 
demands that the players hand over their shirts as they were deemed unworthy of 
wearing them. After consulting with club president Enrico Preziosi, who by now 
had joined the players on the pitch along with a host of stewards and police, 
Rossi began to collect the shirts. It was a moment that evoked a certain 
pathos, with some players reduced to tears.

Giuseppe Sculli was having none of it. Known to be the grandson of a notorious 
Calabrian mafia boss and bolshie at the best of times, he refused to hand over 
his shirt. After a passionate exchange, the player and the Ultras embraced and 
the game eventually resumed.

The Ultras had halted a top flight game (neither the first nor the last of 
such incidents), but it was the revelations that followed that beggared belief. 
While Genoa were hit with a hefty fine, Sculli was banned after accusations of 
having prior knowledge of the Ultras' protest; his apparent heroism was a sham. 
Whether it is true or not, the story shows the power and sway held by the 
Ultras.

Despite such incidents, the supporters have been unwavering and the atmosphere 
produced at the Marassi can often stun and awe. Their fealty has not gone 
unnoticed and in an ultimate tribute the club retired the number 12 in honour 
of the supporters. They are both figuratively and literally Genoa's 12th man 
and this is encapsulated in their motto: "Support Genoa when they win but love 
them when they lose".

Classic player: Tomas Skuhravy
 Tomas Skuhravy celebrates during a Serie A match against Parma. Photograph: 
Getty Images 
Tomas Skuhravy first exploded on to the world stage at the 1990 World Cup in 
Italy. The Czech striker showed his predatory instincts by scoring five goals 
and helping his team reach the quarter-finals.

His ability to score with his feet and his head saw him finish second top 
scorer in the tournament, a feat not missed by Genoa, who snapped him up in 
time for the 1990-91 Serie A season. His hat-trick in Bari against Costa Rica 
in the second round typified him as a striker.

At Genoa he linked up with the Uruguayan, Carlos Aguilera, with whom he formed 
a venomous partnership. They managed to score 15 goals apiece in Skuhravy's 
first season in Italy. TheRossoblu finished fourth that year and went on to 
reach the semi-finals of the Uefa Cup in the subsequent season.

Skuhravy was a special breed forward: an old-school finisher. His only aim was 
to score and it did not matter how the ball reached the net. Goals were his 
lifeblood and it meant as much for him to slide in and push one over the line 
or head in a deflected shot, as it did for him to piledrive in a screamer from 
20 yards. There was no emphasis on trickery, little interest in the 
spectacular, and an indifference towards bravado: the Czech vulture only talked 
in numbers.

Skuhravy's heading ability was also one of his trademarks When Genoa were 
awarded a corner in the early 1990s, fans would feel that tingling of 
anticipation that the rest of us only get with a well-placed free-kick. 
Skuhravy would win the header so often than, even if he did not score directly, 
he would more than likely set up someone else. Many opposing fans were left 
with nightmares about a tall man with long hair in a Genoa kit wheeling away 
with both arms in the air.

He went on to score 59 goals in 164 games for the club, making him one of the 
most prolific goalscorers in their modern history. He would later return to 
Genoa to work as a TV pundit, nightclub owner and a youth team coach. Back in 
the 1990s, when Calcio ruled the world, a 6ft 4in Czech was causing havoc among 
some of the best defences in Italy.

â€¢ This blog first appeared on The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://thegentlemanultra.tumblr.com/>
â€¢ Follow Richard Hall on Twitter <https://twitter.com/Gentleman_Ultra>
â€¢ Follow Guardian Football on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>
 