
The night was supposed to belong to Gigi Buffon. Making his 500th appearance 
forJuventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> on Wednesday, the 
goalkeeper had hoped to mark the occasion with his 300th Serie A win. He could 
not have asked for a much more fitting opponent than Genoa – a team he used to 
travel to watch with his uncle as a boy.

Although Buffon’s first love will always be his hometown club, Carrarese 
<http://blogs.thescore.com/counterattack/2013/05/15/bandini-he-plays-for-juve-but-buffons-heart-and-pocketbook-belongs-to-carrarese/>
, he holds a strong affection for theGrifone. His agent, Silvano Martina, even 
told the newspaper Il Secolo XIX in 2010 that Buffon hoped to play for Genoa 
before he retires. “Sooner or later he will do it,” said Martina. “He has 
expressed this desire to me many times.”

Such warm sentiments have been returned by Genoa’s fans down the years, and on 
Wednesday they applauded Buffon at the Marassi as he was presented with a 
trophy commemorating his landmark appearance before kick-off. For a long time 
thereafter it appeared that collecting the award would be the most work he had 
to do all evening. Buffon barely had a save to make in a game that Juventus 
dominated, despite never playing their best.

But in the end, this night did not belong to him at all. Instead it belonged 
to Mattia Perin, the man who aspires to succeed him as Italy’s No1, and whose 
four saves were highlighted by a stunning one-handed stop to deny Alvaro 
Morata. It belonged to Rolando Mandragora, the 17-year-old who made his senior 
debut in midfield forGenoa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa>, 
capping a fine performance with an impeccable sliding tackle to deny the same 
Spanish forward when clean through on goal.

Most of all, though, this night belonged to Luca Antonini. It was the 
full-back, on as a second-half replacement for Aleandro Rosi, who arrived right 
on cue to meet an Alessandro Matri cross on the edge of the six-yard box in the 
94th minute. Stranded at the near post, Buffon could only watch asthe Genoa 
player scuffed the ball over the line <https://vine.co/v/OMTAhUZ7HpA> to snatch 
an improbable 1-0 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/29/serie-a-luca-antonini-gianluigi-buffon>
.

The celebrations at the Marassi were delirious, going far beyond what might 
normally seem reasonable for a league win at the end of October. In the context 
such enthusiasm was appropriate. This, after all, was a Juventus team who 
racked up 102 points last season, and whose only other Serie A defeat in the 
last 12 monthscame away at Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/mar/31/napoli-juventus-big-match-serie-a>
.

More than just the victory, though, Genoa’s fans were celebrating Antonini 
himself. The defender had already claimed hero status in their eyes with his 
recent actions off the field.When severe flooding struck the city earlier this 
month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/13/floods-in-europe-share-your-images-videos-and-stories>
 – leaving one man dead and hundreds of homes and businesses damaged – Antonini 
and his wife Benedetta Balleggi responded by grabbing shovels and running down 
to the worst-affected areas to muck in.

Images of the player 
<http://www.sportmediaset.mediaset.it/calcio/genoa/2014/articoli/1048597/alluvione-a-genova-luca-antonini-aiuta-a-spalare-il-fango.shtml>
, clad in heavy boots and rubber gloves, digging out the dirt from a city 
street, quickly went viral. He had joined together with a group of young men 
and women who organised themselves online under the loose banner of ‘gli angeli 
del fango’ – the ‘angels of mud’.

Perhaps it was the wings he gained in their company that carried him up the 
pitch on Wednesday night. Genoa’s own president, Enrico Preziosi, spent much of 
his post-game conversation with reporters wondering what Antonini was up to 
joining the attack at a point when most of his team-mates were committed to a 
resolute rearguard action.

“It’s the same question I ask myself after every goal,” said Antonini when 
asked what had possessed him to make that one last charge up the field. “I have 
no idea what came over me. I felt like I needed to go, like it was up to me, as 
though the ball would be there.”

He went on to describe it as the “most beautiful goal of my career”, although 
he was quick to deny any sense of revenge against Massimiliano Allegri – who 
had cast him aside when they were both at Milan. “Let’s not confuse the two 
things,” said Antonini. “That is the past, the present is this success against 
Juventus. My goal is beautiful and special because it will represent something 
fantastic to Genoa and their fans for a long time.”

A banner hung by supporters at the Marassi on Wednesday had called on the home 
team’s players to live up to the emblem on their shirts, saying, “It’s time to 
make this Grifone (Griffon) fly”. For one night, at least, Antonini helped it 
to soar higher than most fans had dared to imagine.

Talking points

• Juventus were not the only team to see their unbeaten start to this season 
go up in flames. Sampdoria, just like the Bianconeri, seemed to be on course 
for a goalless draw right up until the dying moments of their game on Wednesday 
night. Then Alessio Romagnoli made an ill-advised kick at Zdravko Kuzmanovic’s 
heels, gifting Internazionale a penalty which Mauro Icardi converted. Still, 
there is no shame in losing at San Siro even if this did represent the first 
time that Inter had won back-to-back games inSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> this season.

• Roma’s 2-0 win over Cesena puts them back level with Juve at the top of 
Serie A, though opening goalscorer Mattia Destro did not sound entirely happy 
with his lot when he spoke to reporters after the game. He has found the net in 
each of his last four starts, but continues to play second fiddle to Francesco 
Totti when it comes to the big games. “It’s right that the manager makes his 
own judgments,” said Destro. “At the end of the season I will make mine.”

• Some goal from Giacomo Bonaventura <https://vine.co/v/OMI6h6XIge9> to rescue 
a point for Milan away to Cagliari, although the player confessed afterwards 
that he had not really meant to shoot. “I wanted to put a strong ball into the 
box, but it snuck under the crossbar,” he said. “These are things that happen 
over a career. The goalkeeper was coming off his line, but I was trying to put 
it in for our attackers.”

• Gonzalo Higuaín might be back among the goals, but now his position as 
Napoli’s first-choice penalty-taker is coming under question after he was 
denied from the spot for the second time this season. To be fair to him, the 
first, against Chievo, was kept out by a startlingly good save from Francesco 
Bardi.This time <https://vine.co/v/OMTaMdAHYKB> he could have struck the ball a 
lot better. To be fair to Higuaín, he was not the biggest culprit in Napoli’s 
draw against Atalanta. It might only be October, but we can probably go ahead 
and handthe Miss of the Season award to José Callejón right now 
<https://vine.co/v/OMI0EgTqdd6>.

• Brit-watch: Ashley Cole was back in the starting XI for Roma, as he 
continues his rotation with José Holebas at left-back. He got 6/10 (equivalent 
to a 7/10 in English terms, really, since Italian papers tend to grade out 
‘perfectly fine’ a little lower) from each of Corriere dello Sport, Gazzetta 
dello Sport and La Repubblica.

Results: 

Atalanta 1-1 Napoli, Cagliari 1-1 Milan, Fiorentina 3-0 Udinese, Genoa 1-0 
Juventus, Inter 1-0 Sampdoria, Palermo 1-0 Chievo, Roma 2-0 Cesena, Sassuolo 
3-1 Empoli, Torino 1-0 Parma

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Juventus 9 12 22 
2 Roma 9 12 22 
3 AC Milan 9 6 16 
4 Sampdoria 9 4 16 
5 Udinese 9 2 16 
6 Napoli 9 5 15 
7 Genoa 9 2 15 
8 Inter Milan 9 5 15 
9 Lazio 8 7 15 
10 Fiorentina 9 3 13 
11 Verona 8 -5 11 
12 Torino 9 -2 11 
13 Sassuolo 9 -5 10 
14 Cagliari 9 2 9 
15 Palermo 9 -8 9 
16 Atalanta 9 -7 8 
17 Empoli 9 -6 7 
18 Cesena 9 -9 6 
19 Chievo 9 -9 4 
20 Parma 9 -11 3  