
On 1 June Georginio Wijnaldum gave Holland a 2-1 win over Poland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/01/spain-football-euro-2016-favourites-russia-beaten-czech-republic>
, driving his 13th goal of the season into the top corner of Wojciech 
Szczesny’s net; he packed his bags in Gdansk and did not watch another 
competitive match until 10 July. It might have been longer had his friend not 
started the European Championship final that night. “I was done with football 
for a few weeks,” he explains, somewhat conservatively given he switched off 
for 39 days before switching on toPortugal’s mind-numbing victory over France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
. Failures with club and country had cut deep but they seem far away now. 
“These are better days,” he says with the broadest of grins. Far from done.

If results dictate the 26-year‑old’s mood then it is no surprise the Liverpool 
midfielder was in engaging form in the buildup to Sunderland’s visit on 
Saturday. “What a nice guy,” texts the photographer having asked Wijnaldum to 
pose for a series of snaps after the interview and encountered a patient, 
amiable Premier League subject. Liverpool’s commanding form, league position 
and a meeting with Jürgen Klopp must take some of the credit. The 
Rotterdam-born midfielderchose Anfield over White Hart Lane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/21/liverpool-agree-sign-georginio-wijnaldum-newcastle>
 in the summer, although strictly speaking there was no choice as Tottenham 
Hotspur did not meet Newcastle United’s £25m asking price, and has settled 
seamlessly into a team of increasing substance.

What next for Steven Gerrard? Charlton and Guardiola offer lessons from 
history | Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/24/steven-gerrard-study-pep-guardiola-manager-liverpool-retirement>
“I had great conversations with [Mauricio] Pochettino and Klopp,” says the 
Dutch international. “But in the meeting with Jürgen we had a laugh and did not 
speak only about football. He was interested in my personal life and that was 
good for me. He was not only interested in Wijnaldum the footballer but 
Wijnaldum the person. When you’re not out on the football field you have to 
communicate as people and it is good if you know something about how the other 
person is. It makes things easier.”

Wijnaldum’s debut season in English football was anything but simple when, 
despite scoring 11 Premier League goals and thriving upon Rafael Benítez’s 
belated arrival, he endured relegation with Newcastle. Holland’s failure to 
qualify for the Euros compounded a season to forget.

He reflects: “It was a really difficult time. The first thing was that it was 
hard to acceptwe didn’t qualify for the Euros 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/13/holland-czech-republic-euro-2016-qualifiers-match-report>
. When you finish third at a World Cup you have confidence you might be able to 
win the Euros and we didn’t go.

“I didn’t watch the Euros, I only watched the final. I wanted to spend time 
with my family and friends instead but, to be honest, I was done with football 
for a few weeks because everything had gone wrong. Personally it was a great 
year but when you don’t achieve things with your team, and especially if you 
get relegated, it is hard. I was a little bit done with football but Moussa 
[Sissoko, of France] is a good friend of mine so I thought I should watch him 
in the final.

“The Euros was a really big disappointment but relegation with Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/11/newcastle-united-devastated-relegation-managing-director-lee-charnley>
 was for me even bigger. Before I went to Newcastle I spoke with the manager 
and the people there and they had big plans to bring good players in and play 
for titles. I was really disappointed because I wanted to achieve something 
with Newcastle. Even if it was not a title I wanted to help the club get back 
to fifth-to-10th place to start with, and maybe get the club back into Europe 
again. Unfortunately it didn’t go that way. It went totally wrong. That was the 
biggest disappointment for me last season.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fgeorginio-wijnaldum-interview-liverpool-klopp-newcastle-holland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd755f32bba297101889c85a576a5122806807f57%2F0_50_5487_3292%2F5487.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Georginio%20Wijnaldum%3A%20%E2%80%98Klopp%20was%20interested%20in%20my%20personal%20life%20and%20that%20was%20good%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fgeorginio-wijnaldum-interview-liverpool-klopp-newcastle-holland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Georginio%20Wijnaldum%3A%20%E2%80%98Klopp%20was%20interested%20in%20my%20personal%20life%20and%20that%20was%20good%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fgeorginio-wijnaldum-interview-liverpool-klopp-newcastle-holland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd755f32bba297101889c85a576a5122806807f57%2F0_50_5487_3292%2F5487.jpg>
 Wijnaldum at Liverpool’s Melwood training ground. Photograph: Jon Super for 
The Guardian 
Four months into his Liverpool career and Wijnaldum has rediscovered the 
feeling he had during his final season at PSV Eindhoven when, as captain, he 
led Phillip Cocu’s team to theirfirst league title since 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa90/2015/nov/26/psv-eindhoven-eredivisie-factory-workers-holland>
. He will not say whether Liverpool can end a much longer wait for a league 
title this season. To do so would run contrary to everything Klopp demands of 
his players, indeed the entire club, in his quest for constant improvement, 
although the midfielder admits Liverpool have confidence they can win every 
game at present. “There is no chance of us getting carried away,” he says. 
“That comes from the manager. Even if we have played a good game he still wants 
to work on the things that didn’t go so well. Every time you have to give 100%. 
It’s the same every week and in every training session. Every exercise we do he 
asks us to do it at 100% and never less.”

Wijnaldum adds: “I feel like I did at PSV. The most important thing is to 
enjoy football because you don’t know how long your career is going to last, 
but it is difficult when things don’t go well. It was difficult to enjoy last 
season. You are losing games, everything is going bad, you don’t play well and 
in the end you get relegated. That was hard.

“This season I started to enjoy it as soon as I knew Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> really wanted to sign me, 
especially after the meeting with Jürgen. I came away from that with a really 
great feeling that I could train with a good manager, a really good team and 
make myself a better player. I’m probably enjoying it now more than I did 
before because I have seen the other side of football where I was losing a lot 
of games and got relegated with Newcastle and didn’t go to the Euros. These are 
better days.

“Every training session we do is to improve you as a player. That’s different 
to what I’ve experienced before and I’m really happy with it. The manager gives 
you confidence. He’s not a manager who yells at you or gets angry with you 
whenever you make a mistake. He will only get mad if you don’t do the things 
you are good at so, for example, [Sadio] Mané is a good player who can dribble, 
[Philippe] Coutinho is a good player who can dribble and if they stop doing 
that there’s a chance he might get mad and upset because you are not using your 
quality.Against Southampton last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/southampton-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 he wanted me to make a run. I did it but it was too late and he said something 
about it.

“But sometimes, if I lose the ball easily, I expect him to be angry and he’s 
not. You can hear his voice easily enough – he’s quite loud. He is really 
passionate and not only in the game. People might see him during a game and 
think that’s an act. It’s not an act. He’s like that in training. For me that’s 
a good thing because it keeps you sharp and, from his side, he is doing 
everything he can to make the team ready to win games. That’s a good thing.”

The Holland international has a more defensive role at Liverpool than at 
Newcastle, where he operated out wide or as a No10, but Klopp did not outline a 
specific role when they met in the summer. “He explained his way of playing and 
said that I would fit in. From that moment I was very excited,” says Wijnaldum 
who, for his part, neglected to mentioninspiring Newcastle’s 2-0 defeat of 
Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/06/newcastle-united-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 at St James’ Park in December. “At the time he still had to make me an offer 
so I thought it is probably best to say nothing about that game, although it 
was a good one for me. Maybe I will remind him.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fgeorginio-wijnaldum-interview-liverpool-klopp-newcastle-holland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc749a7a5ce6262b1c19696851828471cb509983e%2F0_77_1403_958%2F1403.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Georginio%20Wijnaldum%3A%20%E2%80%98Klopp%20was%20interested%20in%20my%20personal%20life%20and%20that%20was%20good%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fgeorginio-wijnaldum-interview-liverpool-klopp-newcastle-holland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Georginio%20Wijnaldum%3A%20%E2%80%98Klopp%20was%20interested%20in%20my%20personal%20life%20and%20that%20was%20good%20for%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fgeorginio-wijnaldum-interview-liverpool-klopp-newcastle-holland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc749a7a5ce6262b1c19696851828471cb509983e%2F0_77_1403_958%2F1403.jpg>
 Georginio Wijnaldum inspired Newcastle United to 2-0 win over Liverpool at St 
James’ Park last season. Photograph: Rex Shutterstock 
Wijnaldum admits that “in different circumstances” he would have “loved to 
have worked longer” with Benítez. “But I had my plans in my head and we both 
went our own way. He said he wanted to keep me to get promoted and that the 
right offer had to be made before I could leave. Once everything was done he 
said Liverpool was a wonderful club and that he hoped I’d enjoy it here.”

Jürgen Klopp warns Liverpool players will be dropped for any complacency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/liverpool-jurgen-klopp-players-complacency>
A more formative influence currently resides across Stanley Park. Erwin 
Koeman, assistant to his brother, Ronald, at Everton, was the Feyenoord coach 
who gave Wijnaldum his debut in April 2007; the midfielder became the club’s 
youngest debutant, in a team featuring Pierre van Hooijdonk and Angelos 
Charisteas, Greece’s European Championship-winning striker, against a Groningen 
side featuring one Luis Suárez.

“The game was on the Sunday and he told me on the Wednesday that I would be 
playing,” he recalls of the elder Koeman. “That was a really special moment. I 
realised that not every trainer has the balls to let a 16-year-old play in the 
first team and things were not going so well for the team at that time so they 
didn’t want to take the risk with young players. I was 16 years and 148 days 
old.

“That is why I always respect him as a trainer, because he made a decision 
that other trainers would have been scared to make. He told me I could tell my 
grandma, who I was living with at the time, but asked me not to tell anyone in 
school. I was still at school and he wanted to keep it a secret. You know how 
it is with reporters. It was very difficult to concentrate on class.”

While Wijnaldum is effusive in his praise of past and present coaches, it is 
his grandmother Francina to whom he owes the greatest gratitude. As he 
explains: “I wanted to be a gymnast when I was young, I used to do backflips 
and all those things in the street and at home, but my grandma said it was 
dangerous and made me stop. Now my daughter is doing gymnastics and I’m a 
little bit jealous of her because she is doing all the things I wanted to do 
when I was young. I had to stop and concentrate on football but I’m happy about 
that now.”
 