
German government officials have said they are investigating an unprecedented 
proliferation of fake news items amid reports of Russian efforts toinfluence 
the country’s election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/russian-cyber-attacks-could-influence-german-election-says-merkel>
 later this year.

The BfV domestic intelligence agency confirmed that a cyber-attack last 
December against the Organisation for Security and Cooperation inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> (OSCE) used the same “attack 
infrastructure” as a 2015 hack of the German parliament attributed to Russian 
hacking group APT28.

Last month, BfV said it had seen an “enormous use of financial resources” and 
the deployment of a wide variety of Russian propaganda tools to carry out 
disinformation campaigns aimed atdestabilising the German government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/german-spy-chief-russian-hackers-could-disrupt-elections-bruno-kahl-cyber-attacks>
.

German police quash Breitbart story of mob setting fire to Dortmund church
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/07/german-police-quash-breitbart-story-of-mob-setting-fire-to-dortmund-church>
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> denies involvement in 
cyberwarfare targeting western governments and institutions.

Steffen Seibert, a government spokesman, said Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> would use all possible means to 
investigate the spread of fake news online, saying the best response was 
greater transparency.

 “We are dealing with a phenomenon of a dimension that we have not seen 
before,” he said.

 The OSCE, which has 57 members including Russia and the US, said it had been 
the target of a cyber-attack last month, but declined to comment on a report in 
French newspaper Le Monde that APT28 was to blame.

 Commenting on the cyber-attacks, the German foreign ministry spokesman Martin 
Schaefer said: “We take the incidents related to possible hacking attacks 
against the OSCE very seriously, and we also take other cases very seriously.

 “It is obvious that everything must be done to prevent and impede such 
incidents as much as possible in our sphere, in our domain.”

 On Monday, the Kremlin denounced a US intelligence report that Russia had 
tried toinfluence the US election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/vladimir-putin-slates-baseless-amateurish-us-election-hacking-report>
 in favour of Donald Trump, and said no evidence had been produced to show that 
Russian officials were involved.

 German officials said Berlin had looked into creating a separate branch of 
the government press office that would specifically evaluate andrespond to fake 
news items 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/07/german-police-quash-breitbart-story-of-mob-setting-fire-to-dortmund-church>
. The Czech Republicannounced a similar move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/28/czech-republic-to-fight-fake-news-with-specialist-unit>
 last month.

 But sources familiar with the problem say efforts are in the early stages and 
may not result in any concrete steps, given concerns about the government being 
seen to try to manage news reports in an election year.

 Angela Merkel, who has strongly criticised Russia’s role in Ukraine and led 
the drive for sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/05/russia-refugee-germany-angela-merkel-migration-vladimir-putin>
 against Moscow, is hoping to beelected for a fourth term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/angela-merkel-expected-stand-for-re-election-germany>
 as chancellor.
 