
The Great British Bake Off final review – equal parts flour, butter, sugar, 
eggs and tears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/27/great-british-bake-off-gbbo-final-flour-butter-sugar-eggs-tears>
Crowns, Victoria sandwiches and a picnic fit for a queen. The Bake Off’s BBC 
finale certainly got the royal treatment. But did Candice deserve to be crowned
Bake Off champion 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/candice-brown-takes-great-british-bake-off-crown>
?


For those who don’t hang on Mary Berry’s every curd, an explanation: each week 
the Great British Bake Off set its bakers a “technical challenge”, ranking the 
bakers from worst to best. Separately, one contestant (not necessarily the 
winner of the technical challenge) was awarded the title of “star baker”.

The data for this, the BBC’s last series of Bake Off before it moves to 
Channel 4, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/27/great-british-bake-off-triumphant-finale-channel-4-tricky-task>
 indicates that Candice was indeed deserving of this year’s title. Not only was 
she named star baker three times this series (compared to Andrew’s two and 
Jane’s one), she also ranked better than the other finalists in the technical 
challenges.

To measure how well contestants did in the technical challenges over the 
course of the series, we averaged their ranking from each episode: by this 
measure, the lower the mean, the better.

With an average of 3.3, Candice did better in the technical challenges than 
Jane (whose average score was 3.9) and Andrew (4.0).

Three past winners – Edd (season 1), Frances (season 4) and Nancy (season 5) – 
had the best average among the finalists on the technical challenges.

But doing well in the technical is not always a recipe for success – something 
proven by Joanne, John and Nadiya (winners of seasons 2, 3 and 6 respectively) 
whose averages were worse than their fellow finalists.

Strangely, up until season six, the contestant who received the weekly star 
baker title most often had never won the competition.

This changed with Nadiya, who was star baker three times before reaching the 
final (as was her fellow finalist Ian), and continued with Candice.
Contestants' paths to the Bake Off final, series by series 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/bake-offtechnicalwinners/giv-1406XfO5ph5wFPbp/> 