
The Juventus goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon has railed against the influx of Far 
East money into Serie A and said the sales ofInternazionale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale> and Milan to Chinese 
investors are a defeat for Italian football.

China’s president, Xi Jinping, is looking to expand the country’s global 
presence in the sport, and Chinese investors have struck a series of 
eye‑catching deals for European clubs this year.

Southampton batter at door but 10-man Inter hold out to take the spoils
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/internazionale-southampton-europa-league-group-k-match-report>
The Electronics retailer Suning bought nearly 70% of Inter Milan in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/06/internazionale--chinese-ownership-suning-holdings-serie-a>
 for €270m, while a consortium of Chinese investorssigned a preliminary 
agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/05/milan-silvio-berlusconi-serie-a-club-sale-chinese-investors>
 in August to buy Inter’s city rivals AC Milan.

“It is the defeat of Italian football. Of Italy as a country, of the 
traditions, of everything,” Buffon, 38, the captain of his club and Italy,told 
the Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera 
<http://www.corriere.it/sport/calcio/serie-a/2016-2017/notizie/juventus-buffon-ride-la-mia-follia-da-grande-ct-659d8df8-9693-11e6-9c27-eb69b8747d1f.shtml?refresh_ce-cp>
 on Thursday.

“But we have what we deserve, we are fickle, without a rooted sense of 
belonging and history has always demonstrated that.

“We ask for Italian identity, but if, after 30 years, the Italian experiences 
a difficult moment, with five years in 10th place, then we don’t accept it.”

AC Milan, who are third in Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> on 16 points, have not 
won a domestic league title in the past five years and missed out on European 
qualification for the third consecutive campaign last season. Inter Milan, who 
are 11th in the table, have not won a league title since José Mourinho led them 
to a treble in the 2009-2010 season and have not qualified for the Champions 
League for the past five years.

Buffon, who wants to retire after the 2018 World Cup, said he was open to the 
idea of coaching a national team when his playing career ends, but ruled out 
managing a club as it would take up too much time.
 