
Justin Edinburgh has been sacked by Gillingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> after the club’s hierarchy 
lost patience with the team’s form this season. The Gills lost 1-0 at home to 
Oxford United on Monday and after just one win in five games lie 17th in League 
One, eight points above the relegation zone.

Football League roundup: Reading stay third after comeback win at Bristol City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/championship-roundup-reading-bristol-city-jaap-stam>
A club statement on Tuesday 
<http://www.gillinghamfootballclub.com/news/article/2016-17/club-statement-january-3-2017-3498574.aspx>
 read: “Gillingham Football Club can this morning confirm that manager Justin 
Edinburgh has had his contract terminated with immediate effect. This 
announcement follows Monday’s 1-0 home defeat against Oxford United; the club’s 
coaching team have also been relieved of their duties.”

Gillingham went down to a Cheyenne Dunkley goal in the 66th minute of Monday’s 
match at Priestfield Stadium. The defeat leaves the club with just eight league 
wins from 25 games this season, and they have failed to win 11 of their last 15 
stretching back to the beginning of October.

The club’s chairman, Paul Scally, said: “Having returned to work yesterday, 
this is obviously a difficult decision to begin 2017 with. I have been very 
keen to work with Justin and his coaching staff, I have become close friends 
with them over the past two years, and that is what makes this decision even 
harder. I have great respect for them and everything they have done for the 
club.

“I’d like to express my gratitude to Justin for his efforts; he has tried 
extremely hard to turn things around. However, the form over the past 12 months 
has not been as good as expected, and yesterday’s defeat was the final straw. 
Nonetheless, Justin is a manager of great ability, and I have no doubt he will 
go far in football.”

Edinburgh, who played for Tottenham Hotspur from 1990 to 2000, a spell in 
which he won an FA Cup winners’ medal for the club, having started in the 1991 
final against Nottingham Forest, took over at the Kent club in February 2015 
having previously managed Newport County, Rushden & Diamonds and Grays 
Athletic. Gillingham finished ninth in League One last season.
 