
What with crickets still being a bit of a hard sell, food manufacturers have 
been trying to come up with new alternative sustainable protein sources to wean 
us off meat. Now food companies are hoping we will give peas a chance. Pea 
protein, extracted from dried and ground yellow split peas, has made it on to
lists of 2017 food trends 
<http://www.foodbev.com/news/10-food-and-drink-trends-for-2017/>, probably 
because it crosses over into so many other trends – high-protein diets, 
plant-based eating and those avoiding meat, gluten and dairy.

You can buy pea milk to replace cow or soya milk; gym-goers can choose pea 
protein powder over whey shakes. You can get high-protein pizzas made with pea 
flour, pea-protein sauces,protein bars made from the stuff 
<https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.wellandgood.com%2Fgood-food%2Fpea-protein%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGnJuugk8W3UGt8FxvMYAsanGI8rw>
, and some gyms add it to pancakes and smoothies. According to Mintel, the 
number of products containing pea protein grew by 195% between 2013 and 2016.

Towards the end of last year, US company Beyond Meat launched a burger made 
from pea protein that it claims “looks, cooks and tastes like fresh ground beef”
 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-4100488/Vegetarian-burger-s-like-meat-sizzles-bleeds.html#ixzz4VFZzpwFP>
 – the pink “bleeding” inside is thanks to the beetroot. It also makes 
“chicken” strips and “beef” mince from pea protein (and meat manufacturers are 
taking note – Tyson Foods, the biggest meat processor in the US, bought a 5% 
stake in the company).

Protein made from peas is far more sustainable than animal-based protein, but 
dietitians advise that it doesn’t deliver the same nutrients that animal-based 
protein does (other qualities that make split peas healthy in their whole 
state, such as fibre, are also removed in the processing). “Protein is made up 
of building blocks called amino acids, which are essential to our bodies,” says 
Susan Short, a spokeswoman for the British Dietetic Association. “Animal 
proteins contain the complete mix of essential amino acids we need. Plant 
proteins provide some, so where pea protein is used as an alternative, people 
should make sure they don’t base their entire diet around it.” Eating a 
balanced diet, including other forms of plant-based protein such beans, 
lentils, soya products and nut butters, should provide what you need, she says. 
“The key message is to have a mixture of plant proteins.”

That, and don’t be fooled that you need extra protein in the form of 
pea-protein powders and additives –most of us get more than enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/26/protein-hype-shoppers-flushing-money-down-the-toilet-say-experts>
.
 