
Aston Villa extended their unbeaten record under Steve Bruce to six 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> games with a 
1-1 draw at second-placed Brighton.

Nathan Baker headed Villa in front on 20 minutes but striker Glenn Murray 
ensured a point for Chris Hughton’s side by replying just before the interval. 
Villa’s top scorer Jonathan Kodjia twice saw headers pushed against the bar by 
goalkeeper David Stockdale as the visitors carried a greater threat in the 
closing stages.

Brighton, now unbeaten in nine matches, would have gone level on points with 
leaders Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/garry-monk-revived-leeds-united-rafael-benitez-buoyant-newcastle>
 with victory, but Villa were more than worth a share of the points before a 
season’s best Amex crowd of 30,107.

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/18/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
Bruce, winless in four previous visits to the Amex as a manager, made two 
changes with Ashley Westwood and Gabriel Agbonlahor coming into the side. It 
was Agbonlahor’s first start since March and the striker was almost put in the 
clear early on only for former Brighton loanee Gary Gardner to fail to control 
the ball on the edge of the area.

Villa goalkeeper Pierluigi Gollini’s handling was less than assured when Czech 
Republic winger Jiri Skalak curled a testing free-kick into the area. But Villa 
went in front in the 20th minute when Baker headed his first goal for the club 
from 13 yards.

A foul by Anthony Knockaert on Gardner on the edge of the area gave Villa a 
free-kick and Baker rose to head in Albert Adomah’s flighted delivery. This was 
the first goal that Brightonhad conceded in six and a half hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/jose-mourinho-arsene-wenger-manchester-united-respect>
 and Albion had a let-off when sloppy play let in Agbonlahor, whose shot was 
blocked by Shane Duffy.

Murray drove Albion level on the stroke of half-time with his 10th goal of the 
season, all of them coming at the Amex. Murray, on a season-long loan from 
Bournemouth, fired low into the bottom right-hand corner after excellent 
link-up play with striker partner Sam Baldock. It was his 150th league goal.

Gollini flapped at a Skalak corner shortly after the interval moments after a 
teasing cross by Gaetan Bong eluded the Brighton forward line. The Seagulls, 
beaten only once at home since New Year’s Day, threatened when Murray rose 
early from a flick from Baldock but directed his header over.

The Villa substitute Jordan Ayew saw a shot deflected shot before the recalled 
Westwood, in space on the edge of the area, drove over. Stockdale kept his side 
on terms by turning a low shot from Adomah round the post on 70 minutes.

The Seagulls then had an escape when, from Adomah’s corner, Kodjia headed 
against the top of the bar. Kodjia was unlucky again when a superb reflex save 
from Stockdale saw the striker’s header come back off the bar nine minutes from 
time.
 