
Glenn Murray scored twice as Brighton & Hove Albion comfortably beat 
Nottingham Forest 3-0. Murray, on aseason-long loan from Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/03/glenn-murray-brighton-bournemouth-chris-hughton>
, secured the points with a second-half double after Anthony Knockaert had 
given Brighton a 36th-minute lead.

Brighton sustained an injury blow in stoppage time when the goalkeeper David 
Stockdale was helped off with a leg injury and the defender Lewis Dunk was 
forced to take over with three substitutes used, but Forest could not take any 
advantage.

Brighton, who missed out on automatic promotion last season on goal difference 
before being beaten in theplay-off semi-finals by Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/brighton-sheffield-wednesday-championship-play-off-second-leg>
, have not lost at the Amex Stadium since New Year’s Day.

They were unchanged from the side who drew at Derby, while Forest were forced 
into a late change when Alex Lacovitti was called up in place of migraine 
victim Thomas Lam.

Chris Hughton signs new four-year contract to stay on at Brighton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/chris-hughton-signs-new-contract-brighton-manager>
Despite that setback, Forest started brightly and a goal-bound shot from Jamie 
Ward was blocked by Dunk in the first minute. Dunk then went close at the other 
end as he headed wide from a corner from Knockaert.

Brighton began to claim the upper hand and the Israel international midfielder 
Beram Kayal tried his luck from 30 yards before the former Leicester winger 
Knockaert curled a free-kick wide.

The Forest goalkeeper Stephen Henderson was well positioned to hold a powerful 
cross by Liam Rosenior after Murray played the ball out wide.

Oliver Burke threatened for Forest with a 50-yard run but, with Rosenior 
covering well, the midfielder was unable to get a shot away.

Burke displayed his lightning pace again on the half-hour by getting free down 
the right, but he dragged a right-footed shot wide.

Just when it looked like Forest were getting on top, Brighton broke the 
deadlock when the Frenchman Knockaert struck from point-blank range. Jiri 
Skalak released Gaetan Bong down the left and his cross was delivered with pace 
for Knockaert to score from inside the six-yard area.

Forest came close to equalising when Bong fouled Burke and Pajtim Kasami 
shaved the post with the resultant free-kick, but the visitors were on the back 
foot again just before half-time with Henderson forced to parry a header from 
Steve Sidwell after a Skalak corner.

The Brighton goalkeeper David Stockdale was called into action five minutes 
after the break to block a goal-bound effort from Kasami, before Murray went 
close for the home side with a fierce shot which flew just wide.

Nottingham Forest make bright start as Philippe Montanier gives youth a chance 
| Nick Miller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/08/montanier-nottingham-forest-championship-football-league>
Damien Perquis should have hit the target for Forest in the 64th minute when 
the Polish defender wastefully put a close-range header over, and Brighton made 
him pay by doubling their advantage four minutes later.

Tomer Hemed powerfully headed back a free-kick from Skalak to strike partner 
Murray and he did the rest from six yards out.

Skalak, seeing a lot of the ball, set up Hemed shortly after but the Israel 
international failed to make contact sliding in at the far post.

It mattered little, though, as Murray completed Brighton‘s win eight minutes 
from time by shooting home from eight yards after substitute Sam Baldock set 
him up following a strong run by Knockaert.
 