

Global investment in coal and gas-fired power generation plants fell to less 
than half that in renewable energy generation last year, in a record year for 
clean energy.


It was the first time that renewable energy made up a majority of all the new 
electricity generation capacity under construction around the world, and the 
first year in which the financial investment by developing countries in 
renewables outstripped that of the developed world.


Catherine Mitchell, professor of energy policy at the University of Exeter, 
said the developments were “extremely significant” and showed a new trend. She 
said: “We are looking at serious sums of money being invested in clean energy, 
with the dirtiest forms of fossil fuels the losers. This is the direction of 
travel that we need to see to have a chance of escaping the worst impacts of 
climate change.”

About $286bn (£200bn) was invested globally in renewable energy last year, 
more than the previous peak of $278bn reached in 2011, according toresearch 
published on Thursday by the UN Environment Programme 
<http://fs-unep-centre.org> (Unep). The figures exclude investment in large 
hydroelectric plants but include solar, onshore and offshore wind and biomass.

China alone accounted for 36% of the global total, as the country pins it 
hopes on clean energy as a means of combating air pollution. Chinese investment 
rose 17% from 2014 to 2015, totalling $103bn.

This surge is likely to continue for years to come, as China’s 
recently-unveiled new five-year plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/01/china-global-economy-state-opinion-divided>
 places a strong emphasis on new renewable energy.

The rise in renewable investment comes even as fossil fuel prices suffered 
sharp falls last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/30/oil-iran-saudi-arabia-russia-venezuela-nigeria-libya>
. However, as the report covers 2015 it may not have fully captured the 
continued depression in fossil fuel prices, which may have further effects on 
investment in new generation in future.

In the US, money committed to renewables rose strongly as new rules took 
effect. Although investment was up by a fifth, to $44bn, it was still less than 
half of China’s.


Europe, once world leader in clean energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/23/european-clean-tech-industry-falls-into-rapid-decline>
, gave one of the worst showings. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/23/european-clean-tech-industry-falls-into-rapid-decline>
 Investment fell by a fifth to $49bn, despite a surge in offshore wind, 
according to the report, which was co-authored byBloomberg New Energy Finance 
<http://about.bnef.com/blog/liebreich-europe-at-a-clean-energy-crossroads/> and 
the Frankfurt School of Finance and Management.

European clean tech industry falls into rapid decline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/23/european-clean-tech-industry-falls-into-rapid-decline>
In part, these headline investment figures reflect falling costs, particularly 
for solar panels, which have tumbled in price by more than 60% since 2009. But 
they also illustrate the need for politicians to play a role in encouraging 
clean technology, according to Mitchell.

“Globally, we are seeing a rapid take up of renewables alongside a switch to 
more energy-efficient and flexible electricity systems. Technology changes are 
facilitating that transition, but increasingly it is governments that are 
holding it back, as policy makers are failing to put in place policies that can 
keep up,” she told the Guardian.

“This is particularly the case in the EU, that has been prone to a ‘boom and 
bust’ approach to renewables deployment [by which an initial enthusiasm from 
politicians is followed by a rowing back as the costs of subsidies become 
apparent], which will see [member states] lose out to countries that can 
provide more long-term policy clarity.”

Solar power <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/solarpower> had a 
particularly good year, according to Unep, with a 12% increase in investment to 
$161bn globally, while the boost to wind was much smaller, an increase of about 
4% in dollar terms to $110bn.

Biomass energy plants and biofuels also dropped significantly, as did 
geothermal energy systems and wave and tidal energy. Many green campaigners are 
likely to cheer thediminishing investment in controversial biofuels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/apr/02/eu-renewable-energy-target-biomass>
 – down 35% to $3bn – and biomass – a fall of 42% to $6bn, when waste-to-energy 
plants are included.

But the relatively tiny amounts invested in the promising geothermal 
technology, which dropped by more than a fifth to $2bn, and the paltry showing 
of marine energy – a plunge of 42% to only $215m – will be of concern to those 
hoping that these technologies could plug the gaps for regions where solar and 
wind power are less practical.

Unep also warned that it was far from certain that the strongly positive 
trends for clean energy would continue, especially as the recent falls in 
fossil fuel prices were only beginning in the year the report examined.

“Policy support for renewables remains fickle,” the authors cautioned, 
pointing to theUK government’s withdrawal of incentives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/05/confusing-government-policy-biggest-threat-to-uk-clean-energy-says-top-academic>
, and theUS supreme court decision delaying Barack Obama’s clean power plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/10/supreme-court-ruling-obama-power-plant-emissions-clean-energy-impact>
. “It is also possible that the recent big fall in coal, oil and gas prices may 
tempt some developing countries to keep relying on fossil fuel capacity for 
longer.”

 