
What a tragic rollercoaster of a time for France. Bombs and savage murders, 
widespread floods that affected the heart of Paris, a series of violent strikes 
and then Britain’s Brexit vote – and the disruption still to follow. Thank 
goodness for the reassuring spectacle of the Tour deFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> and the chance of glory hosting 
football’s Euro 2016 championship.

But no. The Tour is still whizzing through the towns and villages of the 
republic in all their magnificent diversity – we watched it pass close to our 
holiday destination in the south-west the other day. However,Portugal’s 1-0 win 
over their more fancied French rivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 on Sunday night left the same communities feeling distinctly gloomy.

No cheers from the local bars, no car horns at midnight. Just sullen rural 
blackness punctuated by the occasional village fete, the outdoor communal 
dinner on trestle tables, dancing to the inevitable accordion. All a bit 
subdued.

Andrea Leadsom to pull out of Tory leadership race, BBC reports - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jul/11/andrea-leadsom-apologises-to-theresa-may-politics-live>
There had been signs this spring of a recovering economy, though the 
manufacturing data in June was the worst since early 2015. The bankers crash of 
2008-09 and subsequent eurozone recession – not to mention the currency crisis 
that staggers on in Greece and elsewhere – have made for more than the usual 
gloom. France is a country nostalgic for the “thirty glorious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/13/nuit-debout-france-occupy-wall-street-1968>
” years of boom that followed the second world war and the early decades of the 
emerging EU.

Brexit? To spend a few days here is to encounter embarrassed sympathy rather 
than hostility. French opinion polls suggest even more Euroscepticism at home 
than in Britain, resentments Front National’sMarine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/03/marine-le-pen-brexit-france-victor-hugo-humanity>
 was quick to exploit with a call for aFrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/27/frexit-nexit-or-oexit-who-will-be-next-to-leave-the-eu>
 referendum. Scary stuff for the French, who have suffered far more from 
European division – three traumatic invasions in just 70 years from 1870 to 
1940 – than Britons have.

They have also suffered more from unemployment, currently at 10.2% 
<http://www.tradingeconomics.com/france/unemployment-rate>, more than double 
Germany’s 4.5% and Britain’s 5%, higher among young people as it is across most 
of the EU. If fears for good and secure jobs, not zero-hours contracts and 
stagnant wage rates, drove much of last month’s Brexit vote in Britain, they 
also drive the FN’s electoral strength in France – as well as the trade union 
militancy.

Can the same people strike for the still relatively powerful CGT union over 
François Hollande’s government’s attempts to relax rigid labour laws and 
increase unemployment – read Kim Willsher’s backgroundhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/04/what-are-french-strikes-about-and-will-they-affect-euro-2016>
 – and also vote for Le Pen? Of course, the rhetoric of struggle shifts easily 
from left to right. A lot of British Labour voters supported Brexit too, 
despite the campaign being led by free-market Tories who wantless social 
protection from the forces of globalisation. For all the street action, 
France’s workforce, by the way, is 8% unionised, below even the US (11%), let 
alone Britain (25%).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Ffrance-gloom-descends-again-euro-2016-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02c24dace8fb2706f52daf3bdcf2485f60340c7f%2F0_449_4691_2815%2F4691.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gloom%20descends%20again%20on%20France%20as%20chance%20of%20sporting%20glory%20is%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Ffrance-gloom-descends-again-euro-2016-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gloom%20descends%20again%20on%20France%20as%20chance%20of%20sporting%20glory%20is%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Ffrance-gloom-descends-again-euro-2016-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02c24dace8fb2706f52daf3bdcf2485f60340c7f%2F0_449_4691_2815%2F4691.jpg>
 François Hollande consoles Blaise Matuidi after the Euro 2016 final. 
Photograph: Reuters 
In theory, Brexit offers Paris and Frankfurt – Amsterdam, even – the chance to 
grab some of the high-end financial service businesses that have made London 
the global mega-city of recent decades, to the resentment of provincial Britain 
as well as French governments. Paris wants those ambitious French expats to 
come home and has beenplanning better to exploit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/paris-city-of-london-brexit-bankers>
 a possible Brexit vote than our own Brexiteers appear to have done. The 
lucrative euro-derivatives business (surely it can’t be handled by a non-EU 
state, they argue?) is a prime target.

Can it succeed? On paper the City of London looks vulnerable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/city-of-london-could-be-cut-off-from-europe-says-ecb-official>
, shifting jobs to Paris is already being openly discussed as part of the UK’s 
post-Brexit panic. And yet, even to spend a few days in France – a wonderful 
country in so many enviable ways – is to be reminded just how its passion for 
bureaucracy and paperwork makes life harder in so many ways.

France makes strong bid for banking business poised to leave London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/06/france-strong-bid-banking-business-poised-to-leave-london-paris-brexit-manuel-valls>
British expats in France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> – many of 
them not at all well off – moan about Brexit, many are fearful about what it 
means for their resident status and future healthcare. But they also moan about 
the paperwork that attends their dealings with the tax authorities, with estate 
agents, with the unresponsive water board and electricity companies.

Yes, I know they can all be pretty tricky in Blighty. Believe you me, they are 
mostly worse in the Fifth Republic. The other day I listened to a couple who 
had come to rural France to “start again” from rural eastern England. Although 
the man has many skills, he does not qualify to register as a self-employed 
“micro-entrepreneur” so has ended up as his partner’s dependent. She is 
registered as an “auto-entrepreneur” in the laundry business, though the couple 
also mow lawns. That is allowed because it is not a trained skill that ought to 
see the work go to someone else.

To be registered as a gardener would require training and qualifications, also 
the necessary insurance. It is very complicated and time consuming, errors can 
be penalised quite hard. The tax situation, PAYE even for the self-employed, is 
complex too.

In a small way it reinforces the comments you get from French residents in 
Britain, gallantly putting up with our weather and filthy coffee – often better 
than theirs – because “it’s much easier to start a business here”.

Will France's young economy minister – with a volunteer army – launch 
presidential bid?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/11/emmanuel-macron-will-frances-young-economy-minister-launch-presidential-bid>
A young friend of mine who tried merging his tech company with a French one, 
spending two days a week in Paris, eventually gave up. The elaborate perks 
provided by French labour laws meant staff were always owed time off; the tax 
system was, he concluded, “hostile to wealth creation”.

Which is consistent with French attitudes over many decades, consistent with 
François “I hate the rich” Hollande’s stated positionbefore becoming president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/16/french-presidential-election-sarkozy-hollande>
, since modified in the realities of office.

In terms of the historic ideals of the revolution of 1789 – liberty, equality 
and fraternity (at least for men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/21/french-feminists-rights-of-man-declaration-petition>
) – that is fine in theory and there are aspects of French life that reflect a 
more egalitarian outlook than Britain’s. No one ever accused the French of 
saying “the customer is always right”. The producer is right and when we 
watched the Tour pass through a small Aveyron town last week I was astonished 
by the resolute refusal of local retailers to grab whatever commercial 
opportunities the roadside crowds might offer. “Closed on Thursdays” means just 
that and sod the Tour.

But students with poor prospects of permanent or full-time jobs after 
graduation, who demonstrate in support of strikers who are defending their own 
secure jobs, may wonder how much their underlying interests are actually 
aligned. “We want the same secure jobs our elders have,” I heard one explain on 
TV.

But in a fast-changing world where the Chinese Communist party has abandoned 
communism, we are all going to have to be a lot more nimble than we were, 
whateverDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/28/donald-trump-foreign-policy-speech-tpp-china-free-trade>
 or Marine Le Pen says. That applies to bankers in London and Paris – and 
journalists, too, as well as to gardeners.
 