
2017 Golden Globes: full list of nominations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/2017-golden-globes-full-list-of-nominations>
La La Land <https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land> looks set to dominate 
the 74th Golden Globe awards, taking seven nominations, including best comedy 
or musical, best director, best actress in a comedy or musical and best actor 
in a comedy or musical.

The film, which proved triumphant at last night’s Critics Circle awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/la-la-land-critics-choice-awards-damien-chazelle>
, is a mournful romance about the relationship between a jazz pianist played by 
Ryan Gosling and an aspiring actor (Emma Stone). It is the third feature from 
Chazelle, 31, whose Whiplash was a crowd-pleasing critical hit two years ago. 
The film opened in the US last Friday and scored a record-breaking per-screen 
average of $171,000.

Bookies are increasingly considering the film a shoo-in to triumph in the best 
comedy or musical category, and currently quoting 1/2 odds for it to take best 
picture at next year’sOscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=La%20La%20Land%20trailer%3A%20Ryan%20Gosling%20and%20Emma%20Stone%20star%20in%20musical%20movie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fla-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video&media=>
La La Land trailer: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone star in musical movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/01/la-la-land-trailer-ryan-gosling-emma-stone-star-musical-movie-video>
Just trailing in second place is Moonlight, Barry Jenkins’s acclaimed drama 
about a black gay man at three different stages of his life. The film, which is 
seen as a strong contender to steal La La Land’s glory if voters can resist the 
allure of a hymn to old Hollywood in the mould of Argo andThe Artist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-artist>, took six nominations, including 
best picture, best screenplay, best supporting actor (for Mahershala Ali) and 
best supporting actress (for Naomie Harris).

A surprise third place – with five nominations – was taken by Manchester by 
the Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/film/manchester-by-the-sea>, Kenneth 
Lonergan’s drama starring Casey Affleck as a depressed Boston janitor returning 
to his hometown. Tying for fourth were Lion, in which Dev Patel (a contender 
for best supporting actor) plays a man seeking his long-lost family with the 
help of Google Earth, and Stephen Frears’ Florence Foster Jenkins, about a 
dreadful yet deluded singer (Meryl Streep) in 1940s New York.

The awards are voted for by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, an 
LA-based group of around 90 foreign journalists. The scale of the voting pool 
is just one of the ways in which the makeup of the Globes differs from the 
Oscars. The Academy awards are decided by around 7,000 members, and they 
traditionally favour dramas. The Globes’ tradition of splitting categories 
gives equal focus to lighter fare – and the tastes of the voters also tends to 
skew more upbeat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-2017-la-la-land-leads-pack-with-seven-nominations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbbdf917d8d6f2ee081a8e09b15f405bd442ffc9%2F0_102_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Globes%202017%3A%20La%20La%20Land%20leads%20pack%20with%20seven%20nominations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-2017-la-la-land-leads-pack-with-seven-nominations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Globes%202017%3A%20La%20La%20Land%20leads%20pack%20with%20seven%20nominations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-2017-la-la-land-leads-pack-with-seven-nominations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbbdf917d8d6f2ee081a8e09b15f405bd442ffc9%2F0_102_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Meryl Streep and Hugh Grant in Florence Foster Jenkins. Photograph: Nick 
Wall/AP 
Earlier this year, Golden Globe drama winner The Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant> missed out on the best picture 
Oscar to Spotlight. This decade, the awards have synched only twice; notable 
divergences included the Globes choosing Avatar over The Hurt Locker in 2010 
and The Descendants over The Artist in 2012.

This early success for Frears’s film is further reflection of an awards body 
eager to reward a lighter movie – it also picked up nods for Streep, Hugh Grant 
and supporting actorSimon Helberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/05/simom-helberg-big-bang-theory-cartoonish-pianist-florence-foster-jenkins>
.

Grant’s nomination was not the most leftfield pick in the best actor – comedy 
or musical category. Colin Farrell’s morose singleton in Yorgos Lanthimos’s The 
Lobster also made the cut, as did Ryan Reynolds for Deadpool and Jonah Hill for 
the little-loved War Dogs. Rounding out the quintet was La La Land’s Gosling.

There was disappointment for Love & Friendship, Whit Stillman’s Jane Austen 
adaptation, Sully, Clint Eastwood’s plane crash drama, Italian erotic thriller 
A Bigger Splash, Andrea Arnold’s American Honey, Jim Jarmusch’s Paterson and 
Martin Scorsese’sSilence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/silence>, all of 
which went home early and empty-handed.


Can Mel Gibson ever be rehabilitated?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/can-mel-gibson-ever-be-rehabilitated-hacksaw-ridge>
That final film may however have hobbled its odds with late screenings and 
could look to pick up momentum over the Christmas season, before January’s 
Oscar nominations.

Instead, another epic and gory drama – Mel Gibson’s second world war bloodfest 
Hacksaw Ridge <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hacksaw-ridge> – took three 
nods, including one for Andrew Garfield, who also stars in Silence, and who 
joins Affleck, Joel Edgerton for Loving, Denzel Washington for Fences and Viggo 
Mortensen for Captain Fantastic in the running for best dramatic actor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-2017-la-la-land-leads-pack-with-seven-nominations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d7d9cf7cd7f52dc339a02ecaa66130b757b1ff6%2F0_202_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Globes%202017%3A%20La%20La%20Land%20leads%20pack%20with%20seven%20nominations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-2017-la-la-land-leads-pack-with-seven-nominations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Globes%202017%3A%20La%20La%20Land%20leads%20pack%20with%20seven%20nominations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-2017-la-la-land-leads-pack-with-seven-nominations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d7d9cf7cd7f52dc339a02ecaa66130b757b1ff6%2F0_202_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Andrew Garfield in Hacksaw Ridge. Photograph: Mark Rogers/AP 
Tom Ford’s artful thriller Nocturnal Animals also picked up three, including 
best director, best supporting actor (for Aaron Taylor-Johnson, rather than the 
much-fancied Michael Shannon) and screenplay.

Among its competitors in that last category is Hell or High Water, the David 
Mackenzie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/hell-or-high-waters-david-mackenzie-i-look-forward-to-the-day-people-get-sick-of-superheroes>
 western that came through to take three strong nominations, including Jeff 
Bridges’s supporting actor turn and best drama.

Amy Adams’s best actress in a drama nod was among only two nominations for 
Arrival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/arrival>, Denis Villeneuve’s cerebral 
sci-fi, the other being best score. She faces Jessica Chastain for Miss Sloane 
and Natalie Portman for Jackie (both films with single nominations), as well as 
Ruth Negga for Loving and Isabelle Huppert for Elle.

Reacting to the news of her nomination, Huppert said: 

In my heart it is all sunshine — the film is complex and it could be 
considered controversial. But from the beginning, the international press and 
the American press, I could feel that people really got the story. Now, this 
has been proven by all of the recognition from the HFPA and all of the critics 
circles. I am so happy that people could see beyond the controversy and beyond 
the complexity.

Elle, a rape revenge comedy from Paul Verhoeven, is one of five 
foreign-language contenders, including the frontrunner, Toni Erdmann, a German 
comedy thatswept the board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/11/toni-erdmann-sweeps-the-board-at-european-film-awards-2016>
 at the European Film awards on Saturday, as well asDivines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/divines-director-houda-benyamina-its-better-to-make-a-film-than-a-bomb>
, an urban French gangster drama, Pablo Larraín’s Chilean biopicNeruda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/09/gael-garcia-bernal-pablo-larrain-donald-trump-we-have-a-camera>
 andThe Salesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/21/the-salesman-review-asghar-farhadi-cannes>
, the latest from Iranian film-maker Asghar Farhadi.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-2017-la-la-land-leads-pack-with-seven-nominations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e234d5e6de37e9933df8d344920939d57e4064b%2F0_15_6143_3685%2F6143.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Globes%202017%3A%20La%20La%20Land%20leads%20pack%20with%20seven%20nominations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-2017-la-la-land-leads-pack-with-seven-nominations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Globes%202017%3A%20La%20La%20Land%20leads%20pack%20with%20seven%20nominations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fgolden-globes-2017-la-la-land-leads-pack-with-seven-nominations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e234d5e6de37e9933df8d344920939d57e4064b%2F0_15_6143_3685%2F6143.jpg>
 Isabelle Huppert in Elle 
In the TV categories, An American Crime Story: The People v OJ Simpson led 
with five nods, including best TV movie or limited series, as well as acting 
acclaim for Sarah Paulson, Sterling K Brown and John Travolta.The Night Manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-night-manager> scored nominations 
for best series, as well as acting nods for Tom Hiddleston, Hugh Laurie and 
Olivia Colman.

Both were among a number of new shows on the list, including Stranger Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/stranger-things>, This Is Us, 
Westworld and The Crown, which added nominations for John Lithgow and Claire 
Foy to best series.

Atlanta, which focuses on the city’s rap scene, will compete for comedy 
against Black-ish, Veep, and previous victors Mozart in the Jungle and 
Transparent.

The winners will be announced at a ceremony hosted by Jimmy Fallon on 8 
January 2017. His late-night talk-show peer Jimmy Kimmel will host the Oscars a 
month and a half later. The Academy Award nominations are released on 24 
January.
 