
Summer 1992. After years of political wrangling the biggest football clubs in 
the land had got their way. The Premier League had arrived and the football 
landscape in England had been changed forever.

Some things back then were very different. Leeds United, a second division 
team between 1982 and 1990, had just pipped Manchester United to the title 
under Howard Wilkinson. Southampton pulled out of an attempt to sign Everton’s 
England Under-21 winger Peter Beagrie because they were not prepared to match 
his salary, which, reported the papers, was “believed to be about £125,000 a 
year”. The backpass rule had just been introduced. Denmark were European 
champions. The Cup Winners’ Cup existed.

Other things are pretty familiar. England had been dismal in a major 
championship, going out in the group stages at Euro 1992. Ticket prices for 
1992-93 rose by nearly 20% on the previous year, a result of clubs needing to 
pay for the ground improvements demanded in the Taylor report. While some 
baulked at wage demands, there was still a growing concern about escalating 
transfer spending, Blackburn having broken the British record to snap up Alan 
Shearer from Southampton for £3.6m and Chelsea spending a club record £2.1m to 
take Robert Fleck from Norwich. And Sky’s shifting of kick-off times brought 
fears of fan alienation.

Adding to this tumult was England’s new 
“don’t-call-it-a-breakaway-super-league” breakaway super league and it was far 
from universally approved. Smaller clubs feared extinction; the PFA felt it was 
a way for “leading clubs to seize virtually all the money, leaving the 
remaining clubs to wither and, for some, die”. Even the England manager was 
unconvinced. “I think a lot of this is based on greed,” said Graham Taylor at 
the time.

Golden Goal: Ian Wright for Arsenal v Leeds United (1995) | Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/04/golden-goal-ian-wright-arsenal-leeds-united-1995>
But it had been in the offing for a while, with the big clubs – in particular 
the “big five” of Manchester United, Liverpool, Arsenal, Everton and Tottenham 
– desperate for a bigger slice of a financial pie that was set to get much 
meatier with the arrival of satellite TV money. Formal support from a 
small-minded and short-sighted FA arrived in the summer of 1991 and, after an 
unsuccessful high court challenge from the Football League, the new mega-club 
cash-cow was up and ready for milking just a year later.

The first goal of this brave new era, though, was not scored by one of the 
ultra-elite. It was scored by a team whose presence among the then 22 runaways 
was something rather remarkable in itself and by a player who was a £40,000 
signing from Doncaster.Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> had been plummeting when 
Dave Bassett brought Brian Deane to the club in the summer of 1988. Four years 
later he would rise above the Manchester United defence to head home the first 
ever Premier League goal.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUNx_HmifAm4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUNx_HmifAm4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUNx_HmifAm4&media=>
“The place was dead … there was not a corner of the club which hadn’t 
succumbed to an aura of impending doom,” wrote Bassett of his early impressions 
of a club that he joined in January 1988. By that stage, they were already 
heading towards relegation to Division Three. Demoralised and divided they 
ended up going down via a relegation play-off defeat to Bristol City. Memories 
of their drop into Division Four in 1981 echoed around Bramall Lane.

Bassett offered his resignation on the back of that disappointment but was 
told to stay on and turn the club around. Armed with a selection of misfits and 
outcasts, he did just that, masterminding back-to-back promotions. Deane and 
Tony Agana combined for 66 goals as the Blades surged out of Division Three and 
a return to the top flight for the first time since 1976 was secured with a 5-2 
victory over Leicester City at Filbert Street on the final day of the 1989-90 
season. That Sheffield Wednesday were relegated from the First Division on the 
same afternoon means 5 May 1990 remains a cherished date in the red half of the 
city.“BLADES GLORY – OWLS DOWN” 
<https://pbs.twimg.com/media/BOLkHLrCMAAGm_F.gif:large> was the front page 
headline of the day’s Green ‘Un.

But the return to the big time did not go as planned. Bassett’s newly-promoted 
Blades picked up four points from their first 16 matches – P16 W0 D4 L12 F7 
A30. It was the worst start ever made to a top-flight season and, as Christmas 
approached, United were eight points adrift of second-bottom QPR. “If the 
Berlin Wall can fall, Major become prime minister and turtles rule the world, 
it is possible that Sheffield United will one day win a match,” began a 
Guardian match report of their defeat to Spurs in late November. Relegation 
seemed a certainty.

But the dam broke when Brian Clough’s Nottingham Forest visited Bramall Lane 
on 22 December 1990 and were beaten 3-2. Luton were beaten 1-0 on Boxing Day 
and a seven-game winning streak in January, February and March took them clear 
of danger. Had the season started with that win over Forest the Blades would 
have finished second in the league come May. Instead they were simply safe with 
time to spare.

Golden goal: Jan Molby for Liverpool v Manchester United (1985) | Gregg 
Bakowski
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/feb/20/golden-goal-jan-molby-liverpool-manchester-united>
Their 1991-92 season started almost as badly for the Blades, with Bassett’s 
side winning one of their first dozen games and sitting a point outside the 
relegation zone at Christmas. With the boardroom a mess and fears over the 
future of the club’s star striker, supporters organised a demonstration against 
the board in the Bramall Lane car park after that one win – against Everton at 
home in September. The police called on Bassett to help calm the crowd, with 
the manager using a loudhailer to tell the protesters that: “I’m staying here, 
Deano’s going nowhere.” Another rally, this time from the team – United’s 
post-Christmas run would have seen them finish third had the season started 
with the turkey and trimmings – saw another mid-table finish, this time in 
ninth.

Against the odds, then, Sheffield United would be a founder member of the new 
Premier League and would go into it with the man who had spearheaded two 
promotion campaigns and two great escapes still leading the line. Deane is 
better remembered by some for his disappointing spell at Leeds and his 
late-career role as target-man for hire. In his early 20s as he was here, 
though, Deane was a different prospect – tall and powerful, yes, but quick and 
blessed with more technical ability than he is given credit for. His brilliant 
brace against Liverpool in March 1992 – the first of whichwas a stunning 
45-yard lob <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=941QX07dFpw> after a bonkers Bruce 
Grobbelaar charge, the second a combination of pace, muscle and finesse – 
showcased all those abilities. His continued presence at the club came as a 
welcome surprise to supporters and the manager alike. “I had a sneaking 
suspicion that if a £1m carrot was dangled in front of our donkey of a board, 
they would follow it all the way to relegation,” writes Bassett in his 
autobiography, Settling the Score.

And while the new league system would eventually mean vast sums of money for 
all concerned, Bassett was still operating on a shoestring. United’s summer 
spending consisted of the £120,000 splurged on Preston goalkeeper Alan Kelly. 
On the opening day of the season the Blades first XI had cost roughly £1m to 
put together, the bulk of it on Glyn Hodges (whose £410,000 move from Crystal 
Palace had been part supporter-funded in 1991) and Paul Beesley (a £300,000 
signing from Leyton Orient in 1990). Just over a week earlier Manchester 
United, having missed out on Alan Shearer, had spent £1m on Cambridge United’s 
Dion Dublin, who made his debut 69 minutes into the game at Bramall Lane.

In the buildup to the new campaign Bassett, always one for an unusual 
approach, had added something extra to the pre-season routine. “The players 
thought I had totally lost it when I told them we were going to have a 
Christmas party a few days before the start of the season,” he writes. “I 
ordered them all to turn up in Christmas gear and, to be fair to them, they all 
went along with it. We had a Bramall Lane suite decorated, a turkey, a visit 
from Father Christmas, the lot.”

The festive theme – inspired by the difference in United’s pre- and 
post-Christmas performances over the previous two seasons – went as far as the 
match programme, which featured on the front Bassett in full Santa Claus gear, 
a tinsel-festooned Deane and club captain Brian Gayle wearing a Christmas 
cracker hat and, slightly missing the intended tone, holding aloft an 
inflatable bee.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fgolden-goal-brian-deane-for-sheffield-united-v-manchester-united-1992%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ac9e038538db1e62c484e3630482e94a2c9c056%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Brian%20Deane%20for%20Sheffield%20United%20v%20Manchester%20United%20(1992)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fgolden-goal-brian-deane-for-sheffield-united-v-manchester-united-1992%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Brian%20Deane%20for%20Sheffield%20United%20v%20Manchester%20United%20%281992%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fgolden-goal-brian-deane-for-sheffield-united-v-manchester-united-1992%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ac9e038538db1e62c484e3630482e94a2c9c056%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
 A festive theme for the Blades’ programme. Photograph: No Credit 
Manchester United, meanwhile, were still stinging from having missed out on 
the title to Leeds. Wilkinson’s championship had been secured on the 
penultimate weekend of the season in Sheffield, when the Blades had beenbeaten 
3-2 in a borderline bizarre affair <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y5WNqAJCxyU>
.

But five minutes into the season, the home side had the lead and a little 
slice of history. The goal itself was hardly a classic. Carl Bradshaw sent a 
long throw hurtling into the area, Clayton Blackmore got his defensive header 
all wrong and Deane reacted quicker than Gary Pallister to plant his header 
past Peter Schmeichel. Still it was, and always will be, the first – the 
scoring in the league for the Haves started off by the Have-Nots.
 