
Napoli maintained their pursuit of the Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> leaders, Juventus, with a 
1-0 win overPalermo thanks to a first-half penalty by Gonzalo Higuaín.

The former Real Madrid striker Higuaín matched his career-best haul of 27 
league goals in a season to leave Napoli three points behind the champions with 
nine games remaining. Despite dominating their Sicilian hosts throughoutNapoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> were unable to add to Higuaín’s 
22nd-minute goal.

Roma remain an outside bet in the title race after beating Udinese 2-1 for an 
eighth straight victory.

Luciano Spalletti has reinvigorated Roma since replacing Rudi García as head 
coach and a bright start at the Stadio Friuli produced Edin Dzeko’s opening 
goal. Alessandro Florenzi made the points safe in the second half, with Bruno 
Fernandes’ scoring a late consolation forUdinese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/udinese>.

Fiorentina are all but out of contention for the title after Eros Pisano’s 
late equaliser enabledHellas Verona to snatch a 1-1 draw in Florence. Mauro 
Zárate’s first-half opener looked like sustaining Fiorentina’s faint hopes of a 
first championship since 1969 but the right-back Pisano punished their 
profligacy with a towering header on the stroke of full-time.

Genoa recovered from going two goals down to pull well clear of the relegation 
zone with a 3-2 victory overTorino. Ciro Immobile scored twice inside the 
opening 15 minutes but the formerTorino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> winger Alessio Cerci pegged his 
old side back with a pair of penalties. Luca Rigoni then completed the comeback 
by heading Suso’s free-kick beyond Daniele Padelli.
 