
Gonzalo Higuaín scored in his first match against Napoli since their bitter 
divorce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/30/gonzalo-higuain-not-sign-napoli-contract-agent-chelsea>
 in July to give his new club Juventus a barely-deserved win in their Serie A 
showdown on Saturday.

The Argentinian, who scored a record 36 league goals for Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> last season, drilled the ball 
home in the 71st minute. It was his seventh goal of the season, and ultimately 
decided the game, but he did not celebrate.

Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> had been struggling 
to create chances and Higuaín had made little impact until then, yet there was 
an air of inevitability about the goal as Napoli failed to take their chances 
and made mistakes at the back.

Edin Dzeko's renaissance keeps Roma on pace at top of Serie A | Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/27/edin-dzekos-renaissance-keeps-roma-on-pace-at-top-of-serie-a>
Leonardo Bonucci had volleyed the Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> leaders in front, taking 
advantage of a misplaced Faouzi Ghoulam clearance, in the 50th minute, but José 
Callejón silenced the Juventus stadium with a clinically taken goal four 
minutes later.

Higuaín had two years to run on his contract with Napoli, who did not want to 
sell him, butmoved to Juventus in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/27/crazy-transfer-fee-gonzalo-higuain-theatre-absurd-football>
 after the Turin club agreed to pay a €90m (£81.1m) buyout clause in his 
contract.

Napoli’s striking problems have continued since Higuaín’s departure, with 
Arkadiusz Milik suffering a long-term knee injury while Manolo Gabbiadini was 
completing a two-match suspension.

There were certainly no hard feelings between the Napoli coach Maurizio Sarri 
and Higuaín, who warmly embraced at the start, while Bonucci suggested that the 
Argentinian should celebrate if he scored.

“He is a phenomenon,” said Sarri after the game. “A loose ball at Gonzalo’s 
feet is a death sentence for defenders. If Gonzalo wins something in Europe, I 
am happy for him, although less so for Juventus.

“I still consider him to be like a son, even though the transfer to Juventus 
made me feel bad.”

Higuaín had just one sniff of goal in a first half of few openings but was 
well blocked by Vlad Chiriches.

Juventus broke the deadlock five minutes after the restart when Ghoulam 
completely miscued a clearance, the ball rose into the air and fell invitingly 
for Bonucci to volley home from 12 metres. Napoli responded quickly when 
Lorenzo Insigne dinked a delightful pass over the Juventus back line and 
Callejón met it first time to sidefoot the ball under Gianluigi Buffon.

Higuaín was not to be denied, though, and put Juventus back in front, meeting 
the ball perfectly with his left foot to fire his shot past Pepe Reina when 
Ghoulam’s attempted interception fell right into his path.

Juventus have 27 points from 11 games, five ahead of Roma who visit Empoli on 
Sunday. Napoli, last season’s runners-up, are third with 20.

Elsewhere, a penalty converted by Nikola Kalinic in the 31st minute gave 
Fiorentina a 1-0 win at Bologna in Saturday’s other game. Bologna’s Daniele 
Gastaldello was given a straight red card for pulling back Kalinic in the 
incident which led to the penalty, but Fiorentina failed to add to their score 
despite having a one-man advantage for nearly one hour.
 