
Leonardo Blanchard was not about to depart Serie A without a proper memento. 
This has been a chastening season for the 28-year-old, starting most weeks in 
central defence for aFrosinone <https://www.theguardian.com/football/frosinone> 
side that conceded 76 goals in 38 league games. This was his first-ever taste 
of the top flight and, with theCanarini relegated in 19th place, might well 
turn out to be his last.

So who could blame him for wanting to take a little piece of Italian football 
history with him? Frosinone had, in a funny way, helped to write it – as they 
were mauled 4-0 byNapoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> at San 
Paolo. Three of the hosts’ goals were scored by Gonzalo Higuaín - enough for 
him to break Serie A’s single-season scoring record. Blanchard asked the 
Argentinian if he would be willing to swap shirts afterward.

It was one thing getting Higuaín to consent, and quite another to complete the 
exchange. As the curtain came down on a famous night in Naples, the striker was 
in high demand. He had interviews to conduct, hands to shake and applause to 
milk. Blanchard headed down into the tunnel to wait for him.

Napoli’s Gonzalo Higuaín sets Serie A record while Juventus sign off in style
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/14/napoli-frosinone-gonzalo-higuain-serie-a>
Forty minutes later, the Frosinone player was still waiting. Wrapped in a 
towel, Blanchard refused to take his post-game shower for fear of missing out 
on this appointment. For him, in the end, this vigil was worth it.

“It was an honour to wait more than half an hour to swap shirts with you,” 
wrote Blanchard in an Instagram post showing him together withHiguaín outside 
the changing rooms <https://www.instagram.com/p/BFbrY8oFFRU/>. “And the same 
just to try to stop you with sliding tackles on the pitch. Congratulations on 
entering into the legend of Italian and world football.”

To say that Higuaín had acquired legendary status on Saturday was no 
exaggeration. By finishing theSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> season with 36 goals, he 
had broken a record that stood for 66 years. Many people had believed that the 
scoring feats of Gunnar Nordahl could never be replicated in the modern Italian 
game.

The Swede – who scored 35 times for Milan in 1949-50, and then 34 times the 
following season – belonged to a distant footballing era, back when 
professionalism was still patchy and the sport picking itself up after the 
second world war. Prior to joining theRossoneri in January 1949, Nordahl had 
worked as a fireman between matches for IFK Norrköping.

In the six-and-half decades after he set his record, only two other players 
even made it to 30 goals - Antonio Valentin Angelillo at Internazionale in 
1958-59, and Fiorentina’s Luca Toni in 2005-06. In more recent seasons, the 
likes of Juve’s Carlos Tevez, Inter’s Mauro Icardi and Toni (again) had been 
crowned ascapocannoniere with a mere 22 to their name. 

Higuaín eclipsed Nordahl’s record despite missing three games due to 
suspension. His 36 goals arrived at a rate of one for every 82.3 minutes that 
he spent on the pitch. Best of all, he completed his achievement in style – 
completing Saturday’s hat-trick with agoal of the season contender 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/731748466972463104>, teeing 
the ball up off his chest before slamming in an overhead kick from the edge of 
the box.

It is tempting to wonder whether Higuaín would have won the European Golden 
Shoe this season, if he had only avoided the tantrum against Udinese that 
provoked his ban last month. As it is, he finishes second only to Luis Suárez.

As TV pundits debated which of the two forwards had been more impressive – the 
Uruguayan, after all, does have Leo Messi and Neymar as a supporting cast – the 
crowd at the San Paolo offered up the highest form of praise they could think 
of, adapting achant that they once sang for Diego Maradona 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tht6Ffu3ez8>. “Oh mamma, mamma, mamma, do you 
know why my heart is beating? I’ve seen Higuaín.”

Will they see him again in Naples next season? The question has hung 
uncomfortably in the air for many weeks. Napoli are under no immediate pressure 
to sell, especially after Saturday’s win sealed second place and automatic 
qualification to the Champions League group stage, but the player’s contract 
runs through only to 2018 and he is understood to have a €94m release clause 
written into his deal.

It was not a discussion that Higuaín was interested in getting into on 
Saturday. “Let’s think about the extraordinary season that we’ve just had,” he 
told reporters. “This is a satisfaction that not only the team but the whole 
city deserves.”

The celebrations in Naples were matched by those in Turin, as Juventus were 
presented with the Scudetto, and Reggio Emilia, whereSassuolo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sassuolo> beat Inter 3-1 to secure a 
sixth-place finish. Unless Milan upset Juventus in Saturday’s Coppa Italia 
final, theNeroverdi will play in Europe next season.

But the wildest scenes unfolded in Sicily on Sunday night. Palermo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> had come into this final weekend 
needing to either beat Verona, or at least equal the result that Carpi got away 
to Udinese, in order to avoid relegation. So far, so straightforward. Only, 
this picture was complicated greatly by the perverse incentives within Serie 
A’s parachute payment system.

Despite being bottom of the table and relegated, Verona ought to have been 
well motivated to try to beat Palermo – whose owner, Maurizio Zamparini, had 
accused them of not giving full effort in their match against Frosinone last 
month. But such considerations were offset by the very sound financial reasons 
that Verona could have for wanting Carpi to be relegated instead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fgonzalo-higuain-napoli-gunnar-nordahl-record-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63e8dd2bd755c20af6d23ae61e042ad7d8226ba3%2F0_169_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gonzalo%20Higua%C3%ADn%20is%20the%20history%20man%20as%20Gunnar%20Nordahl's%20record%20finally%20falls%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fgonzalo-higuain-napoli-gunnar-nordahl-record-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gonzalo%20Higua%C3%ADn%20is%20the%20history%20man%20as%20Gunnar%20Nordahl%27s%20record%20finally%20falls%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fgonzalo-higuain-napoli-gunnar-nordahl-record-serie-a%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63e8dd2bd755c20af6d23ae61e042ad7d8226ba3%2F0_169_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Palermo’s Franco Vazquez of Palermo celebrates after scoring the opening goal 
in the 3-2 win over Verona. Photograph: Tullio M. Puglia/Getty Images 
Under new rules ratified in February, Serie A provides €10m in parachute 
payments to any relegated team that has been in the division for just one 
season, €15m to those that have been in the top flight for two years and €25m 
to any who had stuck around longer than that. But there is also potential for 
teams to get even more cash if there is any money left over from the overall 
€60m pool that the league sets aside for this purpose.

In this instance, Verona (three years in top flight) and Frosinone (one year) 
had already been relegated before this weekend, meaning that €35m had been 
assigned between them. If Palermo were to join them in dropping into Serie B, 
then they would take up all of the remaining money in the pool. But if Carpi 
were relegated, there would still be €15m left over.

That remaining money would go, in the first instance, to Verona, if they 
should fail to bounce back to the top-flight at the first attempt. Faced with 
such a stark financial reality, could they really be expected to go against 
their own interests?

Perhaps the answer to that question was yes. Because Verona did not go quietly 
on Sunday at all. After falling behind to a Franco Vázquez goal in the 28th 
minute, they remained a goal down at half-time. Both teams had seen a player 
sent off, though it was not especially clear why Pavel Wszolek had been 
dismissed after Michel Morganella introduced his elbow to the Verona player’s 
face.

Far from running up the white flag, however, Verona had struck the woodwork 
twice in that first half, and would equalise within moments of returning from 
the interval. With Carpi 2-0 up away at Udinese, the tension in the stands of 
the Barbera was palpable.

Palermo got back in front with strikes from Enzo Maresca and Alberto 
Gilardino. But there was time yet for another twist. With just over five 
minutes to go, Verona pulled a goal back through Eros Pisano. The visitors 
pushed on in search of another. If they truly wanted to lose this game, they 
were doing a good job of hiding it.

Lose they did, however, just as they have on 19 other occasions this season. 
The Barbera exploded. Carpi had won 2-1 against Udinese, but Palermo were safe. 
It has taken an improbable surge, theRosanero taking 11 points from their final 
five games after previously taking 28 from their first 33.

The credit must go to Davide Ballardini, who returned to the club in mid-April 
after being fired at the start of January. Palermo went through six managerial 
changes in the interim, and a total of eight for the campaign. Ballardini’s 
triumph was to recognise his own failings. He had frozen Maresca out of the 
side during his first stint, but made the 36-year-old into a central figure 
during the late push for survival.

None of which will console Carpi. They had been the form team in the 
relegation battle since February, with only four defeats in their last 13 
games. Despite it all, they fell one point short of an escape that few could 
have predicted at the start of the year. Unlike Frosinone’s Blanchard, they did 
not even get a commemorative shirt to show for their efforts.

Talking points

• Carpi supporters were not the only ones with tears in their eyes as the 
full-time whistle blew at the Dacia Arena. Udinese bid farewell to Antonio Di 
Natale, at least in a playing sense (he has said that he will talk to the Pozzo 
family after his summer holiday to discuss possible ways for him to stay 
involved in the future) after 12 years and 191 league goals for the club – the 
last of those scored from the penalty spot on Sunday. There have been more 
technically gifted forwards in Italy over that time but few whom I personally 
have enjoyed watching more. Di Natale could have played for bigger clubs, but 
stayed put because he loved his life and his football exactly where he was. 
That sense of joy was something that came through very clearly in the way that 
he played. I know I won’t be alone in missing it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fgonzalo-higuain-napoli-gunnar-nordahl-record-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c60760c97f3b56a856574ed52767af6b5b64bbd%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gonzalo%20Higua%C3%ADn%20is%20the%20history%20man%20as%20Gunnar%20Nordahl's%20record%20finally%20falls%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fgonzalo-higuain-napoli-gunnar-nordahl-record-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gonzalo%20Higua%C3%ADn%20is%20the%20history%20man%20as%20Gunnar%20Nordahl%27s%20record%20finally%20falls%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fgonzalo-higuain-napoli-gunnar-nordahl-record-serie-a%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c60760c97f3b56a856574ed52767af6b5b64bbd%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Lazio’s fans thank Miroslav Klose for his goals after his last game for the 
club on Sunday, during which he scored a penalty against Fiorentina. 
Photograph: Angelo Carconi/EPA 
• Miroslav Klose, likewise, marked his final Lazio appearance with a converted 
spot-kick – albeit he only agreed to take it after fans at the Stadio Olimpico 
demanded that he do so. Those same supporters put on a rather beautiful tribute 
to him in the stands, holding up photographs of all his previous goals for the 
team.

• Hats off to Empoli’s goalkeeper Maurizio Pugliesi, who became the 
oldest-ever player to make their Serie A debut, at 39 years and five months 
old. He was not able to mark the occasion with a clean sheet, but did make a 
couple of useful saves on the way to a 2-1 win over Torino.

How Barcelona lost La Liga, then won it all over again | Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/16/how-barcelona-lost-la-liga-title-then-won-it-again>
• Juventus warmed up for the Coppa Italia final by smashing Sampdoria 5-0. 
There was a fine strike in there from Paulo Dybala 
<https://twitter.com/FootyPlanet__/status/732135327524110336> - who ends his 
first Juventus campaign with 19 league goals and nine assists. But on this 
occasion, he was outshone in the finishing stakesby Giorgio Chiellini 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x4ahptv_chiellini-goal-4-0-juventus-vs-sampdoria_sport>
.

• Milan’s league campaign ended on an appropriately dismal note as they lost 
3-1 at home to Roma, with Stephan El Shaarawy among the visitors’ goalscorers. 
Cristian Brocchi held no punches as he tore into his players in the changing 
room afterwards, though - and although he is much more the symptom than the 
root of the problems afflicting the club, his own contribution should also be 
examined. This team is playing worse now than it was under Sinisa Mihajlovic, 
and it is hard to imagine anything other than a resounding defeat in the Coppa 
Italia final.

• One more note to add on Palermo’s win: by scoring Gilardino moved up 
alongside Alessandro Del Piero and Giuseppe Signori in joint-ninth on Serie A’s 
all-time scoring charts.

Results: Chievo 0-0 Bologna, Empoli 2-1 Torino, Genoa 1-2 Atalanta, Juventus 
5-0 Sampdoria, Lazio 2-4 Fiorentina, Milan 1-3 Roma, Napoli 4-0 Frosinone, 
Palermo 3-2 Verona, Sassuolo 3-1 Inter, Udinese 1-2 Carpi
 