
The Juventus striker Gonzalo Higuaín was largely anonymous as his new side 
were held to a disappointing 0-0 draw by Sevilla in their opening group match 
in theChampions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> 
on Wednesday.

Higuaín joined from rivals Napoli for 90 million euros (£77m) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/22/gonzalo-higuain-juventus-serie-a-fiorentina>
 in the off season after scoring 36 goals last season to break a 66-year-old 
Serie A record. He scored twice in the opening 10 minutes of a 3-1 win over 
Sassuolo on Saturday.

The Argentina forward was kept quiet by a defensive-minded Sevilla side at the 
Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> Stadium, although he 
did go closest to breaking the deadlock shortly before the hour when he headed 
Dani Alves’ cross on to the bar.

Higuaín almost had a great opportunity with 10 minutes remaining but the 
Sevilla <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> defender Nicolás Pareja 
managed to get in front of him to clear Miralem Pjanic’s cross out for a corner.

Higuaín also fired straight at the Sevilla goalkeeper, Sergio Rico, in the 
15th minute when in a good position, moments after his team-mate Sami Khedira 
had done the same.

Khedira had missed an earlier chance in the eighth minute when put through by 
Paulo Dybala, the Germany forward’s diagonal effort flying past the left 
upright.

The Sevilla substitute Joaquín Correa had a rare sight of goal for the 
visitors in the 66th minute as he cut in from the right, but his powerful shot 
flashed wide of Gianluigi Buffon’s goal.

Juventus had a strong penalty appeal waved away in the final minute when 
Sevilla forward Franco Vázquez appeared to push over Marko Pjaca, while Rico 
made his first real save moments later to keep out Alex Sandro’s header.

Sevilla, who managed only one shot on target all match, have not scored at the 
Juventus Stadium in 300 minutes. They drew 0-0 against Benfica in the 2014 
Europa League final, before going on to win the first of their three successive 
titles on penalties, andlost 2-0 to Juventus in last year’s group stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/30/juventus-sevilla-champions-league-match-report>
 – winning 1-0 at home.
 