
After spending a fascinating two days at the International Congress on Love 
and Sex with Robots <http://loveandsexwithrobots.org/>, where academics 
discussed everything from robot design to the ethics of programming lovers, I 
was surprised to learn from Gizmodo that “sex robots may literally f**k us to 
death <http://gizmodo.com/sex-robots-may-literally-fuck-us-to-death-1790276123>
.”

How, I wondered, could these otherwise thoughtful researchers allow humanity 
to walk into such a dystopian nightmare?


Quite rightly, they won’t. That headline was in fact inspired by a discussion 
on the ethics of artificial intelligence by Prof. Oliver Bendel, who outlined 
some of the broad implications of creating machines which can “think” – 
including how we make sure robots make good moral decisions and don’t end up 
causing humans harm. Far from “warning” of the dangers of oversexed robots, 
Bendel was actually trying to ensure that theydon’t “f**k us to death”. So 
while I might personally fantasise about the future headlines like “Woman, 102, 
Sexed To Death By Robot Boyfriend”, it’s unlikely that I’ll kick the bucket 
with such panache. Thanks to Bendel, and others who are exploring these 
questions as artificial intelligence develops, sex robots will likely have a 
built-in kill switch (or “kill the mood” switch) to prevent anyone from being 
trapped in a nightmare sex marathon with a never-tiring machine.


Reporting on events like the sex robots conference is notoriously tricky. On 
the one hand, sex robots are guaranteed to grab the attention of anyone looking 
for something to distract them from their otherwise robot-less lives, so an 
article is guaranteed to be a hit. On the other hand, academics are notoriously 
careful in what they say, so quite rightly you’re unlikely to find one who’ll 
actually screech warnings about imminent death at the hands (or genitals) of a 
love machine.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fgood-news-you-probably-wont-be-killed-by-a-sex-robot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc9e06a8a9873ab4713dfecf898f7100b8415f6a%2F0_194_3698_2220%2F3698.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20news!%20You%20probably%20won%E2%80%99t%20be%20killed%20by%20a%20sex%20robot%20%7C%20Girl%20On%20The%20Net&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fgood-news-you-probably-wont-be-killed-by-a-sex-robot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20news%21%20You%20probably%20won%E2%80%99t%20be%20killed%20by%20a%20sex%20robot%20%7C%20Girl%20On%20The%20Net&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fgood-news-you-probably-wont-be-killed-by-a-sex-robot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc9e06a8a9873ab4713dfecf898f7100b8415f6a%2F0_194_3698_2220%2F3698.jpg>
 “I don’t know if you heard me counting, I did over a thousand” Photograph: 
TASS / Barcroft Images 
But no one wants to click a Twitter link that says “Academic Research Revealed 
To Be More Complicated Than We Can Cram Into 20 Words.” Hence Gizmodo’s 
terrifying headline, and other pieces which picked an interesting observation, 
then sold it to readers with something more juicy than the title in the 
conference schedule. The Register went with “Non-existent sex robots already 
burning holes in men’s pockets 
<http://www.theregister.co.uk/2016/12/20/love_robots_on_shopping_lists/>” in 
reference to a paper presented by Jessica Szczuka, in which men were quizzed 
about their possible intentions to buy a sex robot. The Daily Mail chose to 
highlight the data issues which arise from intimate connections with machines 
by telling us “Sex Robots Could Reveal Your Secret Perversions! 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-4051008/Sex-robots-reveal-secret-perversions-Handing-intimate-data-privacy-risk-warns-expert.html>
”


They’re blunt tools, but they get people interested, and hopefully encourage 
people to read further into issues they might not previously have considered. 
For example, during her keynote talk, Dr Kate Devlin mentioned a robot which 
hit the headlines last year because it “looked like Scarlet Johansson”. She 
posed an ethical question for makers of realistic bots and dolls: how do you 
get permission from the person whose likeness you’re using? Alternatively: 
“Celebrities Could Sue OverSex <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> 
Robot Doppelgangers!”

Dr Devlin also questioned why research into care robots for elderly people 
doesn’t also include meeting their sexual needs (“Academic Demands Sex Toys For 
Pensioners”) and pointed out that while more established parts of the sex 
industry tend to be male-dominated, in the sex tech field pioneering women are 
leading the way (“Are Women The Future Of The Sex Industry?”).


Julie Wosk – professor of art history and author of “My Fair Ladies: Female 
Robots, Androids and other artificial Eves” explored pop culture 
representations of sex robots, from Ex Machina’s Ava to Good Girl’s 
brothel-owned learning sex bot. Sex robots are most commonly female, beautiful 
and subservient, and Wosk pointed out that in pop culture they also have a 
tendency to rebel. Westworld, Humans, Ex Machina – all include strong, often 
terrifying, female robots who gain consciousness, and could be seen as a 
manifestation of society’s fears of women gaining power. Put a sub editor’s hat 
on and voila: “Is Feminism To Blame For Our Fear of Sex Robots?”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fgood-news-you-probably-wont-be-killed-by-a-sex-robot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8521e551d9f17f9053806a87c5d328aebe72b2a%2F0_23_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20news!%20You%20probably%20won%E2%80%99t%20be%20killed%20by%20a%20sex%20robot%20%7C%20Girl%20On%20The%20Net&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fgood-news-you-probably-wont-be-killed-by-a-sex-robot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20news%21%20You%20probably%20won%E2%80%99t%20be%20killed%20by%20a%20sex%20robot%20%7C%20Girl%20On%20The%20Net&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fgood-news-you-probably-wont-be-killed-by-a-sex-robot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8521e551d9f17f9053806a87c5d328aebe72b2a%2F0_23_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 It’s difficult enough getting a usable celebrity image for their Wikipedia 
page; imagine getting permission to use their likeness for a sex robot. 
Photograph: Jay Maidment/AP 
Dr Lynne Hall focused on user experience – while sex robots are often 
portrayed as humanoid, in fact a robot that pleasures you may be more akin to 
something you strap to your body while you watch porn. She went on to point out 
that porn made with one or more robotic actors has a number of interesting 
benefits such as a lower risk of STI transmission, and perhaps better performer 
safety, as robot actors replace potentially predatory porn actors (“Sex Robots 
Will Revolutionise Porn!”). David Levy, author of “Love and Sex with Robots”, 
gave a controversial keynote on the implications of robot consciousness when it 
comes to relationships: “Humans Will Marry Robots By 2050.”


In other presentations, designers and engineers showed off the real-life 
robots they had built. Cristina Portalès introduced us to ‘ROMOT’ – a robotic 
theatre which combines moving seats, smells, virtual reality and more to create 
a uniquely intense experience. But while the ROMOT team have no plans to turn 
it into a sex show, Cristina outlined how itcould be used to enhance sexual 
experiences - using porn videos and sex scents to create a wholly X-rated 
experience. Or, if you prefer: ‘Immersive Sex Theatre Could Be The Future Of 
Swinging.’ Other designers showed off projects designed to increase human 
intimacy over a long distance – like ‘Kissinger’ (‘Remarkable Gadget Helps You 
Smooch A Lover Over The Internet’ 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/tech/send-kiss-through-internet-remarkable-9485904>) 
and ‘Teletongue’ (‘With X-Rated Lollipop You Can Make Sweet Love At A 
Distance’).


You get the idea. If we had a classification system for science reporting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2014/sep/10/wild-extrapolation-classification-system-science-media-scepticism>
, all these headlines would be flagged to let the user know that the actual 
story is far more complicated. But they’d also probably languish unclicked, 
meaning similar research is less likely to get covered in the future.

Towards the end of the conference one of the Q+A sessions moved into the area 
of science and tech communication. Inevitably, with so many journalists in the 
room, there was an uneasiness from some academics about the way in which the 
conference would be covered. As someone with a bee in my bonnet aboutthe way 
sex is often reported in the mainstream media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2016/may/12/science-hasnt-proved-that-women-go-for-bad-boys?CMP=share_btn_tw>
, I think this wariness is often justified. But while my initial reaction to 
Gizmodo’s headline was to roll my eyes, their presence – and that of other 
journalists – made the overall topic of robotic relationships and intimacy much 
more accessible to the public. There have been one or two swiftly-corrected 
inaccuracies, but the press presence means that what could otherwise have been 
a small conference just for academics has sparked debate around the world.


Girl on the Net  <https://twitter.com/girlonthenet>is a sex and relationships 
writer <http://www.girlonthenet.com/> who has, thus far, never had sex with a 
robot.Her latest book - How A Bad Girl Fell In Love <http://bit.ly/GirlOnTheNet>
, is out now via Blink Publishing RRP £8.99
 