
The decision to keep Raymond Domenech as France coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/oct/15/france-football-raymonddomenech-pauldoyle>
 ended up as a minor footnote to the main talking-point on last week'snews 
programmes <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XH07nXXTMEQ> and chat-shows: to boo 
or not to boo <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dw487rMP_w8> the national anthem. 
Nicolas Sarkozy's fantastically impractical solution to abandon any match 
minutes before kick-off if an anthem is jeered completely overshadowed the
Domenech saga 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/20081015_114227_raymond-domenech-confirme_Dev.html>
. But if the France coach can thank one man for saving his job, it wouldn't be 
the FA chiefJean-Pierre Escalettes 
<http://www.ladepeche.fr/content/photo/biz/2008/04/03/200804031943_zoom.jpg>, 
who had to meet Sarko at the Elysée Palace fora wrist-slap 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/20081015_104122_sifflets-sarkozy-convoque-escalettes_Dev.html>
 following the trouble against Tunisia, nor would it be Gerard Houllier, who 
reportedly stood up for Domenech after the failure at Euro 2008 before 
insisting he didn't want the job. No, the man Domenech owes it to is a 
22-year-old midfielder who has spent the last two years in Italy, and who is 
doing a pretty bad job if he wants to stop being compared with Zinedine Zidane.

Yoann Gourcuff <http://www.gourcuffyoann.fr/> ran the show in his first France 
start last month – days after the team hadlost 3-1 to Austria 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=i39BJNGYsEU> in World Cup qualifying – and set 
up the winner for Nicolas Anelka before hitting the bar in a2-1 win over Serbia 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=64Z0shzdFGo>. When France were two down in 
Romania 10 days ago, it was Gourcuff who smashed in a 30-yarder thatwent in off 
the crossbar <http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=2d4sleTcU0M> (enjoy the 
commentary!) to start the comeback in a 2-2 draw – and his goal was eerily 
similar toZidane's debut strike 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x1uhxl_zidane-ces-debuts-pro-de-88-a-96_sport>
 against Czech Republic in 1994. Meanwhile in the Champions League, Gourcuff - 
on loan from Milan - put Bordeaux ahead against Roma before Henrique was sent 
off andthe team lost 3-1 
<http://www.uefa.com/competitions/ucl/fixturesresults/round=15276/match=302706/index.html>
.

Gourcuff was at it again this weekend, scoring an amazing first goal 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=5zRAU9fRdH0> and setting up the winner for David 
Bellion inBordeaux's 2-1 south-west derby win over Toulouse 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=3Lq7NW5KeTg>. "If Kaka or Ronaldinho had scored 
that goal, it would be shown all around the world this week," said Canal Plus's 
commentator after the midfielder spun from two defenders with a backheel before 
smashing the ball past Cédric Carrasso. "I had two options, either to pass 
sideways or backwards but then I saw another solution that the defenders didn't 
think I could pull off," said Gourcuff. "It was all about instinct."

The Milan coach Carlo Ancelotti said, "If he carries on like that, he'll be 
coming back to Milan," but the Bordeaux president Jean-Louis Triaud has other 
ideas. "We have an option to buy him and it's very clear: if we sign the 
cheque, he's our player." The buy-out clause is reported to be €12m, but 
already Gourcuff is worth much more than that.Bordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> are not normally big spenders, 
but they can't afford not to buy him.

An outcry normally follows when French players leave Ligue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> at a young age, but there 
is a feeling that Gourcuff, who was 19 when he moved to Milan from Rennes, has 
benefited from his time at Milanello. "We wanted a player who was used to the 
big time, and we took Yoann because even though he didn't play much Champions 
League football with Milan, he gained lots of experience from being surrounded 
by quality players," said the Bordeaux coach Laurent Blanc.

Gourcuff is now flourishing in Blanc's 4-2-3-1 system – which mirrors how Les 
Bleus play – and Bordeaux are up to joint-third as their dismal August becomes 
a distant memory. Zidane also burst onto the scene at Bordeaux and the pair 
have similar on-pitch postures and shooting styles. "Don't put too much 
pressure on the guy and don't ask him to be the new anybody,"warned Zidane 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2008/20081020_154132_zidane-veut-installer-mexes_Dev.html>
. "We can all see he's very talented."

Bordeaux's win closed the gap on Lyon, who twice came from behind to draw 2-2 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=hdel5awi6sg> with Claude Puel's former side 
Lille. Dropping their first points at home this season was not how Jean-Michel 
Aulas wanted to end his 1,000th match in charge, but the president has other 
concerns: among them Fred, who started ahead of Karim Benzema but was booed by 
the supporters. "These people are not real fans, jeering me is not going to 
help, and that's why I think I will leave in June." The problem for Aulas, who 
hates players leaving Lyon for nothing, is that Fred cost €15m and his contract 
is up next summer.

Another Brazilian, Michel Bastos <http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=UejTE-79EAk>, 
is threatening to take Juninho's crown asLigue 1's free-kick specialist 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x4zros_coupfranc-de-michel-bastos_sport>. The 
Lille midfielder scored his third dead-ball effort of the season against Lyon. 
"When I first arrived at Lille I wasn't playing very well, but the boss [who 
was then Puel] did not lose faith in me. I owe it all to him," he said after 
the game, which may or may not have helped Puel's mood.

Just a point behind Lyon now are Marseille, who extended their unbeaten run 
away from home to 13 games after a3-1 win at Valenciennes 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=sqEgitsyV_k>. L'OM are the one unbeaten side 
left in France, and have only been trailing in matches for six minutes all 
season. The work of their new fitness coach Philippe Manouvrier appears to have 
made a difference. Former players under the coach Eric Gerets have told how he 
used to hang under-performing players on dressing-room pegs and kick in doors 
after defeat, but the Belgian cuts a cooler character these days. He even 
recentlyfeatured on 30 Millions D'Amis 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x6zvhp_mr-erik-gerets-a-30-millions-damis_sport>
, a Me And My Pet-style show, where his Great Dane, Georges, was featured lying 
under his desk at L'OM's Comanderie training-ground. "Georges is like my son, 
he comes to work with me and sometimes he joins in training with the players," 
said Gerets. The dog was a gift from the Galatsaray president Ozhan Canaydin 
after Gerets led them to the title, but caused problems as his white-and-black 
coat reflected the kit of rivals Besiktas.

It's a big week for Gerets, who this week returns to PSV Eindhoven in the 
Champions League, where he won six league titles and the European Cup as a 
player and two titles as a coach. "The best thing is to win the league title, 
it's so much more gratifying even than winning the European Cup," he said. "So 
long as there are no unforeseen accidents, I think we will be up there at the 
end of the season."

The same cannot be said of Paris Saint-Germain, who remain in mid-table 
despite twice coming from behind tobeat their bogey-side Lorient 3-2 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NsMsLqwVVyw> in a match that their 
under-pressure coach Paul Le Guen needed to win. The coach has fallen out with 
the owner Charles Villeneuve over transfer dealings: Le Guen wanted Jimmy 
Briand, Villeneuve bought the higher-profile Mateja Kezman, whose only success 
has been to beat Ivan Klasnic and Freddy Adu toFrance Football's No1 transfer 
flop of the season. Didier Deschamps is just the type of big-name coach 
Villeneuve wants to replace Le Guen, and if results in the coming week against 
Schalke and Marseille go against him, there may be a change at the club.

Elsewhere, Nantes beat Saint-Etienne 1-0 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9-VBGMMTljU> for their second win in a row 
under Elie Baup and are climbing to a position of safety while Le Mans, the 
best away team in the league,beat Nancy 2-0 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BkCZ_1buqFc> at home (helped by a cracking own 
goal from Pascal Bérenguer) to move up to third place. Steve Savidan scored 
again for Caen in a2-2 draw with Grenoble 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CgU6rretxds>. Nice won 2-1 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ka_BU22Yims> at struggling Monaco and next week 
they welcome Bordeaux to the Stade du Ray. With Gourcuff in his current form, 
it could be anything but nice for them.

Results, week nine: Bordeaux 2-1 Toulouse, Caen 2-2 Grenoble, Monaco 1-2 Nice, 
PSG 3-2 Lorient, Nantes 1-0 Saint-Etienne, Sochaux 1-1 Le Havre, Lyon 2-2 
Lille, Le Mans 2-0 Nancy, Auxerre 0-0 Rennes, Valenciennes 1-3Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille>
 