
The first time I met Elton John <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/eltonjohn>
 was in a restaurant in Sydney in 1983. I was on my first tour as an England 
cricketer and my teammate Ian Botham had invited me along. Beefy loved Elton’s 
music and Elton was a big fan of cricket – he’d go so far as to schedule 
concerts to coincide with England’s matches abroad – and so they had become big 
pals.

At the meal I ended up sitting opposite the great man. I was terrified – what 
do I say? But then, wearing his big earring – a hoop with a jewelled parrot 
sitting on the bottom – he leaned across to me. “Do you know,” he confided, 
“I’ve been nervous about this all day.” He felt the same about meeting a 
cricketer as I did meeting him. Underneath, we were just the same.

Nerves weren’t affecting me when I met him next, two years later at a party at 
his hotel in Auckland. By the time I got there I was already plastered. I’d 
been out drinking tequila all day. Downing a glass of gin, mistaking it for 
water, didn’t exactly help – I fell backwards through a glass-topped coffee 
table and it smashed to pieces.

I found myself between Elton and then wife Renate. Don’t ask me why but I bit 
her on her arm

It was then that I found myself between Elton and his then wife Renate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pop/story/0,,1943322,00.html>. Don’t ask me 
why – up until then I had only routinely bitten my teammate Paul Allott – but I 
turned sideways and bit her on her upper arm. All things considered, she wasn’t 
very happy. “Get him out of here!” she screamed. Next thing I knew, Beefy was 
dragging me out of the room.

I was riddled with shame and remorse. Elton, meanwhile, was having a barbecue 
on his hotel balcony. I knew I had to apologise. But the reception I received 
was somewhat unexpected – a standing ovation. “Stay!” said Elton, sitting on 
the bed in a pair of faux zebra skin boots. But I couldn’t. I was just too 
embarrassed.

Two years later, Elton spotted me again – I was at the Ashes Test while 
playing club cricket in Perth. “Foxeye,” that’s what he called me, “let’s have 
a barbecue this afternoon.” He meant at the house where I was staying. Jumping 
in my Ford Fiesta, he filled three shopping trolleys. He was like a kid, 
running around the supermarket, just chucking stuff in. “We don’t need all this 
you know,” I said. “Yes,” he looked at me, “but darling, you won’t need to go 
shopping for a few days, will you?”

“How come I’m here?” I asked him, when we were hanging out on a later 
occasion. He pondered the matter. “I thought cricketers were quite boring,” he 
told me, “until I came across you in Auckland. You were the best entertainment 
we’ve ever had.” He’d never wanted me to leave that party. He was loving the 
chaos that I was creating.

Absolutely Foxed 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/393589/>, by Graeme 
Fowler, published by Simon & Schuster at £18.99, is out on 5 May. To order a 
copy for £16.14, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/393589/>
 