 1. Sunday's grand prix <http://www.grandprix.com.au/cars/index.html> is the 
first of this year'sformula one season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international> - and the action is already hotting 
up <http://www.newsunlimited.co.uk/sport/story/0,3604,145220,00.html>. 
 2. In Melbourne's Albert Park 
<http://www.arts.monash.edu.au/ncas/multimedia/gazetteer/list/albertpk.html> at 
2pmlocal time <http://times.clari.net.au/location.php3/Australia/Melbourne> 
(1am on Sunday morning in the UK) the world's leading racing drivers will 
battle it out between themselves to be first to reach thecheckered flag 
<http://www.diecastwhse.com/>. 

 3. And luckily for the drivers and spectators the weather 
<http://uk.weather.yahoo.com/111/index_c.html> should be good. 

 4. Michael Schumacher <http://www.schumacher-fanclub.com/> set the fastest 
time at the practice <http://www.schumacher-fanclub.com/news/w10-item6.htm> but 
also crashed hisFerrari <http://www.ferrari.it/> as he slammed into a tyre 
barrier on theMelbourne track 
<http://www.ferrari.it/comsport/formula1.e/austral.html>. 

 5. The last time Schumacher crashed (in July 
<http://www.guardianunlimited.co.uk/Archive/Article/0,4273,3882541,00.html>) he 
leftSilverstone <http://www.silverstone-circuit.co.uk/index.htm> in an 
ambulance with his rightleg broken <http://www.graphics.cornell.edu/~wbt/leg/> 
in two places below the knee.

 6. Motor racing had an inauspicious start 
<http://www.ddavid.com/formula1/story.htm#Nobody> - at the first event, the 
1887 Paris Velocipede, only one driver turned up and the event had to be 
abandoned.

 7. For many, the sport peaked with the introduction of formula one in the 
post-war period <http://www.f150.com/new01/frame1-about.html> when sleek, curvy 
cars racing aroundthe Monaco circuit 
<http://www.acm.mc/images/Rallye/affiches/26.html> gave fast cars a glamour of 
their own.

 8. Then Jaguar 
<http://www.autoweb.com.au/start_15/showall_/id_JAG/doc_jag9802252/article.html>
 was in the ascendent. Todaythe team <http://www.jaguar-racing.com/uk/flash/> 
has less success: British driverEddie Irvine 
<http://www.exclusively-irvine.com/> was forced off the track with technical 
problems.

 9. But the international, jet-setting side of formula one 
<http://www.fia.com/> lives on. After Melbourne come races in Brazil, San Marino
 <http://www.formula1.sm/> and Spain 
<http://www.formula-one.cz/kam/circuits/spain.html>. 

 10. Those of a less Eurotrash 
<http://www.altculture.com/aentries/e/eurotrash.html> disposition can log on 
for a full race report onThe Observer 
<http://www.newsunlimited.co.uk/observer/sport/>.
 