
When Granit Xhaka completed his £35m move to Arsenal from Borussia 
Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/25/arsenal-granit-xhaka-confirm-signing>
 at the end of May, Gary Lineker, a noted opinion-shaper on Twitter, spotted an 
opportunity. “Will Arsenal’s new signing turn them into title contenders?” the 
former England captain wrote. “Well, if anyone can, Xhaka can … ”

The Match of the Day presenter has become quite the wordsmith, as anybody who 
listened to his speech in honour of Jamie Vardy at the Football Writers’ 
Association’s Player of the Year dinner will attest. That was a beautifully 
constructed piece and here he raised a smile and a few funk moves with his 
reference to Chaka Khan and her1984 hit I Feel for You 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hX9E44mClKs>.
Gary Lineker (@GaryLineker) 
Will Arsenal's new signing turn them into title contenders? Well if anyone 
can, Xhaka can....
 <https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/735423069334962177> May 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/735423069334962177> 
Lineker’s more serious point neatly précised the situation that will confront 
Xhaka at Arsenal and which has generated traction around him at Euro 2016, 
where he has driven Switzerland to the first knockout tie of their history at 
this competition –they face Poland in the last 16 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2015/dec/12/euro-2016-interactive-wallchart-groups-fixtures-venues-and-more>
 on Saturday in Saint-Étienne.

The Guardian’s Euro 2016 team of the tournament so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/24/guardian-euro-2016-team-of-the-tournament-so-far>
It has long since reached the point where Arsène Wenger needs to win the 
Premier League title to vindicate the second part of his tenure atArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> and, as he enters the final year 
of his contract, there are those who think he may be gearing up for a final 
roll of the dice. On the other hand, it is too early and too difficult to 
pronounce on Wenger’s future – not least because he has not yet decided whether 
to give himself a new deal.

Nonetheless, it is plain that a big season lies ahead for him and the club, 
and Xhaka, as a marquee signing, particularly in the long-time problem position 
of holding midfielder, will feel a weight of expectation. Nobody expects the 
23-year-old to carry Arsenal to the title but there is the hope that he could 
be one of the missing pieces in the puzzle.

Sky-high expectation levels are part of the territory at the Emirates Stadium, 
as Xhaka will discover, but here is a player who believes that he has the 
mechanisms to cope. Moreover, it has been impossible not to have been impressed 
with him at the European Championship so far, and the manner in which he has 
stepped up to become Switzerland’s outfield talisman – the goalkeeper Yann 
Sommer has also been outstanding. Arsenal fans have had their appetites whetted.

During Switzerland’s qualification, it had been increasingly clear to most 
people – particularly Xhaka – that the manager, Vladimir Petkovic, had an 
either/or decision to make in midfield. It was either Gökhan Inler, the captain 
and 89-cap veteran, or Xhaka, the fast rising star. Xhaka felt restricted 
alongside Inler, when he wanted to set the tempo; to be the boss.

The situation came to a head in March, leading up to the friendlies against 
Republic of Ireland and Bosnia-Herzegovina. Inler, who hadjoined Leicester City 
from Napoli last August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/19/leicester-napoli-gokhan-inler-three-year-deal>
, was out of favour under Claudio Ranieri and he would be one of the few 
players who could say the season was a nightmare for him at the King Power 
Stadium.

Petkovic made his move. He dropped Inler from his squad to face Ireland and 
Bosnia – a controversial and confrontational decision – and he would not 
include him in his 23-man party for the finals, even as a fringe player for the 
benefit of his experience.

Petkovic placed his trust in Xhaka. Although he named the Juventus full-back 
Stephan Lichtsteiner as his new captain, he made Xhaka and Valon Behrami, the 
Watford midfielder, the vice-captains. Things did not start well. Xhaka was 
poor in the 1-0 defeatby Ireland in Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/25/republic-of-ireland-switzerland-friendly-match-report>
 and Switzerland would also lose to Bosnia and – in May – Belgium, before they 
beat Moldova in their final warm-up fixture. Expectation levels among the 
supporters were low.

Xhaka, however, has imposed himself here and he was at the heart of each of 
his team’s Group A ties. The statistics show that only three nations have had 
more possession thanSwitzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> – Germany, Spain and 
Portugal – and Xhaka has been the conductor-in-chief.

So much of what Switzerland have done has gone through Xhaka, who has had 
Behrami as an effective foil alongside him inPetkovic’s 4-2-3-1 formation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/03/euro-2016-switzerland-team-guide>
. Xhaka had many more touches than anybody on either team in the matches 
against Albania, Romania and France and his passing numbers have been 
eye-catching.

He made more than twice as many passes as any France player in the 0-0 draw 
last Sunday and he has made roughly 33% more than his next most involved 
team-mate in each of the three games. He does not merely play safe square 
balls. His range has been varied and he has been credited with having created 
seven chances.

What has been most striking about Xhaka is his ability to look unhurried. He 
appears to have an extra second on the ball before he is closed down or a 
tackle comes in while he has two or three options in mind when he receives it 
and routinely picks the right one.

David Squires on … a review of the Euro 2016 group stage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/jun/24/david-squires-on-a-review-of-the-euro-2016-group-stage>
His composure and aggression have proved a ratings winner. In the Swiss 
newspapers, the players are awarded marks out of six and, according to Aargauer 
Zeitung, Xhaka was worth a fiveagainst Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/11/albania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report>
, five and a halfagainst Romania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/15/romania-switzerland-euro-201-match-report>
 and sixagainst France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/switzerland-france-euro-2016-match-report>
.

With Switzerland in the more open half of the knockout draw, the fans’ dreams 
have ignited. Will they ever have a better chance to go deep into this 
tournament? It is amazing to think that Xhaka remains so young and he will be 
tested by a finePoland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/poland> team. He 
is ready.

“I have learned one thing in my life,” Xhaka said, in an interview with 
Aargauer Zeitung. “If I put too much pressure on myself, then everything goes 
wrong. When I went to Gladbach from Basel in 2012, I put a lot of pressure on 
myself at first and it was too heavy. I will not put any pressure on myself at 
Arsenal, even though the transfer fee was high. I feel as though I needed this 
new challenge and I like challenges.”
 