
The sponge has risen, the icing is set and now it is time to put the cherry on 
top: the remaining three bakers in the Great British Bake Off go head to head 
in a tense finale on Wednesday night.

Messy and marvellous: why Jane should win the Great British Bake Off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/24/the-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-jane-should-win>
With GBBO, as it is affectionately known to those who know the value of a good 
meringue, moving toChannel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> in 
2018 after a year’s hiatus, there are likely to be emotional scenes in the 
final episode to be broadcast on the BBC.

The final will see PE teacher Candice Brown, jet engine engineer Andrew Smyth 
and garden designer Jane Beedle attempt to wow judges Mary Berry andPaul 
Hollywood <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/paul-hollywood> for the 
last time in the royal-themed final.

Brown, 31, is favourite to win after impressing the judges sufficiently to be 
crowned star baker on three occasions. The secondary school teacher from 
Bedfordshire grew up in her parents’ pubs, an experience that paid off in week 
two when she created a gingerbread pub, complete with sticky ginger carpet and 
miniature pool table.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fgreat-british-bake-off-candice-brown-jane-beedle-andrew-smyth-bbc-finale-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc194dceb6656d4e3d93b513978da124e1c58d93%2F0_294_1900_1140%2F1900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Great%20British%20Bake%20Off%20stars%20to%20cook%20up%20a%20storm%20in%20tense%20BBC%20finale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fgreat-british-bake-off-candice-brown-jane-beedle-andrew-smyth-bbc-finale-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Great%20British%20Bake%20Off%20stars%20to%20cook%20up%20a%20storm%20in%20tense%20BBC%20finale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fgreat-british-bake-off-candice-brown-jane-beedle-andrew-smyth-bbc-finale-channel-4%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc194dceb6656d4e3d93b513978da124e1c58d93%2F0_294_1900_1140%2F1900.jpg>
 Ace of bakes: Andrew Smyth’s Tudor-themed cake turned out to be one of the 
show’s rudest yet. Photograph: BBC One/PA 
It's always the quiet one: why Andrew should win the Great British Bake Off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/25/the-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-andrew-should-win>
But she will have to see off stiff competition from Smyth, a 25-year-old 
aerospace engineer from Northern Ireland, who has won star baker twice. The 
Cambridge graduate impressed GBBO fans with his creations, which have included 
a structure of interlinking cog-shaped pies, a 3D gingerbread recreation of his 
time punting down the river Cam and ice-cream mousse cakes in dessert week. 
Smyth caused some smiles in Tudor week by creating an undeniably phallic 
caramel jousting pole for his rotund knight on horseback decoration.

Fans have also not written off Beedle. The 61-year-old has proved to be an 
accomplished baker, even if Hollywood suggested in botanical week that her 
three-tier cake with its floral chocolate collar looked like colourful mashed 
potato.


Beedle’s passion for baking has been passed down the generations: her 
grandfather owned a bakery in Hastings and her dad was a keen baker. She won 
star baker in the first week but has not managed to repeat the feat before the 
final.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fgreat-british-bake-off-candice-brown-jane-beedle-andrew-smyth-bbc-finale-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c1c3469fd4b945e5239ebdfb9f2753d4b62fb62%2F0_10_1392_1738%2F1392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Great%20British%20Bake%20Off%20stars%20to%20cook%20up%20a%20storm%20in%20tense%20BBC%20finale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fgreat-british-bake-off-candice-brown-jane-beedle-andrew-smyth-bbc-finale-channel-4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Great%20British%20Bake%20Off%20stars%20to%20cook%20up%20a%20storm%20in%20tense%20BBC%20finale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fgreat-british-bake-off-candice-brown-jane-beedle-andrew-smyth-bbc-finale-channel-4%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c1c3469fd4b945e5239ebdfb9f2753d4b62fb62%2F0_10_1392_1738%2F1392.jpg>
 Nadiya Hussain, GBBO’s most successful champion. Photograph: Linda Nylind for 
the Guardian 
But the uncertainty about Bake Off’s future may somewhat over shadow its final 
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> episode, said PR expert Mark 
Borkowski. “If it wasn’t the last one, I think the final would be a bit 
underwhelming,” he said. “While Nadia was a fantastic winner and a great icon 
for diversity, they haven’t got a real star out of the final episode. The last 
episode will be quite poignant but it will slightly steal the thunder from the 
winner.”

He also warned Bake Off lovers that Channel 4’s offering would, by necessity, 
be much more commercial. It emergedon Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/23/channel-4-to-start-sponsorship-bids-at-8m-for-the-great-british-bake-off>
 that the broadcaster is to start bids to sponsor the show at up to £8m.

Channel 4 agreed a £25m a year deal with the show’s creator, Love Productions, 
but will have to find new presenters, afterSue Perkins and Mel Giedroyc 
announced they would not be “following the dough” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/13/sue-perkins-and-mel-giedroyc-to-leave-great-british-bake-off>
. Berry also said her allegiance was with the BBC, but Hollywood agreed to move 
to Channel 4.

“Bake off will just have to become more commercial. If it isn’t getting 4 
million viewers then Channel 4 have overpaid,” he said. “I doubt that viewers 
will move en masse, and I think there will be a lot of dewy-eyed regret about 
the old days when it was on good old Aunty.”

Stop all the clocks – Selasi has left the Great British Bake Off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/20/selasi-has-left-the-great-british-bake-off>
Nonetheless, the winner of the final final can expect a serious financial 
windfall – with the potential for book deals and further television and radio 
appearances. Nadiya Hussain, who won in 2015, has arguably beenBake Off’s most 
successful champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/14/bake-off-nadiya-hussain-bbc-paul-hollywood-channel-4>
. After signing a reported £1m book deal, her recipe book has sold almost 
25,000 copies since its release in June. Alongside a bestselling children’s 
cookbook she has also secured a three-book fiction deal with Harlequin.
 Selasi Gbormittah’s ‘so bling’ marzipan Battle of Bosworth creation. 
Photograph: BBC/Love Productions 
Hussain was also the subject of a BBC documentary, The Chronicles of Nadiya, 
and the corporation have recently given her a contract to make the BBC her 
“home” where she will work on other programmes.


Stardom has already come for some of the contestants. Selasi Gbormittah, who 
was eliminated in the semi-final, has spoken of his plans to open a bakery in 
west London and release a recipe book.


The former contestant wrote on Instagram: “This has been a massive learning 
curve for me, especially at times when I performed badly! … The journey is just 
beginning.”
 