
John Lukic, LEEDS v Arsenal, 1980 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JFt29Bgp-i4>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJFt29Bgp-i4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJFt29Bgp-i4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJFt29Bgp-i4&media=>
Two for the price of one to kick us off. Come the end of this harrowing 
afternoon, a 19-year-old John Lukic received a commiserative arm around the 
shoulder from Arsenal coach Don Howe after his team had crushed Leeds 5-0 at 
Elland Road. In just the second minute of Leeds’ clash with Arsenal, John 
Hollins got to the byline and drove in a hopeful cross – “All I wanted to do 
was keep the ball in play,” he said later – onlyfor Lukic to push the ball into 
his own net <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TkpWyCbbtNQ&t=12m49s>. But his 
nightmare wasn’t over. Arsenal’s third goal involved the same combo, as 
Hollins’ shotsomehow crossed the line via a pinball move off of Lukic’s arm, 
hands, leg and heel <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TkpWyCbbtNQ&t=13m26s>. 

Lukic ended up scrambling about for the ball like a drunk man trying to find 
his keys that he’s dropped outside his house. It was uncomfortable viewing. 
Lukic would go on to win the league title with both Leeds andArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> but such success must have felt 
a million miles away as he trudged off the pitch with Howe.

Pat Jennings, Tottenham v ARSENAL, 1982 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fy8qmxDE-vs>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfy8qmxDE-vs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfy8qmxDE-vs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfy8qmxDE-vs&media=>
Big Pat simply didn’t do mistakes, so his error in the FA Cup third round, at 
White Hart Lane of all places, was a terrible moment. Garth Crooks’strike from 
outside the box was pretty weak <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fy8qmxDE-vs> – 
Jennings later compared it to a back pass – so there was genuine amazement in 
the stands when it squeezed under the hands of Arsenal’s keeper. When a groin 
injury forced Jennings to limp off with 15 minutes to go – Peter Nicholas 
taking his place in goal – his hideous day in N17 was complete.

In his autobiography Jennings wrote that the mistake would “haunt me for the 
rest of my days ... To this day I couldn’t tell you how or why the ball got 
past me. At the moment it happened I just wished the ground would open up and 
swallow me. I lay awake for hours that night trying to work out how I could 
have been so stupid. The thing which hurt the most of all was that my Cup error 
cost Arsenal the match.” Indeed it did. Jennings couldn’t have picked a worse 
time to make his blunder. It didn’t help that Tottenham went on to defend the 
FA Cup successfully.

Waldir Peres, BRAZIL v USSR, 1982 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-ecITF16fYg&feature=youtu.be&t=135>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-ecITF16fYg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-ecITF16fYg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-ecITF16fYg&media=>
Ah, the Brazil 1982 World Cup team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2014/jul/02/brazil-1982-world-cup-goals-ranked-15>
. Junior, Eder, Socrates, Falcao, Zico and Serginho. And Waldir Peres. The 
Brazilian keeper played behind a thrilling attacking unit but his defence was 
prone to throwing in the odd error. He provided on e of his own in their first 
group match against the USSR.

Ranking all 15 of Brazil's goals at the 1982 World Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2014/jul/02/brazil-1982-world-cup-goals-ranked-15>
“Oh, that’s not a bad try, and it’s in,” said Barry Davies as Andriy Bal let 
fly from 20 yards out, although in truth the effort was far from impressive. 
Bal’s effort did dip awkwardly and land just in front of Peres, but the keeper 
went after the ball with the agility of a middle-aged man with a bad back. And 
I should know a thing or two about that.

Ray Clemence, Manchester United v TOTTENHAM, 1983 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cG4C-vqmx3Y&t=197>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcG4C-vqmx3Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcG4C-vqmx3Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcG4C-vqmx3Y&media=>
Long before Sky’s broadcasts of Friday night football, the BBC screened the 
first ever live league match on a Friday night in 1983. And what a cracker it 
turned out to be. Manchester United 4-2 Tottenham was a memorable occasion, but 
not one that Ray Clemence will want to recall.

Clemence had already let one shot trickle past him 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cG4C-vqmx3Y> before his mistake in the 80th 
minute.Failing to hold a simple Frank Stapleton header 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cG4C-vqmx3Y&t=3m17s>, Clemence was helpless as 
Kevin Moran fired in the final goal of the match. “And Clemence is mortified,” 
cried John Motson, as the Spurs goalkeeper laid face-down in the muddy 
goalmouth in front of the Stretford End. The clanger dominated the back pages 
but, as we will find out later, this was far from the worst goalkeeping blunder 
from a Spurs keeper the 1980s.

Luis Arconada, SPAIN v France, 1984 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hXIUaSOgS5g>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhXIUaSOgS5g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhXIUaSOgS5g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhXIUaSOgS5g&media=>
To many in Northern Ireland, Luis Arconada will be forever linked with Gerry 
Armstrong’s goal in the 1982 World Cup 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vf6cbkIp-w8>, but the Spanish keeper would 
also have an unfortunate moment of fame linked with Euro 84. Arconada had been 
superb, his saves against West Germany playing a huge part in Spain reaching 
the semi-final. Yet such is the lot of the goalkeeper, that Arconada’s 
tournament would be remembered for the wrong reason.


Michel Platini’s free-kick in the final should not have beaten Arconad – 
indeed the he seemed to have saved the effort – but then disaster struck. The 
ball squirmed under the keeper, Arconada trying desperately to recover, as 
slowly it dawned upon everyone what had happened. Just like Oliver Kahn in 
2002, Arconada chose to wrong moment for a howler.

Gary Bailey, ENGLAND v Republic of Ireland, 1985 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CPOOBjJrLi4&t=2m24s>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCPOOBjJrLi4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCPOOBjJrLi4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCPOOBjJrLi4&media=>
Not the ideal international debut for Manchester United’s Gary Bailey. England 
were beating the Republic of Ireland comfortably thanks to goals from Trevor 
Steven and Gary Lineker when Bailey was called upon to deal with his first shot 
on target of the evening. As Liam Brady moved towards the England goal, there 
seemed very little danger. But then calamity struck for the debutant.

The shot across goal was hardly a piledriver, yet Bailey allowed Brady’s 
effort to squeeze under his body and dribble apologetically over the line 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CPOOBjJrLi4&t=2m24s>, somehow being beaten at 
his near post when the original attempt had been heading towards the far post. 
Picking the ball out of the net, Bailey thought it best to hide his 
embarrassment by clapping enthusiastically and geeing up the rest of the 
England team. It was not the greatest way to impress on a rare opportunity at 
international level; he would only win one more cap.

Eddie Niedzwiecki, CHELSEA v Queens Park Rangers, 1986 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z6m3dQd7ITs&t=8m41s>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ6m3dQd7ITs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ6m3dQd7ITs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ6m3dQd7ITs&media=>
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> were 1-0 down to QPR in 
a League Cup quarter-final replay when their keeper, Eddie Niedzwiecki, moved 
purposefully from his goal. Niedzwiecki was desperate to launch one more attack 
and get his team back into the tie but it all went wrong.

It was the third touch that really did for Niedzwiecki. The ball squirted away 
from him and he jumped into a tackle to retrieve the situation. He hooked the 
ball away from one oncoming QPR striker but only found a second, Michael 
Robinson, who launched a shot from the halfway line. Niedzwiecki could only 
look onas the ball bounced towards his empty net 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z6m3dQd7ITs&t=8m41s>.

Bruce Grobbelaar, LIVERPOOL v Everton, 1986 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uD3nmqEfTqk&t=6m50s>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuD3nmqEfTqk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuD3nmqEfTqk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuD3nmqEfTqk&media=>
This goalkeeping error appeared to be fatal to Liverpool’s title hopes at the 
time. Bruce Grobbelaar’s aberration in the Merseyside derby in February 1986 
gave Everton the lead in a fiercely contested match, as Kevin Ratcliffe’s
speculative effort squeezed past the keeper and into the net. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uD3nmqEfTqk&t=6m50s> Gary Lineker scored a 
second late on to give Everton the win and an eight-point lead over their 
neighbours with just 12 matches remaining.

It looked like the beginning of the end for Liverpool but it proved to be the 
kick up the arse they needed. Claiming 34 out of the 36 points left to play 
for, Liverpool marched to the title and clinched an unbelievable double when 
they defeated Everton in the FA Cup final. With the score at 1-1 at Wembley, 
Grobbelaar flew through the air to pull off a dramatic and crucial save from 
Graeme Sharp’s header, and a little over a minute laterLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> took the lead and never looked 
back.

Liverpool supporters had to learn to take the bad with the good when it came 
to Grobbelaar. From clown to matchwinner, things were very rarely dull when he 
was involved.

Simon Tracey, WIMBLEDON v Arsenal, 1988 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NsqmwqXar5c>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNsqmwqXar5c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNsqmwqXar5c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNsqmwqXar5c&media=>
File this under how not to make a good impression on your league debut. After 
the transfer of FA Cup final hero Dave Beasant to Newcastle, Wimbledon reserve 
keeper Simon Tracey was given a chance to establish himself in the team. A 
solid performance in the Charity Shield was encouraging but, just one week 
later, Tracey dropped a clanger that would spell the end of his time at the 
club.

Wimbledon were leading 1-0 when Tracey gifted Arsenal a goal that opened the 
floodgates. Backpedalling to deal with a Brian Marwood cross, Tracey fell back 
into his goal,carrying the ball over the line in the process 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NsqmwqXar5c>. He stood up, drop-kicked the 
ball away and then dipped his head in shame as he contemplated his mistake.

Arsenal sensed blood and their 5-1 victory was an ideal way to kick off a 
league campaign. Tracey, on the other hand, was dropped and never played for 
Wimbledon again. By October he had moved to Sheffield United.

Bobby Mimms, Queens Park Rangers v TOTTENHAM, 1988 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=joogju7PO90&t=14m09s>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Djoogju7PO90&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Djoogju7PO90>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Djoogju7PO90&media=>
Bobby Mimms’ entry into the hall of shame was guaranteed after a moment of 
staggering ineptitude at Loftus Road. Quite how he managed it is still unknown, 
but as David Kerslake’s (plastic) daisy-cutter rolled towards Mimms, maybe his 
mind was elsewhere?

Mimms’ early displays after his £375,000 move from Everton had been strewn 
with errors, but this blunder was on another level. As the ball squirted 
through Mimms’ body, and a young Massimo Taibi looked on admiringly, 
Tottenham’s keeper remained curled up in a ball, attempting to ignore Peter 
Schmeichel’s advice and making himself as small as possible. If Chris 
Fairclough had not picked up a distraught Mimms, he may well have still been in 
that position when the Loftus Road Omniturf was rolled up shortly afterwards.

The press were naturally sympathetic; the Mirror renamed the keeper Booby 
Mimms, and kindly described each of his goalkeeping gaffes during his short 
time at the club. But the final word, or guffaw, has to come from Ian St. John. 
As Danny Baker so rightly states in his Own Goals and Gaffes video (Part II),
the former Liverpool forward summed up Mimms’ efforts so ably with a few 
well-chosen words 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=joogju7PO90&index=7&list=PL3F4F3A15068F0E56&t=14m09s>
.

Bjarte Flem, TROMSO v Sogndal, 1988 <https://youtu.be/OP_En84aIOM?t=14>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOP_En84aIOM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOP_En84aIOM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOP_En84aIOM&media=>
If we’re being generous, we could call Bjarte Flem’s howler unfortunate. Even 
more unfortunate was the fact that the match was shown live on Norwegian 
television so, even before the days of YouTube,the clip was repeated ad nauseam 
to the amusement of viewers throughout the world 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OP_En84aIOM>. Attempting to throw the ball out 
to a team-mate, Flem obviously thought better of it, yet in changing his mind 
he signed his own death wish.

Yes, the own goal is hilarious, but there are also a couple of side dishes 
that make the meal complete. The defender on the edge of the box turning around 
to realise the full horror of the mistake is marvellous, yet it is the 
resignation of Flem that makes it for me. As he releases the ball that split 
second too late, Flem watches helplessly as it bounces towards the net, 
trotting towards his goal wearing the body language of a man who can just see 
the bus pulling away from his stop. An absolute classic.

Erik Thorstvedt, TOTTENHAM v Nottingham Forest, 1989 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bil1AvJEcSw&t=6m43s>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBil1AvJEcSw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBil1AvJEcSw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBil1AvJEcSw&media=>
A worrying slump in form for the aforementioned Bobby Mimms forced Venables to 
make a move in the market. In December 1988 the Spurs boss brought in Norway 
international Erik Thorstvedt. Strangely, Mimms immediately stepped up and put 
in a few decent displays and a bout of influenza also delayed Thorstvedt’s 
introduction to the English game. But come Sunday 15 January, Thorstvedt 
finally made his debut in a live match against Nottingham Forest on ITV.

The Joy of Six: Goalkeeping calamities | Scott Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/mar/18/joy-of-six-goalkeeping-calamities>
Oh dear. Tottenham were already 1-0 down and struggling to cope with Forest 
when the debutant announced himself to the watching nation. After lettinga 
Nigel Clough drive slip through his fingers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bil1AvJEcSw&t=6m43s>, Thorstvedt slumped to 
his knees in horror at what he had just done. “Thor blimey!” blared the Express 
back page the following day, which continued on the theme with the line: “New 
boy Erik’s big day turns into a Viking funeral.”

“It is the worst mistake I have ever made,” said Thorstvedt. “I have never 
done anything like it before.” In time, though, Thorstvedt would brush off the 
Erik the Unready tag and win the FA Cup with Spurs. He also helped Norway 
qualify for the 1994 World Cup at the expense of England. So, he might have 
provided us with a few laughs on his Tottenham debut, but maybe he had the last 
chuckle after all.

• This blog first appeared on That 1980s Sports Blog 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/>
• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter <https://twitter.com/1980sSportsBlog>
 