
The new hard-left faction inside the Greens is holding a meeting on “the 
future of the left” in the party as factional turmoil continues to plague the 
organisation.

Left Renewal, whose members are openly antagonistic towards the federal leader,
Richard Di Natale <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>
, will hold the “open discussion” in Sydney’s Redfern town hall on 25 January.


A mixture of Greens members and members of explicit socialist parties have 
sent RSVPs, includingHall Greenland 
<https://marrickvillegreens.wordpress.com/2013/03/10/hall-greenland-for-grayndler-2013/>
, a past convenor of the NSW Greens and 2013 candidate for Grayndler,Astrid 
O’Neill <https://nsw.greens.org.au/person/nsw/astrid-oneill-0>, a close ally of 
Senator Lee Rhiannon and member of the NSW Greens committee of management,
Rachel Evans <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f1V1KtW-6ww>, a prominent member 
of Socialist Alliance, andTom Raue <https://twitter.com/tomraue>, a staffer to 
the NSW Greens MP David Shoebridge.

Richard Di Natale says Greens group that wants end to capitalism does not 
represent party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/richard-di-natale-says-greens-group-that-wants-end-to-capitalism-does-not-represent-party>
Bruce Knobloch <http://brucek.org/>, a NSW Greens delegate to the Australian 
Greens national council, has indicated interest in the meeting.

A Facebook post publicising the event 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/388687364814742/?active_tab=about> says topics 
they hope to discuss include:


 * Why should anti-authoritarian leftists be involved in parliamentary 
politics?

 * Class politics of the Greens

 * What do leftwing Greens look like, and what have the Greens failed to do so 
far?

 * The Greens as a “party of protest” and/or a “party of government”

 * Accountability and binding of Greens MPs

Left Renewal’s stated aim is to bind its members in a formal faction system, 
which is something the Greens have publicly rejected in the past. It also wants 
to bring about the end of capitalism.

Its manifesto says bureaucracy can function as a “mediator” to suppress 
radical change, so it supports rank-and-file control of the Greens. “Change can 
only come from below, not from bureaucratic declaration and mediation,”the 
manifesto says 
<https://www.facebook.com/notes/left-renewal/statement-of-principles/101438823691099>
.

The planned meeting comes after Geoff Ash, a registered officer of the NSW 
Greens and long-term partner of Rhiannon,publicly attacked the federal party 
and defended Left Renewal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/31/factional-turmoil-for-greens-continues-amid-attack-from-lee-rhiannons-partner>
 last month.

He warned that the emergence of Left Renewal may provide a “wake-up call” for 
the party, particularly its “dominant right grouping” that he says has vilified 
some left NSW figures.

Rhiannon has traditionally drawn support from the left of the party. Ash says 
he is not a member of the faction.

“It is not at all surprising that Left Renewal has formed and I think there 
are at least several key reasons for it,”Ash wrote last month 
<https://www.facebook.com/groups/159389417582255?view=permalink&id=618875308300328>
.

“Not only is our suite of economic justice policies underdeveloped, some 
existing positions are soft (eg theAustralian Greens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-greens> axing a moderate 
policy of inheritance tax on wealthy estates in 2012; continued government 
funding of private schools, accepting corporate donations).”

Di Natale has said if members of Left Renewal are unhappy with Greens policies 
they should “consider finding a new political home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/22/richard-di-natale-says-greens-group-that-wants-end-to-capitalism-does-not-represent-party>
”.

Last month Knobloch put out a call on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/bruce.knobloch.9/posts/588978837956431?pnref=story> 
for more “democratic lefties” to join the Greens after the loss of the left’s 
candidates in New South Wales preselections, where Dawn Walker and the former 
military intelligence officer and Lock the Gate co-founderJustin Field 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/lock-the-gate-campaigner-justin-field-wins-bitter-greens-nsw-race-20160813-gqrs7o.html>
 were chosen as replacements for NSW upper-house positions.

“The Greens NSW have been in the media a lot this week, with a preselection 
mired in controversy and a tight count … and with a Left Renewal ‘faction’ 
declaring itself against capitalism, to the ire of present and past federal 
parliamentary leaders,” Knobloch wrote.

“I encourage more democratic lefties to join and help drive our future. No one 
else can do it.”
 