
Simon Jenkins writes that “To question China’s good intentions in financing 
the power station [at Hinkley Point] is silly. It is a French-built plant, and 
the idea that Beijing might contrive to embed and then activate some doomsday 
bug is absurd” (Trade with China is a good thing. But Hinkley Point is a dud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/11/trade-china-hinkley-point-dud-theresa-may-absurdly-expensive-nuclear-deal>
, 11 August).

Not that absurd. The China General Nuclear Group (CGN), which is involved in 
financing Hinkley Point, expects to build a new nuclear station with its own 
reactor at Bradwell in return for its involvement at Hinkley. This was agreedby 
David Cameron and Xi Jinping last October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/21/hinkley-point-reactor-costs-rise-by-2bn-as-deal-confirmed>
.

The reactor it hopes to build is its small modular reactor Hualong One.

CGN has just been indicted by the US authorities for exporting nuclear 
technology to China without authorisation (Nuclear espionage charge for China 
firm with one-third stake in UK’s Hinkley Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/11/nuclear-espionage-charge-for-china-firm-with-one-third-stake-in-hinkley-point>
, theguardian.com, 11 August). The indictment specifically relates to Hualong 
One and the “verification and validation of nuclear reactor codes”.

Computer bugs in nuclear power stations are not science fiction. Israel 
and the US planted the Stuxnet bug in the nuclear reactor at Bushehr in Iran in 
2010.

Hualong One would not be allowed in the US. Neither France nor Germany would 
allow China to build it in their countries. Is the UK really so desperate for 
Chinese funds to build Hinkley Point that it will allowChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> a major stake in the provision of 
electricity in the UK in return?
Norman Dombey
Professor emeritus of theoretical physics, University of Sussex, and former 
specialist advisor to the Commons select committee on energy

• Simon Jenkins decries the potential deal with China over the Hinkley Point 
proposed nuclear power station. He argues that project is “reckless and 
absurdly expensive”, and so it is. But there are other reasons for stopping 
this project, which many in China will appreciate. China is arguably the world 
leader in renewable energy, both in manufacturing for the world and in using 
itself. The intrinsic variability of most renewables (especially wind and 
solar) is no longer a misfit with the variability of human demand. Ever 
advancing telecommunications and electronic control systems allow the demand to 
be adjusted to fit the supply on a scale from household to national.

Witness the sophisticated systems widely available for matching electrical 
loads and energy stores to solar power. Householders already use these; 
electrical grid operators are trialling methods for widespread integration of 
solar and wind power with load demand control, energy storage and price 
adjustment.

The last thing such advances need is an untried gigawatt source of constant 
electricity generation that cannot be matched to demand, that is expensive, and 
whose waste is harmful and untreatable. There are many in China and France who 
share these views; ceasing Hinkley will be welcomed by them too.
Dr John Twidell
Horninghold, Leicestershire

• I agree with Simon Jenkins that Hinkley is a dud, for many reasons that have 
been discussed in his article and elsewhere. However, I am saddened that he 
appears to dismiss wind, and implicitly all renewable energy sources, as not 
providing baseload electricity. At the same time that Hinkley has been 
generally given the red carpet, theSwansea Bay tidal lagoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/10/swansea-bay-tidal-lagoon-energy-project-hinkley-point-wales>
 and further similar projects have potential to produce 8% of our baseload 
electricity.

The tidal lagoon project would last about three times as long as any nuclear 
power station – about 90 years.

The cost of the Swansea <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/swansea> lagoon is 
estimated to be £1bn. So to achieve the full 8% of baseload electricity (more 
than Hinkley), perhaps about £5bn would be needed to complete four or five 
similar projects in the UK – less than a third of the Hinkley costs. There is 
also no nuclear waste to manage for thousands of years. Tidal power flows into 
the lagoon for six hours, out for six hours and does this twice a day, giving 
reliable electricity for 24 hours a day.

Swansea Bay tidal lagoon is the best alternative to Hinkley, so why is it not 
getting immediate government support and approval? Why is it not even being 
discussed?
Steve Emsley
Newcastle upon Tyne

• To make a sound judgment on energy sources British citizens should be given 
the relevant facts. One such fact is the disaster of Fukushima which has been 
ongoing for more than five years. Still out of control, the multiple meltdowns 
are pouring radioactive particles into the atmosphereand radioactive water into 
the Pacific Ocean 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/11/world/asia/japan-fukushima-nuclear-disaster.html>
. The crown estate is right (Crown estate says future is in wind not Hinkley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/14/crown-estate-hinkley-point-nuclear-debate>
, 15 August). No lethal pollution emanates from windfarms.
Jim McCluskey
London

• Perhaps Foreign Secretary Johnson might have a word with the Chinese 
authorities and explain, with his inimitable gift for communication, that the 
UK has now taken back its sovereignty and can no longer be pushed around (
Theresa May seeks close ties with China despite Hinkley Point delay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/09/government-says-links-with-china-are-vital-after-hinkley-point-warning>
, 10 August).
David Walker
Sheffield 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 