
The handling of Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace>
 International’s £58m budget has been in disarray for years, with its financial 
team beset by personnel problems and a lack of rigorous processes, leading to 
errors, substandard work and a souring of relationships between its Amsterdam 
headquarters and offices around the world, documents leaked to the Guardian 
show.

Coming after it emerged that a staffer had lost £3m on the foreign exchange 
market by betting mistakenly on a weak euro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/16/greenpeace-loses-3m-pounds-currency-speculation>
, the documents show that the group’s financial department has faced a series 
of problems, and that its board is troubled by the lack of controls and lapses 
that allowed one person to lose so much money.

Greenpeace, which prides itself on being largely funded by relatively small 
individual donations,apologised to supporters for the loss 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/press/releases/Statement-on-foreign-currency-exchange-losses/>
, claiming that the “serious error of judgment” was the result of a single 
staff member “acting beyond the limits of their authority and without following 
proper procedures”. But the documents show that internally the group is worried 
about the organisational failings that allowed it to happen.

Minutes of a board meeting in the spring this year say: “The board takes this 
[the £3m loss] very seriously and is deeply concerned that there should be such 
financial loss at a time of transition – when reserves are stretched and income 
is substantially lower than projected, and it is particularly troubled by how 
it happened, ie the lack of strong, coherent processes and controls that 
prevent the possibility that contracts can be entered into without due 
authorisation.”

One of the biggest and highest-profile environmental campaigning groups, 
Greenpeace has more than 2,000 employees globally and thousands more 
volunteers. It is based in Amsterdam and has 28 offices around the world, which 
campaign and raise funds independently, including Greenpeace UK, which this 
year successfullysent six activists to climb to the top of the Shard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jul/11/greenpeace-shard-shell>, 
Europe’s tallest building, to send a message opposing Shell’s plans for oil 
drilling in the Arctic.

The leaked material also reveals that:

• the group’s public face and top campaigner, executive director Kumi Naidoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/kumi-naidoo>, admits that internal 
communications are a “huge problem” and staff have “good reason” to be upset at 
a range of problems;

• staff are concerned at being shifted from Amsterdam on Dutch wages to 
national offices on lower local wages, as part of a major restructuring effort 
to decentralise the group;

• the group did not campaign to have one of its three ships, the Arctic 
Sunrise, released by Russia because the political circumstances would have made 
it a “wasted effort”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fgreenpeace-losses-financial-disarray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F19%2F1403178052845%2Fd83eacae-088a-4ad4-a47e-6ee4cb9a912e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greenpeace%20losses%3A%20leaked%20documents%20reveal%20extent%20of%20financial%20disarray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fgreenpeace-losses-financial-disarray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greenpeace%20losses%3A%20leaked%20documents%20reveal%20extent%20of%20financial%20disarray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fgreenpeace-losses-financial-disarray%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F19%2F1403178052845%2Fd83eacae-088a-4ad4-a47e-6ee4cb9a912e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A sign aboard the Greenpeace ship the Rainbow Warrior III during an open day 
in London, November 2011. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for The Guardian 
The Guardian has also learned that one of the group’s most senior executives, 
Pascal Husting, Greenpeace International’s international programme director, 
works in Amsterdam but flies between the city’s offices and his home in 
Luxembourg several times a month.

Naidoo defended the arrangement, saying: “Pascal has a young family in 
Luxembourg. When he was offered the new role, he couldn’t move his family to 
Amsterdam straight away. He’d be the first to say he hates the commute, hates 
having to fly, but right now he hasn’t got much of an option until he can move. 
He wishes there was an express train between his home and his office, but it 
would currently be a 12-hour round trip by train.”

The loss of £3m, paid out this year, comes as the group is already dealing 
with lower than expected income, despitethe Arctic 30 incident last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2013/oct/14/greenpeace>
, when dozens of its activists and several journalists were imprisoned by 
Russia over a protest at oil drilling in the Arctic. Greenpeace International 
has said it will soon report a £5.4m deficit – which includes the £3m – for 
2013.

Mike Townsley, the group’s head of communications, told AP last week of the 
£3m loss: “Hindsight is 20/20, but we believe if he [the individual who made 
the transactions] had followed rules and procedures, this wouldn’t have 
happened.”

However, a strategy document dated November 2013 shows that problems seem to 
extend well beyond one individual and that Greenpeace International’s senior 
executive team was aware of widespread problems in its finance department that 
date back years.

“[The] international finance function at GPI [Greenpeace International] has 
faced internal team and management problems for several years and the situation 
did not improve during 2013 despite efforts and support,” the document warns.

“This has resulted in errors and sub-standards in the quality of financial 
systems, information and support provided to the teams, units in GPI and NROs 
[national reporting offices], and have on occasions adversely affected 
relationship between GPI and NROs.”

As the story of the losses unfolded last week after it was broken by Der 
Spiegel 
<http://www.spiegel.de/wirtschaft/soziales/greenpeace-mitarbeiter-verzockt-spender-millionen-a-975215.html>
 and picked up by international media, Townsley emailed colleagues to say: 
“This is a bad story for us and the best we can do is be honest and respectful 
to our audiences.”

The leaked material seems to show disquiet over a continuing major 
restructuring, aimed at moving staff from Greenpeace International’s base in 
Amsterdam to national offices across the world to fulfil Naidoo’s goal of 
better tackling environmental problems in the global south. “This [2014] will 
be a testing year for all of us,” the strategy document warns.

Some staff are concerned at being moved from Dutch wages to lower, local wages 
at regional operations. An audio recording of a staff meeting this year 
includes a male employee telling Naidoo and other senior staff: “One of the 
biggest challenges is salaries … If I had to identify one problem clearly it’s 
going to be salaries.”

The audio recording reveals Naidoo telling the same meeting: “On 
communications … let me just concede that we have a huge problem with the way 
we are doing communications, I want to own that and take responsibility for 
that. It’s not where it needs to be.”

He added: “There’s good reason why people actually are upset about a range of 
things. But when I looked at what the problem was, it was actually a patent 
lack of communication, not just a lack of communication but not communicating 
at the right time, and things not clear.”

He later sent an email to staff admitting: “Last Thursday’s staff [meeting] 
was tough; hardly surprising given what we are trying to achieve and the impact 
that it will have upon all of us.”

The documents and material also give an insight into internal debates over 
future actions in Russia following the Arctic 30 last year, which eventually 
saw the release of all 30 activists and journalists and, earlier this month,the 
release of the group’s icebreaker, the Arctic Sunrise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/06/arctic-30-sunrise-russia-to-release-greenpeace-ship>
. The ship is still in Murmansk, Russia, while Greenpeace arranges for people 
to examine its condition.

“[After the Arctic 30] one of the key debates we need to have is defining the 
ethical and appropriate levels of risk that we are willing to take,” minutes of 
the board meeting this year note. The minutes also say: “It was queried why 
there has been no campaigning to bring attention to the AS [Arctic Sunrise] and 
gain public support for a successful return of the ship since the safe return 
of the activists. Pascal [Husting] said that under the current political 
circumstances launching a campaign to free the ship would probably be a wasted 
effort.”

Gerald Steinberg, president of NGO Monitor, which seeks to make NGOs more 
transparent and accountable, said he saw parallels with thefinancial problems 
Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/02/amnesty-international-staff-management-restructuring>
 had experienced in recent years.

“The extent of it [the financial problems] was not something I expected [at 
Greenpeace]. But it’s part of the fact that NGOs keep things very much within 
the organisation; there’s no culture of accountability. They call on 
governments to be accountable but they lack this in so many ways, so in that 
sense it’s not a surprise.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fgreenpeace-losses-financial-disarray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F19%2F1403177840497%2F6f2fb4b5-24f9-46da-81c6-d4166b5324af-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greenpeace%20losses%3A%20leaked%20documents%20reveal%20extent%20of%20financial%20disarray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fgreenpeace-losses-financial-disarray%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greenpeace%20losses%3A%20leaked%20documents%20reveal%20extent%20of%20financial%20disarray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fgreenpeace-losses-financial-disarray%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F19%2F1403177840497%2F6f2fb4b5-24f9-46da-81c6-d4166b5324af-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Two Greenpeace activists display a banner beneath the clock face of Big Ben on 
the first anniversary of the invasion of Iraq. Photograph: David Bebber/Reuters 
He said a shift in culture was required to address the problems. “It requires 
a cultural change. NGOs tend to see themselves as insurgents. They have now 
become the establishment but without the structures that are required for such 
large organisations – they can no longer think of themselves as insurgents but 
as corporate organisations. That hurts their self-image but there is no other 
way to avoid the financial meltdowns that can take place.”

Naidoo told the Guardian that changes were already under way to address the 
handling of its budget. “Greenpeace International’s annual accounts have always 
been given a clean bill of health by independent auditors. However, there have 
definitely been ongoing problem with some of the systems and high staff 
turnover in our international finance unit, no denying it.

“That’s why I hired a new head of finance who has over 20 years’ experience 
working with international NGOs. We have also strengthened his team. He’s 
already put checks in place to make sure the problems we have had are a thing 
of the past.”

He also said the restructuring was not about reducing staff numbers but about 
redeploying people. “This restructuring is not about reducing the number of 
people working full time on Greenpeace campaigns; it’s about making sure we 
have people where we need them, and increasingly that’s not in Amsterdam. The 
big environmental issues are increasingly in the southern hemisphere, be it 
Indonesian or Amazonian deforestation, Chinese coal plants or overfishing in 
the Indian and Pacific Ocean.”
 