
Forget cups of tea, a stiff upper lip or proper behaviour in the face of a 
long, unwieldy queue. According to theMasterChef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/masterchef> judge Gregg Wallace, 
nothing sums up the British way of life more than a deep-fat fryer.

The presenter launched an extraordinary defence of the cooking appliance after 
fellow BBC starMary Berry <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/mary-berry> said 
they should be banned from the home. Wallace claimed the Great British Bake Off 
star was out of touch with British life.

The Great British Bake Off review – blood, innuendo and drizzle cake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/25/great-british-bake-off-review-blood-innuendo-drizzle-cake>
Berry’s opposition to the deep-fat fryer was an “an attack on our British way 
of life”, Wallace said, adding that the smell of frying “brought family and 
friends together”.

“To suggest getting rid of it isn’t just an assault on the deep-fat fryer but 
on the traditional British psyche. I love Mary dearly but this is an attack on 
our British way of life. We fry things, that’s what we do. It’s like banning 
the wok in China or outlawing the pizza oven in Italy. It’s ludicrous,” he said.

Great British Bake Off’s Berry had told Good Housekeeping magazine earlier 
this week that she did not think any family should have their own deep-fat 
fryer, and also spoke out against giving fizzy drinks to children.

Her opinions were deemed “ludicrous” by Wallace in a column for the Sun on 
Saturday 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/1681032/telly-chef-gregg-wallace-goes-to-war-with-bake-off-star-mary-berry-over-fried-food/>
. He said that while “we probably did use the fryer a little bit too much” when 
he was young, fatty food was OK in moderation, adding: “Our nation was built on 
chips and Spam fritters.”

Reminiscing about his childhood, Wallace said: “Just thinking about it takes 
me back to happy times when what we call dinner now was known as ‘tea’ and we 
ate it around five o’clock. Dinner was what you had at school at midday. The 
smell of deep-fat frying was universal back then, wasn’t it? It brought 
families and friends together.”

Berry returned to the screen this week with fellow judge, Paul Hollywood, in 
the new series of Bake Off. On Wednesday, 10.4 million people tuned in,making 
the first episode the most watched in the show’s history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/25/great-british-bake-off-mary-berry-paul-hollywood-bbc>
.

The 81-year-old, who is Good Housekeeping’s October cover star, said parents 
needed to be taught about the right foods to give children. “Many people think 
children must have chips,” she said. “I don’t think any household should have a 
deep-fat fryer. I never fry a doughnut. If you want a doughnut, go and buy one 
once in a blue moon. It’s about everything in moderation.”
 