
Franca Sozzani’s earliest memory takes place at home. Her father is coaxing 
her to overcome her fear and jump from a dressing table. It is the only way she 
will learn to be strong, he tells her. So Sozzani jumps. That jump is real, but 
it’s also a metaphor, and it comes conveniently early inFranca: Chaos and 
Creation <http://www.francathemovie.com/>, a new documentary in which Sozzani’s 
son and only child, Francesco Carrozzini, attempts to unravel the origins of 
his mother’s fierce independence and her soaring magazine career as the 
long-time editor ofVogue Italia <http://www.vogue.it/>.

In London in the 1960s everybody was different – that was beautiful

That he doesn’t entirely solve the conundrum is no impediment to enjoying the 
film. Sozzani is a thoughtful, sometimes stubborn, sometimes droll subject who 
broke with Italian convention by annulling her first marriage after three 
months and running off to see the world – first to India, and then London in 
the late 1960s when it felt like the centre of the universe. Later still she 
would hitch around the US, with an itch to get out into the world that served 
as a catalyst for her magazine career.

“In London you really smelled the freedom, it changed my way of thinking 
completely,” Sozzani recalled during a recent visit to New York. We were 
sitting at the back of theBowery Hotel <http://theboweryhotel.com/>, and the 
sun glinted off the mane of golden hair that rolls over her shoulders and down 
her back (she says she is terrified of ageing, but appears to be managing it 
exceptionally well). Late 1960s London left a singular imprint on Sozzani. “In 
London everybody was different – that was beautiful,” she says. “Nobody wanted 
to look alike. In a way this kind of freedom gives you even more creativity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65de4bb001c0165c1f3523c8045f539584a77492%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20about%20my%20mother%3A%20growing%20up%20with%20Franca%20Sozzani%20of%20Vogue%20Italia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20about%20my%20mother%3A%20growing%20up%20with%20Franca%20Sozzani%20of%20Vogue%20Italia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65de4bb001c0165c1f3523c8045f539584a77492%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Blonde ambition: Franca Sozzani and Francesco Carrozzini at a fashion show in 
1994. 
As she talks, Sozzani’s son, and the director of this curate’s egg of a 
documentary, offers small murmurs of assent or dissent depending on the 
subject. At other times he is absorbed by his mobile phone. Although he was 
spurred to make the movie by the death of his father, who he barely knew,
Franca: Chaos and Creation belongs wholly to Carrozzini’s mother and her 
relentless drive to succeed. “I always thought my life was predetermined to be 
a normal life – house, children, golf,” Sozzani says in the movie. “And then I 
decided that this was not the life I wanted to have. I couldn’t stay home with 
the kids and make spaghetti.” The fact that she is recounting this to her only 
child is part of the movie’s central conflict. Carrozzini grew up in a 
single-parent household in which the single parent was frequently away. Even as 
he insists that she’s a terrible cook, you get the feeling he would have liked 
the odd bowl of spaghetti.

I decided that this was not the life I wanted to have. I couldn’t stay home 
with the kids and make spaghetti

Many people are driven to succeed, but for a mother to prioritise career over 
family in 1970s Italy was an anomaly that marked out Carrozzini from his 
schoolfriends. Several decades later, in 1992, Hillary Clinton would deploy 
similar language to defend herself as First Lady-in-waiting (“I suppose I could 
have stayed home, baked cookies and had teas, but what I decided to do was 
fulfil my profession”), and the fact that we’re still arguing about whether and 
how mothers can find a work-life balance is a big part of what makes Sozzani so 
refreshing. For her, workis life.

In the documentary we see mother and son watching old home movies. “You never 
took me to the park like other kids,” Carrozzini says, more curious than 
accusing. “I never took you to the park, period,” she replies. “Not even with a 
stroller. I even missed your school’s elementary graduation because I got back 
home the day after.” If there is regret, it registers as barely more than a 
flicker. Where Carrozzini is frequently sentimental, Sozzani is decidedly not. 
“She’s very much about the future, and I’m a huge nostalgic,” he says. “This is 
literally the thing that differentiates us the most.” It’s also, perhaps, the 
animating principle behind Sozzani’s editorial instincts. “It’s not that I 
don’t think of the past, but it’s a waste of time,” she says. “If you’re stuck 
in the past, beholden to it, then your creativity is stuck there, too, because 
you don’t give yourself a chance to evolve.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4d639cce944e97f1cc8307e500dbbc70b3c0b85%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20about%20my%20mother%3A%20growing%20up%20with%20Franca%20Sozzani%20of%20Vogue%20Italia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20about%20my%20mother%3A%20growing%20up%20with%20Franca%20Sozzani%20of%20Vogue%20Italia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4d639cce944e97f1cc8307e500dbbc70b3c0b85%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Shock tactics: an image from Steven Meisel’s 70-page Makeover Madness story. 
Photograph: Steven Meisel 
It’s been just over 50 years since Vogue Italia was first published, and 
Franca Sozzani has been the magazine’s editor-in-chief for more than half that 
time. She arrived in 1988, the year – the same month in fact – that Anna 
Wintour became editor-in-chief of AmericanVogue 
<https://subscribe.vogue.com/subscribe/vogue/105319?source=google_sem>. Since 
then, each woman has spawned a cult following, while pursuing very different 
paths. You could say that Wintour’sVogue is the magazine no fashion house can 
afford to ignore, while Sozzani’s is the magazine that no fashion house wants 
to ignore. One is insistently commercial, the other ceaselessly creative.

There are 21 international editions of Vogue, and most cleave more or less to 
the formula that Wintour has established. “I don’t think you can say anyone 
else has more power than Anna,” says Sozzani. “She represents America, and she 
represents the biggest power you can have as an editor. At the same time my 
choice was about creativity, so we really made separate choices but with total 
respect for each other.” The two women are now friends, but Sozzani says it 
took some years to get to that point. “We are both very determined and 
relentless,” she says. “We have a great sense of family in terms of our 
children – and she’s British, so she also has a sense of humour.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe05fc237ff10a54cff7778e00778cc5a4b04333e%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20about%20my%20mother%3A%20growing%20up%20with%20Franca%20Sozzani%20of%20Vogue%20Italia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20about%20my%20mother%3A%20growing%20up%20with%20Franca%20Sozzani%20of%20Vogue%20Italia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe05fc237ff10a54cff7778e00778cc5a4b04333e%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 ‘We have a great sense of family in terms of our children’: Francesco 
Carrozzini as a baby. 
As a rule, Sozzani says, she gets on better with men. “I like things to be 
clear, and with men that’s usually easier. The women I’m closer to, like Anna, 
are women who are very straight.” She feels the same way aboutDonatella Versace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/versace>. “She always fights, and she pays 
for her mistakes, but she’s willing to take risks. Gianni [Versace] was the 
opposite in many ways, very temperamental. One day he could say something and 
after five minutes change his mind completely. Donatella is very reliable, and 
much more focused.”

Every magazine editor knows you cannot please all the people all the time, but 
few have appeared quite as sanguine as Sozzani about pissing off so many people 
so much of the time. If she sees a fire, her instinct is to run to it. War, 
violence, terrorism, drug abuse, environmental catastrophe – all are grist for 
Sozzani’s fashion mill, an oil-and- water mix that frequently gets her into 
trouble.

Condé Nast believed they were hiring a businesswoman with a plan, but she’s 
crazy!
Bernard-Henri Lévy 
Jonathan Newhouse, the chairman of Condé Nast International 
<http://www.condenastinternational.com/>, admits she initially pushed the 
magazine too far out of the company’s comfort zone. “I said if you keep going 
in this direction, I might have to fire you.” Sozzani persuaded him to give the 
transition time even as the magazine’s older advertisers fell away. Meanwhile, 
she was granting photographers greater and greater latitude to do as they 
pleased. At one point in the film the philosopherBernard-Henri Lévy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/bernard-henri-l-vy> pops up, randomly, to 
say that Condé Nast believed they were hiring a businesswoman with a plan, 
before adding with a smirk, “But she’s crazy!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4043a7cfbbda2c60bed7599c0d75d077d5acedc2%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20about%20my%20mother%3A%20growing%20up%20with%20Franca%20Sozzani%20of%20Vogue%20Italia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20about%20my%20mother%3A%20growing%20up%20with%20Franca%20Sozzani%20of%20Vogue%20Italia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4043a7cfbbda2c60bed7599c0d75d077d5acedc2%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘If you keep going in this direction, I might have to fire you’: Condé Nast 
chairman Jonathan Newhouse with Franca Sozzani, Naomi Campbell and Donatella 
Versace in Dubai, 2013. Photograph: Andreas Rentz/Getty Images 
What Condé Nast wanted, says Sozzani, was “girls jumping, laughing”. What they 
ended up with was stories like Steven Meisel’s 70-page “Makeover Madness”, a 
riff on cosmetic surgery that featured models in various “before” and “after” 
poses, and some in mid-operation. There are bloody bandages, liposuction tubes, 
syringes and scalpels. It’s as if the screenwriters ofAb Fab had managed to 
insert Patsy and Edina into the acme of fashion, illuminating the artifice of 
the beauty industry in one fell swoop.

For a woman who grew up anticipating a life of bourgeois boredom, it’s telling 
that Sozzani has no compunction in skewering the world she escaped. “Some of 
the people I know very well told me: ‘I thought this was disgusting, this 
issue, with all this blood, it has no respect for women,’” she recalls. “I 
don’t understand that point of view. Women decide to have plastic surgery, and 
it’s a choice. It’s not like it’s an imposition from somebody else.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb40710cad16ca352491177fdbbb1e9a9d80311eb%2F103_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20about%20my%20mother%3A%20growing%20up%20with%20Franca%20Sozzani%20of%20Vogue%20Italia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20about%20my%20mother%3A%20growing%20up%20with%20Franca%20Sozzani%20of%20Vogue%20Italia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb40710cad16ca352491177fdbbb1e9a9d80311eb%2F103_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 In deep water: from Steven Meisel’s Water & Oil story. Photograph: Steven 
Meisel 
Another Meisel story, this time from 2010, conjured a Deepwater Horizon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bp-oil-spill>-style oil spill, and 
featured models as mermaids washed up in slicks of oil. The story was 
eviscerated on social media, a factor Sozzani never had to consider when she 
started, but every attack on her taste or sensitivity appears to leave her 
unmoved. “I’m very stubborn when I have ideas,” she says. “When pursuing them I 
prefer to make my own mistakes, and not because they tell me it’s wrong.” Her 
instincts have sometimes let her down – a graphic fashion story highlighting 
domestic abuse, again shot by Meisel, served to trivialise the issues.

“In Italy, every three days a woman dies, killed by a relative, husband, 
boyfriend,” says Sozzani. “Probably the fact I credited the clothes was a bit 
too much. At the same time, to make a statement I have to use the tools I have. 
My tool is a fashion magazine.” She recalls being told at journalism school 
that photographs must serve the text, an axiom she has since turned upside 
down, not least because Italian speakers, by and large, are limited to Italy. 
Language is no barrier for a photo story.

Of course the stories that flirt with the news are only part of the formula 
she has developed. To pore over a fashion editorial likeTim Walker 
<http://www.timwalkerphotography.com/>’s whimsical contributions to the 
magazine is to lose yourself in a bedtime story that is one part PL Travers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/24/pl-travers-mary-poppins-documentary>
 to two partsKenneth Grahame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/09/100-best-novels-the-wind-in-the-willows-kenneth-grahame>
, in which you might stumble on a wrought iron bed suspended from an oak tree, 
or find yourself looking into a stately home overrun by horses. Often it seems 
the clothes are there to propel the story more than the story is there to sell 
the clothes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84c339df1c2d112faf78aede52c605460f74e897%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20about%20my%20mother%3A%20growing%20up%20with%20Franca%20Sozzani%20of%20Vogue%20Italia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20about%20my%20mother%3A%20growing%20up%20with%20Franca%20Sozzani%20of%20Vogue%20Italia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fall-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84c339df1c2d112faf78aede52c605460f74e897%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 The more fantastical the better: Franca Sozzani looks over a new issue of 
Vogue Italia. 
For Sozzani the more fantastical a fashion story the better. She worries that 
the relentless focus on commerce – collections being sold as they are being 
sent down the runway – is diluting fashion’s potency. “People want to dream,” 
she says. “They want to take a journey, a trip in their imagination, and that’s 
not simply about buying a dress.” At the same time, she thinks that luxury 
fashion is designed for young women but only affordable for the middle-aged. 
“So you see women of 55, 60, nude – wearing a transparent dress as if that’s 
normal,” she scoffs.

Neither is she impressed by ready-to-wear lines that have made fashion generic 
across the world. “It’s a kind of conformity, it’s the antithesis of fashion,” 
she says. “Creativity is about doing anything you want – in London in the 60s 
nobody wanted to look alike, but today everyone does.”

The same might be said of fashion magazines, or at least the mass-circulation 
titles, and it’s the fact thatVogue Italia is not interested in conforming that 
separates it from its competition. For the photographerPaolo Roversi 
<http://www.paoloroversi.com/pages/bio.html>, Italian Vogue is a self-portrait 
of Sozzani. “It reflects her,” he says in the documentary. “She takes what she 
needs from each photographer to build this self-portrait.”

I don’t know how you had all this success, because I don’t think you’re that 
smart
Francesco Carrozzini 
Because of their relationship, the conversations between mother and son in the 
movie can be feisty, but also honest. “I don’t know how you had all this 
success,” Carrozzini tells Sozzani at one point, “because I don’t think you’re 
that smart.” She laughs off his impudence, but later the two wrestle with the 
movie’s most palpable absence. Carrozzini wants to know about his father, a man 
he barely got to know before he died five years ago.

It’s during a routine taxi ride, the backdrop for many of the interviews, that 
Sozzani tells him matter-of-factly that his father was married to another woman 
when he was born. “I can’t even remember her name,” she says. “Ah well,” 
replies Carrozzini. “It’s always good to learn new things.” They never return 
to the subject.

“He was not a bad person, he was just messy,” says Sozzani later as we say our 
goodbyes at the Bowery Hotel. Does she want to share her life with anyone else? 
She considers the question, and then says, “I never compromise, and in any kind 
of relationship you have to compromise.” Perhaps that is why she is so 
successful in the world of magazines, where compromise is a hindrance.

What does she think is the single greatest asset she brings to her work? “I 
add the dream,” she cries, the light glancing off her arresting blue eyes. And 
then again, for emphasis: “I add the dream.”

Franca: Chaos and Creation <http://www.francathemovie.com/> will be released 
early in 2017
 