
When a flu-ridden Mika Hakkinen walked into the paddock here yesterday the 
thought uppermost in his mind was fighting a pair of losing battles - against a 
virulent germ and a victorious German.

With his season yet to get flying the Finn is already 32 points behind Michael 
Schumacher, the man who stole victory in the Spanish grand prix in Barcelona 
two weeks ago when Hakkinen's clutch dramatically failed on the last lap when 
he was leading - a mechanical failure which has perhaps mortally damaged his 
chances of winning a third world championship.

"It was on the second-last corner of the second-to-last lap that I suddenly 
realised the car's traction control seemed to be working harder than 
previously," Hakkinen recalled, wincing at the memory of a cruel disappointment.

"Initially I thought it was just that the rear tyres might have worn down, but 
then as I went round the last corner to start my last lap there was a metallic 
'drrrr' from the clutch. I knew that was it."

Yet he feels that dealing with such stark disappointment is easier with 18 
grand prix wins under his belt. "If I'd never won a grand prix I would have 
felt really, really pissed off," he said. "But winning races and championships 
helps you to realise there is no point in getting too upset.

"You just have to look inside yourself and ask if there was anything else that 
you could have done. On this occasion it was a mechanical problem and that's 
the end of it."

Hakkinen's Nordic reserve betrays little outward emotion. He is not a man who 
likes to let outsiders know what he is thinking, although he freely 
acknowledges that he has an uphill struggle to close the gap on Schumacher.

"It is always the ideal approach to concentrate on each individual grand prix 
as it comes," he said. "But if you are fighting closely for the championship, 
it is impossible to isolate the individual races because people are always 
saying, 'What about the championship, what about the championship?' So your 
mind gets cluttered up.

"But from the viewpoint of my current strategy, to come from my position at 
the moment to challenge for the championship is extremely difficult.

"However much I might think in an optimistic and positive way, it's going to 
be very hard because the cars are very closely matched in both the McLaren and 
Ferrari camps. So for me to suddenly pick up 30-something points is going to 
take about 10 races.

"I'm going to need a miracle, but I'm sure I can do it. It's just what 
everybody else does which could be the crucial thing."

Historians point to the 1976 season in which James Hunt overturned a 
mid-season 47-point deficit to Niki Lauda and won the title by a single point. 
The difference there, of course, was that Lauda missed the German, Austrian and 
Dutch grands prix after the fiery accident at the NÃ¼rburgring which very nearly 
cost his life.

Hunt was also given an added boost in the final race of the season when Lauda, 
spooked by the treacherously flooded conditions at the Mount Fuji track, 
withdrew from the race after a single lap.

Hakkinen, who enjoyed his moments of ultimate triumph in the drivers' 
championship in 1998 and 1999, has now been a McLaren driver for almost nine 
years. Does he ever feel the tantalising temptation to move? Does he ever 
wonder what it might be like partnering Michael Schumacher at Ferrari?

A mischievous grin crosses Hakkinen's face. "I don't think this is really the 
time for me to answer that, because I feel really bad with this flu," he said, 
impishly dodging the question. "I feel the world is on my shoulders."

So what about that reservoir of motivation on which he has been drawing on 
relentlessly since the start of his formula one career in 1991? Are there any 
signs of it yet running dry?

"If we're talking about my first championship in 1998, maybe I had maximum 
motivation," he said. "Maybe today I feel a little less. Retiring is not yet in 
my mind. There's going to be some time when I'll have to start thinking about 
it. But not yet."

However, although the thought of hanging up his steering wheel might not be on 
the immediate agenda, the prospect of him having to play second fiddle to David 
Coulthard very much is. The Scot lies second in the championship, eight points 
behind Schumacher but more significantly 24 ahead of his McLaren team-mate.

Hakkinen admits to a good relationship with Coulthard, the longest-standing 
and most successful partnership in world championship grand prix history. 
Together they have won 27 races in their six seasons in tandem at the 
McLaren-Mercedes team. Yesterday they were the two fastest in practice for 
tomorrow's race, Hakkinen just 0.027sec behind his team-mate.

"I think we're getting on better together," he said, "although I sometimes 
think that it's difficult managing a relationship where you're trying to beat 
the guy out on the circuit and then get out of the cars and talk about other 
things."

For his part, Coulthard is too astute to make play on Hakkinen's special 
relationship with the team's principal, Ron Dennis - forged in the aftermath of 
the Finn's horrific 125mph accident in practice for the Australian grand prix 
in Adelaide in 1995 - because it is conducted purely on a personal level and 
never impinges on the professional and technical operation of the team.

Dennis, meanwhile, is keen to allay either driver's fears that the other might 
be gaining some sort of preferential edge.

"The moment you start the formal process of trying to win races, all the 
emotion goes out of it," he said. "I can comfortably say that I am totally 
committed to either of the drivers winning. I don't care who wins."

However, in the days and weeks that followed Hakkinen's accident, a deep 
personal bond developed which has defined the relationship between the two men 
ever since. It is something which transcends the customary employer-employee 
relationship in this sport, and has inevitably given rise to speculation that 
Hakkinen is Dennis's favourite driver.

"There is a perception that I have a closer relationship with Mika than with 
David [Coulthard]," Dennis said. "There is that emotional value [between us], 
but you've got to understand where it comes from. Walking into that Adelaide 
hospital, being sucked into the trauma of the whole thing. Seeing the guy going 
through the [medical] stages which were predicted by the specialists.

"I am a guy who, if he ends up in a situation in which he doesn't want to be, 
then I've got to be able to look back and ask whether I did everything in my 
power. I got involved mentally in the milestones of his recovery through to the 
point where he was up and running again.

"You're not human if that doesn't affect you, but it doesn't mean diddly-squat 
when I have to take decisions about the outcome of a grand prix and who's going 
to win. I'm consumed by winning. I don't give a damn who wins, I really don't."
 