
Americans throw away almost as much food as they eat because of a “cult of 
perfection”, deepening hunger and poverty, and inflicting a heavy toll on the 
environment.


Vast quantities of fresh produce grown in the US are left in the field to rot, 
fed to livestock or hauled directly from the field to landfill, because of 
unrealistic and unyielding cosmetic standards, according to official data and 
interviews with dozens of farmers, packers, truckers, researchers, campaigners 
and government officials.

From the fields and orchards of California to the population centres of the 
east coast, farmers and others on the food distribution chain say high-value 
and nutritious food is being sacrificed to retailers’ demand for unattainable 
perfection.

 “It’s all about blemish-free produce,” says Jay Johnson, who ships fresh 
fruit and vegetables from North Carolina and central Florida. “What happens in 
our business today is that it is either perfect, or it gets rejected. It is 
perfect to them, or they turn it down. And then you are stuck.”

Food waste <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food-waste> is often 
described as a “farm-to-fork” problem. Produce is lost in fields, warehouses, 
packaging, distribution, supermarkets, restaurants and fridges.

 By one government tally, about 60m tonnes of produce worth about $160bn 
(£119bn), is wasted by retailers and consumers every year - one third of all 
foodstuffs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1879a5793476db03faa74bc89788168a73a717f1%2F0_0_2200_1467%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Half%20of%20all%20US%20food%20produce%20is%20thrown%20away%2C%20new%20research%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Half%20of%20all%20US%20food%20produce%20is%20thrown%20away%2C%20new%20research%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1879a5793476db03faa74bc89788168a73a717f1%2F0_0_2200_1467%2F2200.jpg>
 Edible food dumped by vendors in a New York market. There is a demand for 
‘blemish-free produce’ in the industry. Photograph: LA Times/Getty 
But that is just a “downstream” measure. In more than two dozen interviews, 
farmers, packers, wholesalers, truckers, food academics and campaigners 
described the waste that occurs “upstream”: scarred vegetables regularly 
abandoned in the field to save the expense and labour involved in harvest. Or 
left to rot in a warehouse because of minor blemishes that do not necessarily 
affect freshness or quality.

When added to the retail waste, it takes the amount of food lost close to half 
of all produce grown, experts say.

“I would say at times there is 25% of the crop that is just thrown away or fed 
to cattle,” said Wayde Kirschenman, whose family has been growing potatoes and 
other vegetables near Bakersfield, California, since the 1930s. “Sometimes it 
can be worse.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae894e29bd5a4e41f1d9aaa255dec86362af6bd1%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Half%20of%20all%20US%20food%20produce%20is%20thrown%20away%2C%20new%20research%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Half%20of%20all%20US%20food%20produce%20is%20thrown%20away%2C%20new%20research%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae894e29bd5a4e41f1d9aaa255dec86362af6bd1%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Wayde Kirschenman . Photograph: Dan Tuffs/for the Guardian 
“Sunburnt” or darker-hued cauliflower was ploughed over in the field. Table 
grapes that did not conform to a wedge shape were dumped. Entire crates of 
pre-cut orange wedges were directed to landfill. In June, Kirschenman wound up 
feeding a significant share of his watermelon crop to cows.

Researchers acknowledge there is as yet no clear accounting of food loss in 
the US, although thinktanks such as theWorld Resources Institute 
<http://www.wri.org/> are working towards a more accurate reckoning. 
<http://flwprotocol.org/>

Imperfect Produce <http://www.imperfectproduce.com/home/>, a subscription 
delivery service for “ugly” food in the San Francisco Bay area, estimates that 
about one-fifth of all fruit and vegetables are consigned to the dump because 
they do not conform to the industry standard of perfection.

But farmers, including Kirschenman, put the rejection rate far higher, 
depending on cosmetic slights to the produce because of growing conditions and 
weather.


That lost food is seen increasingly as a drag on household incomes – about 
$1,600 a year for a family of four – and adirect challenge to global efforts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/aug/12/produced-but-never-eaten-a-visual-guide-to-food-waste>
 to fight hunger, poverty and climate change.

Globally, about one-third of food is wasted: 1.6bn tonnes of produce a year, 
with a value of about $1tn. If this wasted food were stacked in 20-cubic metre 
skips, it would fill 80m of them, enough to reach all the way to the moon, and 
encircle it once. Taking action to tackle this is not impossible,as countries 
like Denmark have shown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/13/how-did-denmark-become-a-leader-in-the-food-waste-revolution>
.
Wasted 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/food-wastetotal/giv-12515mnuvCDqJJ6g4/>
The Obama administration and the UN have pledged to halve avoidable food waste 
by 2030. Food producers, retail chains and campaign groups such as theNatural 
Resources Defense Council <https://www.nrdc.org/about> have also vowed to 
reduce food loss in theReFED <http://www.refed.com/?sort=economic-value-per-ton>
 initiative.

Food experts say there is growing awareness that governments cannot 
effectively fight hunger, or climate change, without reducing food waste. Food 
waste accounts for about 8% of global climate pollution, more than India or 
Russia.

“There are a lot of people who are hungry and malnourished, including in the 
US. My guess is probably 5-10% of the population are still hungry – they still 
do not have enough to eat,” said Shenggen Fan, the director general of the
International Food Policy Research Institute <http://www.ifpri.org/> in 
Washington. “That is why food waste, food loss matters a great deal. People are 
still hungry.”


That is not counting the waste of water, land and other resources, or the toll 
on the climate of producing food that ends up in landfill.

Within the US, discarded food is the biggest single component of landfill and 
incinerators, according to the Environmental Protection Agency. Food dumps are 
a rising source of methane, a far more powerful greenhouse gas than carbon 
dioxide. But experts readily acknowledge that they are only beginning to come 
to grips with the scale of the problem.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F591d287eeebc595cc6f0b63b2ee5546964f6804c%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Half%20of%20all%20US%20food%20produce%20is%20thrown%20away%2C%20new%20research%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Half%20of%20all%20US%20food%20produce%20is%20thrown%20away%2C%20new%20research%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F591d287eeebc595cc6f0b63b2ee5546964f6804c%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 A farm worker harvests lettuce in a field near Calexico, California. The US 
has set a target of halving avoidable food waste. Photograph: AFP/Getty 
The May harvest season in Florida found Johnson with 11,000kg (24,250lbs) of 
freshly harvested spaghetti squash in his cool box – perfect except for brown 
scoring on the rind from high winds during a spring storm.

“I’ve been offering it for six cents a pound for a week and nobody has pulled 
the trigger,” he said. And he was “expecting an additional 250,000lbs of 
squash,” similarly marked, in his warehouse a fortnight later.

“There is a lot of hunger and starvation in the United States, so how come I 
haven’t been able to find a home for this six-cents-a-pound food yet?” Johnson 
asked.

Such frustrations occur regularly along the entirety of the US food production 
chain – and producers and distributors maintain that the standards are always 
shifting. Bountiful harvests bring more exacting standards of perfection. Times 
of shortage may prove more forgiving.

Retail giants argue that they are operating in consumers’ best interests, 
according to food experts. “A lot of the waste is happening further up the food 
chain and often on behalf of consumers, based on the perception of what those 
consumers want,” said Roni Neff, the director of the food system environmental 
sustainability and public health programme at theJohns Hopkins Center for a 
Livable Future 
<http://www.jhsph.edu/research/centers-and-institutes/johns-hopkins-center-for-a-livable-future/>
 in Baltimore.

“Fruit and vegetables are often culled out because they think nobody would buy 
them,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b1da3526e526e14393ab3863aa8152d020737a1%2F0_172_5696_3419%2F5696.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Half%20of%20all%20US%20food%20produce%20is%20thrown%20away%2C%20new%20research%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Half%20of%20all%20US%20food%20produce%20is%20thrown%20away%2C%20new%20research%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b1da3526e526e14393ab3863aa8152d020737a1%2F0_172_5696_3419%2F5696.jpg>
 Green Bell peppers discarded and left to decay in the sun. These peppers are 
rejected as seen as not fit for market due to odd shape or blemishes. 
Photograph: Dan Tuffs/for the Guardian 
But Roger Gordon, who founded the Food Cowboy <http://www.foodcowboy.com/> 
startup to rescue and re-route rejected produce, believes that the waste is 
built into the economics of food production. Fresh produce accounts for 15% of 
supermarket profits, he argued.

“If you and I reduced fresh produce waste by 50% like [the US agriculture 
secretary] Vilsack wants us to do, then supermarkets would go from [a] 1.5% 
profit margin to 0.7%,” he said. “And if we were to lose 50% of consumer waste, 
then we would lose about $250bn in economic activity that would go away.”

Some supermarket chains and industry groups in the US are pioneering ugly 
produce sections and actively campaigning to reduce such losses. But a number 
of producers and distributors claimed that some retailing giants were still 
using their power to reject produce on the basis of some ideal of perfection, 
and sometimes because of market conditions.

The farmers and truckers interviewed said they had seen their produce rejected 
on flimsy grounds, but decided against challenging the ruling with the US 
department of agriculture’s dispute mechanism for fear of being boycotted by 
powerful supermarket giants. They also asked that their names not be used.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67cc15d742d6cfacf67d339130b84f8b2d5bf9e9%2F0_0_5205_3457%2F5205.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Half%20of%20all%20US%20food%20produce%20is%20thrown%20away%2C%20new%20research%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Half%20of%20all%20US%20food%20produce%20is%20thrown%20away%2C%20new%20research%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67cc15d742d6cfacf67d339130b84f8b2d5bf9e9%2F0_0_5205_3457%2F5205.jpg>
 Compost collection at Union Square Greenmarket in New York. Photograph: Alamy 
“I can tell you for a fact that I have delivered products to supermarkets that 
was [sic] absolutely gorgeous and because their sales were slow, the last two 
days they didn’t take my product and they sent it back to me,” said the owner 
of a mid-size east coast trucking company.


“They will dig through 50 cases to find one bad head of lettuce and say: ‘I am 
not taking your lettuce when that lettuce would pass a USDA inspection.’ But as 
the farmer told you, there is nothing you can do, because if you use the Paca 
[Perishable Agricultural Commodities Act of 1930] on them, they are never going 
to buy from you again. Are you going to jeopardise $5m in sales over an $8,000 
load?”

He said he experienced such rejections, known in the industry as kickbacks, “a 
couple of times a month,” which he considered on the low side for the industry. 
But he said he was usually able to sell the produce to another buyer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00c0bc4bae3197d7fa2750d6b82a0cb6575823fb%2F0_0_5129_3421%2F5129.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Half%20of%20all%20US%20food%20produce%20is%20thrown%20away%2C%20new%20research%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Half%20of%20all%20US%20food%20produce%20is%20thrown%20away%2C%20new%20research%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fus-food-waste-ugly-fruit-vegetables-perfect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00c0bc4bae3197d7fa2750d6b82a0cb6575823fb%2F0_0_5129_3421%2F5129.jpg>
 Squash left to rot in a field in Florida. Globally, about one-third of food is 
wasted: a total of 1.6bn tonnes a year. Photograph: Alamy 
The power of the retail chains creates fear along the supply chain, from the 
family farmer to the major producer.

“These big growers do not want to piss off retailers. They don’t enforce Paca 
on Safeway, Walmart or Costco,” said Ron Clark, who spent more than 20 years 
working with farmers and food banks before co-founding Imperfect Produce.


“They are just not going to call because that will be the last order they will 
ever sell to them. That’s their fear. They are really in a pickle.”
 