
Hamburg SV clung on to their time-honoured place in the Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> once again after 
beating second-tier Karlsruhe 2-1 – and 3-2 on aggregate – after moments of 
extraordinary late drama in the second leg of their play-off on Monday.

The three-times German champions are the only club never to have been 
relegated since the Bundesliga’s creation in 1963 but they were 1-0 down and on 
their way out with 90 minutes played atKarlsruhe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/karlsruhe>. Their raucous travelling 
support feared the worst until the Chilean international Marcelo Díaz curled 
home a last-minute free-kick to take the tie into extra time.

Then, with a penalty shootout looming and four minutes of the extra period 
remaining, Nicolai Müller scored forHamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamburg>, ensuring that Karlsruhe would 
need to score twice to gain promotion.

Finally, the Hamburg goalkeeper René Adler guaranteed victory by saving a 
Rouwen Hennings penalty, awarded for handball, two minutes into stoppage time.

The late drama ensured the former European champions narrowly maintained their 
proud record after another dismal season.

“No one gave up,” said Müller, whose tap-in secured the victory. “We did it. 
We’re still in the Bundesliga. We were carrying a lot of baggage all season and 
it feels great to unload that all in a few seconds now.“

Adler said: “I feel like I aged three years tonight. It’s incredible what we 
did in the last six weeks. A triumph of team spirit.

“It was a crazy match and anything could have happened in a match like this. I 
was already thinking at the end of regulation time that we’d end up in the 
second division but caught myself and said, ‘Stop, no that’s not going to 
happen.’”

Reinhold Yabo had brought them to the brink by volleying Karlsruhe ahead in 
the 78th minute.

Hamburg, 16th in the 18-team Bundesliga the last two seasons, also needed a 
relegation play-off to stay up last season thanks to an away goal in a 1-1 draw 
at Greuther Fuerth in the second leg of the play-off after a goalless first leg 
in Hamburg.

Paderborn and Freiburg were relegated to the second division at the end of the 
season last week while Ingolstadt and SVDarmstadt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/darmstadt> 98 gained promotion to the 
Bundesliga.
 