
The lost weekend of Lewis Hamilton, like that of Ray Milland in the film noir 
classic, is likely to result in an epic hangover. AJapanese Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/09/f1-japanese-grand-prix-live>
 he really had to win to stand a realistic chance of retaining his Formula One 
world championship was lost as his team-mate Nico Rosberg took an increasingly 
strong grip on the 2016 title.

Lewis Hamilton says he told Mercedes to withdraw Japanese Grand Prix appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/lewis-hamilton-withdraw-appeal-japanese-grand-prix>
However, after two shattering defeats for the British driver in the space of 
eight days, the investigation that Mercedes will inevitably hold to discover 
what went wrong for Hamilton in Suzuka is likely to be careful with his 
sensibilities.

The Mercedes head of motorsport, Toto Wolff, hinted as much when he said here 
on Sunday evening: “I am on the same flight [home]. I think just after such a 
race, it is not the right moment to really put the finger where it hurts.

“We need to calm down and find out what happened, regroup and my learning from 
the last couple of years is that 24 hours later things look different. Our main 
emphasis will be on building him up and enjoying the ride home before Austin.”

Besides, Wolff was hardly in a postmortem mood after seeing his team nail 
their third constructors’ title in three years, while Rosberg closed on his 
first drivers’ championship.

Hamilton has caused Mercedes much embarrassment recently, however. After the 
Malaysian Grand Prix,where his engine blew 15 laps from the end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/daniel-ricciardo-wins-malaysian-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1>
 of a race he was dominating, he gave ammunition to the many conspiracy 
theorists on social media when he said that someone did not want him to win the 
tile. Then in Suzuka press conferences on Thursday and Saturday –the Snapchat 
farce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/lewis-hamilton-f1-under-fire-snapchat-bunny-app>
 followed by an overreaction by the driverwhen he refused to answer any 
questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/lewis-hamilton-walks-out-japan-gp-press-conference>
 – there were signs of a mental fragility not seen since his meltdown year of 
2011. And again on Sunday evening there was more controversy when he appeared 
to go against an appeal decision made by his team.

Hamilton remains Mercedes’s – indeed Formula One’s – major asset and his team 
will be anxious that all is well with him going into the final four races of 
the season, starting with the US round in Austin on 23 October. So they are 
likely to speak to him.

Wolff said: “I saw a Lewis in Malaysia that was on a roll, dominating, then we 
let him down with the engine failure. During the week he was OK – then all 
these things around the press conference, then yesterday.”

Hamilton, of course, has had rotten luck, plain and simple, with three engine 
failures, in China, Russia and Malaysia. There are also signs, though, that 
Rosberg’s greater strength and consistency this season is beginning to get to 
him. After all, Hamilton has been beating Rosberg on a regular basis for almost 
two decades and the prospect of losing the 2016 world championship to him will 
be hurting him grievously.

Then there is the technical issue of his bad starts. For the fifth time this 
season Hamilton made a wretched getaway, immediately dropping from his second 
place on the grid to eighth. That followed other awful starts in Australia, 
Bahrain, Canada and Italy. Rosberg, it seems, has no trouble with the extra 
demands on clutch control that are being made this season.

“The clutch is not perfect,” says Wolff. “It’s difficult to handle and we have 
tried to optimise it. I have never driven the clutch, so I can only tell you 
what we analyse. It is difficult to handle it in the right way and both drivers 
have worked on it and gone as far as changing the way their gloves are in order 
to release it.

“It is very complicated to deploy and then there is the random factor. We are 
also more in the spotlight if it goes wrong [because Mercedes are usually 
running at the front].”

Hamilton still had a decent couple of days in Japan, even though Rosberg 
dominated all three practice sessions as well as qualifying and the race 
itself. The British driver was as close as 0.013sec to Rosberg in qualifying 
and on Sunday he clawed his way up to the field in a valiant effort to make up 
for yet another disappointing beginning and almost came second. That will not 
be helping the hurt he is feeling, knowing that the championship is now beyond 
his control.

F1: Japanese Grand Prix - as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/09/f1-japanese-grand-prix-live>
Rosberg, meanwhile, just cannot stop winning. This was his ninth victory of 
the season (while Hamilton has six). There was a growing sense in Japan that 
Rosberg deserves the world title this year. Certainly he will if he wins more 
races and goes on to take the championship by a healthy margin of more than 25 
points, which seems likely now.

“It’s been an awesome weekend, for sure, the whole weekend had gone great from 
the word go,” he said. “It’s been very, very special, especially on this 
legendary track. It’s beautiful to win here.”

If Hamilton was imploding in Japan, Rosberg hadn’t noticed. “I haven’t seen 
any ‘self-destruction’,” he said. “The Lewis that I have seen was massively 
motivated and focused. Anyways, it is about getting the best out of myself and 
not focusing on Lewis’s state of mind.”
 