
The Americans are coming! The Americans are coming!

Last week the lantern signals of the internet revealed that the Broadway smash 
Hamilton,which just won 11 Tony awards, including best musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/13/tony-awards-2016-winners-hamilton-the-humans-broadway>
, will invade London’s West End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/10/hamilton-the-musical-transfer-west-end-london-lin-manuel-miranda-broadway-tonies>
, specifically the Victoria Palace in October 2017, after the theater undergoes 
a £30m ($42.8m) renovation, led by the producer SirCameron Mackintosh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/30/cameron-mackintosh-interview>. 
As Hamilton requires a fairly minimal, mostly static set, how will that money 
be spent? On anti-scalper defenses? On crowd control? On a revolutionary 
war-themed bar?

 But whether or not Hamilton will continue its democratic reign as critic’s 
darling and box-office behemoth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/10/hamilton-broadway-golden-ticket-quest>
 is of course the most pressing question. If America and England are two 
countries divided by a common language, we are also often separated by finicky 
and fiddly matters of taste. There’s a lengthy list of shows that soared in 
London only to flop on Broadway and a similar compendium of New York living 
legends that proved DOA in the West End.

 Unfortunately, the equation for hit and miss is nothing so simple as the 
lavishly false truism that Broadway favors style over the West End’s substance. 
(Both light and heavy shows have sizzled then fizzled at each locale.) For every
Book of Mormon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/oliver-burkemans-blog/2013/mar/26/why-british-critics-dont-get-book-mormon>
 that kills, there’s aSpring Awakening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/feb/04/spring-awakening> that dies a 
lot less gloriously. As for Broadway, its history is strewn with duds that 
scintillated in London:Enron, to cite a recent example  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2010/may/05/enron-play-bombed-broadway>or 
Starlight Express, to call upon a classic (though why that one succeeded 
anywhere is still something of a mystery).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRtLKdQW40Xo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRtLKdQW40Xo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRtLKdQW40Xo&media=>
 Hamilton does have its difficulties. The first, perversely, is its 
overwhelming popularity. The show has become such a cultural phenomenon that it 
is bound to inspire skepticism and a feeling that it can’t possibly live up to 
its hype. The recent announcement that itsNew York producers had raised the 
top-tier ticket price to $849 
<http://www.playbill.com/article/new-block-of-hamilton-tickets-go-on-sale-to-public-at-11-10-pm>
 – ostensibly as a countermove against scalpers – is also unlikely to encourage 
charitable feelings. That Lin-Manuel Miranda has achieved so much at such a 
young age could also conceivably incite some tall poppy syndrome.

 Additionally, the London production will have a new cast, which is unlikely 
to include Miranda or Tony winners Renée Elise Goldsberry, Daveed Diggs or 
Leslie Odom Jr. These new performers are unlikely to be as closely bonded as 
those in the original New York corps, many of whom have known one another for 
years, and have a jaunty, playful spirit, as seen in theHam4Ham 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/theater/2015/11/ham4ham_lin_manuel_miranda_and_the_cast_of_hamilton_reward_ticket_lottery.html>
 videos, in which the cast entertain those waiting for the last-minute ticket 
lottery. This new cast, like the New York one, will almost certainly be 
assembled from actors of color, a move that strengthens the musical’s vision of 
the American founding fathers as a group of upstart immigrants. But will that 
aesthetic choice have similar resonance in England, a country with different 
(though perhaps no less fraught) relationships to race and immigration and a 
place in which multiracial casts are more common?

 Then there’s the story itself, which encompasses key moments in American 
history, like that war we won against, er, the British. (Though surely that’s 
all water across the Atlantic by now. Right? Right?) More problematically, the 
second act deals with America’s nation formation and political infighting, 
material that won’t have been taught in British schools. Additionally, its 
musical language draws from styles such as rap and R&B – a potential problem as 
musicals that feature a more contemporary sound, likeRent  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/oct/16/theatre4>or Spring Awakening, 
haven’t fared as well in the West End.

So why bet on Hamilton at all? Well, it’s the most original and perilously 
exciting new musical to have made it on toBroadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> in years. The lyrics have an 
ocean-crossing energy and the music is a spirited and confident pastiche of a 
multitude of styles, including familiar ones like the pop ballad and the show 
tune.

Miranda’s In the Heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/14/in-the-heights-review-utterly-huggable-musical-lights-up-london>
, an enjoyable but more minor effort now running at the King’s Cross Theatre in 
London, also featured some unusual musical varieties, like hip-hop and salsa, 
which doesn’t seem to have hurt its reception. Nor has the absence of Miranda – 
who originated the role of Usnavi – and other original cast members been 
perceived as a particular detriment. London audiences seem to have had little 
difficulty responding to the rhythms and culture of a distinctly New York 
neighborhood.

This again bodes well for Hamilton. If the British are unfamiliar with much of 
Hamilton’s story, most American audience members are no better versed in the 
intricacies of Washington’s cabinet and the drafting of the Federalist Papers. 
(Yes, the show makes fun of mad King George, but mocking the royals is hardly a 
distinctly American pastime. Furthermore, he gets a very good song.) Recently, 
Americans have managed to follow the plots of recent pieces such asThe Audience 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/09/the-audience-review-helen-mirren-queen-broadway-gerald-schoenfeld-theater>
and King Charles III, so surely the Brits will keep up. Besides, Hamilton is at 
its heart both a great man biography and a classical tragedy – the tale of a 
hero ultimately undone by his own confidence, hubris – and that needs no 
translation.

There’s nothing to be done about the extraordinary acclaim that precedes 
Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> to London. But ticket 
buyers, even disbelievers, will still want to be in the room where it happens.
 