
The tiny Caribbean island of Nevis is receiving a boost from an unexpected 
source: fans of the hit Broadway showHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton>, who have been drawn to the 
birthplace of the US founding father.

Alexander Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> – who went on 
to establish the nation’s financial system, the Federalist party, and the 
United States Coast Guard – was born on Nevis in 1757 and lived in Charlestown 
until he was eight, when the family moved to the nearby island of St Croix.

A small museum dedicated to Hamilton, one of the Founding Fathers, stands on 
what is believed to be the original site where the family lived, and hoteliers 
have now started to leverage the connection to make more people aware of the 
island.

Why Hamilton is making musical history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/05/why-hamilton-is-making-musical-history>
Richard Lupinacci, owner of the Hermitage hotel – one of the oldest buildings 
on the island, which Hamilton would certainly have known – said the Hamilton 
connection is helping Nevis, a former UK territory dominated by a single 
volcano and known for its rich soil and population of feral donkeys.

“People are coming to the island because they want to see the places that he 
knew and because they want to know more about such an extraordinary 
individual,” Lupinacci said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhamilton-broadway-caribbean-island-nevis-birthplace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F027b8052d6d7a8ec9a66dddc0bd0da770cb47c6a%2F0_180_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hamilton's%20Broadway%20success%20proves%20a%20boon%20for%20tiny%20Caribbean%20island%20of%20Nevis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhamilton-broadway-caribbean-island-nevis-birthplace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hamilton%27s%20Broadway%20success%20proves%20a%20boon%20for%20tiny%20Caribbean%20island%20of%20Nevis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhamilton-broadway-caribbean-island-nevis-birthplace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F027b8052d6d7a8ec9a66dddc0bd0da770cb47c6a%2F0_180_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Lin-Manuel Miranda’s final performance in Hamilton on 9 July. Photograph: 
Nicholas Hunt/Getty Images 
Several hotels are now offering Hamilton-themed packages. Lupinacci’s offer 
includes a specially curated island history tour; a copy of Alexander Hamilton, 
Ron Chernow’s book that inspired the play; an afternoon at sea to view Nevis by 
boat; and a donation to the Graham Wyndham Foundation, the orphanage founded by 
Hamilton’s widow, Eliza.

Some Nevis institutions, including the tiny museum dedicated to Horatio 
Nelson, the British admiral who defeated Napoleon’s fleet at Trafalgar and who 
met and married Fanny Nesbit on the island, are reporting a 30% increase in 
traffic.

“We’ve seen a real transformation in understanding about Hamilton and Nevis,” 
said Rand Scholet, president of the Alexander Hamilton Awareness Society, which 
donates to the Nevis Historical and Conservation Society (NHCS).

Scholet said that the society was created to address mischaracterizations that 
Alexander Hamilton was overbearing and egotistical. “What we found was just the 
opposite. His humanity was incredible, he founded the abolition of slavery, 
founded the first African free school, fought for American Indian rights.”

George Washington, Scholet added, “would never have surrounded himself with 
someone of poor quality. He called Hamilton “his principal and most 
confidential aide’.”
Nevis map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/nov/2016-11-11T11:40:00.html> 
According to Lupinacci, Nevis was not in fact a happy place for Hamilton. His 
mother, Rachel Faucette, had married a much older man, who imprisoned her on 
nearby St Croix when she attempted to leave him.

After her release, Faucette fled back to Nevis, where, in time, she met an 
itinerant Scotsman, James A Hamilton, the fourth son of a Scottish laird, who 
came with “no money and no luck”.

She had several children with him, including Alexander. Though divorced, she 
was not permitted to remarry and therefore neither she, nor her new family, 
were accepted in high social circles.

“That’s what Hamilton remembers,” said Lupinacci. “I’d say he was embarrassed 
by his time in Nevis.”

When Faucette died, her former husband claimed her property on Nevis on behalf 
of her legitimate son. Hamilton received nothing, and was bound to serve as an 
apprentice. His intelligence and abilities were soon recognized, however, and 
with the help of wealthy benefactors, was sent to King’s College (now Columbia 
University) in New York City.
 