
On most nights, New York’s Richard Rogers theater is buzzing thanks to its 
current tenant, Hamilton, the hit musical phenomenon that took over the space 
in July 2015 and subsequently tookBroadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> and the culture at large by storm. 
On Thursday afternoon, the buzz was no different as the theater’s stage was 
home to a special promotional performance of the Hamilton Mixtape, an ancillary 
album filled with pop and R&B stars crooning their interpretations of songs 
from the hit musical. Streamed live online to fans around the globe, the 
Hamilton Mixtape performance was an extension of Hamilton’s famed Ham4Ham 
weekly show held Wednesday afternoons outside the theater, which was first 
meant to build buzz but later morphed into a thank you to fans who have 
supported the musical and can’t manage to get actual tickets.

Lin-Manuel Miranda: the bard behind Broadway's Hamilton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/20/lin-manuel-miranda-musicals-hamilton-broadway-disney-hiphop>
Ahmir “Questlove” Thompson and Tariq “Black Thought” Trotter of the Roots – 
two executive producers of the album – took the stage to MC the festivities and 
noted that the album took over a year to put together. Of course, the entire 
project was masterminded byHamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton>
 creator Lin-Manuel Miranda who broadcast a special video message inside the 
theater thanking fans and invited guests for attending. Currently in London 
preparing for an upcoming remake of Mary Poppins for Disney with Emily Blunt as 
the titular nanny, his other collaboration with Disney, the animated Moana, is 
currently No 1 at the box office. In addition, Miranda just announced he’s 
producing a television version of the popular fantasy novel series, The 
Kingkiller Chronicles.


Inside the Rogers, the performance recruited stars from the album to boast 
their tracks from the Mixtape. Grammy nominee Andra Day was no doubt the 
highlight of the event receiving a standing ovation after an emotional 
rendition of the angry ballad Burn, originally sang in the show by Hamilton’s 
wife after she discovers her husband’s affair. Regina Spektor was also on hand 
to croon her version of Dear Theodosia, an ode sung in the show by Aaron Burr 
and Hamilton as love letters to their children. The performance’s grand finale 
was a buoyant duet of the show’s bubbly R&B number Helpless from late 90s 
stalwarts Ashanti and Ja Rule.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhamilton-actor-no-apology-needed-over-pence-remarks-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hamilton%20actor%3A%20no%20apology%20needed%20over%20Pence%20remarks%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhamilton-actor-no-apology-needed-over-pence-remarks-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hamilton%20actor%3A%20no%20apology%20needed%20over%20Pence%20remarks%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhamilton-actor-no-apology-needed-over-pence-remarks-video&media=>
Hamilton actor: no apology needed over Pence remarks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/nov/22/hamilton-actor-no-apology-needed-over-pence-remarks-video>
Though not on hand, other artists featured on the album range the gamut from 
throwback acts to current stars and novelty names. Rappers Chance the Rapper, 
Wiz Khalifa and Nas all pitched in for the mixtape’s hip-hop tracks, while the 
likes of Kelly Clarkson, Alicia Keys, Sia and John Legend handled the pop 
ballads. Jimmy Fallon is even featured with The Roots, delivering his comedic 
take on King George’s bitter anthem You’ll Be Back.


Trump demands apology from Hamilton cast after Mike Pence booed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-booed-at-hamilton-performance-then-hears-diversity-plea>
Two weeks ago, the show about 1700s American politics found itself in the 
middle of the current conversation thanks to a visit from vice-president-elect 
Mike Pence, who was greeted with a mix of boos and cheers upon entering the 
theater for a Friday night performance. Brandon Dixon, the actor who currently 
plays Aaron Burr, later delivered a message to Pence that went viral, saying 
that he truly hopes “this show has inspired you to uphold our American values 
and work on behalf of all of us”.

Thanks to the new wave of publicity, Hamilton set a new sales record the week 
after the affair grossing $3.3m over eight performances, the most money ever 
made on Broadway in a single week. Perhaps it’s a mix of fate and perfect 
synergy, then, that the Hamilton Mixtape has a song titled Immigrants (We Get 
the Job Done), featuring rappers K’naan, Snow Tha Product, Riz MC and Residente 
and opens with the staticky voice of a reporter.

“It’s really astonishing,” he notes. “In a country founded by immigrants, 
‘immigrant’ has somehow become a bad word.”
 