
John Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> is Debenhams for 
people with labradors, and they’ll never get my pubes.

Having grown up in a city without one, I have often been struck by the 
cult-like way in which people talk about John Lewis. I have seen grown men 
brought almost to tears discussing its bedding selection and choice of 
lightbulbs. I’ve sat through literally hours of office chat about its “never 
knowingly undersold” commitment and geisha-like customer service. I’ve heard 
it’s where people have their wedding lists.

All of which makes the fact that John Lewis is moving into the sticky-fingered 
business of bikini waxes 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/07/john-lewis-to-swap-haberdashery-for-bikini-waxes-and-prosecco-ba/>
 all the more disquieting.

Now, let us be clear – your hair is your hair and you have complete authority 
over what you do with it. You can thank theMy Body, My Rules 
<http://mybodymyrules.weebly.com/> school of feminism for that. But, when it 
comes to the decision between haberdashery and hair removal, I’m afraid I have 
to take issue with the latter.

Festive fake: viewers fooled by student Nick Jablonka's John Lewis Christmas ad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/06/festive-fake-viewers-fooled-by-students-john-lewis-christmas-ad>
When the Sunday Times, after interviewing John Lewis’s new managing director, 
Paula Nickolds (who in fact started her career in the sewing department of the 
organisation),says 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/new-boss-gives-john-lewis-bikini-wax-makeover-6qmgvnqc8>
 that the “traditional products, including hats and haberdashery, are being 
downgraded in favour of new services, including holidays, in-store prosecco 
bars and bikini waxes” it makes me want to weave myself a row-boat out of leg 
hair and sail away to the horizon.

John Lewis today reassured <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-37908223> customers 
that they “have no plans to close or downgrade our haberdashery departments. 
Haberdashery is woven into the fabric of our business and there are no plans to 
unstitch it.” But such rumours are unnerving, not least because the better part 
of life lies in creating things, not ripping them out. As women – and let’s be 
honest, women are more likely to be booking in for John Lewis bikini waxes than 
men – we should aspire to be making things, rather than removing them. To sew 
your own is an act of creative independence; hair removal and prosecco bars 
simply fuel the endemic belief that our bodies are flawed and we need 
“professionals” to fix them or drown our sorrows.

The idea that shopping and “pampering” are a “leisure day out” as Nickolds 
claims, is a bare-thighed lie. There is nothing leisurely about disliking your 
own legs. There is nothing relaxing, luxurious or indulgent about covering your 
nadgers with hot wax and ripping out the evidence of an adult, mammalian body. 
I’ve had less painful rock-climbing accidents than the one time I tried to wax 
the back of my thighs. And at the risk of going full Trotsky on your nether 
regions, the removal of pubic hair is yet another way that capitalism plays on 
personal insecurities to make money from your body. And we don’t have to go 
along with it if we don’t want to.

Can we stop talking about our bushes now? Feminists are needed elsewhere | 
Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/bush-feminists-donald-trump-rape-complainant-domestic-violence>
On the other hand, taking on the active, creative, expressive role of maker is 
genuinely galvanising. In June I went to Berlin for the summer, armed with 
little more than my sewing machine. Over the next three months I created almost 
everything I wore with my own hands. There was a dress made from antique soviet 
linen bought on the corner of Boxhagener Platz, a pair of trousers made from 
Neukölln cotton, a bridesmaid dress made from a roll of silk found behind a box 
of potatoes at the Türkischer Markt, numerous jumpsuits, shorts, shirts and 
vests – all made on my bedroom floor using a machine I inherited from my 
great-aunt Margaret. Those items weren’t only cheap, didn’t just fit me, didn’t 
just keep me off the streets for an hour at a time, but will serve as a 
lifelong reminder of a wonderful trip and the fact that, despite what the 
fashion industry may tell us, we can all do it ourselves.

Many of my friends would no doubt be thrilled to their very pudenda at the 
idea of a John Lewis wax. As leisure activities go, it at least gives money to 
one of our last employee-owned companies and might be more fun than 
pole-dancing classes or throwing up sambuca into a sticky bin outside Flares. 
But my generation needs materials, tools and the confidence to do it 
themselves, not “me time”, prosecco and plucked genitals.

When tearing out your pubic hair and slapping on grease become genuinely 
uplifting acts of self-empowerment then sports societies will stop using them 
as hazing initiation rites. In the meantime, you’ll find me, crouched over my 
sewing machine, making yet another outfit. For that is my own personal 
commitment: never knowingly underdressed.
 