
A Happy New Year to all our solvers! 
My selfish wish is that we can avoid some of the technical problems that 
bedevilled the last few weeks of 2011. But, just in case this wish is not 
completely granted, may I draw your attention to a way round one of the 
problems that we had for a couple of days in December? It was the temporary 
failure of the "print version" option for those who do not want to solve their 
puzzles on line. With all the daily puzzles there is also a PDF option, which 
allows you to print off the puzzle more or less as it appears in the paper 
itself. It has the other feature of giving you on the same page the solution to 
the previous puzzle in the series. I know that printing this off the PDF uses 
up more ink than the "print version" itself, but at least it provides a way 
round the problem on a temporary basis.
_____
I don't usually comment on the parsing of individual clues here, as that is 
done in the comments under each puzzle, by Alan Connor in his regular blog, by 
the helpful folk atFifteensquared <http://fifteensquared.net/> and elsewhere. 
But there was some misplaced criticism of a clue (4 down) inCryptic No 25,501 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25501> by Puck on 9 December, 
which it may be helpful for some solvers to mention. The clue was: "Upset 
girl's outburst (7)" for DISTURB. The "complaint" was there the clue contained 
one S too many (on the basis that DI'S + BURST (anag) contains eight letters 
and two S's). But it is common crossword practice for 's to indicate any one of 
three things: the normal possessive, 'of a girl'; or 'girl is' or 'girl has'. 
Here the intended meaning of the clue was 'DI (girl) has BURST (anag).
_____ 
One last word on the LASAGNE/LASAGNA controversy (see my December update). To 
Barry Ethridge I am indebted for the following: "The fact that Garfield's 
favourite food has been LASAGNA since he first appeared in 1978 suggests that 
it has been the preferred American spelling for the dish for as long as they 
have eaten it. As many Italian dishes came to the UK via New York rather than 
Rome it is perhaps the more surprising that LASAGNE survives here at all."
_____
The gremlins that made it impossible to submit entries for the November Genius 
puzzle (No 101 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/java/new/0,,-27531,00.html> set by 
Brummie) for the final two days before the deadline could not be dealt with in 
time for the publication of the December GeniusNo 102 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/java/new/0,,-27633,00.html> by Qaos (a 
new setter for the Guardian) on Monday 5 December. The result was that there 
were only two correct entries on that first day: from the ever-regular Tony of 
London W5 at 16:58 and from a newcomer in the early bird stakes, Thomas of 
London SW20, at 20:11. Perhaps because of that late start, or perhaps because 
of Christmas distractions, or perhaps because this puzzle involved chemical 
symbols unfamiliar to those of the non-scientific tendency, the total entry was 
lower than usual: just 158 by the deadline.

Congratulations to Nesta Thomas from Swansea, who is December's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com> 
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>
 