
May I wish you all a happy New Year and congenial crosswording in 2011. From a 
technical point of view the period between Christmas and New Year was for us 
not without its hiccups, for which I offer my apologies. As those more familiar 
than I with preset computer programs (designed to operate without further 
intervention) tell me, if an error once gets into the sequence one thing leads 
to another, as Apple discovered with its alarm clock phone app at the same 
time. But that is scant consolation to frustrated crossworders.

As a user, though, may I pass on two tips that could help you get round a 
specific problem? First, there is a back way into today's Cryptic and Quick 
puzzles that is not signposted on the crossword home page. The two 'normal' 
ways in are by clicking on the puzzle of choice in the menu running along the 
top of the screen or by clicking where it offers the 'latest' puzzles down the 
left-hand side. But, if both of these clicks spit some 'error message' back at 
you, do not immediately despair. There is a Third Way. It is the archive search 
box on the right-hand side of the home page. Set it to 'cryptic', 'quick' 
'prize, 'speedy' or whatever and type in the serial number for today's puzzle 
(remembering not to put a comma after the thousands, eg 25001 not 25,001). If a 
mega-technical hitch is involved even the Third Way will lead nowhere, but (for 
reasons that are beyond me) very often it gets you through.

Second, if some 'print' or PDF version refuses to print out, or prints out in 
a type size that can't be read without a microscope, the fault (I regret to 
tell you) is more likely to be at your end than at the Guardian's. At this 
point a trick that can work is to 'save' whatever it is that concerns you 
directly to your own hard disk and try to print it out from there (upping the 
type size on the way, if that it what you need). After that, please ask 
userhelp@theguardian.com (not me) for advice on where the problem may lie and 
what might be done about it.
_____

There was no clear majority view expressed on my question last month as to 
whether solutions like PVC and FBI, which are not spoken as acronyms, should 
continue to be awarded letter counts like (1,1,1) at the end of clues, rather 
than the (4) that, say, NATO and AWOL get. In fact the total number of replies 
was so low as to leave me in the uncomfortable position of having to make up my 
own mind, which for the moment is to stay with the (1,1,1) format â€“ another 
example of Stephenson's First Law in action: when in doubt do nothing.
_____

December's Genius (No 90) was set by Crucible, who is now a regular setter of 
our daily cryptics and lives in Northern Ireland. This was his first Genius, 
with a theme of 'marks' and 'couplings', triggered by Mark Twain, who died in 
1910: or rather by his real name, Samuel Langhorne Clemens (9 & 7 down). It 
attracted a high entry of 390 correct solutions, 24 of them on the first day. 
Some usual suspects were in the van: Tony of London W5 at 00:36; Ian of London 
N14 at 01:00; and Peter of Montville, Queensland at 01:39. The first 'newcomer' 
to finish was Ben P. from somewhere in Australia at 10:05, followed by Alan H. 
of York at 10:45. Our January Genius is also by a new setter, Tramp. Because of 
the way the first Monday of the month falls this February, the deadline for 
submission is later than normal: 23:59 GMT on Saturday 5 February.

Congratulations to John McKenzie from Cheshire, who is December's Genius 
winner.
We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please email userhelp@theguardian.com . If you have any comments or 
queries about the crosswords, please email 
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk . For Observer crosswords please email 
crossword.editor@observer.co.uk .
 