
Harry Enfield is to make his theatrical debut in a revival of Once in a 
Lifetime <http://www.youngvic.org/whats-on/once-in-a-lifetime>, Moss Hart and 
George S Kaufman’s satirical comedy about Hollywood’s transition from the 
silent era to the talkies. The Young Vic production will star Enfield as movie 
mogul Herman Glogauer, a role previously taken by David Suchet in a 1979 Royal 
Shakespeare Company production and in the play’s last major London revival,at 
the National Theatre in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/dec/16/theatre>. Once in a Lifetime – 
which was written shortly after the first talking picture,The Jazz Singer 
<http://www.filmsite.org/jazz.html>, rocked the film industry – first ran on 
Broadway in 1930.

Richard Jones will direct the new production, which begins previews on 25 
November. Enfield, wholast year undertook a high-profile UK stage tour with 
fellow comedian Paul Whitehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/25/harry-enfield-paul-whitehouse-legends-tour-brighton-centre-review>
, said: “When Richard suggested it, I thought that playing this all-powerful 
Hollywood studio boss sounded like a lot of fun. I love the Young Vic and I’m 
really excited to be working there, and with Richard Jones and the rest of the 
company, on this brilliant comedy.”

Once in a Lifetime will be followed, in the Young Vic’s main house, by A 
Midsummer Night’s Dream directed by Joe Hill-Gibbins, whose last Shakespearean 
production at the Young Vic,Measure for Measure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/09/measure-for-measure-review-sex-decay-astonishing-romola-garai>
, filled the stage with a sea of inflatable sex dolls. Hill-Gibbins said that 
his Dream will explore the emotional complexities of “a grownup play about 
adult relationships” rather than be about “fickle adolescence and wacky 
fairies”. He stressed that it is a play about love, and that love “sometimes 
can be fun and magical but can also be difficult, painful and complex. That’s 
written-in throughout the play. It’s a comedy, and lots of comedy comes from 
pain. It’s a play about the joy of relationships, but also the damage that 
people can do to each other in relationships.” The production will be designed 
by Johannes Schütz, who worked on the Young Vic’s radical 2012 production of 
Chekhov’sThree Sisters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/sep/14/three-sisters-review>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fharry-enfield-theatre-debut-once-in-a-lifetime-young-vic-new-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5c783b6349211f83ee77c2f601bd4573a6e4c2c%2F0_0_3336_2832%2F3336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Enfield%20to%20make%20theatre%20debut%20as%20movie%20mogul%20in%20Hollywood%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fharry-enfield-theatre-debut-once-in-a-lifetime-young-vic-new-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Enfield%20to%20make%20theatre%20debut%20as%20movie%20mogul%20in%20Hollywood%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fharry-enfield-theatre-debut-once-in-a-lifetime-young-vic-new-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5c783b6349211f83ee77c2f601bd4573a6e4c2c%2F0_0_3336_2832%2F3336.jpg>
 Gala Gordon, Mariah Gale and Vanessa Kirby in Three Sisters, designed by 
Johannes Schütz, at the Young Vic in 2012. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
A Midsummer Night’s Dream opens in February 2017. That month, the Young Vic’s 
Maria theatre will present See Me Now, a new show created and performed by sex 
workers. Its director, Mimi Poskitt, said the project was “born out of wanting 
to work with and understand more about who sex workers are. The industry is 
multifaceted, often invisible, yet shrouded in controversy. Over the last year 
we have been fortunate enough to work with an awesome group of performers who 
have shared their own deeply personal histories. They are writers, teachers, 
musicians, cleaners, parents; they work in IT, in public services. [Although] 
by no means definitive, what they are creating reflects a kaleidoscope of life 
experiences; some touching, some tough, some hilarious.” The show is a 
co-production by the Young Vic,Look Left Look Right 
<http://www.lookleftlookright.com/> and HighTide <https://www.hightide.org.uk/>.

The Young Vic has also announced casting details for its production of trade, 
written by debbie tucker green (whose play titles, like her name, are always 
given in lowercase). Performed in the theatre’s smallest space, the Clare, the 
play is a three-hander billed as “a sharp examination of our transactional 
world”. Directed by Bryony Shanahan, the play will star Ayesha Antoine, Jo 
Martin and Sharon Duncan-Brewster, who is currently playing Stella opposite 
Maxine Peake’s Blanche in a production ofA Streetcar Named Desire at the Royal 
Exchange in Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/14/a-streetcar-named-desire-review-a-superb-and-tragic-spectacle-michael-billington>
.
 