
Not long after Harriet Tubman was named to replace Andrew Jackson on the $20 
bill, the celebration that an escaped slave would be honored over a slaveowner 
president gave way to mixed feelings among her most ardent admirers, some of 
whom fear the myth may overtake the woman.

The legend of Tubman, who escaped slavery as a young woman, held tight to her 
revolver into freedom and evaded bounty hunters for years, is in part what 
frustrates historians. “I am stunned and excited and thrilled that Harriet 
Tubman is having her day,” said biographer Kate Larson, “but at the same time, 
for so many years, I have been working towards rewriting those myths.”

Since the decision was made, exaggerations and outright falsehoods have 
proliferated amid celebrations of Tubman. Several inspirational quotes long 
attributed to Tubman – falsely – have circulated freely on social media, 
including oneshared, and later retracted 
<https://newrepublic.com/minutes/132894/bill-de-blasio-tweeted-fake-as-hell-hallmark-esque-harriet-tubman-quote>
, by New York mayor Bill de Blasio.

Inflated figures about how many enslaved people Tubman rescued also seeped 
into the discussions. Citing Tubman’s own words, Larsonestimates 
<http://www.harriettubmanbiography.com/harriet-tubman-myths-and-facts.html> 
that Tubman led about 70 enslaved people on 13 trips from Maryland to freedom, 
rather than 300 or 1,000 people, as isoften 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aia/part4/4p1535.html> written. She also instructed 
about 70 more people on how to traverse the underground railroad.

Larson said misconceptions about Tubman had flourished in part because she was 
a “malleable icon”. As she was illiterate and unable to record her own history, 
little is definitively known about many details of Tubman’s life, Larson said. 
“People from different parts of the political spectrum have used her over time 
as representative of their particular viewpoint.”

Few have actively opposed an honor for the abolitionist, though some have 
criticized acclaim for Tubman at the expense of Jackson. Donald Trump, the 
Republican frontrunner for president,argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/22/donald-trump-opposes-placing-harriet-tubman-on-20-note>
 this week that Jackson should hold his spot on the $20 bill and Tubman have 
her own, separate denomination. He suggested the $2 bill.

To put Harriet Tubman on the $20 bill would be an insult to her legacy | 
Steven W Thrasher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/15/a-slave-abolitionist-has-no-business-being-on-the-20-bill>
Others have argued that the knotted history of slavery and capitalism makes 
money an inappropriate way to honor an escaped slave. “By escaping slavery and 
helping many others do the same,” the writer Feminista Jones argued inthe 
Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2015/05/14/keep-harriet-tubman-and-all-women-off-the-20-bill/>
, “Tubman became historic for essentially stealing ‘property’.

“Her legacy is rooted in resisting the foundation of American capitalism. 
Tubman didn’t respect America’s economic system, so making her a symbol of it 
would be insulting.”

Andrea Williams, a professor at Ohio State who has written about Tubman, did 
not disagree. “The irony of her image being exchanged in return for commodities 
in the future,” she said, “seems to recall the way that actual slaves’ bodies 
were serving as currencies of exchange.”

Larson arrived at a different conclusion about the honor. 

“She turned that system on its head. She robbed her own body and her family 
from that system,” she said. “But everyone forgets that she was an unbelievable 
entrepreneur. She wanted freedom and liberty to be able to determine your own 
future and to provide for your own family.”

Williams said she found it “troubling” that a woman who was treated as 
currency will be enshrined on bills, but said the decision was not necessarily 
bad. “That paradox can be a way to encourage people to think more critically,” 
she said. “We can welcome it as the beginning of something, just not 
necessarily as the end of the conversation.”

Phil Goff, a critic and president of the Center for Policing Equity thinktank, 
was more blunt. “America is terrible and it is amazing,” he said. “Money is 
both of those things all the time, so it’s fitting.”

But the currency decision is not even so simple as an ex-slave replacing a 
rarely remembered president. Tubman and Jackson will share the bill, 
abolitionist on the front and slave-owning southerner on the back.

“The two sides of the bill really are informing each other,” Williams said. 
“It presents a counterpoint and it reminds us of the overlap in different 
threads of American history.”

Jackson was not only a slaveowner but also the hero of the 1815 Battle of New 
Orleans, the most important (if belated) victory over Great Britain in the war 
of 1812. He also actively sought conflict with Seminole tribes in Florida, 
eagerly expanded US territory on to indigenous land and, as the seventh 
president, signed the Indian Removal Act, pushing thousands of Native Americans 
to move west along what become known as the Trail of Tears. About 4,000 people 
arebelieved to have died <http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aia/part4/4p2959.html> in the 
forced migration.

“Andrew Jackson, of all people, should be taken off the bill,” Larson said, 
“but we have to look at this as she’s sitting on top of this guy, and she’s got 
him at the back of the bus for a change.”
 