
Harrods <https://www.theguardian.com/business/harrods> has been accused of 
shortchanging its restaurant staff in the latest row over how service charges 
added to diners’ bills are shared among workers.

The union representing Harrods waiters and kitchen staff believes the Qatari 
owner of the upmarket London department store 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/29/harrods-owner-dividend-falls-third-qatarai-holding>
retains up to 75% of the service charge, a situation it says reduces their pay 
by up to £5,000 a year.

The United Voices of the World union (UVW) says an unspecified percentage of 
the service charge collected at Harrods’ 16 cafes and restaurants is shared 
among the 483 kitchen and waiting staff. It is organising a demonstration 
outside the Knightsbridge department store on Saturday as part of a call for 
greater transparency.


 A Harrods spokeswoman confirmed that, like many businesses in the hospitality 
sector, the company operated a “tronc” system, whereby the service charge is 
shared out.


 “Harrods is taking steps to improve the current system through which it 
distributes its service charge, to ensure it best serves our employees and is 
completing a detailed review into the existing scheme,” she said.


“As this is an ongoing review, we are unable to provide further details on the 
distribution. However, employees will be informed of the details of the new 
system as soon as the review is complete.”

Tips should go to workers, not employers, says government report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/02/tips-should-go-to-workers-not-employers-government-report-restaurants>
Petros Elia, the UVW general secretary, said: “Customers expect the service 
charge to go to staff and that’s where it should go. If Harrods feels the need 
to retain a percentage they should explain why.”

What happens to the cash generated by the service charge applied to bar and 
restaurant bills has become a moot point. The TV chef Michel Roux Jr admitted 
in December that his Michelin-starred restaurantLe Gavroche classed service 
charge income as revenue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/15/michel-roux-jr-restaurant-staff-no-share-service-charge-le-gavroche>
 rather than tips to be shared among staff. He has since said the restaurant 
wouldscrap the charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/16/michel-roux-jr-scrap-service-charge-increase-menu-prices-le-gavroche>
 from the end of January.

The chef also apologised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/13/michel-roux-jr-apologises-paying-chefs-minimum-wage-le-gavroche>
 following a Guardian reportin November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/17/tv-chef-michel-roux-jr-paid-kitchen-staff-below-minimum-wage>
 which revealed that Roux was paying some of his staff less than the minimum 
wage at his Mayfair restaurant, where the menu includes starters costing as 
much as £62.80 for lobster mousse with caviar and champagne sauce.

Fortnum & Mason, another high-end London department store, is also trying to 
persuade staff at its Heathrow bar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/fortnum-mason-staff-tips-heathrow-bar-tronc>
 to move over to a tronc system.Fortnum & Mason does not currently distribute 
any of the 12.5% service charge collected on drinkers’ bills at Heathrow.

Accounts filed at Companies House show that Harrods’ owner, Qatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar> Holding – the investment arm of the 
country’s sovereign wealth fund thatacquired the store from Mohamed Al Fayed in 
2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/may/08/mohammed-al-fayed-harrods-sold-qatar>
 for an estimated £1.5bn – paid itself a £100.1m dividend in 2016.


That followed a record year in which pre-tax profits increased 19% to £168m. 
Sales rose 4% to £1.4bn in the year to 30 January 2016. The highest-paid 
director, presumed to be its managing director, Michael Ward, earned £1.6m.

The retailer attracts high-spending overseas tourists and Ward told the 
Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/26/footfall-drops-as-shoppers-choose-online-for-boxing-day-sales>
 that it had been insulated from theeconomic gloom emerging in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/26/boxing-day-shoppers-expected-splash-out-before-brexit-price-rises-kick-in>
 since the Brexit vote.

“Christmas has been particularly strong this year,” he said, pointing to solid 
demand for bags, shoes and diamonds, with Yves Saint Laurent and Gucci among 
the most popular brands.

“The top end of the market is always less affected than anyone else … from our 
perspective we’ve got great local customers plus we’ve seen more international 
customers come toLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.”

Qatar’s sovereign wealth fund, the Qatar Investment Authority, was founded in 
2005 to help the Gulf state strengthen its economy by investing its oil and gas 
riches in other assets.



 * This article was amended on 4 January 2017. The original said the service 
charge is shared out, but only if staff accept a cut in basic pay. This has 
been corrected.
 