
Sonia Friedman, the West End producer responsible for some of the biggest 
stage hits of 2016, has been named the most influential person currently 
working in UK theatre and performing arts.

Friedman has for the first time been placed at No 1 in the Stage 100 list, an 
annual league table organised by the long-established industry newspaper.

A big part of her taking top spot is the stellar success of Harry Potter and 
the Cursed Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/26/harry-potter-cursed-child-review-palace-theatre-london>
, the pair of plays which she produced and watched become one the biggest 
theatrical events for decades.

“She has had such a phenomenal year,” said the Stage’s print editor Alistair 
Smith. “Harry Potter has been an extraordinary success both on a box-office 
level and an artistic one. As long as I’ve been writing about theatre I can’t 
think of another show that has been as big – you’re going back to the 
mega-musicals of the 80s.”
 Harry Potter And The Cursed Child with Jamie Parker (left) as Harry Potter 
and Sam Clemmett as Albus Potter. Photograph: Manuel Harlan/PA 
Smith said bringing Harry Potter to the stage was always likely to be a 
licence to print money. “What has made it really special was that Friedman and 
her fellow creatives resisted the temptation to treat the production as a cash 
cow and created something truly magical, original and – above all – theatrical.”

In 2016 Friedman was also responsible for the musicals Dreamgirls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/14/dreamgirls-review-savoy-theatre-amber-riley-soul-musical>
 andFunny Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/29/sheridan-smith-funny-girl-musical-comedy-savoy-theatre-london>
 and plays such asNice Fish starring Mark Rylance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/25/nice-fish-review-mark-rylance-harold-pinter-theatre-london>
. But she has been a major player for years and was producer on big hits such 
as the West End transfer of Jerusalem from the Royal Court and The Book of 
Mormon.

Friedman replaces Howard Panter and Rosemary Squire in the top spot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/07/ambassador-theatre-group-founders-break-stage-100-record>
. Panter and Squire, the co-founders of Ambassador Theatre Group – the largest 
commercial theatre company in the world – had topped the list since 2009 but 
were in 2016 unexpectedly replaced at the helm by Mark Cornell and Adam 
Kenwright, who are new on the list at No 4.

Andrew Lloyd Webber <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/andrew-lloyd-webber> 
goes up to second spot from fourth, while Cameron Mackintosh remains at No 3.

Friedman, often to be seen with her two bichon frise dogs in tow, is the first 
No 1 not to own or operate West End theatres. She is only the second woman at 
the top as a solo entry, the previous one being Janet Holmes who in 1998 was in 
charge of Stoll Moss Theatres.

Smith said there had been a small increase (up 2% to 34%) in representation of 
women in the list, but a striking rise in the number of women in the top 10 (up 
50% on 2016).

They include Emma Rice (No 10) who was hired to shake up Shakespeare’s Globe 
but will step down in 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/25/emma-rice-step-down-artistic-director-shakespeares-globe>
 because trustees wanted a return to natural lighting.

The number of entries from black, Asian and minority ethnic professionals 
remains low, a reflection of whatLord Lloyd-Webber recently called the 
“hideously white” theatre industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/01/andrew-lloyd-webber-warns-diversity-crisis-british-theatre>
. There are seven people, up from five in 2016.

Among the big risers in the list are Rufus Norris and his executive team at 
the National Theatre, in the top five for the first time.After a rocky start 
which saw the departure of chief executive Tessa Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/16/tessa-ross-resigns-as-national-theatres-chief-executive>
, the high placing was a sign, said Smith, “of that team bedding in and Rufus 
Norris starting to really make his mark as artistic director”.
 Rufus Norris is the Artistic Director of the National Theatre. Photograph: 
Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
The importance of Harry Potter and the Cursed Child is further highlighted 
with its director, John Tiffany, in at No 15, Hermione Granger actor Noma 
Dumezweni at 22, playwright Jack Thorne at 50 and sound designer Gareth Fry at 
93.

The highest placed actor is Kenneth Branagh (18) after his company’s 
successful year-long residency at the Garrick Theatre. Other actors include 
Sheridan Smith (40),Ian McKellen and Patrick Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/20/no-mans-land-review-ian-mckellen-and-patrick-stewart-capture-the-contrasts-of-pinters-masterwork>
 (44), Mark Rylance (48),Billie Piper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/07/yerma-review-young-vic-billie-piper-simon-stone>
 (60), Simon Russell Beale (65), Maxine Peake (66), andPaapa Essiedu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/23/hamlet-review-paapa-essiedu-rsc-tragedy>
 (71).

Smith said the aim of the list was to recognise people who are doing well in 
the industry. “It is the same reason people do award ceremonies, it is to 
reflect on success.”

It was also a good way of keeping tabs on theatre trends over a period of time 
and there is, of course, an element of it being fun: “People like lists.”

Friedman said of her top ranking: “This is an amazing recognition of the 
extraordinary people I have been privileged to work with over the year, and 
also of my sensational team at Sonia Friedman Productions who helped me 
produce, co-produce and develop over 20 shows in 2016 and who are already 
preparing for an even busier 2017.”

The Stage 100 top 10 

1 Sonia Friedman

2 Andrew Lloyd Webber

3 Cameron Mackintosh <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/cameron-mackintosh> 
and Nicholas Allott

4 Mark Cornell and Adam Kenwright

5 Rufus Norris <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rufus-norris>, Lisa Burger 
and Ben Power (NT)

6 Nica Burns and Max Weitzenhoffer

7 Gregory Doran, Catherine Mallyon, Erica Whyman (RSC)

8 David Lan and Lucy Woollatt (Young Vic)

9 Josie Rourke and Kate Pakenham (Donmar Warehouse)

10 Emma Rice and Neil Constable (Shakespeare’s Globe)

The full list will be available at www.thestage.co.uk 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk> and in the 5 January print edition of the Stage.
 