
During previews of her latest West End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/westend> show, theatre producer Sonia 
Friedman has developed an analogy for the pressure she is feeling. “Imagine 
Star Wars was opening in one cinema in one city and that was the only place you 
could see it. That’s sort of what’s happening with this. The amount of interest 
worldwide is that much.”

Casting a spell: meet the characters of Harry Potter and the Cursed Child
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2016/jun/01/harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-in-pictures>
 Though playing in just one venue, the Palace theatre, in one city, London, 
Harry Potter and the Cursed Child offers two opportunities for fans to fight 
for a ticket.Dramatist Jack Thorne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/11/jack-thorne-trusted-jk-rowling-theatre-scriptwriter-harry-potter-play>
 has written a pair of instalments, each two and a half hours long, based on 
several major characters in JK Rowling’s seven novels, which became eight 
movies.

While still about the superstar wizard, the plays introduce multiple new 
figures and plot lines. And if I said much more than that, one of Rowling’s 
fearsomedementors <http://harrypotter.wikia.com/wiki/Dementor> would descend 
and suck out my soul.


Talking to Friedman and her co-producer, Colin Callender, in the Palace bar, 
I’m wearing two lapel badges with the legend #keepthesecret, handed to 
theatre-goers as they leave each part. This is because Rowling, whose character 
Voldemort was infamously known as He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named (and may or may not 
appear on stage),has decreed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/06/jk-rowling-harry-potter-fans-not-reveal-plot-cursed-child-play>
 the Harry Potter plays should have The Plot That Must Not Be Mentioned.

 Callender was impressed by the defence given by John Tiffany, the show’s 
director. “He said: ‘Why would you open a kid’s Christmas present in November?’ 
Which is a lovely metaphor.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fharry-potter-cursed-child-london-palace-theatre-jk-rowling-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%20hailed%20by%20fans%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fharry-potter-cursed-child-london-palace-theatre-jk-rowling-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%20hailed%20by%20fans%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fharry-potter-cursed-child-london-palace-theatre-jk-rowling-video&media=>
Harry Potter and the Cursed Child hailed by fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/jun/08/harry-potter-cursed-child-london-palace-theatre-jk-rowling-video>
 “It’s extraordinary that, six weeks into previews, the story still isn’t 
out,” says Friedman. This is partly due to the willingly zipped lips of 
audiences and newspapers. While you could plot-spoil The Mousetrap by standing 
outside the theatre and shouting the surprise identity of the murderer, the 
Potter plays are so complex – especially the second one – that a killjoy would 
need to give a half-hour lecture with diagrams.

JK Rowling: ‘Harry Potter’s world is always in my head’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/05/jk-rowling-harry-potter-cursed-child-jack-thorne-john-tiffany-interview>
 So secretive has the preview period been there are stories of tweet-eaters 
being sent out into cyberspace to close down an Albanian fan who heard 
something from a cousin in London. Is that true? “No,” Friedman insists. “The 
only tweets we have closed down have beenracist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/22/hermione-black-harry-potter-star-wars>
.” His dismayed head shaking in time with Friedman’s, Callender adds: “Some 
really ugly stuff aboutNoma being cast as Hermione 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/05/harry-potter-jk--rowling-black-hermione>
.”

 Though otherwise keeping stumm about the production, Friedman is prepared to 
say what the show isn’t: “What’s interesting is that there has been an 
immediate assumption, from anyone who hasn’t done their research, that this is 
a musical. People still call it Harry Potter: The Musical! And I think that’s 
because it’s usually the form in which franchises and big musicals are seen.”

“Or, otherwise, they think it’s the books adapted for stage,” says Callender. “
What Thorne and director John Tiffany have done 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/05/jk-rowling-harry-potter-cursed-child-jack-thorne-john-tiffany-interview>
, it can probably be safely said, is to push every element – emotion, 
adventure, magic – to the maximum.

The plays explore two empty spaces in the Potter story. What happened after 
the seventh book – Jamie Parker, Noma Dumezweni and Paul Thornley playHarry, 
Hermione and Ron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2016/jun/01/harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-in-pictures>
 as 40-year-olds with Hogwarts students of their own – interacts with a new 
perspective on a key moment in Harry’s childhood. The key to the drama – 
including a three-hanky scene in the second play that still makes Callender 
well up as we discuss it – is the wizard’s status as an orphan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-west-end-palace-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94a9cb7a79c755f68a30f72a3dc9522f0e9ce1da%2F0_0_1772_1183%2F1772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%3A%20'It's%20extraordinary%20the%20story%20still%20isn%E2%80%99t%20out'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-west-end-palace-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%3A%20%27It%27s%20extraordinary%20the%20story%20still%20isn%E2%80%99t%20out%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-west-end-palace-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94a9cb7a79c755f68a30f72a3dc9522f0e9ce1da%2F0_0_1772_1183%2F1772.jpg>
 Jamie Parker, Sam Clemmett, and Ginny Potter Photograph: Charlie Gray/PA 
 “Yes,” says Friedman. “The first thing Jo [Rowling] said to us was ‘Harry the 
orphan’. The starting point was: how does a 40-year-old man, who’s also an 
orphan and a wizard and one of the world’s greatest heroes, how does he do the 
most basic thing of being a dad when he’s had no parenting experience and 
actually had quite a lot of abuse.”

 As the title warns, it is the darkest of all the Potter projects – the 
“cursed child” could be a reference to any one of several characters. The 
chills, however, will be punctuated by gasps of surprise at a succession of 
ingenious illusions. The production wants to prove that theatre can compete 
visually with CGI technology.

 “It does,” says Friedman. “And the gasps are great to hear. But the magic and 
illusions are so simple – most of them could have been done in Victorian 
theatre. Or in Trafalgar Square. We deliberately wanted no David Copperfield or 
Siegfried & Roy-type magic.”

 The box office regularly releases cheaper tickets in the hope of keeping the 
show family-affordable. Devices to prevent mass online purchase by electronic 
diallers or bots have kept thesecondary ticket-sales market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/datablog/2016/jun/10/harry-potter-and-the-curse-of-ticket-resellers>
 small, though Friedman thinks this is partly due to the demographic. The 
banker types who were willing to pay thousands to seeBenedict Cumberbatch’s 
Hamlet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/26/cumberbatch-hamlet-reviews> or 
Nicole Kidman inPhotograph 51 <http://photograph%2051/> are not potty for 
Potter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-west-end-palace-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc809b489588a455bf017b970fefac77d58b9c0f%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%3A%20'It's%20extraordinary%20the%20story%20still%20isn%E2%80%99t%20out'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-west-end-palace-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Potter%20and%20the%20Cursed%20Child%3A%20%27It%27s%20extraordinary%20the%20story%20still%20isn%E2%80%99t%20out%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fharry-potter-and-the-cursed-child-west-end-palace-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc809b489588a455bf017b970fefac77d58b9c0f%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
 Friedman and Callender at the Palace theatre. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for 
the Guardian 
 “Over 50% of our audience are first-time theatre-goers,” says Callender, with 
Friedman adding: “And over 50% of our audience – again, unusual – is under 35. 
Which is genuine audience development for our industry.”

 They finish each other’s sentences like a long married couple, but there are 
presumably creative disagreements between the pair and Tiffany, Rowling and 
Thorne. So who has the final veto? “It’s never come to that,” says Callender. 
Seriously? “We have never disagreed about one thing,” Friedman insists.

If a dispute did arise, the casting vote would surely go to Rowling? Callender 
says: “Yes, if it had to do with theHarry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrypotter> canon, then all of us would want 
to defer to Jo.” If it’s about anything on stage, it’s John Tiffany.” “And,” 
Friedman laughs, “if it’s a production issue, Colin and I will just slug it out 
in the car park.”

 During the rehearsal period, Jack Thorne became a father for the first time. 
Given Potter’s pulling power, it seems a strong chance that The Cursed Child 
will still be running when his child is old enough to see it. Friedman refuses 
to speculate about how long and how far the show might go. “Colin and I are 
ridiculously superstitious. We won’t even think about what happens next until 
after the opening night.”

 * Harry Potter and The Cursed Child: Parts 1 and 2 
<http://www.harrypottertheplay.com/> opens at the Palace Theatre on 30 July. 

This article was amended on 21 July 2016 to correct the misnaming of dementors 
as death eaters in the third paragraph.


 