
Dame Harriet Walter has called for artistic directors and playwrights to stage 
more plays with lead female characters, saying the lack of strong parts is 
driving her and others towards performing male roles.

Walter, who is currently playing male leads in three Shakespeare plays, said 
that they should think beyond the Bard’s template of “male protagonists whose 
thoughts and actions matter and females who only matter in as much as they 
relate to those men”.

The Guardian view on women in theatre: a leading role please, not just a bit 
part | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/14/the-guardian-view-on-women-in-theatre-a-leading-role-please-not-just-a-bit-part>
Though she says that women playing lead roles for men reflects something of a 
“culture change”, she adds that “imitating men can’t be the only answer”.

Figures released last year by the Writers’ Union showed 
<https://writersguild.org.uk/why-do-women-playwrights-lag-behind/> that female 
writers contributed only 31% of plays staged in UK theatres in 2013.Research by 
11 of Britain’s most important and influential theatre groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/22/theatre-female-figures-gender-gap>
 found over the course of six months last year that only 29% of their plays 
were directed by women, and a similar proportion of the performers were women.

While acknowledging that male artistic directors and playwrights are “very 
sympathetic” to the issue, Walter said the atmosphere could be likened to a 
men’s club because “male playwrights, on the whole, are probably more 
interested in male characters. They need women characters to be the women in 
their lives or to be the domestic difficulty.”

Harriet Walter: On the Donmar stage, all Shakespeare's players are women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/15/harriet-walter-donmar-shakespeare-women-henry-iv-julius-caesar>
She added: “My big thing is not that you’re ‘doing us a little favour’, 
patronising us or pandering to us. It’s that you’re opening up to a whole 50% 
of talent that you haven’t had before. The audience likes to see themselves 
reflected out there.”


She spoke to the Guardian at the Donmar Warehouse’s temporary theatre in 
London’s King’s Cross, where Walter and the directorPhyllida Lloyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/phyllida-lloyd> have revived their acclaimed 
all-female productions of Julius Caesar (2012) and Henry IV (2014) alongside a 
new production of The Tempest, which are running until 17 December. All are set 
in a women’s prison and feature Walter in male lead roles, playing Brutus, 
Henry IV and Prospero respectively.

She says her initial unease about playing male characters went long ago. “I 
feel we all own them … I’m Brutus just as I’m Queen Elizabeth. They’re both 
lies. That’s what we [actors] do for a living. We pretend to be someone else 
and I don’t see it’s that different.”

Walter has played most of Shakespeare’s heroines, including Ophelia, Lady 
Macbeth and Cleopatra. But in a book released last month, titled Brutus and 
Other Heroines: Playing Shakespeare’s Roles forWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, she writes that Shakespeare’s 
portrayal of women still cast “a long shadow over the theatrical tradition”.

“Where does an actress go after playing Cleopatra’s magnificent death? Why 
didn’t Shakespeare write more – and more powerful – roles for mature women?” 
she asks.

Writing an “open letter” to Shakespeare, she adds: “Despite the fact that the 
world has changed enormously since your day, the stories we tell about 
ourselves still tend to follow your template.”

With Glenda Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/05/king-lear-review-glenda-jackson-old-vic>
 andAntony Sher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/02/king-lear-review-royal-antony-sher>
 both delivering acclaimed interpretations of King Lear at the Old Vic and the 
Barbican respectively, Walter says that modern theatre is “challenging all 
preconceptions about gender”.

Though she believes women playing lead male roles is progressive, she also 
says there is a long way to go.

“There are still very traditional things going on, so you never quite know how 
much of a breakthrough it is,” she said. “But we are reflecting something of a 
cultural change.”

 