
Celtic regained pole position in the Scottish Championship race last night 
thanks to the predatory skills of John Hartson, who ended a minor drought in 
spectacular style by scoring a hat-trick to enableCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> to move two points clear of 
Rangers.

But it was not until Hartson, who had struck late in the first half, rose to 
power home Stilian Petrov's 75th-minute cross that Celtic were able to relax 
and enjoy their success.

Hartson finished a splendid evening's work by claiming his third from the 
penalty spot in the 86th minute after he had been impeded by David McNamee. 
Stanislav Varga scored a fourth in the final minute.

"I knew John would score at some stage or another but he has rewarded us 
tonight," said the Celtic manager Martin O'Neill. "The goals and his 
second-half display will give him an enormous lift."

Craig Bellamy displayed great urgency yet the striker fluffed his lines when 
one-on-one with Roddy McKenzie in the 22nd minute, shooting straight at the 
goalkeeper, who saved with his legs.

Livingston <https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> were looking to 
enhance their survival prospects after falling into bottom spot in the table 
through Dundee United's unforeseen victory over Rangers 24 hours earlier. The 
home side had a physical presence previously missing this season, reminis cent 
of their manager Richard Gough when he captained Rangers with great distinction.

But Hartson removed any unease among the Celtic fans when he scored two 
minutes before the interval. Joos Valgaeren and Emmanuel Dorado challenged for 
Jackie McNamara's cross and the ball broke kindly for Hartson, who was able to 
prod it into the net.

Hibernian came from behind to beat Hearts at Tynecastle for the first time in 
nearly six years. Garry O'Connor and Dean Shiels overturned Hearts' lead, 
provided by Lee Miller.
 