
"In light of Edgar Davids's red card at the weekend, has a 
player-coach/player-manager ever been sent off while playing, then while 
serving a playing ban but still on the bench been sent to the stands?"asks Ian 
Burnett.

As Gillingham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> fan Matt 
Davison points out, Andy Hessenthaler twice did something very similar during 
his player-manager stint at the Priestfield.

The first incident occurred when Hessenthaler's Gills side travelled to Ninian 
Park to face Cardiff in September 2003. The player-manager named himself among 
the substitutes for the visitors in south Wales and watched on as his side fell 
3-0 behind to the Bluebirds inside 35 minutes. The third goal, scored by Robert 
Earnshaw after Gillingham's players mistakenly stopped playing believing the 
referee had awarded a free-kick, slightly annoyed the visiting manager.

"The goal stood so I went mental," he told the Sun. "I had a go at the fourth 
official and when he called the ref to the dug-out, I was off. I asked: 'What 
about me coming on as a player?' and the fourth official said there was nothing 
in the rules to stop it. So I trotted down the tunnel – but then our kit man 
drags me from the dressing-room.

"We were 3-0 down and my first-team coach Wayne Jones – who was now in charge 
of the side – wanted me on straight away as sub. I was all kitted up so I 
trotted back out, my number was held up and I was on the pitch. Even Cardiff 
manager Lennie Lawrence was laughing because he couldn't believe what was 
happening."

With 10 minutes to go Hessenthaler was booked, but he survived the final few 
minutes on the pitch to avoid going into the record books as the first 
player-manager to be sent off twice. A year later he was in a similar mess. In 
the Gills final home game of the 2003-04 season Hessenthaler was shown a red 
card (as a player) for a challenge on a Coventry player. After the game – a 5-2 
defeat for the Gills – the cool, calm and collected Hessy, in his managerial 
capacity, had a quiet word with the referee and wound up with a three-match 
touchline ban.

So for the first game of the 2004-05 season against Ipswich at Portman Road 
Hessenthaler sat out a one-match playing ban and began a three-match touchline 
ban. The visit of Leeds to the Priestfield in the following game, though, 
presented a problem.

"So I have been told that even if I'm a sub I have to sit in the stands and if 
I want to bring myself on I cannot warm up on the touchline,"said Hessenthaler 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/2384315/Ipswich-add-to-Hessenthalers-aggravation.html>
. "Instead I've got to warm up behind one of the goals, probably the one where 
there will be 1,100 Leeds fans. And I'm not allowed to walk around the 
touchline to get to behind the goal, so I've got to spend the day of the game 
plotting my route. I'll have to go through the supporters somehow; maybe I'll 
dress up as the mascot.''

Twenty minutes in he received a big cheer as he made his way through fans to 
warm up behind the goal and a few minutes later he was on the pitch as a 
replacement for the injured Nyron Nosworthy.

OUTFIELD GOALKEEPERS (2)

Last week 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2012/nov/21/outfield-goalkeepers-the-knowledge>
 we looked at the goalkeepers who ditched the gloves during a game and went to 
play outfield. And the Knowledge inbox has been groaning under the weight of 
emails detailing other custodians to have made mid-match moves up the pitch.

Perhaps the most high-profile came in the 1957 FA Cup final between Manchester 
United and Aston Villa. "Early in the game the Villa winger Peter McParland, 
who scored both goals,cynically took out the United goal keeper Ray Wood in a 
challenge that today would see him sent off 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ce-RMQy3eK4#t=6m55s>," writes Des Browning. 
"Wood's cheekbone was smashed and he was taken off and replaced in goal by 
Jackie Blanchflower. He late came back on (no subs then) and wandered about in 
a daze on the left wing."

With eight minutes to go Wood went back in goal as United searched fruitlessly 
for an equaliser. Rather wonderfully, you can watch the whole game here:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCe-RMQy3eK4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCe-RMQy3eK4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCe-RMQy3eK4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Making more of an impact than Wood in his outfield position was Manchester 
United's Harry Gregg in January 1961. Gregg dislocated his shoulder midway 
through the first half in a game against Spurs at Old Trafford. "He had to have 
his arm put in a sling," writes Chris Kenway. "United played him up front for a 
while and he famously back-heeled the ball to Mark Pearson who then blasted 
home United's second goal."

Manchester City's Harry Dowd went one better on 8 February 1964, scoring the 
equaliser for City against Bury 
<http://www.citytilidie.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2950&Itemid=2966>
. And Peter Clarke writes: "I remember seeing, in the late 50s, Blackpool lose 
at home to Preston 6-2. The Blackpool and Scotland keeper George Farm injured 
his arm early in the match and moved to centre forward. And he scored with a 
header."

And last but not least (although slightly off-topic) is Spain's José Molina. 
"The uncapped Molina was on the bench for Spain against Norway in 1996," writes 
Liam Henry. "All other substitutes has been used when one of the Spanish 
players was injured, leaving Molina as the only available replacement. Thus 
Molina made his international debut as a left winger."

YOUNG ONES (2)

Last week 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2012/nov/21/outfield-goalkeepers-the-knowledge>
 we examined fixtures featuring the youngest pair of clubs possible, with 
Farsley AFC v Louth Town coming out on top with a combined age of four and a 
half. But a man in the know can go a even younger than that.

"I'm a director of the supporter-owned club Scarborough Athletic," begins 
Richard Oldale. "We were formed in June 2007, and we played AFC Emley (formed 
January 2005) at the start of the 2007-08 season in the Northern Counties East 
League."

The 331 present on 15 September 2007 to see Athletic's 3-2 win 
<http://www.barisncel.co.uk/teams/scarboroughathletic/matches/2007/> were 
watching two clubs with a combined age of less than three years.

KNOWLEDGE ARCHIVE

"Please help with a bet I foolishly made in the pub which subsequently got out 
of hand,"wrote Richard Freeland in the sepia-tinged days of 2001. "I heard that 
Diego Maradona once had a trial with Ipswich Town, and for some reason gave 
credence to this story. Does anyone have more details?"

You better start counting those pennies Richard, because Diego Armando 
Maradona never had a trial at Ipswich. However, in mitigation, you might 
mention that a few famous names have trialed and failed at Portman Road, 
including Ruud Gullit, John Barnes and Paul Gascoigne.

"Bobby Robson was worried about Gullit's discipline," reckons James Newton, 
"while Gascoigne was considered to be too fat."

If that doesn't convince your friends, point out that if it wasn't for the 
stinginess of the Sheffield United board, Maradona would have played in England 
in the late 70s.

In 1978, the Sheffield United manager Harry Haslam saw the 17-year-old 
Maradona in action on a scouting trip to Argentina and was so impressed he 
immediately arranged a £200,000 deal.

But that deal fell through when United, then in the Second Division, failed to 
stump up the cash. So Haslam signed another Argentine instead, River Plate 
midfielder Alex Sabella for a club-record £160,000.

Sadly, although Sabella wowed the Bramall Lane crowds, he couldn't stop United 
sliding into the Third Division in 1978-79. In 1980, Sabella was offloaded to 
Leeds for £400,000, and the Blades slipped quietly into the Fourth Division 
later that season.

For thousands more questions and answers take a trip through the Knowledge 
archive <http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/series/theknowledge>

Can you help?

"On Monday in the game between Rapid Bucharest and Gaz Metan Medias in 
Romania's top league Alexandru Ionita was subbed off, the player to replace him 
was also called Alexandru Ionita," begins Harry Bronsdon. "They are known as 
Ionita I and Ionita II to avoid confusion. Has this happened before, a player 
coming off to be replaced by someone with exactly the same name?"

"Spanish second divison side Recreativo De Huelva currently play in a red and 
white polka dot number for away matches," writes Jaime Begbie. "The design 
transpired after Danish kit maker Hummel were only given 10 days to put 
together new home/away kits after a late deal was agreed. Are they the first 
polka-dotted professional football team?"

"When Murray Davidson came on for Scotland last week he was the first St 
Johnstone player to play for Scotland since 1932," writes Alec Cochrane. "This 
has got to be some sort of record hasn't it?"

"In his 200-and-some-days Roberto Di Matteo got an FA Cup and a Champions 
League trophy," notes Mikkel Andreas Beck. "Has there ever been a manager with 
more trophies in a shorter reign?"

Send your questions and answers to knowledge@guardian.co.uk 
<mailto:knowledge@guardian.co.uk>
 