
If we are talking about #firstworldproblems, “headphone hair” is up there. The 
curse of the urbane, city dweller, the spiky upturn is caused when the crown of 
your do meets the curve of your headband. It’s very “I woke up like this”. And 
not in a good way.

The solutions to the problem have traditionally been: shave all your hair off 
(extreme); grow your hair longer (again, quite extreme but hair flattening is 
easier to take with longer locks); or solve the problem with a hair-moulding 
dad cap. The latter could, of course, cause a double whammy of hat hairand 
headphone hair. I mean, you might as well never leave the house …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhas-william-sorted-the-problem-of-headphone-hair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd8232fc6517b099fae8e8b4dbe251a155bee61c%2F0_0_898_1037%2F898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20will.i.am%20sorted%20the%20problem%20of%20headphone%20hair%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhas-william-sorted-the-problem-of-headphone-hair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20will.i.am%20sorted%20the%20problem%20of%20headphone%20hair%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhas-william-sorted-the-problem-of-headphone-hair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd8232fc6517b099fae8e8b4dbe251a155bee61c%2F0_0_898_1037%2F898.jpg>
 Naomi Campbell poses in a pair of i.am headphones. Photograph: I.am + 
The new wireless iPhone7 is without an earphone socket, but not all compatible 
earphones exist without a headband. An unlikely saviour to the problem has come 
in the form of My Humps creatorwill.i.am 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/will-i-am>. In his capacity as wearable tech 
designer he has founded i.am+, and made Buttons, tiny bluetooth earphones that 
connect together magnetically – and wouldn’t look out of place in Minority 
Report.

“Why should you have to take off your earphones when you finish listening to 
something and put them back in a box or bag, instead of just wearing them 
around your neck like jewellery?” he asks in theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/02/fashion/wearable-technology-will-i-am.html?_r=0>
.

The idea here is that they look like a necklace you would wear when you are 
out and about. The reality is that they look a bit like an accessory worn by a 
robotic monk from the future. A robotic monk who loves Avicii but doesn’t have 
to worry about headphone hair.
 