
The spring sun in Tunis had gained sufficient strength to warm the backs of 
the young men crowding the pavement cafes lining Avenue Habib Bourguiba. With 
the local economy flat-lining and jobs in short supply, many were filling empty 
hours amid the faded elegance of the city’s broad, leafy main boulevard.

Hatem Ben Arfa simply sought temporary respite from the intensity of the world 
he had known ever since his graduation from Clairefontaine, France’s national 
football academy. Barred from playing professionally by Fifa after representing 
two clubs, Newcastle United and Hull City, early last season, a No10 described 
as “a genius” by Gérard Houllier was on an enforced sabbatical.

England and France stand united as Wembley game is given go-ahead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/14/england-france-stand-united-friendly-wembley-paris-atrocities>
Fast-forward seven months and Ben Arfa has returned to centre stage. After 
excelling for Nice he is back in theFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> squad for the first time in three 
years and should feature against England at Wembley on Tuesday night.

His international re-emergence, as a substitute, in Friday’s win against 
Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/13/france-germany-friendly-match-report>
at the Stade de France on what would become a horrific night in Paris, 
reflected a series of outstanding Ligue One performances. One goal, against St 
Étienne, involved the dodging of six markers before scoring with his supposedly 
weaker right foot.

If he and Didier Deschamps – Les Bleus’ coach who experienced a spectacular 
fallout with Ben Arfa when he coached him at Marseille – have reached a 
rapprochement, the mood of forgiveness is far from universal. Should their 
former bete noire impress at Wembley, Alan Pardew and Steve Bruce will most 
definitely not be sending congratulatory text messages.

Those Newcastle fans who once applauded his every touch may be more inclined 
to view the 28-year-old’s extraordinary renaissance as another take on the 
scapegoat’s return from the wilderness. Similar sentiments are echoed in north 
Africa.

Although born in Clamart, a Paris banlieue, Ben Arfa’s parents had emigrated 
from Tunisia where his father, Kamel, starred in midfield for the national 
football team. As a boy, Hatem spent two months of every summer in Tunis and a 
part of his heart has always remained in the city.

When Fifa’s strictures delayed a mooted January move to Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice> until the summer, it became a place 
of sanctuary for a man who had done much of his growing up in public.

Confronted by six unexpected months off he toured Thailand before indulging in 
some nostalgia. “I went back to the Tunis neighbourhood where I grew up,” Ben 
Arfa recently revealed. “It was important to go back. I found old childhood 
friends. In Tunis, I forgot I was a footballer. I lived a different life. I 
went to cafes. I found the images and sensations of my childhood.”

If much of his football appeared as seamless and effortless as his ability to 
morph between fluent French, English and Arabic in the course of a single 
conversation, life off the field was somewhat messier. While the brilliance of 
his ball manipulation and ability to outmanoeuvre opponents often bewitched, he 
lacked the emotional maturity needed to complement such rare talent.

A difficult relationship – and subsequent estrangement – from a demanding 
father only exacerbated the inner turmoil. “At Nice, I’ve found some kind of 
inner peace,” he has said. “It’s been a long struggle, much like the 12 labours 
of Hercules. This is the first time in my life I’ve felt as serene in my head.

“I stayed in the fog a long time, a little lost, a little disorientated. Last 
winter I was going through an inner conflict. In my head a little devil was 
telling me to ‘let it [football] go’ and an angel [was] saying ‘don’t let it 
go’. It was a real fight.”

If he is almost as clever with words as with the ball, conflict is nothing new 
to Ben Arfa. At Lyon, Marseille and Newcastle he polarised opinion, enchanting 
fans and exasperating coaches before invariably acrimonious departures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhatem-ben-arfa-france-nice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F15%2F1447592214907%2F29cd279b-e422-46bf-9ceb-191cdcf53771-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hatem%20Ben%20Arfa%20back%20in%20France%20shake-up%20after%20enforced%20spell%20in%20wilderness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhatem-ben-arfa-france-nice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hatem%20Ben%20Arfa%20back%20in%20France%20shake-up%20after%20enforced%20spell%20in%20wilderness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhatem-ben-arfa-france-nice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F15%2F1447592214907%2F29cd279b-e422-46bf-9ceb-191cdcf53771-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A Newcastle fans’ banner at St James’ Park depicts Hatem Ben Arfa as Che 
Guevara. Photograph: Lee Smith/Action Images 
On Tyneside, a playmaker eventually exiled to the youth squad by Pardew became 
the symbol of the crowd’s growing discontent with the current Crystal Palace 
manager’s Tyneside regimen. A giant, highly professional Che Guevara banner – 
(with Ben Arfa’s face replacing that of the Argentinian revolutionary) – 
lovingly hand-stitched by supporters, regularly symbolised such unrest as it 
billowed in the Gallowgate breeze.

Newcastle’s long balls were a source of consternation, with Ben Arfa claiming 
his enthusiasm for tactical argument with Pardew proved detrimental. Meanwhile 
certain team-mates, infuriated by his reluctance to track back and persistent 
attempts to beat one man too many, lobbied the manager to exclude him. Once 
Yohan Cabaye, his staunchest dressing room ally,departed for Paris 
Saint-Germain, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/27/yohan-cabaye-paris-saint-germain-newcastle-united>
 things really unravelled.

“I did not see any light,” he said, describing life at Newcastle and then 
Hull. “I was a prisoner. I had the feeling of being locked in a dark place 
without a door. I saw hell.”

Things had certainly deteriorated from happier days when Pardew likened Ben 
Arfa to Lionel Messi, and describeda stunning goal he scored against Blackburn 
Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jan/08/newcastle-blackburn-rovers-fa-cup>
 as “the best I’ve ever seen”.

With the devil in his head temporarily cowing the angel, Ben Arfa soon had 
Bruce at the end of his tether too. With the Hull loan and the remainder of his 
Newcastle contract torn up, Thailand beckoned.

A walk down memory lane swiftly followed. Suddenly Houllier’s “genius” was 
just another 20-something playing five-a-side with childhood friends in a dusty 
Tunis suburb. The healing process had begun.
 