
Newcastle have released the French forward Hatem Ben Arfa before his move to 
Nice <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice>.

The Ligue 1 club announced on Saturday they had reached a deal in principle 
with the 27-year-old, who failed to make an impact on loan at Hull City this 
season before returning to Tyneside.

Ben Arfa is due to have a medical in France on Monday before joining Nice on 
undisclosed terms but he will make the move as a free agent.

A Newcastle statement said: 
<http://www.nufc.co.uk/articles/20150104/ben-arfa-contract-terminated_2281670_4399456>
 “Newcastle United can today confirm that Hatem Ben Arfa and the club have 
reached an agreement to terminate the contract between both parties with 
immediate effect by mutual consent. Newcastle United wishes Hatem all the best 
for his future.”

Ben Arfa joined Newcastle from Marseille in 2010, initially on loan before 
signing permanently the following summer despite an injury-ruined first season 
in England.

He became a fans’ favourite after a string of spectacular goals and 
inspirational performances in 2012 and continued to show flashes of his best 
form. But his attitude and fitness came under question and he joined Hull on 
loan in September.

He made only a handful of appearances for the East Yorkshire club, failing to 
score and missing a glorious chance in their defeat by Tottenham, and he was 
substituted in the first half of the defeat by Manchester United.

He returns to Ligue 1, a competition he won four times as a young player with 
Lyon and once more with Marseille in 2010, when he also helped the club win the 
Coupe de la Ligue.

Nice are 11th in the table but only three points clear of the relegation zone 
and will look to their new signing to spark an attack which has mustered 21 
goals in 19 games this season.

Ben Arfa has won 13 caps for France since his goalscoring debut against the 
Faroe Islands in 2007.
 