
The former Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> midfielder Hatem Ben 
Arfa has spoken of his “hell” on Tyneside as his career in English football 
drew to a close.

Hatem Ben Arfa: I would go to the north pole just to play football again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/03/hatem-ben-arfa-north-pole-football-nice>
The 28-year-old, who has won a return to the France squad after excelling with 
his current club Nice, whomhe was prevented from joining in January because of 
Fifa regulations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/03/hatem-ben-arfa-north-pole-football-nice>
, was left to train with the club’s youngsters after the then manager Alan 
Pardew finally lost patience with him and eventually sent out on an ill-fated 
loan spell to Hull City.

Ben Arfa told www.francefootball.fr 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/news/Ben-arfa-je-reviens-de-l-enfer/606514>: “It 
was a very, very difficult period. The worst of my career. It was as if my hell 
began at Newcastle.

“There, on the first day back in August 2014, I was placed directly with the 
reserves. A terrible humiliation. Weeks passed and I was always with these 
young 16 and 17-year-olds on land away from the pros.

“I did not understand. They gave me a nightmare. It was full of little cheap 
shots. And when I believed in me [getting out] by signing forNice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice>, they were forbidden to hire me 
[until July].

“I had the feeling of being locked in a dark room without a door, or in an 
endless tunnel. I saw hell and especially no solution to my problems. At that 
time, I was wrong, I did not see any light. I was a prisoner.

“I was slapping myself every day to not let go. I tried to convince myself 
that the light was coming back, I was going to find the right path. By signing 
this summer with Nice, I really felt out of hell. In fact, that’s it, I come 
back from hell.”
 