
Hull City – summer 2016

Has there ever been a worse-prepared Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> side than promoted Hull 
City? Almost a month after Steve Bruce walked out in despair they still lack a 
permanent manager and will be under the caretaker stewardship of Mike Phelan 
when Leicester City visit the KC Stadium on Saturday.

The failure to make a single signing this summer has been exacerbated by an 
injury crisis andthe sale of Mohamed Diamé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/newcastle-sign-mohame-diame-hull-city>
, an influential midfielder and arguably Hull’s best player, to the 
Championship side Newcastle United.

It leaves Phelan with 13 fit senior professionals – including two goalkeepers 
– and Hull fans planning protests against the owners, the Allam family, this 
weekend. With Assem Allam, the owner, seriously ill, Hull is being run by his 
son Ehab, who seems anxious to sell up and is inadvanced talks with a Chinese 
consortium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/10/hull-city-advanced-talks-sell-club-chinese-investors>
.

Yet any takeover is almost certainly weeks away and there is no sign of 
reinforcements to compensate for the injury-induced loss of the first-choice 
goalkeeper Allan McGregor, plus Michael Dawson, Alex Bruce and the right-back 
Moses Odubajo for a collective 21-month total.

With another centre-half, Harry Maguire, struggling for fitness, Jake 
Livermore, a midfielder, is set to start in central defence against Leicester, 
alongside Curtis Davies, Phelan’s sole fit orthodox stopper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff98c148757f3e5aa8e7ec26670b829b188902b0e%2F0_31_2004_1202%2F2004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Have%20Hull%20City%20suffered%20the%20worst-ever%20Premier%20League%20pre-season%3F%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Have%20Hull%20City%20suffered%20the%20worst-ever%20Premier%20League%20pre-season%3F%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff98c148757f3e5aa8e7ec26670b829b188902b0e%2F0_31_2004_1202%2F2004.jpg>
 Almost half of Hull’s currently-available senior players are visible in this 
picture from their defeat to Torino. Photograph: Heinz-Peter Bader/Reuters 
Newcastle United – summer 2013
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8476845304fdaae9362417f453def94cec2304a%2F0_45_3231_1939%2F3231.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Have%20Hull%20City%20suffered%20the%20worst-ever%20Premier%20League%20pre-season%3F%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Have%20Hull%20City%20suffered%20the%20worst-ever%20Premier%20League%20pre-season%3F%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8476845304fdaae9362417f453def94cec2304a%2F0_45_3231_1939%2F3231.jpg>
 Joe Kinnear and Mike Ashley were hardly a match made in heaven for Newcastle 
fans. Photograph: Stu Forster/Getty Images 
Joe Kinnear’s appointment as the director of football thoroughly upset the 
applecart at St James’ Park. While Derek Llambias, the club’s managing director,
resigned in protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/19/derek-llambias-resigns-newcastle-united>
 at one of the owner, Mike Ashley’s, more left-field manoeuvres Alan Pardew 
felt thoroughly undermined.

If Newcastle’s then-manager was unhappy at having Kinnear as his boss some 
first-team players were horrified. During a radio interview to mark his new 
job, the former Wimbledon manager – who also had a brief reign, ended by heart 
problems, in the dugout at St James’ Park – mispronounced a string of names, 
with Yohan Cabaye becoming Yohan Kebab and Llambias, Derek Lambezee. Kinnear 
then declared he had “more intelligence” than Newcastle fans.

Elsewhere, Newcastle’s controversial new shirt sponsorship deal with Wonga, 
the pay-day lender, provoked unrest, with the principal striker Papiss Cissé, a 
Muslim, initially refusing to wear the branded kit on religious grounds.Cissé 
relented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/30/papiss-cisse-newcastle-wonga> 
– but only after being excluded from a pre-season training camp in Portugal and 
extensive, intricate, negotiations with Imams, Islamic law specialists and the 
PFA.

What happened next? Kinnear resigned in February 2014, shortly after selling 
Cabaye to Paris Saint-Germain for £20m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/29/psg-yohan-cabaye-newcastle>. 
A month later Pardewreceived a hefty touchline ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/11/alan-pardew-seven-games-ban-head-butt>
 for head-butting the Hull midfielder David Meyler. Despite an ostensibly 
respectable 10th-placed finish, the campaign was punctuated by fan revolts 
against Ashley and Pardew and the team lost eight of their last 10 league games.

QPR – summer 2012
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2b8c6c1d5b55792d010e03832a9539148b8c093%2F0_78_2632_1580%2F2632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Have%20Hull%20City%20suffered%20the%20worst-ever%20Premier%20League%20pre-season%3F%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Have%20Hull%20City%20suffered%20the%20worst-ever%20Premier%20League%20pre-season%3F%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2b8c6c1d5b55792d010e03832a9539148b8c093%2F0_78_2632_1580%2F2632.jpg>
 Mark Hughes cut am embattled figure during his brief spell at QPR. Photograph: 
Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
Mark Hughes presided over his first – and, as it turned out, last – pre-season 
at Loftus Road pledging that relegation fights were a thing of the past.

It was not to be: well before August, insiders joked that the sign on his 
door, “Mark Hughes, OBE” – stood for “out by Easter”.

A bewildering array of often expensive and, invariably, extravagantly paid 
signings included José Boswinga, Esteban Granero, Park Ji-sung, Samba Diakité, 
Junior Hoilett, Rob Green and Julio César arrived.

With it swiftly becoming apparent the imports were either past their best or 
not as good as advertised, Hughes’s problems were increased by the emergence of 
a damaging dressing room schism between the old guard inherited from his 
predecessor, Neil Warnock and the new faces.

The chairman Tony Fernandes’s evangelical enthusiasm for broadening QPR’s 
global appeal dictated too many signings seemed commercially driven. WhenPark 
signed from Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jul/09/qpr-park-manchester-united> 
in July the champagne flowed as he was presented to the media high up in 
London’s Millbank Tower. Talk about pride coming before a fall.

What happened next? Hughes was sacked in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/nov/23/mark-hughes-sacked-by-qpr?INTCMP=SRCH>
 after 12 league games produced no wins and only four points. He is now 
impressing at Stoke City. Harry Redknapp took over but failed to prevent QPR’s 
relegation to the Championship in April 2013. Now managed by Jimmy Floyd 
Hasselbaink they remain in the second tier.

Sunderland – summer 2013
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ef911efaa11f667e1091eae109fc12002404cda%2F0_101_2951_1771%2F2951.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Have%20Hull%20City%20suffered%20the%20worst-ever%20Premier%20League%20pre-season%3F%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Have%20Hull%20City%20suffered%20the%20worst-ever%20Premier%20League%20pre-season%3F%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ef911efaa11f667e1091eae109fc12002404cda%2F0_101_2951_1771%2F2951.jpg>
 Paulo Di Canio’s reign at Sunderland quickly spiralled into frustration. 
Photograph: Owen Humphreys/PA 
Paolo Di Canio promised “complete revolution” but provoked revolt at the 
Stadium of Light.

In banning ketchup, mayonnaise, ice in coke – the former West Ham forward was 
adamant it causes terrible indigestion – caffeine and singing in the showers, 
Di Canio raised eyebrows but the real damage was done bythe club’s new director 
of football, Roberto De Fanti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/17/roberto-de-fanti-sunderland-spending-paolo-di-canio>
, who signed 14 new players that summer. Di Canio claimed none had been his 
choices.

An eclectic group including Jozy Altidore, Cabral, Charis Mavrias, Modibo 
Diakité and Valentin Roberge swiftly found themselves surplus to requirements.

“The atmosphere was intimidating,” said the former Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> striker Steven Fletcher. 
“Paolo didn’t want us to smile and laugh in training.” Lee Cattermole, a 
dressing room leader, was stripped of the captaincy and banished to train with 
the youth team.

What happened next? Sunderland took one point from their first five league 
games andDi Canio was sacked in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/22/paolo-di-canio-sunderland-sacked>
 following a player mutiny. The rebellion began following a 3-0 defeat at West 
Brom and continued during a stormy Sunday morning training session. Afterwards 
a group of dissenting senior players, the newly recalled Cattermole prominent 
among them, visited Margaret Byrne, then the chief executive. Di Canio was 
dismissed that afternoon. His successor, Gus Poyet, presided over a last-gasp 
escape from relegation the Uruguayan dubbed “miraculous”. Sunderland also 
reached the League Cup final,losing to Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/02/manchester-city-sunderland-capital-one-cup-final-match-report>
.

Aston Villa – summer 2015
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F647a397f40e9d3b14faf1bf51360c47f029ad70b%2F0_77_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Have%20Hull%20City%20suffered%20the%20worst-ever%20Premier%20League%20pre-season%3F%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Have%20Hull%20City%20suffered%20the%20worst-ever%20Premier%20League%20pre-season%3F%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F647a397f40e9d3b14faf1bf51360c47f029ad70b%2F0_77_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Tim Sherwood presided over a deeply unsatisfactory pre-season at Aston Villa 
last year. Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA 
Tim Sherwood had saved Aston Villa from relegation while leading them to the 
FA Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/19/aston-villa-liverpool-fa-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 but things swiftly began unravelling.

Sherwood became openly critical of the recruitment strategy, hinting that many 
of the 13 – predominantly French – players signed during the close season at a 
cost of £52.5m were not his choices and, crucially, lacked Premier League 
experience.

If the manager seemed deeply uneasy about a statistics-driven scouting 
department run by the head of recruitment, Paddy Riley, and the new sporting 
director, Hendrik Almstadt, it also hardly helped that Randy Lerner, very much 
an absentee owner, was endeavouring to sell Villa.

Or that Christian Benteke and Fabian Delph were sold for a collective £40m. 
Small wonder Idrissa Gueye, Jordan Ayew, Jordan Veretout and Adama Traoré were 
soon suffering nasty doses of culture shock.

What happened next? Sherwood was sacked in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/25/tim-sherwood-sacked-aston-villa-manager>
 following six straight defeats. Villa were bottom, having won only one league 
game. His successor, Rémi Garde,lasted until March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/remi-garde-leaves-aston-villa-mutual-consent>
. They finished 20th with 17 points, and are now managed by Roberto Di Matteo 
and under Chinese ownership.

Portsmouth – summer 2009
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dcd3a461547924459798554ecaeec5152e6b299%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Have%20Hull%20City%20suffered%20the%20worst-ever%20Premier%20League%20pre-season%3F%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Have%20Hull%20City%20suffered%20the%20worst-ever%20Premier%20League%20pre-season%3F%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fhull-city-worst-ever-premier-league-pre-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dcd3a461547924459798554ecaeec5152e6b299%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Optimism abounded when Portsmouth’s new chairman Sulaiman Al Fahim met Paul 
Hart in July 2009. Photograph: Joe Pepler/Getty Images 
Talk of serious financial problems mounted during a summer in which Glen 
Johnson, Peter Crouch, Nico Kranjcar and Sylvain Distin were sold and 
inadequately replaced. Before a ball was kicked, Paul Hart,who had succeeded 
Tony Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/feb/08/portsmouth-tony-adams-sacked> 
that spring, knew he was seriously up against it.

What happened next? The players were not paid in October, the month Hart was 
replaced by Avram Grant. In February Revenue & Customs issued a winding-up 
order. After avoiding liquidation, Portsmouth went into administration. They 
were relegated to the Championship but reached the FA Cup final, losing to 
Chelsea, though Grant subsequently resigned.Portsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> were relegated after two 
seasons in the Championship and again a year later, and are starting a fourth 
season in League Two.
 