
Up to 1,000 jobs are to go after staff at Hazelwood power plant in Victoria’s 
Latrobe valley were told in a meeting on Thursday that the coal-fired station 
will close on 31 March.


The workers – comprising about 800 full-time staff and 200 part-time employees 
and contractors – were told of the closure during a meeting at the plant this 
morning, and have been offered assistance packages from the state and federal 
governments, including retraining, career advice and counselling.


The plant’s main owner, Engie Australia, did not confirm the closure until 
Thursday afternoon. In a statement, its chief executive, Alex Keisser, said the 
power station had been operating in a difficult national energy market 
environment for a “considerable period”.

What will fill the hole left by coal?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/29/what-will-fill-the-hole-left-by-coal>
“Engie in Australia would need to invest many hundreds of millions of dollars 
to ensure viable and, most importantly, continued safe operation,” he said. 
“Given current and forecast market conditions, that level of investment cannot 
be justified.”

While the Construction Forestry Mining and Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Union said about 1,000 workers 
would be affected, Keisser said Hazelwood employs about 750 people – 450 direct 
employees and 300 contractors.

After its closure, up to 250 people will be required between 2017 and 2023 to 
manage the mine and power station site rehabilitation, he said.

Departing Engie employees will receive all their entitlements, including a 
redundancy package.

“I understand this is a very difficult time for our people who have worked so 
hard over the years to produce up to 25% of Victoria’s electricity needs,” 
Keisser said.

“We also appreciate that this decision will have a significant impact on the 
Morwell and broader Latrobe valley communities and we will work with 
regulators, unions and the local community to ensure an orderly closure, 
including rehabilitation of the mine and remediation of the power station site.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhazelwood-coal-power-station-to-close-with-loss-of-800-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65a0c1d0d35c893eee341f6cd96c00338a5a0b97%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hazelwood%20coal%20power%20station%20to%20close%20with%20loss%20of%20up%20to%201%2C000%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhazelwood-coal-power-station-to-close-with-loss-of-800-jobs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hazelwood%20coal%20power%20station%20to%20close%20with%20loss%20of%20up%20to%201%2C000%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhazelwood-coal-power-station-to-close-with-loss-of-800-jobs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65a0c1d0d35c893eee341f6cd96c00338a5a0b97%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 The Hazelwood power plant, which is to close, was described by Environment 
Victoria as ‘the oldest and most polluting power station in Australia’. 
Photograph: Julian Smith/AAP 
Along with the closure of Hazelwood, Engie also announced it had decided to 
appoint a financial adviser for the possible sale of Loy Yang B coal power 
station, also in the Latrobe valley, and the Kwinana co-generation facility in 
Western Australia.

The 1,000-megawatt brown coal-fired Loy Yang B power station provides up to 
17% of Victoria’s power needs. The 122-megawatt Kwinana gas-fired plant 
supplies steam and electrical power directly to the BP Australia Kwinana oil 
refinery and electricity only to the state-owned utility, Synergy.

“It is important to stress that we would only consider a sale of these 
valuable assets if they met our shareholders’ requirements,” Keisser said. “If 
a sale process were to proceed, it would be expected to be completed by late 
2017.”

Wendy Farmer, president of Voices of the Valley, which advocates for new and 
diverse industries in the region, said the closure was not a win for any 
particular group. “It’s a business decision made by a foreign company, simple 
as that, and reaffirms the urgency for a Latrobe valley transition plan to be 
created and implemented,” she said.

“We absolutely do not want to see a thousand people lose their jobs without a 
strategy for re-employment.”

UK coal-powered electricity projected to fall by record amount
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/uk-coal-powered-electricity-projected-to-fall-by-record-amount>
The announcement ends months of speculation that Engie intended to close the 
plant as part of a move away from coal-fire power.

Tony Maher, national president of the CFMEU, said any government assistance 
must include early retirement. “The entire Latrobe valley will feel the impact 
of the closure of Hazelwood, which is the beating heart of this community,” he 
said.

“But despite that, not many people will be surprised as it has been on the 
cards for some time. But that is precisely why workers are so deeply and 
bitterly disappointed in the federal government at this time.

“You’d have to be hiding under a rock not to know the electricity sector is 
changing, it has been doing so for years. These changes are occurring because 
of long-term economic restructuring and policies designed to shift from 
non-renewable energy sources to renewables.”

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, said the government established a 
ministerial task group “some time ago” to ensure support for the community in 
the event of a closure.

The group would now work with the Victorian government to ensure support for 
jobs and business opportunities, he said. The federal government will also 
provide $43m in support to support the workers including $20m in support for 
local infrastructure, $3m to help employees and a $20m regional jobs package.

“Our thoughts today are with the tough times for the men and women who work at 
Hazelwood and of course the many others in that community whose jobs depend on 
that power station,” Turnbull said.

The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, is chair of a Latrobe valley cabinet 
taskforce which he said had been preparing for the announcement. He announced a 
$22m package of support including a workplace transition centre in Morwell, 
education, counselling, and financial advice, and subsidised jobseeker training.

An additional $20m will fund the establishment of a dedicated Latrobe valley 
authority to manage the transition and the future economic development, he said.

But despite calls for the government to focus on renewable energy jobs and 
begin transitioning away from coal, Andrews told reporters that coal industry 
would “have a significant presence in this community for a long time”.

“Perhaps some of those who have been given the bad news today at Hazelwood 
[could be] deployed at other power stations,” he said. “If their production 
goes up, they may need more staff.”

In May, Engie’s chief executive, Isabelle Kocher, told a French Senate 
committee the company planned a gradual withdrawal from coal-fired power 
generation, and that the share of coal in its energy mix would fall to about 
10% from 15% over the next couple of years.

Environment Victoria’s chief executive, Mark Wakeham, described Hazelwood as 
“the oldest and most polluting power station in Australia”. He welcomed the 
closure but criticised the state and federal governments for not putting in 
place plans to retire the plant and assist the affected workers earlier.

Australia's dirtiest power station may be closed or sold, French owner says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/26/hazelwood-power-station-may-be-closed-or-sold-off-french-owner-says>
“It’s been really frustrating watching these decisions being made in Paris by 
corporations,” Wakeham told Guardian Australia. “Our state and federal 
governments should have had a clear plan to support new clean energy projects 
and to support the communities affected.

“Hopefully the closure of Hazelwood is a wake-up call to governments that, 
rather than have these decisions made by corporate headquarters overseas, we 
need to start taking leadership.”

The closure follows the sale by Engie of its coal plants in Indonesia and 
India earlier this year.

Wakeham urged governments to start planning for the closure of other coal 
plants and to start creating new jobs in renewable energy, with Hazelwood one 
of four brown coal plants in the Latrobe valley.

The 1,600-megawatt Hazelwood plant opened in 1971 and provides almost a 
quarter of Victoria’s baseload electricity needs. A Frontier Economics report 
published in May predicted that closing Hazelwood would lead to electricity 
price rises of up to 25% in the immediate aftermath.

The report said: “Given brown coal power stations are the cheapest thermal 
plants to run in the NEM [national electricity market], it follows that the 
removal of these power stations will result in higher cost generation running 
more to meet demand.”

But Victoria’s energy minister, Lily D’Ambrosio, said separate modelling done 
for the Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning had found that 
household energy bills may rise only 4%, or less than $1 a week.

“It’s a sad fact of reality that in the case of Hazelwood’s possible closure, 
there will be an impact on electricity prices,” D’Ambrosio said before the 
announcement. “While that seems small, we know there are Victorian families 
already doing it tough.”

Dr Roger Dargaville, an expert on energy efficiency and energy systems from 
the University of Melbourne, said there was an oversupply of electricity 
nationally. Any gap left by Hazelwood would be filled by other power stations 
in La Trobe or possibly in New South Wales, he said.

“There is more supply than required and given that Hazelwood is one of the 
oldest and most carbon-intensive, it seems logical that it should be the next 
one to exit the market,” he said.

“NSW plants are running at very low capacity and though they run at slightly 
higher costs, as they run on black coal rather than brown coal, I’d say any 
electricity price increases would be minimal. That being said, energy markets 
are fickle beasts and are sometimes unpredictable.”
 