
In the build-up to what always looked like a daunting away day, Cowdenbeath’s 
manager, Jimmy Nicholl, struck an optimistic note. “I’m always confident we can 
go anywhere and get a result,” he said. “It’s the same this weekend.” All did 
not go to plan.

Nicholl’s brutal day out – on his 59th birthday – was summed up in four 
dreadful first-half minutes, with Hearts’ Dutch striker Género Zeefuik scoring 
three rapid goals to set the runaway leaders on their way to a remarkable 
scoreline.

Billy King crashed a shot against the crossbar early on before Zeefuik took 
centre stage. The striker, on loan from Eredivisie club Groningen, opened the 
scoring in the 26th minute from the penalty spot after Nathaniel Wedderburn was 
penalised for handball. He then added a second with a low shot past goalkeeper 
Robbie Thomson, and a third two minutes later with another penalty after Lewis 
Toshney’s poor tackle. TheCowdenbeath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cowdenbeath> defender was sent off.

It was 4-0 in the 33rd minute after Nicholson fired into the roof of the net 
from 20 yards and then he teed up Jamie Walker for another six minutes before 
the break. The sixth came in the 57th minute – Hearts’ third penalty of the 
game after Thomas O’Brien upended Morgaro Gomis, who chipped the spot-kick down 
the middle.

A stunning strike from Alim Öztürk four minutes later made it seven, drilling 
a shot into the bottom corner from 25 yards, and Danny Wilson tucked home in 
off the post in the 68th minute.

Substitute Osman Sow hit a ninth with 20 minutes left, and four minutes later 
struck another into the bottom corner. Hearts’ record league win put them 20 
points clear at the top of the Championship.

“It was a tight opening 25 minutes,” said Hearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> coach Robbie Neilson. “But the 
three goals in four minutes, and a red card on top, totally changed things. We 
had a really good day.”Agencies
 