
Heathrow passport control did it in the end. As frequent travellers, we’ve 
often landed at 5am to see the non-EU queue snaking back to the runway. People 
from countries I didn’t even know existed stand there, miserably inching slowly 
towards the UK border and my wife, Kate, an American, was obliged to join them. 
Meanwhile, of course, I could sail through with my British passport.

So eventually she applied for British citizenship – or “subjecthood” as Kate 
called it, because if you pass the examination to become British you have to 
swear allegiance to the Queen and little Prince George, not the country.

Surprisingly, it’s been a very stressful experience for both of us.

First, there was the business of learning how to be sufficiently British to be 
accepted into the nation fold. I suppose I had assumed that by just observing 
me, Kate would have absorbed Britishness – by a process of national osmosis – 
but she had to buy a book that teaches you all the things that a foreigner 
needs to know.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Famerican-wife-british-passport-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc912dffe7f78b05851a1d42e18b8b867522895f7%2F0_0_1645_2517%2F1645.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Help!%20Since%20my%20wife%20became%20British%2C%20she%E2%80%99s%20been%20driving%20me%20mad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Famerican-wife-british-passport-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Help%21%20Since%20my%20wife%20became%20British%2C%20she%E2%80%99s%20been%20driving%20me%20mad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Famerican-wife-british-passport-study%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc912dffe7f78b05851a1d42e18b8b867522895f7%2F0_0_1645_2517%2F1645.jpg>
 Kate Tadman-Mourby Photograph: Adrian Mourby 
Facts such as when Christianity came to Britain, how far it is from Land’s End 
to John O’Groats and how many Welsh assembly members there are (all things that 
had passed me by in my many years of exemplary Britishness). Kate also learned 
useful social tips such as the fact that British people “enjoy going out for 
meals with friends”, and that they never discriminate against those with a 
different sexual preference and that if a scantily clad British woman dances 
with you at a party she is not necessarily a prostitute.

The book was a fascinating mix of Brit-trivia, useful information and wishful 
thinking. My wife spent a lot of time at the kitchen table diligently going 
through it all. I was impressed by this, but the closer Kate got to being 
British the more serious it all became – and the angrier Kate seemed to get 
with Radio 4.

Of course, shouting at evasive spokespersons on the Today programme is an 
integral part of being British, but now as subjecthood loomed my wife did seem 
to be taking it increasingly to heart. The kind of ire Kate had reserved 
hitherto for the Republican party was now directed at the Tories. And her 
despair over the Brexit vote knew no bounds. “I’ve just paid £1,000 to get a 
European passport,” she moaned. “Now those assholes have voted it away!”

She even flirted briefly with Corbynism and made us watch the DVD of the movie 
Pride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/16/miners-lgbt-activists-pride-film-reunite>
. We were both outraged – Kate by Margaret Thatcher’s treatment of the 
picketing miners; me by Bill Nighy’s Welsh accent.

Our relationship will weather this shift, but it’s been a revelation – and a 
strain

A political gulf was definitely opening up between us.

And so it was, as Kate passed her subjecthood test and went off to County Hall 
to be welcomed into this great nation of ours by the lord-lieutenant of 
Oxfordshire, I’ve found that we’ve started avoiding political discussions and 
giving each other intellectual space in a new way. We may have a country in 
common now but that common ground has exposed a political divide. When I missed 
the local elections because I genuinely had no idea whom I wanted in charge of 
Oxford’s parking spaces, I was told that anything that went wrong in our 
postcode from now on was going to be my fault because of my deeply 
irresponsible attitude.

I suppose all these strong feelings about Britain had lain dormant while Kate 
was not British, but I’m seriously beginning to suspect I may have married an 
activist.

Our relationship will weather this shift, but it’s been a revelation – and a 
strain. I’m dreading the next general election. Meanwhile, we keep getting 
emails from Kate’s family in the States asking if they can claim asylum now 
that Trump has been elected.

Having the in-laws come to live with us might be a relationship shift too far.
 