
José Mourinho has suggested Henrikh Mkhitaryan could not handle the pressure 
of playing in Manchester United’s 1-1 draw with Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 and instead told the forward he would be involved in Thursday’s match with 
Feyenoord.

Mourinho believes Mkhitaryan, following a difficult start to his United 
career, is more likely to do himself justice in theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league>. The Armenian has 
started only once in the Premier League – September’s 2-1 defeat by Manchester 
City – and Mourinho replaced him at half-time.

José Mourinho: ‘Manchester United unluckiest team in Premier League’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-unluckiest-team-arsenal-arsene-wenger-football>
The 27-year-old has made only five appearances since signing from Borussia 
Dortmund for £30m in July. Mourinho has been unconvinced of his worth, despite 
Mkhitaryan being a former Bundesliga player of the year.

“I told him that he is going to be involved in the game against Feyenoord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/feyenoord>,” Mourinho said. “He is 
trying. He is not happy but he is transforming his frustration in a good way, 
which is to close the mouth and work hard and try to adapt.

“I told him Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> was not the 
game for you. I don’t think he needs 10 or 20 minutes from the bench. He needs 
less pressure and better conditions for him to express his qualities. I think 
he needs a good game and he needs to either start or, if not, to come on for 
the second half.”

Mkhitaryan is yet to complete 90 minutes for United despite Mourinho’s glowing 
description after signing him. “I believe he will make an impact on the team 
very quickly as his style of play is suited to the Premier League,” he said at 
the time. “We are all looking forward to working with him.”

If he is selected to face Feyenoord, the midfielder will have a chance to 
affect a pivotal game. United are third in Group A, a point behind the Dutch 
team and Fenerbahce with only one match left after Thursday.
 