

French mime artist Marcel Marceau on stage in Cologne. Photograph: David 
Hecker/AFP

I don't want to write this tribute to Marcel Marceau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/obituaries/story/0,,2175477,00.html>. I wanted to 
put on white gloves and mime it. Eyes closed, arms folded across chest. Then 
trapped in a coffin, noiselessly struggling to get out. Then tears blurting 
from eyes. If I did so, of course, somebody would probably come along, a la 
Dustin Hoffman inTootsie <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0084805/>, and shove me 
to the ground. People who don't know any better thinkmime is deeply irritating 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/steve-young/please-no-marcel-marcea_b_65490.html>
. When my flatmate heardMarceau was dead 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/theatre/drama/story/0,,2175839,00.html> yesterday, 
he issued a (rather uncharitable) one-word response: "Good".

So why (apart from the mean spirit) is he wrong? I suppose I can understand 
why white-faced, white-gloved mime gets people's goat. Marceau allowed his most 
celebrated routines (the walking-against-the-wind, the glass cage) to ossify 
into clichés. The Bip persona could be seen as faux-naïve ("his look," said 
Marceau, "is turned not only to heaven, but into the hearts of men") or, like 
so many clowns before him, as creepy. It got to the point where mime had to 
dissociate itself from its presiding genius. I've lost count of the number of 
articles I've read about the greatLondon International Mime Festival 
<http://www.mimefest.co.uk/intro2007.html>, for example, that start: "A far cry 
from Marcel Marceau..."

But there may be no such festivals without Marceau. He popularised an art form 
that had hitherto been a minority concern, and by doing so, challenged 
theatre's tyranny of blah blah. All of us who work in the fabulous 
multi-faceted perform-o-sphere of so-called "physical theatre" should doff our 
battered top-hats to the great man. He won much ground in the (still ongoing) 
battle to show that theatre needn't just be about chat, needn't be all erudite 
banter between static starched-suits. And he reminded us that theatre can do 
away with not only words, but props, set - everything, indeed, but craft and 
the imagination.

At his best 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/theatre/2007/09/farewell_marceau_the_mimes_bes.html>
, like a live-action Chaplin, Marceau reminded us that stories can be told 
visually as well as aurally, jokes can be silent, poetry doesn't need words - 
and that (as he discovered by touring to over 80 countries) we can share 
experiences in the theatre regardless of the language we speak. Mime is a great 
democrat, which may be why snobs hate it. That's why I'm currently screwing out 
the cork on this non-existent bottle, and filling up this absent glass with 
invisible wine. Here's to you, Marcel - the drink may not actually be here, but 
it tastes great.

· Read more about Marcel Marceau here 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/theatre/marceau>.
 