
“Welcome to paradise,” exclaimed our guide as he led us through the gate. 
Derived from the ancient Persianpardes, meaning “orchard” or “enclosure”, 
“paradise” is an apt description forthis beautifully restored Victorian walled 
garden <https://www.westdean.org.uk/gardens/explore> nestled at the foot of the 
South Downs, which boasts more than 100 varieties of apple, many of Sussex 
origin. Commercial growers nowadays concentrate on a handful of cultivars 
selected for heavy cropping, bruise resistance, keeping quality and uniform 
shape; this garden, in contrast, celebrates our wealth of heirloom apples, 
whatever their peculiar traits.


Country diary: Henstridge, Somerset: Apples of concord
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/28/somerset-apples-of-concord>
The orchard is quartered by flint-edged paths and subdivided with neatly 
clipped dwarf box hedging. Around the periphery, trees have been coaxed into 
elegant forms, withtraditional espalier 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?PID=319>, oblique cordons and 
fork-shaped palmette verriers against the red-brick wall, while others are 
trained as goblets and four-winged pyramids on free-standing metal frames. In 
the centre they are planted in traditional rows with a grass sward beneath.

As he recounted the history of the apple collection, our guide deftly picked 
and sliced an example of each variety for us to taste. I munched on wedges of 
mealy-fleshedNanny 
<https://brightonpermaculture.org.uk/orchards/sussexapples/varieties/419-nanny>
, spicy aniseed-flavoured Sussex Mother, the greasy-skinned but fragrant 
Tinsley Quince, crisp Golden Pippin, which had a refreshing lemon sherbet tang, 
and nutty Egremont Russet.

Genetic russeting is a common feature of Sussex apples, a corky condition of 
the skin that ranges from freckling on the Duck’s Bill and webbing on the 
Saltcote Pippin, to the warted, toad-like skin of the Knobby Russet.

The 10 best apple recipes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/oct/05/10-best-apple-recipes-bramley-coxes>
I was surprised to spot a glossy green supermarket stalwart among the heritage 
varieties. Though the Granny Smith is of Australian origin, it has a Sussex 
connection, having been cultivated by a Peasmarsh-born immigrant to New South 
Wales,Maria Ann Smith <http://adb.anu.edu.au/biography/smith-maria-ann-13199>, 
in the 1880s.

Alongside that old kitchen faithful the Bramley, I discovered the magnificent 
Howgate Wonder, from the Isle of Wight. Its vermilion-flushed fruit are some of 
the largest cooking apples in cultivation, and one tipping the scales at 1.67kg 
made the Guinness Book of Records in 1997, although therecord was broken in 2005
 <http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/heaviest-apple>. But the 
apples I couldn’t resist taking home were Catsheads – glossy, pistachio-skinned 
cookers that did indeed bear more than a passing resemblance to the shape of my 
Siamese’s skull.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 