 Much has been said of the heroism of the men who died in the Titanic. The 
narratives of the survivors show conspicuous instances of the bravery of the 
women. The case of Miss Evans, of New York, who gave up her place in the 
lifeboat in order that her aunt might be saved, is notable.
Miss Evans declared that she was unmarried while her aunt was married and had 
children and her life was the more important. Miss Evans died.

'She was one of the women in my boat,' said an able-bodied seaman from 
Southampton. 'So was Countess Rothtes. There were 35 of us in the boat, mostly 
women. I wanted some men till I saw the way she was carrying herself and heard 
the quiet, determined manner in which she spoke. I knew she was more of a man 
than any aboard, so I put her in command at the tiller. There was another woman 
in the boat who helped row. It was she who suggested we sing as we rowed, 
starting with "Pull for the shore". We were still singing when we saw the 
lights of the Carpathia. Then we stopped and prayed.'

An account given by Mrs JJ Brown, the wife of a Denver mine owner, is 
particularly graphic. 'The whole thing, she said, 'was so formal that it was 
difficult for anyone to realise the tragedy. Men and women stood in little 
groups, and talked and laughed. I was looking down at the boats being filled, 
when two men seized me and threw me into the boat with the words, "You're 
going, too." I owe my life to them. I can still see the men on the deck tucking 
in women and bowing and smiling. It was a strange sight. It all seemed like a 
drama being enacted for entertainment. It did not seem real. Men would say, 
"After you," as they made some woman comfortable and stepped back. I afterwards 
heard someone say that the men went downstairs into the restaurants. Many of 
them smoked for a while.'
 