
Being a nutritional role model for your kids is tough when you're a greedy 
guts with all the self-restraint of a hungry lioness with her head stuffed into 
the carcass of a recently downed zebra. I was thinking about this recently as I 
was hiding my stash. As ever, it was the hard stuff: a bag of sherbet lemons, 
bars of M&S Swiss milk chocolate and a packet of Mr Porky scratchings. The 
hiding place is the corner of the top shelf of our walk-in food cupboard. For 
years it has been the perfect place to hide my filth. I was the only one who 
could see what was there.

And then I realised: no more. My 14-year-old son is almost my height, and 
apparently gifted with the wisdom of the ancients. He now knows and sees 
EVERYTHING. This was confirmed a little while later when he barged in on my 
wife and me in the living room, as we hurriedly tried to hide the tattered 
evidence of the chocolate we had just devoured in front of the telly. He didn't 
even look at us. "I know you've had chocolate," he said. "I know where you keep 
it." He might as well have announced that he had located something boasting 
three speeds and made of washable latex under the marital bed.

Tricky business, this parenting lark. We appoint ourselves custodians of our 
kids' bodies and then keep watch like prison-camp guards: on their teeth, the 
nutritional intake they need for their bones and bodies. No, you can't have 
sweets. That glass of Coke is just pure sugar. Get off the computer and go 
outside and play. I said just ONE custard cream. Step away from the biscuit 
tin. I said, step awayâ€¦

We are right to do this. It really is a part of the job description. The 
problem is that we are the least qualified people for that job. We are like 
bent drug squad coppers, who bust people for heroin possession only to tie on 
the tourniquet and shoot up ourselves once we've clocked off. We rampage 
through a box of Celebrations once the kids are in bed, then hide the evidence 
if we hear small footsteps on the stairs; we stuff late-night crisp packets 
into our pockets hurriedly. And yes, I am making the personal a universal. I 
have to assume I'm not alone in this. I have to assume you are all the same as 
me, otherwise how could I live with myself?

We do, of course, have a rationale. The mere fact that we have reached the 
cool, sunlight pastures of adulthood with all our own teeth intact and minus a 
diagnosis of type 2 diabetes means we have learnt self-restraint. Hurrah for 
us! Let's celebrate with Ben and Jerry's chocolate fudge brownie ice cream from 
those pots we keep hidden at the back of the freezer behind the Tupperware tubs 
of leftovers. Or perhaps with just another glass of that really good value 
chablis from Aldi.

In truth, that's the reality of most middle-aged parental hypocrisy: we 
lecture our kids on eating sweets. We keep their hands out of the biscuit tin. 
And yet too many nights of the week we pull the cork on something eminently 
quaffable. This, I suppose, is life. And parenting. We do the very best we can, 
which never feels quite good enough. We feel gloomy about it. And hence we feel 
the need to comfort ourselves. Oh sod it. The kids are in bed. Just another 
glass. It can't hurt. Can it?
 