
In the end, Hibernian <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hibernian> were 
spared the ultimate embarrassment, Dundee's victory at Motherwell rendering 
their shocking collapse irrelevant, denying the Easter Road side a place in the 
top six for the remaining five matches in the Premierleague campaign and 
depriving them of substantial, much-needed revenue.

In truth, the general level of Hibernian's performance made sense of the claim 
by their manager, Bobby Williamson, after last week's 6-2 thrashing at 
Kilmarnock that he would not want to see them among the elite on that form. The 
goals from Alen Orman and substitute Derek Riordan simply underlined the 
mediocrity ofLivingston <https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> 
before the impossibly late counters from Barry Wilson and Burton O'Brien that 
turned the match into a bizarre experience.

With the potential prize for victory so rewarding, a sense of urgency was the 
least the home supporters were entitled to expect from their team. But no 
amount of spirit, energy and commitment can compensate for a shocking lack of 
ball skills. Put in economic terms, Hibernian would be said for most of the 
time to be living marginally above the poverty line.

Livingston were no more generously endowed, the consequence of which was a 
general impression that there was hardly a player on the field capable of 
killing the ball with his first touch or of completing elementary passes - 
those that need to travel more than 10 yards - to a team-mate.

With such clumsiness, physical collisions are inevitable as the ball breaks 
loose and bounces tantalisingly between two players. Paul Fenwick was a victim 
long before anyone had a chance to be numbed by the standard of play, his 
first-minute injury causing his departure - replaced by Derek Townsley - just 
14 minutes later.

Hibernian's defensive make-over neither strengthened nor weakened the home 
side, as the visitors remained, until those late interventions, as 
unthreatening as they had been, with the odd exception, from the start. In any 
case, they lost striker Davide Xausa, another casualty of cumbersome tacking, 
after 28 minutes.

Xausa had provided the only moment of menace from the visitors when he was 
released into the Hibernian area on a pass from Juanjo Camacho. With only Nick 
Colgan to beat, he overran the ball and the goalkeeper appeared to take 
possession at the forward's feet. Colgan then appeared to lose it and, in a 
cluster of players, Xausa stabbed the ball goalwards, but it was blocked by 
Fenwick.

Since it had taken Hibernian 25 minutes to produce a scoring effort - Gary 
O'Connor's low drive from distance easily gathered by Alan Main - even the home 
crowd would have been almost startled at their taking the lead close to the 
interval.

Tom McManus had, it should be said, tested Main with a powerful and accurate 
free-kick from 20 yards before he ran wide on the left to receive a pass from 
John O'Neil. Challenged by Phillipe Brinquin, the little forward held the ball 
until making the space to cross right-footed towards the middle of the box. 
Orman rose to make the header and the ball seemed almost to float far to the 
right of Main, hit the inside of a post and bounce over the goalline.

It was after McManus had become the third player to be hurt - on this occasion 
colliding with Stuart Lovell - that Hibernian extended their advantage. Riordan 
had been on the field only five minutes when he sent a 20-yard free-kick high 
to the right of Main.

The improbable ending had seemed even less likely when Fernando Pasquinelli's 
header from three yards from a free-kick by Wilson on the left was stopped on 
the line by Colgan. Livingston appeared then to be destined not to score. Even 
Wilson's powerful, low drive to the right of Colgan from the edge of the area 
after motoring in from the right appeared to be too late to matter.

But when a long pass from Marvin Andrews was flicked on by another substitute, 
Eugene Dadi, and the ball was allowed to run to O'Brien, the midfielder hit the 
ball first time on the run with his left foot and, from 16 yards out on the 
left, it hurtled into the net.

Â· You've read the piece, now have your say. Email your comments, be as frank 
as you like, we can take it, tofootball.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:football.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>, or mail the Observer direct at
sport@observer.co.uk <mailto:sport@observer.co.uk>
 