
Alex Preston (novelist and critic)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc197a89389712de00160b1167ae781ad3d3bb9d%2F1377_1143_2323_2903%2F2323.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc197a89389712de00160b1167ae781ad3d3bb9d%2F1377_1143_2323_2903%2F2323.jpg>
 Photograph: Katherine Anne Rose for the Observer 
At the end of a dreadful year, I drew some small comfort from the fact that a 
number of books I loved –The Underground Railroad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/09/the-underground-railroad-colson-whitehead-revie-luminous-furious-wildly-inventive>
,The Essex Serpent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/16/the-essex-serpent-sarah-perry-review-novel>
,Grief Is the Thing With Feathers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/18/grief-is-the-thing-with-feathers-by-max-porter-review-ted-hughes>
 (which I know was a 2015 title, but the ubiquity of the beautiful paperback 
this year has been heart-mending) – got the recognition and readers they 
deserved.

I’m hoping that his James Tait Black prize win will turn more people on to one 
of the most brilliant novels of recent years – Benjamin Markovits’sYou Don’t 
Have to Live Like This 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/05/you-dont-have-to-live-like-this-benjamin-markovits-review>
. The book feels more urgent and powerful now than ever, turning a profound 
intelligence on the rotten state of the US. I can’t believe it hasn’t been high 
on the bestseller lists as people seek to understand the catastrophe that was 
2016. It also reminds us that books can take time to fix themselves to the 
public consciousness, and that the instant smash hit is only one possible life 
for a work.

Also unjustly overlooked was Adam Roberts’s The Thing Itself 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-thing-itself.html> (Gollancz £16.99). 
It’s among the most inventive and bizarre books I’ve read in years, a collage 
of ideas that skips from Kant to the Fermi paradox via Joycean comedy and 
18th-century pastiche. It’s about the nature of reality and perception, and is 
more comic and less of a slog than a book this philosophically complex has any 
right to be.
 ‘Wonderfully engaging’: Dan Richards, author of Climbing Days. 
Fiona Melrose’s Midwinter 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/midwinter-448212.html> (Little Brown £16.99) 
was published in November, perhaps too late in the year to be widely noticed, 
and is a fabulously frosty tale of the bleak Suffolk countryside. It reminded 
me ofMelissa Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/21/rain-four-walks-in-english-weather-melissa-harrison-review-wicken-fen-dartmoor-darent-valley-wrekin>
, with gorgeously understated prose and a keen eye for nature. It deserves to 
be read in front of a fire with the wind roaring outside.

Another book that immerses you in a landscape is Dan Richards’s Climbing Days 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/climbing-days.html> (Faber & Faber, £16.99), 
which is part memoir, part literary history, part meditation on mountains, and 
should have been a much bigger hit. It’s a wonderfully engaging book that tells 
the tale ofDorothy Pilley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/sep/15/dorothy-pilley-climbing-dan-richards-adventure-travel>
, a brave and brilliant climber who also happened to be the wife of the critic 
IA Richards (and the author’s great-great-aunt).

Finally, there’s Trammel <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/trammel.html> 
(Penned in the Margins £9.99), an angry, allusive and highly literary debut 
collection of poems by Charlotte Newman. Leaping from Brexit to theBechdel test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2016/sep/14/more-celia-imrie-fewer-grandchildren-bechdel-test-ageism-films>
, this is poetry that is at once personal and political, of the moment, yet 
offering sudden sublime passages of timeless beauty. A bright new voice for 
dark days.

Alex Clark (critic)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcec80891abfdabc3e4b2659945e6fc5e50748f7b%2F0_333_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcec80891abfdabc3e4b2659945e6fc5e50748f7b%2F0_333_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
 Alex Clark Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Is it a coincidence that a trio of novels I’ve greatly admired this year but 
didn’t feel had quite their due had, at their hearts, a sense of discomfort? 
More precisely, they featured displacement, occupied contested territory, 
wrestled with their characters’ slippery identities. In Garth Greenwell’sWhat 
Belongs to You <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/what-belongs-to-you.html> 
(Picador £12.99), for example – which arrived with much fanfare but was not as 
celebrated as it should have been – is the narrator, a young American man 
teaching English in Bulgaria and embarking on a perilous relationship with a 
capricious male prostitute, the exploiter or the exploited? Is he a foreign 
adventurer, capable of turning his back on Mitko, or an exile from a family 
that has rejected him, finding his own way? We are never quite sure, which is 
the novel’s point; its exquisite and delicate prose contrasts with the rawness 
and violence of its action, its striking originality with our realisation that 
we’re reading one of the oldest stories in the world.

Mary Gaitskill’s The Mare <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mare.html> 
(Serpent’s Tail £14.99), the story of a middle-aged white woman’s relationship 
with a Dominican girl from the inner city, might have shared Greenwell’s title, 
or at least its negative, what doesn’t belong to you. It is a riveting, painful 
account of different varieties of wealth, of privilege, of “having”, ranging 
across class and race divides and interrogating the idea of maternal identity. 
It should have been huge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabc247f21105413fd58e4e9ea7bdb80f46711d95%2F0_59_3286_1973%2F3286.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabc247f21105413fd58e4e9ea7bdb80f46711d95%2F0_59_3286_1973%2F3286.jpg>
 Mary Gaitskill: ‘a riveting, painful account of different varieties of 
wealth’. Photograph: Ulf Andersen/Getty Images 
And finally, a word for Peter Ho Davies’s mystifyingly overlooked The Fortunes 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fortunes.html> (Sceptre £16.99), which sets 
itself the task of bringing to life 150 years of Chinese-American life, and 
does so in a series of partial (and partially true) narratives that take us 
from the building of the railroads to a contemporary scene of international 
adoption. It is a novel about hybridity and reinvention, about home and its 
loss – as, indeed, are all of these novels. None of them makes for easy 
reading, yet all of them reward their readers with riches.

Robert McCrum (author and critic)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe45f5bae0a36ff3eb5cbd1fea48e9a593dc9c60%2F0_456_4912_6140%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe45f5bae0a36ff3eb5cbd1fea48e9a593dc9c60%2F0_456_4912_6140%2F4912.jpg>
 Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
It is hard to believe that this extraordinary memoir is not fiction, but every 
word of AJ Lees’sMentored By a Madman: The William Burroughs Experiment 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mentored-by-a-madman.html> (Notting Hill 
Editions £14.99) turns out to be rooted in hospital life and literary 
experience.Andrew Lees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/21/how-william-burroughss-drug-experiments-helped-neurology-research>
 is an internationally distinguished neurologist, Britain’s leadingAlzheimer’s 
and Parkinson’s expert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/oct/26/william-burroughs-drugs-cure-inspires-alzheimers-researcher>
. He is also a one-time collaborator with the late (and great)Oliver Sacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/30/oliver-sacks>, and himself a 
gifted writer who was not afraid to apply the deductive methods of Sherlock 
Holmes to diagnose his patients.

This account of how Burroughs, the drug-addicted author of Naked Lunch, 
inspired the young and word-struck Lees to pioneer a radical new treatment for 
Parkinson’s is just one of the stranger and more fascinating episodes in the 
history of British neurology. It is also a journey that takes the reader into 
the Amazon rainforest, the back streets of Liverpool, the National hospital in 
Queen Square, via the native quarter of Tangier, and the Botanic Gardens at Kew.

The unconventional Burroughs would probably have made a bad neurologist, but 
his work powerfully “mentored” Lees in his search for answers to the wonderful 
mystery of the brain, and piqued his curiosity for self-experimentation. “I 
came to see his crazy pronouncements,” writes Lees, “as a Hippocratic oath for 
medical science.”

Mentored By a Madman is both an exotic memoir and a passionate appeal for a 
more humane approach to bio-medical research. In associating himself with 
Burroughs, Professor Lees is arguing that potential breakthroughs in the 
treatment of neuro-degenerative diseases are most likely to come from a 
relaxation of the stringent controls surrounding the profession.

Rachel Cooke (author and critic)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd208c1fd5fc253ce8d0400a4d1c51bbae75ee7b4%2F1058_93_1438_1797%2F1438.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd208c1fd5fc253ce8d0400a4d1c51bbae75ee7b4%2F1058_93_1438_1797%2F1438.jpg>
 Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Observer 
I first came across Philip Sassoon, the politician and aesthete, in The Long 
Weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/15/long-weekend-life-english-country-house-adrian-tinniswood-review>
, Adrian Tinniswood’s brilliant book about life in the English country house 
between 1918 and 1938. There, he appeared chiefly by dint of his fabulous home: 
Port Lympne, overlooking Romney Marsh, with its murals by Rex Whistler and its 
dramatic pool that seemed almost to float. “I like the sound of him,” he 
thought. And then, as if by magic, just weeks later there cameCharmed Life 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/charmed-life-469660.html> (Harper Collins 
£20), a biography byDamian Collins 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/charmed-life-469661.html>, the Conservative 
MP for Folkestone and Hythe, once his subject’s seat. Collins, predictably, is 
more interested in politics than in what we might call “the times”. The exotic 
is, for him, another country. Still, in the absence of another account of 
Sassoon’s life, I enjoyed his. It is impossible not to enjoy a book in which 
Diana Cooper, Edward VIII (to whom Sassoon gave delphiniums for the gardens at 
Fort Belvedere) and Lytton Strachey all have walk-on parts.

As the year ends, however, my main cause is to try and convert people, in the 
manner of some crazed evangelist, to Christopher de Hamel’sMeetings With 
Remarkable Manuscripts 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/meetings-with-remarkable-manuscripts.html> 
(Penguin £30), a spellbinding book that I have come, embarrassingly, almost to 
revere. I know it had some wonderful reviews. But I’ve yet to meet anyone who’s 
read it. Perhaps I move in the wrong circles. More likely, though, its great 
girth – this isn’t one for your clutch bag – puts people off.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F880e2a58ce492ce28589186d57c6944ee7eda847%2F0_213_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F880e2a58ce492ce28589186d57c6944ee7eda847%2F0_213_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Damian Collins MP, author of Charmed Life, a biography of Philip Sassoon. 
Photograph: Tom Dulat/Getty Images 
The keeper of the Parker Library at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, de 
Hamel has probably handled more illuminated manuscripts than any person who 
ever lived, and this is his guide to some of the most rare and lusted after: 
objects that the public hardly ever gets to see, and which they will never be 
allowed to touch. Among those included are theBook of Kells and the Hengwrt 
Chaucer. A scholar who can convey his enthusiasm and erudition to the lay 
person without ever seeming to patronise, his tone is so urbane and wise, you 
find yourself absorbing the most arcane and complicated stuff – the history of 
handwriting, say – almost by osmosis. The religious texts he describes, born of 
endless labour and unfathomable (to us) faith, seem not to connect at all with 
our own times, and yet they do, in ways I cannot begin to describe here. In a 
digital world that cares less and less for facts, moreover, de Hamel’s book, 
the product of a lifetime’s learning, is the ultimate analogue consolation.

Viv Groskop (author and critic)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcba539dd07ad52a19bef96e4f2390e4f764fd883%2F1008_1626_1791_2239%2F1791.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcba539dd07ad52a19bef96e4f2390e4f764fd883%2F1008_1626_1791_2239%2F1791.jpg>
 Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
Gulp <https://oneworld-publications.com/gulp.html> by Mary Roach (Oneworld 
£8.99) is a wonderful nonfiction read that was reissued in paperback this 
summer. It’s hilarious. I read it because it was mentioned online by Tom 
Barbash, a short-story writer I greatly admire who always recommends 
interesting and unusual things. (Barbash also wroteOn Top of the World 
<https://www.harpercollins.com/9780060510305/on-top-of-the-world>, the 
definitive account of the 9/11 attacks, which I reread this year, weeping all 
the while.)

Subtitled Adventures on the Alimentary Canal, Gulp is a series of essays about 
food-tasters, competitive hot dog eaters and rectum-examining prison guards. It 
is not to be confused with Giulia Enders’s Gut: The Inside Story of Our Body’s 
Most Underrated Organ, last year’s surprise runaway hit and the reason, I 
suspect, why Roach’s book has been reissued. People love to read about their 
insides, it turns out. I don’t have an especially high tolerance for gross-out 
and, for me,Gulp was just on the right side of the “ewww” line. The journalism 
is gripping and the writing is intensely funny. If biology had been like this 
at school, my life would have taken a different path. The chapter about Elvis’s 
doctor, the King’s final hours and the strain he was under (sorry) is utterly 
priceless.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5a8d7b25ee40ede3195bee47fbdda9a3e2fec9d%2F358_13_2557_1535%2F2557.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5a8d7b25ee40ede3195bee47fbdda9a3e2fec9d%2F358_13_2557_1535%2F2557.jpg>
 ‘Intensely funny’: Mary Roach’s Gulp was reissued in the summer. Photograph: 
Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images 
I also loved A Little History of Religion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/14/a-little-history-of-religion-richard-holloway-review>
 by Richard Holloway (Yale University Press £14.99), theformer bishop of 
Edinburgh, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/13/the-rainbow-of-religious-belief-why-extremist-thinking-doesnt-work-richard-holloway>
 who is now, famously, more or less atheist and has repositioned himself as a 
charming and fascinating authority on “godless morality”. This book features 
witty and generous investigations into every religion you can think of, from 
Buddhism to Scientology, treating them all with equal seriousness and 
scepticism. It is compelling and sweet and should be compulsory reading for the 
entire population in our warring age. Best of all, it’s short, thank God (or 
whoever).

Kate Kellaway (critic)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafbed1d404579d51f1f49f6491252a3353c257ae%2F800_1286_2237_2797%2F2237.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafbed1d404579d51f1f49f6491252a3353c257ae%2F800_1286_2237_2797%2F2237.jpg>
 Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
Though aimed at children, there is nothing childish about the anthology A Poem 
for Every Night of the Year 
<https://www.panmacmillan.com/books/a-poem-for-every-night-of-the-year>, edited 
by Allie Esiri (Macmillan £16.99) – a reminder that poetry is for everyone and 
for every day (or night). It would be easy – but a pity – for adults to miss 
out. There is not even a trace of condescension towards readers – although 
poems are prefaced with serviceable politesse, as though a door were being 
opened by a friend. It is a brilliant idea to divide the year up with a poem 
for every night – it gets round the feeling of defeat that can set in with 
unwieldy anthologies: where to start? Why this poem and not that?

I turn now to 9 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
, the day of Donald Trump’s triumph, not knowing what I will find, but enjoying 
the sense of a lucky dip. Divali by David Harmer is not a poem I know, but I am 
glad to find it. It begins: “Winter stalks us / like a leopard in the mountains 
/ scenting prey. /It grows dark, /bare trees stick black bars / across the 
moon’s silver eye.” The poem transports us to another place, brings light in a 
festival of light – exactly what one wants (and needs) poetry to do. A 
flamboyantly miscellaneous list of authors ranges from Sappho to AA Milne and 
from Langston Hughes to Charles I. Adults and children should read in the new 
year with this book and keep going.

Alice O’Keeffe (critic)
 Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
If I describe Adam Haslett’s Imagine Me Gone 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407111/> (Hamish 
Hamilton £16.99) as an intimate portrait of a family dealing with manic 
depression and suicide, it will not sound like the cheeriest read. And 
naturally, given the subject matter, it is terribly sad in places. Pehaps that 
is why it did not sell in large numbers. But I would urge readers to give it a 
try; I found this book an uplifting experience. For a start, it is written with 
unerring precision. Haslett captures pitch perfectly the voice of each family 
member, from manic, medicated Michael to tough, pragmatic Celia. By weaving 
their stories together, he creates a beautiful, intimate tribute to the way 
families survive, and manage to love and support each other, even when life is 
at its most difficult.

By way of contrast, I enjoyed Lisa Owens’s comic novel, Not Working 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/387099/> (Picador 
£12.99), which was launched to some fanfare from her publishers, but received 
rather mixed reviews. OK, so it’s a gentle prod at the trials of modern life, 
rather than a full evisceration of the evils of late capitalism. But I 
recognised and identified with her drifting, disillusioned protagonist, Claire 
Flannery. I also admired Owens’s ingenious structure, which allowed the story 
to develop in a very natural and lifelike way, without any need for phoney 
drama.

Anita Sethi (critic)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2abc1aeffac7e2734f3b67d678109b1c15c3133f%2F1940_816_2066_2583%2F2066.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2abc1aeffac7e2734f3b67d678109b1c15c3133f%2F1940_816_2066_2583%2F2066.jpg>
 Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
The power of music to stir memory and move the hardest heart permeates 
Taduno’s Song <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/taduno-s-song.html> (Canongate 
£10.99), the overlooked Kafkaesque debut novel by Nigerian writer Odafe Atogun, 
which echoes with the life of the great singer and human rights activistFela 
Kuti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/15/adura-onashile-expensive-shit-nightclub-toilet-fela-kuti>
. When the rebel singer Taduno returns from political exile to his homeland, he 
discovers that the ruthless dictatorship has erased all traces of him, and that 
his beloved Lela has been imprisoned. Taduno faces a stark choice: to sing in 
praise of the regime or to continue striving “against injustice and 
oppression”. I urge people to read this unforgettable new voice, writing in 
polished, gleaming prose about how it feels to be silenced.

The Memory Stones 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/413809/> by Caroline 
Brothers (Bloomsbury £16.99) is an evocative second novel, bringing to life 
“the disappeared” – those who vanished during the 1976Argentine military coup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/25/argentina-junta-coup-videla-peron-1976-archive>
. This includes the Ferrero family, which fragments when its members are forced 
to flee or go into hiding. This rough diamond of a novel is a lyrical portrait 
of brutality that lingers in the memory and deserves a wider readership.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c70092904546bb11539a490bfc647c128c9d1b1%2F167_280_2161_1296%2F2161.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c70092904546bb11539a490bfc647c128c9d1b1%2F167_280_2161_1296%2F2161.jpg>
 ‘A compendium of curiosities’: Travis Elborough, co-author of Atlas of 
Improbable Places. 
Abundant with hidden gems of another kind is the wonderfully illustrated Atlas 
of Improbable Places: A Journey to the World’s Most Unusual Corners 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/atlas-of-improbable-places.html> (Aurum Press 
£20) by Travis Elborough and Alan Horsfield. This compendium of curiosities 
showcases the world’s lesser-known wonders, from the relics of ancient cities 
to extraordinary land formations. But the world’s hidden horrors are also 
elucidated (a British Indianpenal settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2001/jun/23/weekend.adrianlevy> in 
the Andaman archipelago, for example, where freedom fighters were forced to 
construct their own prisons). From an underground cold war spy tunnel to the 
mist- and myth-wreathed Mount Roraima, this engrossing book traverses the 
heights and depths, the beauty and terror, of our world.

A fascinating examination of friendship is at the heart of Anna Thomasson’s 
magnificently researched yet largely ignored biography,A Curious Friendship: 
The Story of a Bluestocking and a Bright Young Thing 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/curious-friendship-380935.html>, published in 
paperback this year (Macmillan £9.99).

Telling the story of the unlikely friendship between a bohemian art student, 
Rex Whistler, and the writer Edith Olivier, which “changed them irrevocably”, 
it explores the transformative power of friendship. This vivid portrait of the 
1920s and 1930s also demonstrates how, through the meticulous process of 
biography – the painstaking excavation of letters, diaries, photographs – 
hidden emotional lives and forgotten nuggets of history can be thrown into the 
light.

Hannah Beckerman (novelist and critic)

Two debut short-story collections, both from John Murray and both little 
noticed, hugely impressed me this year.Dinosaurs on Other Planets 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dinosaurs-on-other-planets-472510.html> by 
Danielle McLaughlin (£8.99), andBlind Water Pass 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/blind-water-pass.html> by Anna Metcalfe 
(£10.99) demonstrated a grasp of storytelling, language and emotional economy 
beyond the expectations for any debut author. Alongside Mark Haddon’s much more 
widely praisedThe Pier Falls <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pier-falls.html> 
(Random House £12.99), they prove the capacity of a short story to immerse the 
reader fully in a fictional world.

Psychological thrillers have been the year’s hot publishing ticket, and a 
number of literary titles have brought complexity to the genre, but received 
less attention than they merited. Amanda Jennings’sIn Her Wake 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/in-her-wake-398182.html> (Orenda Books £8.99) 
is a haunting and elegiac novel, exploring themes of identity, family and loss. 
Following the death of her mother, protagonist Bella begins to uncover secrets 
about her past that force her to question everything she thought she knew about 
herself and her family. Deeply atmospheric, it is compelling and emotionally 
satisfying.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb637d58608d6c6071f05583b1575bb2ded86689c%2F0_0_5138_3082%2F5138.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb637d58608d6c6071f05583b1575bb2ded86689c%2F0_0_5138_3082%2F5138.jpg>
 ‘An instinctive grasp of plot’: Noah Hawley. Photograph: Maarten de Boer/Getty 
Images 
Noah Hawley’s Before the Fall 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/before-the-fall-463049.html> (Hodder & 
Stoughton £7.99), a big hit in the US, didn’t receive the coverage in the UK it 
deserved. Opening with a plane crash from which there are only two survivors, 
Hawley peels back the layers of each passenger’s previous life with all the 
precision and pacing of a great suspense writer. But to describeBefore the Fall 
as a thriller is to undersell it: as Hawley has proved with his previous novel,
The Good Father, and as the creator of the TV series Fargo, he has an intuitive 
understanding of human behaviour and an instinctive grasp of plot that make him 
a master storyteller.

Anthony Quinn (novelist and critic)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F710e097aaca90e6bc95203f4f6a53477a4fd6dd4%2F1438_145_1920_2400%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F710e097aaca90e6bc95203f4f6a53477a4fd6dd4%2F1438_145_1920_2400%2F1920.jpg>
 Photograph: David Levenson/Getty Images 
Benjamin Johncock’s The Last Pilot 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-last-pilot.html> (Myriad Editions £8.99) 
seems at first to be a brilliant pastiche of distinct American classics, the 
Tom Wolfe of The Right Stuff, the short stories of Raymond Carver and James 
Salter ofBurning the Days. The author’s grasp of the intricacies of life among 
test pilots and their perilous pursuit of the demon of speed is striking 
enough. What gives the novel its emotional lift-off is its portrait of a 
marriage going wrong, harrowed by the pressures of American machismo and 
familial loss. The novel dovetails these two different agonies and wrests from 
them a dreadful sense of breakdown, of life being torn apart in front of our 
eyes. It is achieved by the use of pared-down dialogue and prose that conveys 
an absolute understanding of its subject: the technical daring of pilots in the 
age of the space race, and the awareness of their mortality. Despite winning 
this year’s Authors’ Club best first novel award,The Last Pilot has remained, 
mystifyingly, under the radar. I do urge you to seek it out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa38e529e1a10b7894a2b6cdfcf84239d88bec9bb%2F51_50_733_440%2F733.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa38e529e1a10b7894a2b6cdfcf84239d88bec9bb%2F51_50_733_440%2F733.jpg>
 ‘Pared-down dialogue and prose’: Benjamin Johncock. Photograph: Nick Tucker 
In nonfiction, Diary of a Wartime Affair 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/diary-of-a-wartime-affair.html> (Viking 
£16.99) hasn’t received its due as a remarkable record of private life in the 
years between 1934 and 1941. Doreen Bates was a 30-ish, well-read civil servant 
in London involved in a passionate and sometimes anguished affair with a 
married man at her office. Their night-time country walks, trips to the theatre 
and circular arguments (she wants a baby; he doesn’t) are recounted with a 
precision and feeling that might break your heart. But it’s droll and candid, 
too, as only a young woman can be when describing quick sex in a train carriage 
between Leatherhead and Box Hill. This is a companion piece to last year’sA 
Notable Woman, and a treat for anyone interested in the sturm und drang of life 
during wartime.

Stephanie Merritt (novelist and critic)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc332fcf6349224202c0737f1694a3c0c0272fd9%2F1995_46_2842_3553%2F2842.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc332fcf6349224202c0737f1694a3c0c0272fd9%2F1995_46_2842_3553%2F2842.jpg>
 Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
I’ve always been obsessed with ghost stories, and the more I read, the more I 
realise it’s one of the hardest genres to tackle: to create a story that avoids 
cliche and succeeds in being genuinely scary takes real skill. So I loved Julie 
Myerson’sThe Stopped Heart 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-stopped-heart.html> (Vintage, £12.99), a 
properly chilling novel with a dual narrative that plays on the idea of being 
haunted and deals with profoundly disturbing subject matter. I read it almost 
in one sitting and felt it should be a huge hit – I’d love to see a TV 
adaptation, but it would need to be sensitively handled. But the queen of the 
genre is Shirley Jackson; for Halloween a new edition of her collected stories,
Dark Tales <https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/304065/dark-tales/>, was published 
by Penguin Classics (£9.99) and it’s full of little-known gems.

There’s been an explosion of superb nature and travel writing in the past few 
years by writers who have fused the genres with memoir and literary 
reflections. Two recent books I’ve loved have both been fascinated with the 
landscapes of the north. Madeleine Bunting’sLove of Country 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/love-of-country.html> (Granta £18.99) charts 
a series of journeys to the Hebrides over the course of six years, following a 
love born in childhood holidays. She explores the history and culture of the 
islands and, through them, the nature of home and what it means to belong to a 
place.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e0cc5adfe4ee9cc27a20c01d952ba37d8604014%2F0_204_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20gems%20of%202016%3A%20great%20reads%20you%20may%20have%20missed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhidden-gems-2016-best-books-you-may-have-missed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e0cc5adfe4ee9cc27a20c01d952ba37d8604014%2F0_204_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
 Julie Myerson: ‘a properly chilling novel with a dual narrative’. Photograph: 
Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Charles Moseley’s Latitude North 
<http://indiebooks.co.uk/index.php?route=product/product&product_id=68> (Indie 
Books £20) ventures even further towards the pole, following a lifelong passion 
for the icy landscapes of Greenland and Spitsbergen. Moseley draws on his 
expertise as a literary scholar to weave the history and myth of the northern 
lands into accounts of his own travels. The result is a lyrical treasure chest 
of anecdote and insight.

• To order any of these titles for a special price go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/> or call 0330 333 
6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99
 