
It’s been another turbulent month in the long-running saga over the Hinkley 
Point C nuclear power station. Having looked as if she might becontemplating a 
rethink 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2016/07/28/green-light-for-hinkley-point-as-new-18bn-nuclear-plant-approved/>
, Theresa Mayunveiled an apparently decisive approval 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2016/09/15/new-era-of-uk-nuclear-power-as-hinkley-point-finally-gets-go-ahe/>
 just before the Conservative Party conference.But with longstanding issues 
still unaddressed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/theresa-may-accused-backing-down-hinkley-point-c-deal>
 –and new problems emerging even since the PM’s announcement 
<http://www.globalresearch.ca/frances-nuclear-power-stations-at-risk-of-catastrophic-failure/5548593>
 – the debate over Hinkley is far from over.

Now might be a good moment, then, to reflect on the contribution that social 
science can make to these kinds of controversies over science and technology. 
Of course, what counts as useful in any given controversy will depend on your 
perspective. It is inherent to democracy that different values and interests 
yield contrasting conclusions. This is especially so over deeply-fractured 
faultlines like those which run through theUK’s commitments to nuclear power 
<http://www.sussex.ac.uk/broadcast/read/36890>.

Social science can provide a better understanding of why different 
perspectives disagree – and help (when possible) to identify common ground. 
Hard-pressed policymakers often find it useful to understand how to foster 
trust, confidence and “acceptance” of their institutions and procedures.

For powerful interests in any setting, social research can also play a useful 
role in helping to justify, present or implement favoured policies. Here, 
social science can be part of the closing down of debate – helpfully enabling 
political attention to move on.

But what if, on deeper reflection, powerfully-backed policies are a bad idea 
(perhaps as with the Hinkley decision? History is replete with examples – like 
asbestos, heavy metals, carcinogenic pesticides, chlorine bleaches, toxic 
solvents and ozone depleting chemicals – where it only emerged in retrospect 
that the pictures being given of “sound science” or the “evidence base” at the 
time were unduly shaped by vested interests or constrained imaginations.

It is here that social science can play a further crucial role: helping to 
open up policy debates where they are being prematurely “locked-in”. 
<https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/57a08c6ce5274a31e00011ee/1052734439-stirling.2005-opening.pdf>
 This focuses less on society as a target for policymaking, and more on the 
processes of policymaking themselves. The production and interpretation of 
evidence is, after all, as much a social phenomenon as public attitudes or 
political mobilisation.

It is a striking feature of the Hinkley example that even the government’s own 
evidence base is strikingly damning 
<http://www.sussex.ac.uk/internal/bulletin/staff/2015-2016/16092016/hinkley-approval-defies-logic?ref=email>
. Theassessment of value for money 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/556917/3_-_Value_for_Money_Assessment.pdf>
 itself acknowledges Hinkley C to be more expensive than other low carbon 
energy strategies.And the picture in other official sources is even more 
negative 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Nuclear-power-in-the-UK.pdf>.
With nuclear costs rising and renewable costs falling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/07/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-plant-costs-up-to-37bn>
 –and a worldwide turn towards wind and solar power 
<http://fs-unep-centre.org/sites/default/files/publications/globaltrendsinrenewableenergyinvestment2016lowres_0.pdf>
 – global trends compound the picture.

With the UK enjoying the best renewable energy resource in Europe 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/48128/2167-uk-renewable-energy-roadmap.pdf>
 and holding acompetitive advantage in offshore industries 
<http://www.greeninvestmentbank.com/media/44638/osw-pitchbook_ukti_june-2015.pdf>
, industrial policy arguments are also manifestly stronger for renewables.The 
same applies to prospective jobs 
<http://www.theecologist.org/News/news_analysis/2988060/if_its_jobs_they_want_labour_and_the_unions_must_back_renewables_not_hinkley_c.html>
.Compared to nuclear safety and security challenges, renewables are less 
vulnerable <http://fortune.com/2016/03/08/nuclear-energy-security-risk/>. And 
simplistic “baseload” arguments are shown by numerous official reports to be 
superseded by technology – andrepudiated even by the National Grid 
<http://www.energypost.eu/interview-steve-holliday-ceo-national-grid-idea-large-power-stations-baseload-power-outdated/>
. So the officially-stated reasons for nuclear enthusiasm simply don’t stack up.

The contrast with Germany is especially strong. Here, arguably the world’s 
most successful industrial powerhad a nuclear sector far larger and more 
successful than that of the UK 
<https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00585316/document>, and a much less 
attractive renewable resource <https://www.energy.eu/publications/a07.pdf>. Yet 
it is Germany – with a record of far-sighted industrial policy decisions in the 
past – that has made the opposite move to the UK:an “Energiewende” towards 
renewable energy <http://www.bmwi.de/EN/Topics/Energy/energy-transition.html>, 
in contrast to theBritish “nuclear renaissance 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/leading-the-way-the-uks-new-nuclear-renaissance>
”.

So, here emerges another role for social science: critical interrogation of 
what lies behind the official picture. Our own recent research on the Hinkley 
question 
<https://www.sussex.ac.uk/webteam/gateway/file.php?name=2015-18-swps-johnston-stirling.pdf&site=25>
 suggests the best way to understand this continuing commitment – and the 
contrast with Germany – lies in the relativequalities of the two democracies 
<https://theconversation.com/why-germany-is-dumping-nuclear-power-and-britain-isnt-46359>
. The post-war German constitution, and a more critical political culture, 
makes it easier for Germany to resist incumbent industrial interests and ease 
itself out of lock-in.

And our research suggests there is a further – seriously neglected – factor 
that may underlie the intense attachment of successive UK governments to civil 
nuclear power. This involvesparallel UK commitments to maintain nuclear 
submarine capabilities 
<http://www.sussex.ac.uk/broadcast/read/36984#.V-TshqU2QSY.twitter>. Without 
the cover provided by lower-tier contracts in civil nuclear construction, the 
diminished UK nuclear manufacturing sector would simply not be able to build 
these formidable technological artefacts. Nor could they easily be operated 
without civil infrastructures for nuclear research, design, training, 
maintenance and regulation.

So a consequence of withdrawing from nuclear power might also be very serious 
fora particular version of British identity 
<https://www.york.ac.uk/media/politics/documents/research/Trident_and_British_Identity.pdf>
 – especially in the coming post-Brexit era. It is nuclear military prowess 
that supposedly allows the UK to“punch above its weight” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-35566480> on the world stage. Yet, although this 
rationale for continued UK nuclear commitments is clearly documented on the 
military side, it is unmentioned anywhere in official civil nuclear policy 
statements – and in energy debates more widely.

What this might mean for policy is a moot point. But by opening up this kind 
of wider discussion, social science can undertake its trickiest – but arguably 
most useful – task in any controversy. The stakes in this particular case 
transcend nuclear debates alone – and raise questions about the overall health 
of British democracy.

Phil Johnstone <http://www.sussex.ac.uk/profiles/328393> is a research fellow 
andAndy Stirling <http://www.sussex.ac.uk/profiles/7513> is a professor of 
science and technology policy at theScience Policy Research Unit (SPRU) 
<http://www.sussex.ac.uk/spru/>, University of Sussex.
 