
Theresa May has been accused of backing down on security concerns about 
Chinese involvement in nuclear power after she gave the go-ahead to the £18bn
Hinkley Point C <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c> plant 
following a six-week review.

The government insisted the new plant in Somerset was only being approved with 
“significant new safeguards” to make sureChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and other foreign investors could not 
own stakes in British nuclear plants without UK government approval.

However, Labour and environmental groups said the new security measures were 
merely “window dressing” and “hot air” that changed very little about the 
project, as the price remains the same and the new security powers already 
exist in law.

Under the proposals, EDF, the French firm building the plant with a £6bn 
investment from a Chinese state nuclear firm, will not be able to sell on its 
ownership without permission. For future projects, the UK government will own a 
“special share” that means it will have a veto over owners if there are 
national security concerns.

Nuclear power is risky and expensive; here's a better idea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/nuclear-power-is-risky-and-expensive-heres-a-better-idea>
In a sign the new requirements do not appear to be overly stringent, both EDF 
and China General Nuclear said they were delighted by the approval, which they 
claimed will let them proceed with Hinkley and their wider plans for nuclear 
construction in the UK in future.

The Chinese are keen to proceed with a new plant at Bradwell in Essex in 
particular because it will be their own design built under the UK’s tough 
safety regulations, allowing the company to use it as a showcase to the rest of 
the world.

“We are now able to move forward and deliver much-needed nuclear capacity at 
Hinkley Point, Sizewell and Bradwell with our strategic partners, EDF, and 
provide the UK with safe, reliable and sustainable low-carbon energy,” CGN said.

“CGN and EDF have worked together in close cooperation for decades and this 
has laid a solid foundation for these three new nuclear projects. CGN looks 
forward to leveraging its 30 years’ experience in nuclear construction and 
operation and playing an important role in meeting the UK’s future energy 
needs.”

The shadow energy secretary, Barry Gardiner, said the government has “backed 
down with a whimper” over its security concerns about Chinese involvement, 
saying it had announced “new powers they already possess”.

He told Greg Clark, the business secretary: “They have claimed they introduced 
significant new safeguards into this package. The secretary of state already 
has such powers. Will the secretary of state acknowledge that he can prevent 
the sale of any element of critical infrastructure?”

John Sauven, the Greenpeace executive director, also said the government’s 
review “appears to have been a lot of hot air”.

“The prime minister has baulked at the political embarrassment of irritating 
the French and offending the Chinese. Consequently, even if EDF manages to get 
the technology to work, the UK will pay the price by saddling themselves until 
2060 with an out of date, flawed and expensive technology,” he said.

'Golden relationship' with China boosted by Hinkley approval
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/china-uk-golden-relationship-hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power>
Clark, the business and energy secretary, said the new security restrictions 
were an improvement, claiming EDF would have been at liberty to sell its stake 
on without the revised contract.

His Department for Business, Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and Industrial Strategy 
confirmed that this was the only new security requirement for Hinkley to 
proceed.

The controversial scheme in Somerset was approved six weeks after May 
unexpectedly placed the project under review, causing tensions with Beijing.

Following the review, the government is keeping a guaranteed price of £92.50 
to EDF for every megawatt hour of electricity generated, despite concerns that 
is far higher than the market rate.

Chinese officials have previously given a series of veiled warnings that a 
decision by Britain to halt their investment in UK nuclear would be seen as a 
snub and would put at risk a supposed golden era of relations between the two 
countries.

The decision means Hinkley will be the first new nuclear reactor built in 
Britain in two decades.


Before an announcement in the House of Commons, Clark said: “Having thoroughly 
reviewed the proposal for Hinkley Point C, we will introduce a series of 
measures to enhance security and will ensure Hinkley cannot change hands 
without the government’s agreement. Consequently, we have decided to proceed 
with the first new nuclear power station for a generation.

“Britain needs to upgrade its supplies of energy, and we have always been 
clear that nuclear is an important part of ensuring our future low-carbon 
energy security.”

'It puts us on the map': Bridgwater business toasts Hinkley Point C
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/bridgwater-business-toasts-hinkley-point-c-go-ahead-somerset>
The wider changes to the government’s approach to the ownership of critical 
infrastructure are designed to ensure fuller scrutiny for the purposes of 
national security.

This marks a departure from the more laissez-faire approach of David Cameron’s 
administration.

A government statement said: “Following a comprehensive review of the Hinkley 
Point C project, and a revised agreement with EDF, the government has decided 
to proceed with the first new nuclear power station for a generation. However, 
ministers will impose a new legal framework for future foreign investment in 
Britain’s critical infrastructure, which will include nuclear energy and apply 
after Hinkley.
Map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/hinkley-locator/giv-12515x0tCydyqmjx2/>
“The changes mean that, while the UK will remain one of the most open 
economies in the world, the public can be confident that foreign direct 
investment works in the country’s best interests,” it said.

The French prime minister, Manuel Valls, tweeted that it was excellent news 
that the project was going ahead and that it would be a boost for jobs inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>. The economy minister, Michel Sapin, 
said it was an “undeniable success for French industry” and would be “a big 
contribution to supporting employment in France”.

Jean-Bernard Lévy, the chief executive of EDF Group, said: “The decision of 
the British government to approve the construction of Hinkley Point C marks the 
relaunch of nuclear in Europe.”
Manuel Valls (@manuelvalls) 
Accord sur le projet Hinkley Point : une excellente nouvelle pour la filière 
nucléaire française et pour l'emploi dans l'Hexagone. MV
 <https://twitter.com/manuelvalls/status/776331364379586560> September 15, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/manuelvalls/status/776331364379586560> 
But the news was met with dismay by environmental campaigners, who had been 
given hope it would be cancelled when May placed it under review.


Greenpeace’s Sauven said the potential political embarrassment of scrapping 
the deal must have proved too great.

But he added: “This decision is unlikely to be the grand finale to this 
summer’s political soap opera. There are still huge outstanding financial, 
legal and technical obstacles that can’t be brushed under the carpet. There 
might be months or even years of wrangling over these issues. That’s why the 
government should start supporting renewable power that can come online quickly 
for a competitive price.”

Your guide to Hinkley Point C – the UK's first new nuclear plant for 20 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-c-guide-uk-first-new-nuclear-plant-for-20-years>
Caroline Lucas, co-leader of the Green party, said it was absurd and 
disappointing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/15/absurd-hinkley-point-c-cheaper-cleaner>
 that the deal was to proceed when the government was reducing support for 
cheaper, safer and more reliable renewable alternatives.

“Instead of investing in this eye-wateringly expensive white elephant, the 
government should be doing all it can to support offshore wind, energy 
efficiency and innovative new technologies, such as energy storage,” she said.

However, business groups, engineers and trade unions welcomed the decision to 
proceed, saying it would create jobs and ensure a secure supply of energy.

Claire Jakobsson, of the EEF manufacturers’ organisation, it was a “relief to 
see Hinkley proceeding after months of delays and uncertainty”, but called for 
significant reductions in the price of electricity generated by future nuclear 
projects.

Brian Rye, acting general secretary of Ucatt, the construction union, said: 
“The go-ahead was vital for the construction industry, which desperately needed 
the confirmation of such a major project following a slowdown in the industry 
caused by the Brexit vote. It is also good news for the overall economy as it 
helps to guarantee the stability of our future energy supply.”

The French secretary of state for industry, Christophe Sirugue, told France 
Info 
<http://www.francetvinfo.fr/economie/industrie/christophe-sirugue-hinkley-point-valide-les-choix-dans-le-domaine-nucleaire_1826049.html>
 the Hinkley decision was good news because it validated French industrial 
strategy to invest in nuclear. He said it would create 4,500 jobs in France. 
Questions remain over the difficult financial position of the French 
state-owned power company EDF, which will assume up-front costs, which some 
unions in France argue could jeopardise the firm’s survival.

Sirugue said the state had “taken serious account” of the concerns and would 
be reorganising and helping out the firm. He added that it was “extremely 
important” that the Hinkley project went ahead in terms of France 
“demonstrating our industrial savoir-faire” to the international market.

Timeline

November 2005

Tony Blair launches UK energy policy review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2005/nov/29/energy.greenpolitics>.


May 2006

Blair declares that failing to take action on the UK’s nuclear plants would be 
a “dereliction of duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2006/may/17/energy.business>”.


July 2006

Government gives the green light to new nuclear power plants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2006/jul/11/energy.greenpolitics>. The 
industry secretary, Alistair Darling, says the private sector will have to 
“initiate, fund, construct and operate” the nuclear plants.


February 2007

The UK chief executive of French state-owned EDF says Britain will be cooking 
its Christmas turkeys on new nuclear power by 2017.


August 2007

Safety checks begin on the EPR (European pressurised reactor) power plant 
design that will be used at Hinkley.

January 2008

The government says the first new plant will be completed “well before 2020”.

September 2008

EDF buys British Energy, a key player in the UK nuclear industry, for £12.5bn.

October 2010

UK government names Hinkley Point as one of eight candidates for a new power 
station.

October 2011

EDF submits 55,000-page planning application for Hinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c>.


December 2011

First new reactor will not be operational until 2019, says government.


November 2012

EDF awarded first new site licence for a UK nuclear power station in 25 years, 
at Hinkley Point.

October 2013

Government announces subsidy deal for Hinkley Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/21/britain-nuclear-power-station-hinkley-edf>
, which will now not produce power until 2023, according to EDF.

May 2014

European commission approves state aid for Hinkley Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/08/hinkley-point-european-commission-nuclear-power-station-somerset>
 and costs the plant at £24.5bn.

October 2015

EDF signs Hinkley development deal with China General Nuclear Power Corporation
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/20/china-to-take-one-third-stake-in-24bn-hinkley-nuclear-power-station>
, which will provide one-third of the cost, now estimated at £18bn.


March 2016

Finance chief of EDF quits, amid fears Hinkley Point C could jeopardise the 
company’s financial position. EDF’schief executive promises long-delayed final 
investment decision will be made soon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/07/hinkley-investment-decision-soon-says-edf-chief-after-finance-director-resigns>
.

28 July 2016

EDF decides to press ahead with building Hinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/hinkley-point-c-to-go-ahead-after-edf-board-approves-project>
. But government takes everyone by surprise bypostponing its final decision on 
the project until the early autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/28/hinkley-point-c-timeline-all-the-key-moments>
.

15 September 2016

Theresa May finally gives £18bn project go-ahead,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-station-gets-go-ahead>
but adds “significant new safeguards” to ensure national security.
 