
The Manchester Guardian was founded by John Edward Taylor in 1821 and was 
first published on 5 May of that year. The paper was intended to promote the 
liberal interest in the aftermath of the Peterloo Massacre, and in the context 
of the growing anti-Corn Laws campaign flourishing in Manchester during this 
period. It was published weekly on Saturdays until 1836, when a Wednesday 
edition was added. In 1855 the abolition of Stamp Duty on newspapers finally 
made it possible to publish the paper daily, at a reduced cover price of 2d.

The Guardian achieved national and international recognition under the 
editorship of CP Scott, who held the post for 57 years from 1872. Scott bought 
the paper in 1907 following the death of Taylor’s son, and pledged that the 
principles laid down in the founder’s will would be upheld by retaining the 
independence of the newspaper. CP Scott outlined those principals in a
much-quoted article <https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2002/nov/29/1> 
written to celebrate the centenary of the paper: “Comment is free, but facts 
are sacred... The voice of opponents no less than that of friends has a right 
to be heard.”

After retiring from an active role in managing and editing the paper, Scott 
passed control to his two sons, John Russell Scott as manager and Edward Taylor 
Scott as editor. Realising that the future independence of the paper would be 
jeopardised in the event of the death of one or the other, the two sons made an 
agreement that in the event of either’s death, one would buy the other’s share.

CP Scott died in 1932 and was followed only four months later by Edward, so 
sole ownership fell to JR Scott. Faced with the potential of crippling death 
duties and the predatory interest of competitors, Scott contemplated a radical 
move to ensure the future of both the Guardian and the highly profitable 
Manchester Evening News. He concluded that the only solution was to give away 
his inheritance, a far-reaching solution which provoked close advisor (and 
future Lord Chancellor) Gavin Simonds to conclude: “you are trying to do 
something which is very repugnant to the law of England. You are trying to 
divest yourself of a property right”.

In June 1936, JR Scott formally passed ownership of the paper to the trustees 
ofthe Scott Trust <http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/the-scott-trust/>. As well as 
pledging to ensure the radical editorial tradition of the paper (that the 
newspaper “shall be conducted in the future on the same lines and in the same 
spirit as heretofore”, in the words of the founder’s legacy), the Scott Trust 
also has the duty to maintain a secure financial footing for the business: 
“...to devote the whole of the surplus profits of the Company which would 
otherwise have been available for dividends...towards building up the reserves 
of the Company and increasing the circulation of and expanding and improving 
the newspapers.” These principles remain the only instructions given to an 
incoming editor of the Guardian, though the Scott family retained an interest 
in the running of the company until 1984, when, aged 70, Richard F Scott 
retired from the chairmanship of the Trust.

As the influence of the Manchester Guardian grew beyond its Northern 
hinterland, a new challenge faced the paper under the editorship of AP 
Wadsworth, who took over the post in 1944. The limited number of pages in the 
paper, poor quality of the printing and sometimes peculiar news agenda were 
once perceived as part of the regional charm of the paper. In comparison to the 
other papers on Fleet Street, however, the Guardian’s eccentric virtues often 
seemed to be outweighed by its peculiar idiosyncrasies: the absence of horse 
racing, high-handed moral posturing and woolly leaders.

Alongside the Daily Telegraph and the Times, the Guardian lacked resources 
(despite costing 1d more a day), and an approach to commercial activity that 
could be charitably described as naive did not help matters. On the first day 
of the Chatterley trial, the Guardian carried a front page advertisement for 
the Telegraph ‘the paper you can trust’, which ‘provides all you can want in a 
newspaper’ - and at a cheaper cover price too.

The editor of the paper moved to London in 1964, committing the Guardian to an 
uncertain future in the national market, and shortly afterwards financial 
problems came to a head. The paper relied heavily on the Manchester Evening 
News for financial support, and in the mid-60s the threat to the paper’s future 
grew severe enough for the chairman of the Scott Trust, Laurance Scott, to 
approach the Times to discuss the possibility of a merger. The Times was in a 
similarly perilous financial situation, and many were of the opinion that there 
was only room for one competitor to the Telegraph. Eventually the talks came to 
nothing, but not before a serious examination of the logistics involved had 
been considered on both sides. Alastair Hetherington, the editor at this time, 
remained a staunch advocate of the Guardian’s independence, and the modern 
paper owes much to his leadership and vision during this period.

Investment in printing and the completion of a move to improved offices in 
London in 1976 helped consolidate the Guardian’s position, aided by an 
expansion programme that included the revamping of the Guardian Weekly to 
include content from both the Washington Post and Le Monde. In the increasingly 
polarised political climate of the late 70s and early 80s the Guardian’s 
position as the voice of the left was unchallenged. The opinion pages were the 
birthplace of the SDP, and the letters page was where the battle for the future 
direction of the Labour Party was played out, while the coverage of industrial 
disputes including the 1984-1985 Miners’ Strike defined the paper’s position.

The status quo among the quality press was irrevocably altered by the launch 
of the Independent in 1986. Capturing the centre ground between the Guardian on 
the left and the Times and Telegraph on the right, the Independent attracted 
big name writers and readers with a modern design and distribution network that 
made the most of the post-union market. Within a few years the circulation of 
the Independent rose to within touching distance of both the Times and the 
Guardian, and the previously stagnant market was provoked into a frenzy of 
defensive activity to retain readers.

In 1988 the Guardian made a bold and innovative attempt to reassert its 
position on Fleet Street, with a major redesign that began the modern period of 
success in the history of the paper.

In 1993 the intensely competitive broadsheet market was again thrown into 
confusion by the reduction of the cover price of the Times, firstly from 45p to 
30p, then again in June 1994 from 30p to 20p. As the Times attracted readers, 
first the Daily Telegraph and then the Independent followed suit, running at 
substantial losses as they battled to survive. Throughout this period the 
Guardian remained at full price, investing resources in journalism and 
distancing itself from the price war through distinctive and innovative 
marketing, product development and consistently breaking big stories.

During these years the paper increased its circulation, remained commercially 
successful and achieved critical acclaim for both the quality of its journalism 
and its innovation.

The Guardian was at the forefront of the sleaze revelations that contributed 
to the downfall of the Conservative government in 1997, with a series of 
investigations into the affairs of Tory MPs, including Jonathan Aitken and Neil 
Hamilton. This reputation was cemented by the collapse of the libel case 
brought against the paper by former Minister Jonathan Aitken. Aitken was 
convicted of perjury and jailed in June 1999, and the investigations won the 
Guardian critical acclaim from all sides - including the prestigious Newspaper 
of the Year Award in both 1997 and 1998.

In 1997 the Guardian became the first national newspaper to appoint a readers’ 
editor (producer of the daily Corrections and Clarifications column).

In 1994-95 the Guardian began developing online publication. The paper’s 
technology section OnLine was launched in late 1995, and sites for jobs, 
certain sports, and news events followed through 1996-1998. The Guardian 
Unlimited network of websites was launched as a unified whole in January 1999 
(in 2008 it was to become guardian.co.uk and in 2013 theguardian.com). By March 
2001 GU had over 2.4 million unique users, making it the most popular UK 
newspaper website.

On September 12 2005 the new Berliner Guardian launched, with a 
ground-breaking design in a mid-size format. The Guardian became the UK’s first 
full-colour national newspaper, and the first UK national newspaper ever to 
adopt this size.

December 2008 marked a significant point in the history of the Guardian when 
the paper moved to a brand new building in King’s Cross after 32 years in its 
Farringdon headquarters.

In 2011 the Guardian’s groundbreaking journalism and innovation were 
recognised at the Press Awards where it was named Newspaper of the Year for its 
partnership withWikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks>, which 
produced the leaked US embassy cables. In the same year the Guardian not only 
wrote headlines but made headlines with its globally acclaimed investigation 
intophone hacking <https://www.theguardian.com/media/phone-hacking>.

In recent years the Guardian has significantly developed and expanded its 
digital operations. Between 2009-2010 the Guardian launched a range of new 
digital products and services, including apps for iPhone and iPod Touch,Open 
Platform <https://www.theguardian.com/open-platform> and Datablog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog>, the first national data journalism 
site. In June 2011 Guardian News & Media announced plans to become a
digital-first organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/16/guardian-observer-digital-first-strategy>
, placing open journalism on the web at the heart of its strategy. Since the 
launch of the strategy the Guardian has continued its digital expansion with 
the launch of new applications and platforms, includingKindle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/guardian-kindle-edition> and iPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/ipad/guardian-ipad-edition> editions, 
Android <https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/android/guardian> and Blackberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/insideguardian/guardian-blackberry-app> 
apps,Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/insideguardian/2012/dec/12/guardian-facebook-app>
 app,GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> and new digital 
editions in theUS <http://www.guardiannews.com/> and Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia>. For more information on the history of 
the Guardian’s digital developments see thehistory of the Guardian website 
timeline <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/guardian-website-timeline>.
 