 Nuremburg, Saturday 
Herr Hitler made two speeches at the National Socialist Congress today, in 
which he first contrasted the renascence of Germany with the condition in 
'neighbouring countries', and then further explained the new four-year plan as 
the means to achieve economic self-sufficiency.

The keynote of a speech delivered to 60,000 Hitler Youth boys and girls was 
the great opportunity open to Germans of today. 'You have the good fortune to 
live in a great age,' he told them. 'Looking back on my young days, they seem 
to me rather empty in comparison. It is wonderful to live in a time like ours 
at the re-birth of a great Reich. Germany once again has a great national 
future,' continued Herr Hitler. 'We can see this all the better if we look at 
some other countries. In Germany there is life, but countries around us are 
filled with horror and cruelty.'

What they were today, the Fuhrer continued, 'was due to the strength of their 
own will. I believe in Providence, and I believe Providence will be just. 
Therefore I believe that Providence always rewards the strong, the industrious, 
and the upright. I knew we were defeated because we did not deserve success.'

Addressing his young hearers more directly, Herr Hitler said: 'Looking at you, 
I know that the struggle of my life has not been in vain. My work will continue 
to live with you. You will grow up to be men like those who fought in the Great 
War; You will be brave and loyal.

'We are accustomed to fighting. I am not one of those who are afraid, but I am 
on my guard. I am not afraid of the hour of danger. I look into its face and 
stand firmly, and when the hour of danger comes you too will stand before, 
behind and beside me and hold up the flag...'

Â• The 'English' spelling of 'renascence' in the first paragraph, championed by 
Matthew Arnold in the 19th century, is now virtually obsolete but was correct 
in 1936
 