
The Augsburg goalkeeper Marwin Hitz has apologised for sabotaging the penalty 
spot moments before Cologne’s Anthony Modeste missed his penalty kick in their
Bundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> game on 
Saturday.

Nicklas Bendtner: ‘I am tired of being portrayed as an idiot’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/06/nicklas-bendtner-tired-portrayed-idiot>
Hitz deliberately dug his studs into the turf – and swivelled a few times for 
maximum impact – just before Modeste stepped up to try to give the home side 
the lead. The Cologne player, however, slipped as his standing leg stepped on 
the area Hitz had tampered with. To make matters worse,Augsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/augsburg> scored the only goal of the 
game six minutes later to record a 1-0 victory.

Immediately after the game Hitz tried to play down the incident – “There is no 
shame in fooling around a bit in the heat of the moment” –but later admitted 
that he had been in the wrong 
<https://twitter.com/HitzMarwin/status/673456065942523904/photo/1?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
.
BT Sport Football (@btsportfootball) 
.@FCAugsburg <https://twitter.com/FCAugsburg>'s keeper rakes his studs on the 
penalty spot, causing@AModeste15 <https://twitter.com/AModeste15> to slip and 
miss his penalty!https://t.co/onZV5zN2m9 <https://t.co/onZV5zN2m9>
 <https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/673453110988181505> December 6, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/673453110988181505> 
“That wasn’t the most fair thing to do,” he said. “When I see that, that’s not 
me. It won’t happen again. I have never saved a penalty before so I thought I 
would just make the taker a little bit unsure. A lot of things come together 
when something like this happens: a full stadium, a frantic game and … one 
thinking that it wasn’t a penalty to start off with.”

Hitz was criticised by his own manager, Markus Weinzierl, who said: “He hasn’t 
acted well, he hasn’t acted cleverly and [has acted] not fairly. But when you 
feel wronged you sometimes over-react.” The Augsburg sporting director, Stefan 
Reuter, added: “It is also not very fair to dive to get a penalty.”

There have been calls for Hitz to be banned retrospectively.
 