
It was a sight that stunned everyone who saw it, a bizarre vision never before 
seen in public. Television sets may have been adjusted, but it was no technical 
fault. It passed quickly but its meaning was unmistakable: Paris 
Saint-Germain's coach, Paul Le Guen, was smiling, even laughing, on the team 
bench as his side coasted to a4–1 win over Nancy 
<http://www.dingue2foot.com/2009/03/02/video-les-buts-de-psg-nancy-4-1-010309/>
. Le Guen, for that brief moment, looked happy.

After the game normal service resumed and Le Guen, as buttoned-up a Breton as 
you could get, berated his team for giving the ball away too often and allowing 
the visitors too many scoring chances. "But I don't want to put a damper on 
things," he said, having done exactly that.

Le Guen has plenty to be happy about at the moment: PSG moved up to second 
place and, after Lyon were held to a1–1 draw at home to Rennes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=82d7PxZ49_o>, are back to four points behind 
the stuttering leaders; they are favourites to beat Sporting Braga to reach the 
Uefa Cup quarter-finals; the president with whom Le Guen had a clear 
personality clash,Charles Villeneuve 
<http://www.ouest-france.fr/actu/actu_sport_FluxRSS_-Toutes-les-infos-sportives-PSG-Villeneuve-encore-present-_1-834978_flux.Htm>
, has left the club, while the coach's summer signings, Ludovic Giuly, Stéphane 
Sessegnon and Guillaume Hoarau, were all on the scoresheet on Sunday night.

All three have been superb this season but it is Hoarau, Ligue 1's top scorer 
with 15 goals, who has been the star of the show in recent weeks. He scored two 
in PSG's 2–0 Uefa Cup win over Wolfsburg (PSG had won the away leg 3–1), and 
another two againstNancy <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nancy> to 
escalate talk of a France call-up for the two World Cup qualifiers against 
Lithuania in the next month.

Hoarau is more than just a target man, as his goals breakdown shows: five with 
his head, four with his left foot and six with his right foot. He is also 
important in his own penalty area, as PSG's best header at defending set 
pieces. "He is progressing well and becoming a good symbol for this club," said 
Le Guen.

Hoarau turns 25 on Thursday, older than you might expect for someone in his 
first top-flight season. His long journey to this point began on the island of 
La Réunion, playing alongside Florent Sinama-Pongolle for Jeunesse Sportive 
Saint-Pierroise Under-11s. Sinama-Pongolle moved toLe Havre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lehavre> aged 13 (and then Liverpool at 
19), while Hoarau was rejected at the same age.

His father Pierre, who made him do 150 ball-juggles (50 with each foot and 
another 50 with his head) whenever he caught him mucking around, set up a 
regime in which the 18-year-old Hoarau would train until 8pm, do two hours' 
weight training and only then do his homework. "Sometimes I was angry with him 
but I didn't dare tell him," Hoarau recently said. "I used to ask myself, 'Why 
is he always on at me, other dads aren't like that.' But now I understand."

Père Pierre was nicknamed Le Cheval Blanc because, according to a former 
team-mate, "he was a clumsy forward and he didn't want his son to suffer like 
he did from a lack of technique". By the time Hoarau junior was 19, he had 
scored 12 goals for JSSP in the island's top division, and spent his time off 
diving the local reefs and singing Bob Marley songs in a band."Marley is my 
passion," he said 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/psg-foot-paris-saint-germain/hoarau-j-ai-eu-un-declic-21-02-2009-418329.php>
. His favourite sweatshirt has "Redemption Song" emblazoned on its front and 
his ambition is to visit theMarley museum 
<http://www.bobmarley-foundation.com/museum.html> in Jamaica.

The hard work eventually paid off and Le Havre took on Hoarau after another 
trial in January 2004. "It was my last chance," he said. It took Hoarau another 
four years to break the ten-goal barrier in a season, and by then Le Guen had 
identified him as a possible successor toPedro Pauleta 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x79ha2_hommage-a-pedro-miguel-pauleta_sport>. 
"When I signed, everyone said I was crazy but it is possible to have stability 
at Paris," he said. Hoarau was the subject of a €10m (£8.9m) bid from an 
English club in January, but he said: "There is a time for everything and [the 
time for] a transfer to England is not now."

The former PSG forward Dominique Rocheteau is relieved that Hoarau has not yet 
received a France call-up – "It's a bit early now, just remember what happened 
to Bafe Gomis," he said – though he could well be in Raymond Domenech's next 
squad.

He might even take the place of Jimmy Briand, who was the Rennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rennes> villain and hero in their 1–1 
draw at Lyon. Briand missed several one-on-ones against Hugo Lloris, including 
one just before Kim Kallstrom put Lyon ahead, but he made amends with a lobbed 
equaliser in injury-time that left the leaders with only one home win (and that 
against Le Havre) in their last three months. "I think we still had the 
Barcelona [Champions League] game in our legs," said a furious Claude Puel 
afterwards.

Bordeaux and Marseille both closed the gap on Lyon with 1–0 wins over Lorient 
and Caen respectively. Bordeaux'sYoann Gourcuff 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hr-1hjl92VI> played against the team coached by 
his father Christian, although the highlight was the pre-match TV interview in 
which Christian clearly didn't want to talk about his son. Question: "You have 
to admit that he's a good-looking boy, isn't he?" Answer: "I don't want to talk 
about it. He's a good player."

Brandao scored his first goal for L'OM 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CTZHzcBRHq4>, to increase the pressure on 
Caen's likeable manager, Franck Dumas, who said before the game that he would 
rather jump than be pushed out of his job. "I don't think a new guy can make 
that much difference to this group, and I don't want to see the last three and 
a half years of entertainment wasted." Caen last won on 22 November, 101 days 
ago, and while it's certainly entertaining listening to Dumas, his players may 
disagree when they hear his plans for the week. "I'm going to work with a group 
of 16 players who've got some bollocks," he said. "Some of the others might cry 
and scream, but I don't give a damn."

Only goal difference is keeping Caen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/caen> out of the drop zone at the moment, 
but given Sochaux's recent upturn in results – their 1–0 win over Nice, 
courtesy of January signing Vaclav Sverkos's fourth goal in seven games, was 
their third win in five – that won't be for too long.

Elsewhere, the goals of Ireneusz Jelen, three in his last four, have helped 
Auxerre up the table, and he was on the scoresheet again in their1-1 draw with 
Toulouse <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RYTohk77fqg>; Saint-Etienne missed the 
chance to escape the bottom three after a last-minute goal from Yoann Mollo, 
nicknamed the new Marc Overmars, helped Monaco toa 2–2 draw 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5mdQLOIDr8I>; and Jean-Claude Darcheville 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x7vtxt_1er-interview-de-darcheville_sport> 
has become an unlikely hero at Valenciennes, scoring in their2–0 win 
<http://cestoff.com/videos-video-buts-valenciennes-lille-2-0-danicdarcheville-streaming.html>
 over Lille.

Next weekend Lyon warm up for their Champions League trip to Barcelona with a 
testing fixture against Puel's former side Lille at the Stade de France (they 
also face off in the Cup on Wednesday), while PSG look to close the gap with a 
game atLorient <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lorient>. That will be Le 
Guen v Gourcuff, a battle between two men from Brittany who hate the spotlight. 
At least we can be sure the game will be more interesting than the press 
conferences after it.

Results, Week 26: Valenciennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valenciennes> 2–0 Lille, Sochaux 1–0 
Nice, Nantes 1–1 Grenoble, Le Mans 2–0 Le Havre, Auxerre 1–1 Toulouse, PSG 4–1 
Nancy, Caen 0–1 Marseille, Bordeaux 1–0 Lorient, Monaco 2–2 Saint-Etienne, Lyon 
1–1 Rennes
 