
Holden <https://www.theguardian.com/business/holden> will finish manufacturing 
cars at its Adelaide plant on 20 October.

The company, which is owned by US-based General Motors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/generalmotors>, will then import all its 
cars from overseas, but some design and marketing functions will remain in 
Australia.

The Holden spokesman Richard Phillips said the company was giving its 
employees and suppliers advance notice, and providing certainty by announcing 
the date.

Holden says it will build more than 30,000 vehicles between now and the 
plant’s closure. Close to 1,000 employees will remain in work until production 
ends.

Of the 700 people who have left the plant since 2015, almost 70% have found 
new jobs within a year, the company says. Current employees will have access to 
transition services and up to $3,000 in approved training and $500 for 
financial advice.

The Elizabeth plant, which has been making cars for more than 60 years, has 
been winding back production in recent years.

Details of Holden’s new 2018 Commodore model, the first to be manufactured 
overseas, were announced recently, and the company is keen to stress its 
continuing presence in the Australian market.

The car, which was designed and engineered by Opel in Germany, although with 
input from Holden in Australia, will be available as a four-cylinder petrol or 
diesel front-wheel-drive power or a V6 all-wheel-drive. There is no V8 model.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fholden-announces-date-for-last-car-to-roll-out-of-adelaide-plant%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bd10d91ea2cdad2fa2c2b756e7ac992554ceb6a%2F0_0_1280_723%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holden%20announces%20date%20for%20last%20car%20to%20roll%20out%20of%20Adelaide%20plant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fholden-announces-date-for-last-car-to-roll-out-of-adelaide-plant%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holden%20announces%20date%20for%20last%20car%20to%20roll%20out%20of%20Adelaide%20plant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fholden-announces-date-for-last-car-to-roll-out-of-adelaide-plant%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bd10d91ea2cdad2fa2c2b756e7ac992554ceb6a%2F0_0_1280_723%2F1280.jpg>
 The 2018 Holden Commodore model, the first to be made outside Australia. 
Photograph: General Motors 
The acting Labor leader Penny Wong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/penny-wong> said it was an awful 
day for Holden employees and their families.


“We are thinking of you. We know this is a tough day,” she told reporters in 
Adelaide.

She said the focus must now shift to retraining and other employment 
opportunities.

Defence manufacturing and ship and submarine building would create new jobs in 
coming years, Senator Wong said.
 