
Holly

This tree’s jolly red berries and prickly leaves adorn every conceivable piece 
of Christmas paraphernalia, from napkins to wrapping paper. And yet one of the 
oft-asked questions when it comes to this tree in the garden is “why doesn’t my 
holly have any berries?” The plant family Ilex - of which the European hollyI
lex aquifolium <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ilex_aquifolium> is a member - 
consists mostly ofdioecious plants <http://www.cooksinfo.com/dioecious-plants>, 
meaning there are distinct male and female specimens, and only the female bears 
berries - and that’s provided there’s a male plant in the vicinity.

There are exceptions: I. aquifolium ‘Pyramidalis’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/95739/Ilex-aquifolium-Pyramidalis-(f)/Details> 
and‘JC van Tol’ <https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=1017> are both 
self-fertile, so they don’t need another plant for cross pollination and can 
produce berries all on their own. Their leaves are also much less spiny than 
regularI. aquifolium, which may or may not appeal. For more information on the 
vast range of hollies for gardens, check out thisfeature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/dec/13/alternatives-holly-christmas>
 by Naomi Slade from the Guardian archive .

Non-festive fact: if you suffer from cats defecating on your seed beds, try 
laying some holly branches (preferably as spiny as possible - pyracantha is 
another option if you don’t have holly) across the bare soil. They won’t come 
near.

Christmas tree
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fholly-yule-logs-and-norway-spruce-trees-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d9ca9818edd3283f9a3ed5cbc5a9d4763accd38%2F0_96_3483_2089%2F3483.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holly%2C%20yule%20logs%20and%20Norway%20spruce%3A%20trees%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fholly-yule-logs-and-norway-spruce-trees-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holly%2C%20yule%20logs%20and%20Norway%20spruce%3A%20trees%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fholly-yule-logs-and-norway-spruce-trees-of-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d9ca9818edd3283f9a3ed5cbc5a9d4763accd38%2F0_96_3483_2089%2F3483.jpg>
 Nordmann fir trees being cut for Christmas. Photograph: Andrew Milligan/PA Wire



What is a Christmas tree, exactly? The term is a catchall for an awful lot of 
different species around the world. In New Zealand, a tree that features on 
many a Christmas card isMetrosideros excelsa 
<https://meaningoftrees.com/2013/06/18/pohutukawa-metrosideros-excelsa/>, a 
member of the myrtle family known to Maori people aspohutukawa. Settlers, 
noting its habit of producing beautiful red bottlebrush flowers around 
Christmas time, dubbed it the New Zealand Christmas tree. It’s too tender to 
grow outside in the UK unless you happen to live in theIsles of Scilly 
<http://www.monumentaltrees.com/en/gbr/england/cornwall/7525_trescoabbey/15188/>
. In San Francisco, on the other hand, it growsrather too well 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/27/us/27bcjames.html>. Australia has the New 
South Wales Christmas bush,Ceratopetalum gummiferum 
<http://anpsa.org.au/c-gumm.html>: it too turns red in December, although the 
colour is the result of the sepals of the seed capsules, not the preceding 
flowers, which are white.

Back in Britain, the Christmas tree tradition, though it’s been going strong 
over several centuries, has embraced more than a dozen different trees. The 
needle-shedding Christmas tree of my youth, the Norway spruce (Picea abies), 
has gradually been elbowed out of British front rooms in favour of other trees 
that hang onto their foliage far longer - the Nordmann fir (Abies nordmanniana 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/53/i-Abies-nordmanniana-i/Details?returnurl=%2Fplants%2Ftrees%3Fdisplay%3DList%26s%3Ddesc(plant_merged)%26context%3Db%25253D0%252526hf%25253D10%252526l%25253Den%252526s%25253Ddesc%25252528plant_merged%25252529%252526sl%25253Dplants%252526r%25253Df%2525252Fplant_plant_type%2525252Ftrees%26page%3D1%26aliaspath%3D%252fplants%252ftrees>
) leading the way, followed by the noble fir (Abies nobilis 
<https://www.christmasforest.co.uk/product/noble-fir/>), the blue spruce (Picea 
pungens Glauca Group 
<https://www.kelways.co.uk/product/picea-pungens-glauca-group/19167/>), and 
most recently the Fraser fir (Abies fraseri 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fraser_fir>). 

The origins of the practice of decorating a tree for Christmas are far from 
clear, but most agree it originates in central Europe, perhaps some time in the 
1500s. Even in his 1850 short story The Christmas Tree, Charles Dickens refers 
to it as “that pretty German toy” (you can hear Simon Callow read this tale 
aloudhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2012/dec/25/simon-callow-charles-dickens-christmas>
). If you want to read more about its history, I highly recommend the book
Inventing the Christmas Tree 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Inventing-Christmas-Tree-Bernd-Brunner/dp/0300186525/ref=sr_1_5?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1482343898&sr=1-5&keywords=bernd+brunner>
 by Bernd Brunner. For a different perspective, try palaeobotanist Susannah 
Lydon’sblogpost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/21/have-yourself-a-mesozoic-christmas-tree-palaeontologists>
 on the Christmas tree as a survivor from Mesozoic times.

For strictly practical advice on keeping your real Christmas tree alive as 
long as possible, try theBritish Christmas Tree Growers Association 
<http://www.bctga.co.uk/info-for-buyers/care-of-trees.html>.

Yule log
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fholly-yule-logs-and-norway-spruce-trees-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22cc41131fb34a92f235083c9db5eb52fcada35d%2F0_0_6000_3601%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holly%2C%20yule%20logs%20and%20Norway%20spruce%3A%20trees%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fholly-yule-logs-and-norway-spruce-trees-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holly%2C%20yule%20logs%20and%20Norway%20spruce%3A%20trees%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fholly-yule-logs-and-norway-spruce-trees-of-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22cc41131fb34a92f235083c9db5eb52fcada35d%2F0_0_6000_3601%2F6000.jpg>
 Logging in: a yule log burns brightly on American TV. Photograph: Alamy 
As festive customs go, the yule log has fared far worse than the Christmas 
tree. In the dining hall of Hever Castle in Kent hangs the nineteenth century 
paintingYule Log 
<http://www.hevercastle.co.uk/news/castle-object-month-yule-log-painting/> by 
Robert Alexander Hillingford. A man and a boy use ropes to haul a hefty section 
of the trunk of an oak tree, preceded by a prancing spaniel. They are headed 
for a huge fireplace, where this giant log will be burn from Christmas Eve 
right through until Twelfth Night. And there’s the rub, for us in the 21st 
century, where such fireplaces are a relative rarity, replaced by modern 
contrivances such as radiators and underfloor heating.

But of course the yule log predates Christmas anyway, having its origins in 
pagan winter solstice celebrations that took place across Europe in many 
variations, where a tree or log (oak or ash in England, but different woods 
elsewhere - cherry in France, for instance), was burned to ward off evil 
spirits. There’s much more detail to delve into on regional variations of the 
yule log tradition inChambers’ Book of Days 
<http://www.thebookofdays.com/months/dec/24.htm>. 

Today, you’re much more likely to be enjoying the chocolate replica 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yule_log_(cake)>, or if you are in the US, 
watching the now-traditionalTV broadcast 
<http://mentalfloss.com/article/72899/luminous-story-behind-tvs-yule-log> of a 
burning yule log. If you fancy making your very own a chocolate yule log, 
here’s theperfect recipe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/dec/13/how-cook-perfect-yule-log>
.

Boswellia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fholly-yule-logs-and-norway-spruce-trees-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa84c5d7758ad7fda43f7b05f46ff534795002830%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holly%2C%20yule%20logs%20and%20Norway%20spruce%3A%20trees%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fholly-yule-logs-and-norway-spruce-trees-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holly%2C%20yule%20logs%20and%20Norway%20spruce%3A%20trees%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fholly-yule-logs-and-norway-spruce-trees-of-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa84c5d7758ad7fda43f7b05f46ff534795002830%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 ABoswellia sacra tree growing in Oman. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Boswellia may not be a familiar treename to you, but you will know the 
fragrant gum resin drawn from the trees of this genus from its key role in 
Christmas carols and nativity plays. Frankincense was one of the gifts bought 
by the three kings to the infant Jesus, according to thebook of Matthew 
<http://biblehub.com/matthew/2-11.htm> in the Bible.

My favourite Frankincense fact is that the Egyptians called it “sweat of the 
gods fallen to earth”. In fact it was highly valued by several cultures in 
ancient times, including the Romans, the Greeks and the Babylonians. For a full 
account of its uses, visit Marquette University’sHistorians@Work blog 
<https://marquettehistorians.wordpress.com/2012/12/24/sweat-of-the-gods-frankincense-and-myrrh-in-antiquity/>
.

Frankincense is still prized today, as an ingredient for making incense, for 
cosmetics, perfumes and so on. The boswellia tree still grows wild Oman, 
Ethiopia, Somalia, and Yemen, and it is harvested in the same way as ancient 
times: the bark is cut and the resin that exudes is collected. Unfortunately
Boswellia sacra is classed as near-threatened on the IUCN red list 
<http://www.iucnredlist.org/details/34533/0> of endangered species. If you 
would like to see one of these trees in the flesh, there is a specimen ofB. 
sacra growing in the Princess of Wales conservatory at Kew Gardens 
<http://www.kew.org/science-conservation/plants-fungi/boswellia-sacra-frankincense>
 in London.

Myrhh
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fholly-yule-logs-and-norway-spruce-trees-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17490c8fed223f0cff91e8d2fe6afa6f39ab1f05%2F0_45_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holly%2C%20yule%20logs%20and%20Norway%20spruce%3A%20trees%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fholly-yule-logs-and-norway-spruce-trees-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holly%2C%20yule%20logs%20and%20Norway%20spruce%3A%20trees%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fholly-yule-logs-and-norway-spruce-trees-of-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17490c8fed223f0cff91e8d2fe6afa6f39ab1f05%2F0_45_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Abyssinian Myrrh (Commiphora myrrha), flowering twig. Photograph: Alamy Stock 
Photo 
Myrhh is the product of another family of trees, Commiphora 
<http://www.plantzafrica.com/plantcd/commiphora.htm>, that grow in the same 
part of the world as Boswellia. It’s another gum resin that is used for just 
the same purposes as frankincense: incense, perfumes, medicines and the like. 
In fact both trees are members of theBurseraceae 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burseraceae> or incense tree family. 

Read the verse about myrhh in the carol We Three Kings of Orient Are 
<https://www.carols.org.uk/we_three_kings_of_orient_are.htm> and the role of 
this “bitter perfume” as a symbol of death is clear: Jesus’s body wasembalmed 
<http://www.kingjamesbibleonline.org/Myrrh.php4> with pounds of it, according 
to the account inJohn 19 <http://biblehub.com/john/19-39.htm> (myrhh means 
“bitter” in Arabic). Like Boswellia, Commiphora is a shrubby desert tree: it is 
adapted to the harsh conditions with spines to discourage grazing animals. If 
you fancy trying to grow your own myrhh tree, you can buy a youngCommiphora 
myrrha seedling from The Curious Plant Company 
<http://www.curiousplants.co.uk/myrrh-tree-commiphora-var-116-p.asp> in the UK, 
but bear in mind you will need to grow it as a houseplant so you’re unlikely to 
be harvesting resin from it.

 * Read parts one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/dec/15/mistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas>
 andtwo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/dec/20/paperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas>
 of gardening editor Jane Perrone’s series on the plants of Christmas.
 