
Sister Faustyna is a little hunched from the strain of the Christmas rush. She 
has spent every day of the past few weeks outside in the cold, running up a few 
steps to the scales with bags full of fish, weighing them and handing them out 
to customers. At Christmas, Poles are obsessed with carp, a freshwater fish 
that is mandatory on everyChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> table, traditionally 
served fried or jellied with vegetables.

In Staniątki, where Benedictine nuns live as they have done for centuries in 
800-year-old St Adalbert Abbey, the customers pay whatever they think 
appropriate for their festive fish. “It’s a voluntary contribution,” says 
sister Stefania Polkowska, the abbess on a mission to save her nunnery from 
ruin.

For this idyllic medieval abbey, in a village of roughly 3,000 people, 16 
miles south-east of Kraków, is also the site of financial trouble. Where 60 
nuns used to live, only 13 are left, and most of them are well over 70. Despite 
that, the nuns are welcoming and generous, treating their guests to homemade 
gingerbread and tea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpoland-nunnery-saved-by-farming-christmas-carp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12a4b8ac2ba49af15f8d4f2b901cd36c655b2646%2F0_111_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holy%20carp%3A%20how%20fish%20farming%20saved%20a%20Polish%20nunnery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpoland-nunnery-saved-by-farming-christmas-carp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holy%20carp%3A%20how%20fish%20farming%20saved%20a%20Polish%20nunnery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpoland-nunnery-saved-by-farming-christmas-carp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12a4b8ac2ba49af15f8d4f2b901cd36c655b2646%2F0_111_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Sister Stefania at her fish pond 
In 2009, when sister Stefania arrived in Staniątki, the nunnery was being 
maintained with the retirement pensions of the older nuns and offerings 
collected during Sunday mass. The roof was about to collapse, the inside of the 
building was cold and damp, and some ancient frescoes were in danger of being 
lost.

“I prayed to Saint Anthony [patron saint of lost things] to help me find a way 
to save us,” says sister Stefania.

Her prayers were answered when, soon afterwards, she decided to clear two 
forgotten ponds in the garden. Inspired by a local fish farmer, the nuns 
started breeding carp – and the fish became an instant success. The customers, 
including Irena and Jerzy, whom I met queueing on a frosty Wednesday afternoon 
this week, say the carp taste great, but that supporting the nuns is what 
really brings them to Staniątki.

“Our beautiful building needs all the money we can get, and it’s never quite 
enough,” says sister Stefania.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpoland-nunnery-saved-by-farming-christmas-carp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a7440c23ad6c5d2ef5b195bfa62a68be7005326%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holy%20carp%3A%20how%20fish%20farming%20saved%20a%20Polish%20nunnery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpoland-nunnery-saved-by-farming-christmas-carp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holy%20carp%3A%20how%20fish%20farming%20saved%20a%20Polish%20nunnery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpoland-nunnery-saved-by-farming-christmas-carp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a7440c23ad6c5d2ef5b195bfa62a68be7005326%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 Satisfied customers … Irena and Jerzy, with sister Faustyna and their bag of 
festive fish 
The hustle and bustle of the fish trade contrasts with the contemplative 
stillness of the rest of the abbey, where, behind thick metal doors, the nuns 
spend most of the day in prayer. Their only recreation time is at 7.15pm, when 
they’ll often opt for a game of Scrabble. The 13 sisters also tend a large 
greenhouse and have cows, dogs, cats, a beehive and a donkey named Michał, who 
follows sister Stefania around like a dog. Their motto isOra et Labora, pray 
and work.

Visitors can stay in modest rooms in a former school, gaining rare access to 
the private garden. They can interact with nuns outside, help with chores, or 
simply spend some quiet time in a beautifully renovated gothic church. The 
sisters are organising a contemplative New Year’s Eve celebration, but visitors 
of any faith or none are welcome at any time of year.

• Simple en suite bedrooms cost from £20 a night, including three substantial 
meals a day (benedyktynki.eu 
<https://translate.google.co.uk/translate?hl=en&sl=pl&u=http://www.benedyktynki.eu/&prev=search>
). Staniątki is easily reached by train from Kraków
 