
After a promising first weekend it has not been a vintage Heineken Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> season so far. Maybe it is the 
partial fault of the distracting off-field arguments about the tournament's 
future. Too many pitches have also been poor. One day someone in authority will 
make the vital connection between a decent surface – grass or artificial – and 
entertaining professional rugby and appreciate the two are inextricably linked. 
Good groundsmen would suddenly become as sought-after as decent tight-heads.

Nor does it help that the final weekend of pool games threatens to contain 
about as much left-field suspense, relative to previous seasons, as a 
newsreader's autocue. UnlessSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> lose at home to Connacht and 
Leinster fail to collect a point at home to Ospreys, we pretty much know the 
last eight sides already. Come to think of it, we had a pretty good idea before 
Christmas.

Way back in October there seemed a possibility that Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/12/ospreys-northampton-saints-heineken-cup-match-report>
 and Montpellier might edge out Leinster and Ulster but it has not happened. 
The likes of Toulon, Toulouse, Clermont Auvergne, Munster, Leicester and 
Saracens have merely done what most expected, with the exception ofConnacht's 
wonderful Pool Three win at Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/dec/08/toulouse-connacht-heineken-cup-match-report>
. The Italian teams' record, meanwhile, reads P10 L10, ensuring the two best 
second-placed qualifiers will, as per usual, almost certainly emerge from their 
pools.

On the other hand, the blanket survival of the biggest and fittest –has Europe 
now morphed into three tiers comprising the elite rich, the middling strivers 
and the low budget rest? – makes the knockout stages intriguing. As things 
stand it seems Clermont, Toulouse, Toulon andLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> – not necessarily in that 
order – are best placed to secure a home draw, a calculation which assumes an 
unbeaten Ulster team will not quite manage to turn over the Tigers at Welford 
Road on Saturday.

That would leave the three Irish provinces, Munster, Leinster and Ulster, 
looking at an away quarter-final, along with Saracens. It could even be that 
Sarries, having beenbattered into submission in Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/12/toulouse-saracens-heineken-cup-match-report>
 on Sunday, will have to return to the Midi to face the same opponents, their 
delayed punishment for finishing second in their pool.

If Ulster – the only unbeaten team left in the competition – do finish second 
in Pool Five, they might also have to return to the East Midlands in the last 
eight. In that event there would be a distinct chance of Clermont hosting 
Munster andToulon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon> entertaining 
Leinster. That would certainly tell us whether the Irish sides are the equal of 
their champion predecessors.

On the evidence to date, it must be said, a final four of Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse>, Toulon, Clermont and Leicester 
would not be a massive shock. By April, the likes of Manu Tuilagi should be 
back fit and the luck of Sunday's semi-final draw at Thomond Park might also 
boost the Tigers' prospects of reaching the final in Cardiff, in defiance of 
the gulf in salaries which their director of rugby Richard Cockerill is swift 
to highlight.

Whatever Europe ends up looking like in future, this random semi-final draw 
always has a faintly unsatisfactory feel. Surely, in the absence of a 
two-legged semi, the team with the best record – or the most tries – in that 
season's pool stages should have precedence? If Clermont, the current Top 14 
leaders, are allowed to play their quarter-final and semi-final on French soil, 
however, they must still be considered favourites to lift the title. Toulon may 
be the defending champions and Toulouse the tournament's grand masters but the 
big boys from the Auvergne want to give their departing coach Vern Cotter a 
grand send-off and have the squad to make it happen.

If Sitiveni Sivivatu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/11/harlequins-clermont-auvergne-heineken-cup-match-report>
, in particular, keeps playing as he has been doing, their knock-out opponents 
will find them hard to stop. As for the Amlin Challenge Cup qualifiers, 
Northampton and the winners of Scarlets v Harlequins and Cardiff Blues v Exeter 
Chiefs may well join the five pool winners. Unless, that is, a largely 
predictable pool story has a couple of late surprises in store.

Empty nests

So far, we are told, some 773,302 spectators have watched the five Heineken 
Cup pool rounds so far. Perhaps just as relevant is the atmosphere they are 
watching the games in. You wonder, in particular, if Welsh regional rugby would 
be more attractive to more punters if so many games were not taking place in 
soulless half-empty football grounds with little in the way of warmth or 
character. It does not feel like a total coincidence that Europe's most 
successful sides – Clermont, Toulon, Leicester, Munster, Leinster etc – play 
their big matches in atmospheric stadia full of supporters swept away on a tide 
of passionate enthusiasm.

Staging games in front of rows of empty seats on freezing cold Friday nights 
or wet Sunday lunchtimes tests the faith of even the most committed.

Prediction of the week ...

So much for Saracens winning in Toulouse! Undaunted, our hutch pundit has 
boldly gone for the food bowl marked "Ulster" when invited to predict the 
outcome of this weekend's Pool Five decider at Welford Road. With his record 
beginning to look patchier than a 20-year-old pair of jeans, it is time to call 
his bluff. Leicester to win and top the pool.
 