
Horse, possum, camel and donkey will be available for sale from South 
Australian butchers from September next year if recommended changes to food 
safety regulations are adopted.

The SA government, which has to update the regulations by 1 September 2017, 
has suggested the state should adopt theAustralian and New Zealand Food 
Standards code <http://www.foodstandards.gov.au/code/Pages/default.aspx> 
definition of “game meat”, which governs what wild animals may be sold 
commercially for human consumption.

The proposed change would broaden the range of animals available at butchers 
to include wild horses and donkeys, as well as wild buffalo, camel, deer, pig 
and possum.

Tick bites that trigger severe meat allergy on rise around the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/07/tick-bites-that-trigger-severe-meat-allergy-on-rise-around-the-world>
Domestic horses, like racehorses, would still not be allowed to be sold for 
human consumption. Eggs, foetuses and pouch young are still off the list.

Wild goats, rabbits, hare, kangaroo, wallaby and any bird that may be legally 
hunted can already be slaughtered and sold for human consumption in SA.

A spokeswoman from SA Health said the proposed changes would not change the 
laws around hunting or culling protected species.

“Any South Australians wanting to hunt protected species in SA would need a 
permit as per the National Parks andWildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Act 1972 legislation,” she 
said.

The move would make SA only the second jurisdiction to allow for the local 
production and sale of horse meat, afterWestern Australia adopted the broader 
national standards in 2009 
<https://www.slp.wa.gov.au/legislation/statutes.nsf/main_mrtitle_11233_homepage.html>
. The proposed change has been opposed by the Animal Justice party.

“The newly proposed game industries are particularly obnoxious because they 
produce meats that people don’t even like,” convenor Geoff Russelltold the 
Advertiser. 
<http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/news/south-australia/horse-possum-and-donkey-meat-would-be-on-the-menu-under-legal-change-in-sa/news-story/fa4e3882053a5021af34c3341904346c>

According to the Humane Society 
<http://www.hsi.org/assets/pdfs/Horses_meatproduction_Australia_NewZealand.pdf>
, about 100,000 horses are slaughtered annually in Australia.

Of those about 8,400 are processed through one of two abattoirs licensed to 
slaughter horses for export – Samex Peterborough inSouth Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> and Meramist in 
Caboolture, Queensland. The rest are processed by one of 33 knackeries and sold 
as pet meat.

Animal collective: how four film-makers' exposé of the meat trade became as 
fair to farmers as the food
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/24/animal-collective-ow-four-filmmakers-expose-of-the-meat-trade-became-as-fair-to-farmers-as-the-food>
A Perth butcher, Vince Garreffa, received death threats from animal rights 
groups after he received ministerial permission to sell horse meat in 2010 and 
joked that his Inglewood butchery would “be known as the horse whisperers”.

“You just whisper, ‘Can I have a kilo of horse meat please’,” he told Fairfax 
media. 
<http://www.watoday.com.au/wa-news/butcher-threatened-over-horse-meat-20100715-10cc6.html>

He later told the Courier Mail 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/butcher-vincenzo-garreffa-keen-to-get-the-message-out-that-horse-meat-is-good-meat-to-eat/news-story/b4a52937e566daa77866f76297407e11>
 he was doing a roaring trade among French and Italian migrants, who say it 
“tastes of home.”

Legally caught possums and wallabies can already be sold as game meat in 
Tasmania.

Wallaby is said to taste like kangaroo, only “milder”, but possum has proved 
harder to describe, earning the qualified approval of one Tasmanian producerwho 
said it was <http://www.abc.net.au/local/stories/2011/06/06/3236877.htm> “quite 
a different meat.”

The proposed SA regulations are open for public consultation until February 
<http://www.sahealth.sa.gov.au/wps/wcm/connect/public+content/sa+health+internet/about+us/reviews+and+consultation/update+of+the+food+regulations+2002+consultation/update+of+the+food+regulations+2002+consultation>
.
 