
Quiche is, arguably, the world’s most politically loaded food. To the right 
(and particularly when it is made with wholemeal flour), quiche defines 
left-wing joylessness. It smacks of self-denial, sandals, 1970s communal 
living. To unreconstructed sexists, meanwhile – men so insecure that gender 
normsdictate what they eat 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/the-hot-button/why-real-men-dont-eat-quiche/article1370664/>
 – quiche is a byword for the New Man’s namby-pamby, nappy-changing alienation 
from histrue masculinity 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_Men_Don%27t_Eat_Quiche>. But today, How to 
eat <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> intends to 
draw a line under such idiocy. Consider this attempt to define the ideal quiche 
experience as a rational new dawn for the savoury, custard-filled open pie. The 
question is not: do real men eat quiche? But rather: what kind of society 
accepts that question’s patriarchal premise? In 2015, a conversation about the 
identity politics of quiche is as relevant as cooking tips for Tyrannosaurus 
rex steaks. So, to the BTL barricades! Remember: tart opinions and cheesy puns 
are welcome, but do not egg one another unnecessarily. As John Lennon once 
pleaded: give quiche a chance.

Crust 

There must be crust. There is no such thing as “crustless quiche”; that is 
frittata. That crust, moreover, must provide both a sound structure for the 
filling and offer a gently resistant bite – which is why thin, buttery 
shortcrust is preferable to filo or puff. Theoretically, wholemeal should work 
with some richer or stronger flavours, but too often it dominates in a way that 
feels worthy.

Note: for once, the “I just make my own … it’s so simple” brigade, who like to 
post below this blog, have a point. Processed, mass-market shop-bought quiches 
are invariably terrible. Overly thick pastry is a particular problem.

Individual quiches 

Avoid! Yes, quiche needs an edging of crust. But, fundamentally, that crust is 
a method of delivery, a discreet textural contrast. It should not be an 
assertive flavour. No one has ever come away from a quiche wailing: “That was 
amazing, but if only there had been more pastry.” The filling is the star. 
Ergo, the individual quiche (a pastry cage with a sad, shrunken pool of 
pleasure at its centre) is a massive fail. It is bad enough getting the corner 
slice of a rectangular quiche and having to suffer two sides of pastry, but to 
entirely encircle that filling in pastry is criminal.

Hot or cold? 

Quiche must be eaten at least residually warm. Straight-from-the-fridge, cold 
quiche is a sad, drab thing, the filling set and leaden, the pastry all waxy 
with congealed fat. You need to loosen that quiche up a little: light some 
candles, give it a metaphorical massage, warm it through in the oven. When it 
emerges (the filling now wobbly, bulging, almost running free; the hot pastry 
light, crisp and snapping), it is a different meal altogether.

Filling 

As above, a quiche filling should not be “set”. It must (and perhaps this is 
why you so rarely eat a truly great one) combine a certain luxurious density – 
you want to feel like you are eatingsomething – with an airy, silky lightness. 
Remember, also, that the custard is a setting or a canvas for the main 
ingredients. Season it, add a little gruyère or parmesan, but the flavours of 
the embedded components (bacon, caramelised onions, salmon, etc) should be 
clearly and cleanly discernible. If, in biting into your quiche, it pulls apart 
like cheese strings, you have missed the point … and made a cheese pie.

It is also crucial that all added ingredients are chopped into bite-size 
pieces so that they are evenly distributed throughout the quiche (you want a 
bit of everything in each mouthful), and also to protect the quiche’s 
structural integrity. Whether it is strips of bacon laid idly across the 
surface or whole broccoli or asparagus spears hidden within the quiche, you 
often get into a situation where you cannot smoothly bite through either and, 
in pulling said ingredient from your quiche, it begins to fall apart.

Acceptable ingredients

As a broad rule, stronger, smoked and salty flavours work best in a quiche. 
Smoked salmon; smoked haddock; crab; roasted cauliflower; spinach; broccoli (a 
little green/leafiness is welcome in offsetting the richness of a quiche); 
sweet, smoky wood-fired peppers; bacon/lardons; caramelised onions; feta (in 
chunks); goat’s cheese; roasted garlic; chives or dill (all other herbs are 
verboten); tomatoes; olives; grilled courgette.

Unacceptable ingredients

Poached salmon (too mild in flavour, too soft in texture); blue cheese (when 
cooked, it ruins everything it comes into contact with); asparagus 
(particularly tinned, a highly peculiar vegetable); tuna with/without sweetcorn 
(this is not a baguette); sausage and egg (do not even think about the 
full-English quiche); mozzarella; fibrously mushy chicken (see also: pulled 
pork); most cured meats, particularly serrano ham or prosciutto, which are 
difficult to bite through cleanly; chorizo (regularly far too bullying in its 
flavours); mushrooms; peas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fhow-to-eat-quiche%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F3%2F1438603921484%2F2701bcf6-c97e-441c-b5dd-02b339358c37-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20quiche&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fhow-to-eat-quiche%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20quiche&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fhow-to-eat-quiche%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F3%2F1438603921484%2F2701bcf6-c97e-441c-b5dd-02b339358c37-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Rarely has a food so badly needed a side dish – pair your quiche with a cool, 
crunchy salad or slaw. Photograph: Getty Images/Michael Powell 
Accompaniments 

Rarely has a food so badly needed a side dish. Without the dynamic tension 
that a salad or slaw brings to the plate, quiche often feels one-dimensional – 
too narrow in its rich, creamy flavours. Specifically, quiche needs a side that 
offers both cool contrast and crunch. A simple green salad or some sad bagged 
leaves will not cut it – of course, nor will a jacket potato. Instead, think 
raw vegetable salads (celery, fennel, kohlrabi, radish, cabbage, etc) and slaws 
that minimise the mayo. You do not want a great dollop of sweet, gloopy 
coleslaw on there, in which the veg has been shredded into a cotton wool 
consistency. If you do require a little additional creaminess, Greek salad is 
not a bad compromise.



When 

Too insubstantial in its purest form to constitute tea, quiche is a lunch 
dish. Except on those rare summer days when it is pushing 30C and food is, by 
necessity, merely a light, fleeting distraction.

Where

Quiche is often considered picnic food, which is ridiculous for two reasons: 
a) eating outside is abhorrent, particularly in a park or a field; and b) how 
do you intend to keep that quiche warm between your oven and your picnic? 
Quiche needs to be eaten if not immediately as it comes out of the oven, then 
soon after. And at a table with a knife and fork, not with one hand on an 
insect-strewn blanket, wreathed in exhaust fumes as you’re squinting into the 
sun. If you really must have some fresh air with your quiche, open the kitchen 
door (maximum width: two inches).

Drink

White wine, sparkling mineral water or other carbonated soft drinks (for the 
tongue-scrubbing effects of the bubbles), or strong tea, which is surprisingly 
good at sluicing away the dominant fats from the quiche and the pointed 
flavours of any accompanying salad.

So, quiche – how do you eat yours?
 