


Those of you who thought this column had reached what I believe is fondly known
as “peak Guardian” with kale chips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/15/how-to-make-perfect-kale-crisps-chips>
 should look away now – because this week we’ll be turning polenta, thestarchy 
corn porridge beloved of Italian peasants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/nov/21/how-to-make-perfect-polenta>
 and the British chattering classes, into chips, the crunchy snack cherished by 
just about everyone from Prato to Preston and beyond.

It’s a dangerous game mucking around with one of the world’s most supremely 
satisfying foods, but put aside your prejudices, because I promise that polenta 
chips are really, really nice. Hot and crisp, with a creamy interior of 
satisfying stodginess, they’re basically a carb-lover’s dream (and much quicker
to make at home than potato chips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/may/20/how-to-fry-perfect-chips>
). As delicious dunked in a spicy tomato dip as they are served alongside a 
rich saucy ragu or meaty Italian sausages … even if you think you don’t like 
polenta, I bet you’ll love these.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faef497fc804617af330b9afd36f8810191ed5718%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faef497fc804617af330b9afd36f8810191ed5718%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 A carb-lover’s dream ... BBC Good Food polenta chips. Photograph: Felicity 
Cloake for the Guardian 
The polenta

The first thing I realise is that, almost two decades after the New Labour 
revolution, polenta is still hard to get hold of, even in Blair’s former north 
London manor. The recipes I try call for three different forms of the stuff: 
ready-prepared, instant (which comes either partially cooked or very finely 
ground) and ordinary. After visiting three supermarkets and two Italian 
delicatessens, I find the latter two, but Martha Stewart’s 
<http://www.marthastewart.com/316031/baked-polenta-fries> preferred “plain 
prepared polenta” eludes me.

No matter, given, as far as I can tell, the end result for the other two is 
much the same once you’ve made the stuff into chips. Although instant polenta 
doesn’t have quite the same depth of corny flavour as the ordinary kind, and 
tends to have a finer, less interesting texture, here you would be hard pushed 
to tell the difference. Its principal job in this case is to set firm, and 
instant does that just as well as artisanal stoneground biodynamic, and in 
considerably less time, too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa71430bc28623831f701a548b2f0b946c3f01f88%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa71430bc28623831f701a548b2f0b946c3f01f88%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 The no-cheese Martha Stewart version. Photograph: The Guardian 
The liquid

Polenta, particularly the instant variety, can be bland, which is why it’s 
advisable to cook it in something rather more flavourful to give it a helping 
hand. Matt Tebbutt 
<http://goodfood.uktv.co.uk/recipe/polenta-chips-with-broad-beans-and-ricotta/> 
suggests a vegetable stock infused with parmesan rind, rosemary and garlic,
Yotam Ottolenghi 
<http://www.ottolenghi.co.uk/polenta-crisps-with-avocado-and-yoghurt-shop> goes 
for plain chicken stock, whileDan Doherty 
<http://www.olivemagazine.com/recipes/chef-recipes/fried-cheesy-polenta-chips-smoked-chilli-lemon/>
 of Duck and Waffle simmers it in milk. The now sadly defunctGourmet magazine 
<http://www.epicurious.com/recipes/food/views/herbed-polenta-fries-357749> and 
the happily very much alive and kickingBBC Good Food 
<http://www.bbcgoodfood.com/recipes/buttermilk-roasted-poussin-rosemary-polenta-chips>
 keep it simple with water.

When making loose polenta, I like the richness of milk and water, but here it 
makes the texture a little bit soft. Water alone, however, doesn’t deliver 
enough flavour. My testers come out overwhelmingly in favour of Ottolenghi’s 
version, although this may have something to do with the fact that Tebbutt’s 
kilo of polenta absorbs about twice as much liquid as the 1.5 litres called for 
by the recipe, so, panicking, as the pan hisses and spits, I have to pour in 
the contents of the kettle as well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cc4a1f76f506c6b89a397b641ab72d92b45580d%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cc4a1f76f506c6b89a397b641ab72d92b45580d%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Coated in semolina ... Yotam Ottolenghi’s polenta chips. Photograph: The 
Guardian 
From experience, chicken stock tends to have a more neutral savoury flavour 
than the often strongly herbaceous commercial vegetable versions, so it’s 
generally my preference. Vegetarians or those smug people with a freezer full 
of homemade stock should suit themselves.

The seasoning

Polenta’s subtle flavour makes it the perfect vehicle for other ingredients, 
principally fat-based and preferably cheese. Lots of cheese. Everyone except 
for Stewart, who’s unable to add anything to her ready-made polenta, melts in 
grated parmesan, and it’s hard to argue when it tastes so very, very good. (The 
one thing missing from ordinary potato chips, in my opinion, is cheese, hence 
the massive popularity of the cheesy chip in late night eateries of my 
acquaintance.)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b4216f29413a3134707a4e43ab9580b9511b621%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b4216f29413a3134707a4e43ab9580b9511b621%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Almost a parmesan fritter ... Dan Doherty’s effort. Photograph: The Guardian 
Doherty adds so much the whole thing becomes as much parmesan fritter as 
polenta chip – utterly, addictively delicious. However, somewhat reluctantly, 
we agree that one should probably be able to taste the polenta in something 
billed as a polenta chip, so I’ve dialled the cheese down a bit in my recipe.

Herbs are popular, too. Ottolenghi uses chives; Gourmet and Tebbutt rosemary, 
the magazine also adding sage for good measure. This is purely a matter of 
preference, but cheese and chives are a classic combination for a reason. 
Chilli flakes, I suspect, would work equally well.

Tebbutt stirs in a little double cream, and Gourmet finishes it with butter. 
Both excellent ideas ordinarily where polenta is concerned, but given we’ll be 
adding fat later in the cooking process by (spoiler) frying them, it doesn’t 
seem necessary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fb37a63d02540905b5e96d45e8cb4ef84bfa3fc%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fb37a63d02540905b5e96d45e8cb4ef84bfa3fc%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Finished with butter ... Gourmet magazine’s polenta chips. Photograph: The 
Guardian 
The cutting

Strictly speaking, Ottolenghi’s recipe is for polenta crisps, rather than 
chips – he cuts them into thin shards, so they’re super crunchy. I think one of 
the polenta chip’s great selling points is its slightly gooey, creamy centre, 
so I’m going to make mine larger, but feel free to go your own way.

The coating

Ottolenghi coats his chips with semolina before frying, and Tebbutt goes for a 
proper flour, egg and coarse polenta crumb, which gives his triangles a 
wonderfully crunchy, sturdy outer layer. This makes a pleasing contrast to the 
soft stodge within, but the double layer is so robust that testers say it feels 
more like biting into a scotch egg than a chip. A light dusting of polenta, 
just enough to crisp up in the pan, but not so much as to coat the chip 
completely, seems the best bet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa522c3a552a126d5c293ae0fa6daa647eeb5985%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa522c3a552a126d5c293ae0fa6daa647eeb5985%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Matt Tebbutt goes for a proper flour, egg and coarse polenta crumb. 
Photograph: The Guardian 
The cooking method

I try deep-frying (Doherty, Tebbutt), shallow-frying (Ottolenghi), pan-frying 
(BBC Good Food), grilling (Gourmet) and baking (Stewart), and the only one I 
would advise steering clear of is grilling, which leaves them a bit tough. 
Baking (220C for about 45 minutes “until golden and crisp”) gives a crunchy, 
but also slightly dry result, so, as my guinea pigs seem equally happy with the 
deep-fried and pan-fried textures, I’m going to recommend the latter, on the 
basis it’s cheaper, safer and possibly slightly better for you, if anything 
stuffed with cheese and cooked in oil can be classed as better for you. Enjoy 
in moderation, ideally along with a large glass of chardonnay and a D:Ream 
soundtrack.

The perfect polenta chips
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1edddd84d1cce5c004da326e3e83c6a66f43eb10%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20polenta%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-polenta-chips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1edddd84d1cce5c004da326e3e83c6a66f43eb10%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Serves 4
650ml chicken or vegetable stock
125g polenta
50g finely grated parmesan or other hard, strong cheese
3tbsp finely chopped chives
50g polenta, to coat
Extra virgin olive oil, to fry

Line a small baking dish with baking paper. Pour the stock into a medium pan, 
add 125g of polenta, bring to a simmer and then whisk until smooth. Simmer, 
stirring all the time, until it thickens and starts to come away from the side 
of the pan.

Stir in the cheese until melted, then add the chives and pour into the baking 
dish, smoothing it into a flat layer – it should be about 1.5cm thick. Allow to 
cool completely, and then chill until solid.

Cut the polenta into chips of your desired size. Put the remaining 50g of 
polenta into a shallow dish, then turn each chip in it to lightly coat. Put the 
oven on low.

Cover the bottom of a frying pan with oil, and put it over a medium-high heat. 
Fry the chips in batches until golden brown on all sides, then drain on kitchen 
paper and keep warm in the oven until all the polenta is used up. Serve hot.

Polenta chips – as delicious as a fried carb can be, or an offence to all 
decent potato-based versions? And, for the open minded among you, which other 
alternatives to the traditional spud are worth a try?
 