What are Rosencrantz and Guildenstern doing in the opening scene of Tom 
Stoppard's play?  Trying to take off their boots  Betting on the toss of a coin 
 Running to catch a train Which American novelist, in his Hamlet prequel 
Gertrude and Claudius, aimed to 'narrate the romance that preceded the tragedy'?
 Norman Mailer  John Updike  Saul Bellow Who, in a production by Berlin's 
Schaubühne theatre, is imprisoned in a room and tormented by Hamlet?  Claudius  
Polonius  Ophelia In the Simpsons spoof Do the Bard, Man which characters take 
the Rosencrantz and Guildenstern roles?  Lenny and Carl  Moe and Chief Wiggum  
Krusty the Clown and Comic Book Guy In Lee Blessing's comic sequel Fortinbras, 
who kills the eponymous character?  First Gravedigger  Horatio  The ghost of 
Hamlet Whose short story, Gertrude Talks Back, opens: 'I always thought it was 
a mistake, calling you Hamlet. I mean, what kind of a name is that for a young 
boy? It was your father’s idea.'  PG Wodehouse  Nora Ephron  Margaret Atwood 
Horatio moans about the number of ghosts roaming the castle in St John Hankin's 
sequel to Hamlet, published in Punch magazine in 1901. What was the name of the 
story?  Return to Elsinore  The New Wing at Elsinore  Haunting Elsinore Former 
Bad Seed Blixa Bargeld played the Prince of Denmark in a drama by Heiner Müller 
that riffs on Hamlet. What was its title?  Hamletmachine  To be Hamlet  
Achtung, Hamlet! In WS Gilbert's comedy Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, there is 
a play within the play written by which of the characters?  Claudius  Hamlet  
Yorick In the 2008 film Hamlet 2, a high-school drama teacher writes a sequel 
to Shakespeare's tragedy and introduces a new character. Who is it?  King Lear  
Abraham Lincoln  Jesus Christ  You got…  Alas, poor you!  Nothing either good 
or bad  Wondrous!  Challenge your friends Submit answers  