
With Easter fast approaching, ovoid food is all the rage and, being a slave to 
fashion,How to Eat  <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat>
could not pass up this opportunity to pay homage to, arguably, the greatest 
breakfast-slash-brunch dish ... ever. Yes, this month, theWord of Mouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth> blog that is trying to 
identify the best iterations of our favourite dishes, is propping up the 
newspaper on the cruet set, pouring itself a coffee and considering eggs 
Benedict.

As ever BTL, do not ham it up or let your argument boil over. If you feel 
compelled to tell the world that – in answer to the question: how do you eat 
yours? – “I just put it in my mouth and chew”, do so, but be aware that yolk 
isn’t funny any more. If it ever was (it wasn’t).

What is eggs Benedict? 

You are intelligent, urbane people. You know it consists of muffins with ham, 
poached eggs and hollandaise. But, as everyone fromAntony Worrall Thompson 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/food/recipes/eggsbenedict_74872> to the Hairy Bikers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/food/recipes/eggs_benedict_10471> is happy to play 
fast’n’loose with the term, it is worth reiterating that replacing the ham with 
spinach makes it eggs Florentine and replacing the ham with salmon, eggs 
royale. While enjoyable in their way, both are inferior dishes

Where 

Making hollandaise strikes the fear of Carême 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2003/mar/09/foodanddrink.features17> 
into even the most accomplished home cook, and how often do you have the 
ingredients (pristine fresh eggs, soft muffins) in, when the mood takes you? 
Moreover, this is an indulgence best enjoyed at a leisurely pace. One where 
half the pleasure is in letting someone else do the heavy lifting. Therefore, 
it is best eaten out, rather than at home.

Given its recent surge in popularity, however, this dish (the ingredients for 
which cost around £1.50*) is subject to rampant inflation, with the £8.95 eggs 
Benedict now commonly seen on menus. To paraphrase Crass and Billy Bragg – all 
big eggs Benedict fans, I’m sure – do not pay more than £6.99.

*For a double, naturally.

When 

Its eggs-act (sorry) origin is unclear, but one theory suggests that Lemuel 
Benedict 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/08/nyregion/thecity/08eggs.html?pagewanted=1&_r=2&ei=5090&en=475ce1da09cb6767&ex=1333684800&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss&>
– socialite, stockbroker, raffish-man-about-town – “invented” eggs Benedict in 
1894, when, in an emergency attempt to stave off a hangover, he ordered a 
combination of toast, bacon, eggs and hollandaise at New York’s Waldorf Hotel. 
If so, he was a man of great intuitive wisdom.

This only works when your hangover is of the blearily, wearily, giddily 
euphoric kind – when you actively want to leave the house, rather than lying 
poleaxed in bed, trying not to puke – but, in those circumstances, this 
relatively light, easily digested combination of emollient fat and
amino-acid-releasing carbs and protein 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/science/science-news/5118283/Bacon-sandwich-really-does-cure-a-hangover.html>
, is the perfect palliative. It will blow away the vapour trails of last 
night’s excesses, with a power second only to, well, starting drinking again.

This is not to say that eggs Benedict cannot be enjoyed sober. Of course, it 
can. It is a treat at any time. Either way, 10am to 11am on a Saturday or 
Sunday in your favourite brunch hangout is the ideal. It is too much fuss (not 
to mention far too calorific) to eat midweek, and should not be rushed. This is 
a dish in which to luxuriate.

The ideal eggs Benedict

Two is the magic number: two eggs, two muffin halves, two portions of ham. If 
not two litres of hollandaise The key point is, one egg is never enough.

Hollandaise

The accent should be on lemon, not – as my colleague, Felicity Cloake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2011/may/05/make-perfect-hollandaise-sauce>
, has observed – vinegary tang. Moreover, that spritzy, citrusy freshness 
should be thoroughly amalgamated into the sauce; it should break like 
effervescent surf, carried inshore on thick buttery waves. It should not be a 
sharp acid note that punctuates the hollandaise like an angry, aggressive 
full-stop. The sauce’s silky consistency, meanwhile, should be just a shade 
firmer than double cream. The sabayon-method and others that produce a light, 
airy hollandaise more akin to cappuccino foam should be avoided. You want a 
sauce thick enough that it can swaddle and coddle those eggs and assert itself 
in each mouthful.

Eggs

So long as they are impeccably fresh, poach them as you see fit. But, and 
professional kitchens are often guilty of this, there are two key fails here 
that regularly ruin eggs Benedict. 1) Drain, drain, drain your eggs. There is 
nothing worse than soggy muffins or a plate swimming in watery dregs because 
some gormless chef, has chucked wet eggs on the plate. 2) Ever wondered why the 
centre of your egg is cold? It is because kitchens commonly poach eggs in 
batches, hold them in iced water, and reheat them (often incompetently),as the 
orders come in 
<http://blogs.independent.co.uk/2014/02/17/dish-of-the-day-poached-eggs/>. 
Every breakfast item should be cooked-to-order.

Ham

Proper, rugged York-style baked ham is what you want here, gently warmed 
through (that is essential) and hand-cut into substantial, 
going-on-centimetre-thick pieces. None of this pre-cut, thinly sliced nonsense, 
much less sad wafer-thin slices of plastic, reformed meat. Texturally, like the 
muffin, the ham should offer a certain tensile strength and resistance to all 
that slippery egg and smooth hollandaise. Failing that, a couple of rashers of 
back bacon will work, as will, in a different way – its shards offering a 
crunchy textural variation – stiff bookmarks of stridently scorched streaky.

Other meats, however (even if one potential inspiration for eggs Benedict was 
a Philadelphian dish with white chicken meat), have no place here. Whether in 
an attempt to gussy it up or give it a local flavour (see also, the base), eggs 
Benedict does not need to be augmented with black pudding, smoked eel or 
chorizo. Continental cured meats (Parma, Bayonne, serrano) are wasted, here. 
Not only are those delicate slivers fatty and possibly difficult to cut, but 
their complex flavours should be allowed their full expression. They should not 
be smothered in hollandaise.

The base

Again, for reasons of local pride (stotties), laziness (toast) or misplaced 
creative zeal (bagels, corn bread, crumpets etc.), many chefs cannot resist 
tinkering here. Yet, in their density, robustness and absorbency, 
semolina-dusted English muffins are quite clearly the most practical base for 
all that hollandaise and (unless something has gone disastrously wrong), egg 
yolk.

Garnishes

No. No chopped chives, tarragon or worse, parsley. No stalks decoratively 
criss-crossing the plate. It adds nothing. Indeed, it presents the diner with a 
problem – where to dump a piece of a parsley stalk covered in hollandaise sauce?

Crockery

Never has warming a plate (and you need a full, easy-access dinner plate, not 
slate, enamelled tin or a wide shallow bowl), been more important. A cold plate 
means quickly coagulating egg yolk and hollandaise. If it is solidifying 
quicker than you are eating, your plate is too cold.

Drink 

Coffee rather than tea. You need its slightly acrid, roasted edge to cut 
across all that butter.

So eggs Benedict, how do you eat yours?
 