
The golden, softly glowing apricot is a fruit that promises much in the bowl, 
but often proves disappointingly bland and woolly in the eating, whether you 
buy them in Provence or Preston. The problem, according to Jane Grigson, is the 
plant’s delicacy. “It blossoms early,” she points out. Hence the name, which 
comes from the same Latin root as the word “precocious”, and means that the 
flowers are easily caught by frost. And then, such fruit as manages to grow is 
picked early – and reaches us in a sadly underripe condition.

If you happen to have a good source of local apricots, picked at the perfect 
time, then, by all means, gorge yourself on fresh fruit – the British apricot 
season tends to go on longer 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/10318530/British-apricots-finally-ripe-and-ready.html>
 than the European one, so we have a couple of weeks yet before they’re gone 
for good. If not, and if, like me, you can rarely resist their blushing charms 
on the market, then, as Grigson so wisely notes, “you will perhaps be wise to 
regard apricots as a fruit for the kitchen, then you will not be disappointed”.

How to make the perfect custard tart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/30/how-to-make-the-perfect-custard-tart>
Cooking brings out the apricot’s wonderful sharp sweetness, which Nigel Slater 
describes beautifully in volume two of Tender as boasting “notes of peach, 
brown sugar and orange blossom, and an opportunity for pleasure that is too 
good to miss”. In my opinion, it is best showcased in an open tart, where its 
gorgeous colour can be appreciated along with its glorious flavour.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c5abc30637c13e579ca26a8660993f76b4b9982%2F368_89_3280_1968%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20apricot%20tart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20apricot%20tart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c5abc30637c13e579ca26a8660993f76b4b9982%2F368_89_3280_1968%2F3280.jpg>
 Nigel Slater’s apricot tart. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The fruit

They may be spilling from shelves right now, but should you have an 
uncontrollable urge for an apricot tart when they’re not in season, you could 
do a lot worse than Mary Berry’s “wobbly” version 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/food/recipes/wobbly_apricot_tart_20144> using the tinned 
variety. They will never have the acidity of their fresh brethren, so I would 
suggest adding a spritz of lemon juice to the fruit before cooking to help 
boost their flavour.

At this time of year, however, there’s no substitute for the real deal, and it 
seems a shame to cook them down to a virtual jam as in Lulu Peyraud’s recipe in 
Richard Olney’s classic collection, Lulu’s Provençal Table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/19/classic-cookbook-lulus-provencal-table-richard-olney>
, delicious as it tastes. Jane Grigson’s old-fashioned apricot tart 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=ej3cNgbF90gC&pg=PA38&lpg=PA38&dq=jane+grigson+old+fashioned+apricot+tart&source=bl&ots=hs0WaGZi6v&sig=MIocagKoPJon3yvf7QapPGh8dEA&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjV9Z_spfbOAhXhLcAKHQ6ECz0Q6AEIHDAA#v=onepage&q=jane%20grigson%20old%20fashioned%20apricot%20tart&f=false>
, inspired by the ones served at the annual basil and garlic fair in Tours, 
uses fruit poached in a light syrup that doesn’t seem to make a great deal of 
difference to their flavour or texture. Half an hour in the oven seems to be 
sufficient to cook all but the hardest of fruit through.

Of those who use apricots in their raw state, Nigel Slater macerates them in 
sugar and marsala wine before use, while Julia Child 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A8355-2004Aug17.html> simply 
blanches them to remove the skins. Unless these are very pitted, this seems a 
shame; I rather like the chewiness they add, but oddly enough Child’s apricots 
are the best tasting of the lot, being both sharp and sweet at once. This I can 
only attribute to the sugar that sits on top of them during baking, which must 
caramelise even as it draws out their liquid – but, whatever her magic touch, 
I’m stealing it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49531a5e3dc851806ffffa635d2c4f9711349f66%2F0_20_3581_2149%2F3581.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20apricot%20tart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20apricot%20tart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49531a5e3dc851806ffffa635d2c4f9711349f66%2F0_20_3581_2149%2F3581.jpg>
 Mary Berry apricot tart. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The filling

The real debate, however, isn’t over apricots at all, but about what else 
ought to accompany them in their pastry shell. Peyraud, having simmered them 
into thick, sticky deliciousness, needs nothing more than a few silvered 
almonds (the wet, fresh sort preferably, but we’re several months too late for 
that, more’s the pity), while Child keeps it even simpler by simply topping 
them with sugar and butter. I suspect this is an approach that would be better 
with concentric circles of overlapping fruit than the packed halves I go for, 
as the liquid butter would soak in to the apricots themselves, rather than 
sitting in the hollows between them.

Grigson steps things up a notch with a kind of tangy custard made with sour 
and double creams, eggs and sugar, which is lovely, but very rich indeed – I 
prefer a dollop of creme fraiche on the side as a contrast, rather than binding 
the two up together.

None can compare, however, to Slater’s frangipane base – a classic pairing for 
apricots, given almonds belong to the same family. I prefer more fruit than he 
puts in, but the combination is unbeatable, and lighter than Berry’s grated 
marzipan (though the latter is much quicker, and, in its own way, rather good 
too, especially if you happen to have some still hanging around from last 
Christmas).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffde114db7c75d9b86e456f278d7d81cdd8f054ec%2F0_315_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20apricot%20tart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20apricot%20tart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffde114db7c75d9b86e456f278d7d81cdd8f054ec%2F0_315_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Jane Grigson’s apricot tart. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The pastry

All the tarts I try use shortcrust, and, to be honest, shortcrust is always 
delicious, whether it’s savoury and ultra-crumbly, as in Peyraud’s recipe, 
which utilises the same free-form shell as she deploys for a pissaladière 
(Niçoise onion and anchovy tart) or a rich, sweet egg-yolk spiked variety like 
Slater suggests. My favourite, however, comes from Child again, whose pastry is 
unbelievably crisp, making a great contrast to the soft frangipane and fruit in 
my version.

Blind baking is essential – at the risk of incurring a kindly rap on the 
knuckles, my attempt at Berry’s recipe has a rather soggy base.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a9d84600cbe0394c5ef19d1ce6dedda0cef3443%2F109_215_3539_2123%2F3539.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20apricot%20tart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20apricot%20tart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a9d84600cbe0394c5ef19d1ce6dedda0cef3443%2F109_215_3539_2123%2F3539.jpg>
 Julia Child’s apricot tart. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Finishing touches

Grigson and Child both glaze the finished articles, the former with the 
apricot poaching liquid, reduced (and, in my clumsy case, taken halfway to 
caramel), and Child with apricot jam, but I don’t think such gloss will add 
much to my frangipane. I do like the crunch of the flaked almonds Child 
scatters over the top however – you can never have too many almonds in my book, 
and they’re considerably harder to burn than a syrup.


Best served with a dollop of tangy, yellow crème fraîche.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F385fe343157c9f8d95ffe49e343aaf163632fdbf%2F0_235_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20apricot%20tart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20apricot%20tart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F385fe343157c9f8d95ffe49e343aaf163632fdbf%2F0_235_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Lulu Peyraud’s apricot tart. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Perfect apricot tart

Makes one 25cm tart

For the pastry:
225g plain flour, plus extra to dust
2 tbsp caster sugar
¼ tsp salt
165g cold butter
Cold water

110g butter
110g caster sugar, plus 1 tbsp
2 eggs
110g ground almonds
25g plain flour
½ tsp baking powder
Zest of ½ lemon
9 medium apricots
20g flaked almonds

To make the pastry, mix the flour, sugar and salt in a bowl or food processor, 
and then grate in the cold butter. Rub this into the flour, then stir in just 
as much cold water (about 1 tbsp should do it) as you need to bring it together 
into a dough. Wrap in clingfilm and chill for at least 30 minutes.

Grease a 25cm tart tin and roll out the pastry on a lightly floured surface 
until large enough to line the tin. Do so, then chill for another 30 minutes. 
Heat the oven to 200C. Line the pastry shell with baking paper and weigh down 
with baking beans or dried pulses. Bake for about 15 minutes, then remove the 
paper and beans and bake for another 5-7 minutes until golden. Take out of the 
oven and turn down the heat to 180C.

Meanwhile, make the frangipane. Cream together the butter and sugar, apart 
from the extra 1 tbsp, until fluffy, then beat in the eggs. Fold in the dry 
ingredients and zest and a pinch of salt. Cut the apricots in half, remove the 
stones, then cut all but one into wedges.

Spoon the frangipane into the pastry shell, then arrange the apricots in 
concentric overlapping circles on top. Cut the last in half and put one half, 
cut-side down, in the middle (you can eat the other; chef’s perk). Scatter with 
the remaining sugar and bake for about 30 minutes until golden, scattering over 
the almonds five minutes before the end, then allow to cool before removing 
from the tin.

Frangipane tart: the best final resting place for an apricot, or do you have 
other plans for the last of the season’s fruit? And does anyone manage to grow 
great apricots at home in this country?
 