
I like root vegetables. Really I do. But let’s be honest: those first spindly 
stalks of British asparagus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/05/uk-supermarkets-seasonal-homegrown-asparagus-tesco-sainsburys>
 are a bloody relief after months of “hearty, warming stews” and “robust 
comfort food”, kicking off six weeks of glorious greed before they disappear 
for another year.

One of the joys of asparagus is its simplicity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/may/11/asparagus-recipes-hugh-fearnley-whittingstall>
. There is no better way to eat the (far superior) green variety than simply 
boiled or steamed and drenched in melted butter, but so fleeting is this still 
stubbornly seasonal pleasure that I’m loathe to part with even the chewy 
trimmings. So, though it may seem a waste to make soup from from such a rare 
and wonderful vegetable, in fact this is one of the few recipes to make use of 
every part. (Strictly speaking, you don’t even need the much-prized tips, 
making it the ideal partner for fancy recipes that call for nothing but.)

But, if there’s only one way to steam a stalk, there are countless ways to 
turn it into soup – so what’s the best way to give this magnificent vegetable 
the respect it deserves?

The asparagus
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9d558314ecd1a5a84ed3c5d7515b33723b71bb3%2F241_434_3143_1886%2F3143.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20asparagus%20soup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20asparagus%20soup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9d558314ecd1a5a84ed3c5d7515b33723b71bb3%2F241_434_3143_1886%2F3143.jpg>
 Jane Grigson’s asparagus soup. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The recipe in Jane Grigson’s Vegetable Book 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Nr2Dna7hx1EC&pg=PA35&lpg=PA35&dq=jane+grigson+asparagus+soup&source=bl&ots=5v8C8PWBkV&sig=X7v3B7Ng9M9DJ7yvHzT9L3JX6j8&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjZxqWG4JrMAhWMHsAKHVsfAIYQ6AEIHTAA#v=onepage&q=jane%20grigson%20asparagus%20soup&f=false>
 uses nothing but asparagus trimmings and cooking water; a beautifully thrifty 
idea, and one I’ll certainly be bookmarking. The other recipes fall into two 
broad camps: Mary Berry’s Absolute Favourites book 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u18M8vZhl_c> and Margaret Costa’s Four Seasons 
Cookery Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/21/ofm-classic-cookbooks-margaret-costa-four-seasons-cookery-book>
 extract the flavour from the stalks by simmering them in stock, then puree the 
lot. Arto der Haroutunian’s Classic Vegetarian Cookery and Henrietta Clancy’s 
new book, Just Soup 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/370438/>, make a 
stock from the stalks, or in Clancy’s case the asparagus trimmings, then 
discard them.

I’m inclined to think that the stock camp have it right. I’d like to use all 
the vegetable, but the thick, woody bases are distinctly fibrous, even when 
pureed. This, of course, can be remedied by passing the puree through a sieve, 
but unless you’re obsessive about smoothness, this is too blunt an instrument, 
filtering out the tender as well as the chewy elements and robbing the soup of 
much of its body. It seems much more sensible to make a stock, as Clancy 
suggests, and cook the more desirable parts of the stalks in it, before 
pureeing them to make the soup. The tips can be blanched separately and used as 
a garnish or, as Berry helpfully notes, left out altogether.

The base
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43e4d6802fc8faa06e6c80c304d5de3695ff8005%2F0_226_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20asparagus%20soup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20asparagus%20soup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43e4d6802fc8faa06e6c80c304d5de3695ff8005%2F0_226_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Margaret Costa’s asparagus soup. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Clancy and Der Haroutunian, then, use a homemade vegetable stock as the base 
for their soups. Grigson uses leftover asparagus cooking water, writing: “After 
much experiment, I conclude that chicken or veal stock is quite unnecessary … 
water is best.” Costa and Berry clearly disagree, as they both add the chicken 
variety to theirs – and delicious it is too, salty and savoury and subtly 
meaty. But, loth as I am to disagree with two personal culinary heroes in 
favour of a third, I’m with Grigson here. Chicken stock distracts from the star 
attraction, the asparagus, which can be surprisingly delicate in flavour. As is 
so often the case, simple is better.

Der Haroutunian goes down quite a different route and makes a kind of white 
sauce, whisking his homemade stock and an equal quantity of milk into a flour 
and butter roux. It’s hard to taste the asparagus in the finished dish, but it 
does, make a delicious bechamel for an asparagus lasagne 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/370438/>.

The thickener
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b9b1a00c708628157887a67adbac3cd5d7dbbbf%2F338_434_3117_1870%2F3117.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20asparagus%20soup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20asparagus%20soup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b9b1a00c708628157887a67adbac3cd5d7dbbbf%2F338_434_3117_1870%2F3117.jpg>
 Mary Berry’s asparagus soup. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Berry uses a floury potato as a thickener, but this, though undoubtedly tasty, 
is judged to give her soup a rather wintry feel – tasting on one of the first 
sunny days of the year, the guinea pigs are more taken by Clancy’s beautifully 
springy broth, with its tiny broad beans and radishes. Costa beats egg yolks 
into the hot soup in classic veloute style, which makes hers gorgeously rich – 
a little too rich, in fact, for some testers, though others suggest this would 
be a good option to serve in tiny cups “when you’re trying to be fancy”. Flour, 
as used by Grigson and Costa, seems the simplest and subtlest way to give the 
soup a bit of oomph.

Almost all the recipes, with the exception of Clancy’s broth, add dairy of 
some kind: milk for Der Haroutunian; double or whipping cream for the others. 
This only makes the soups more delicious, for what is not improved by cream, 
but I’d caution you to use it sparingly, as too much can deaden the flavour of 
the asparagus.

Other flavours
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F173fe2cabb39e78c5d541c39da5b6d156c7e7ebb%2F0_187_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20asparagus%20soup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20asparagus%20soup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F173fe2cabb39e78c5d541c39da5b6d156c7e7ebb%2F0_187_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Henrietta Clancy’s asparagus soup. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian
Grigson and Berry both start their soups off with onion, and in Grigson’s case 
garlic too, fried in butter. Costa boils a shallot along with her asparagus 
stalks, and Clancy adds a leek to her base stock. Though not strictly 
necessary, alliums do round out the flavour, and the leek in particular pairs 
well with the slightly bitter, vegetal notes of the asparagus – which prompts 
me to think that the fresher flavour of a spring onion would work even better. 
If you happen to have any wild or wet garlic lying around, add a little of that 
too; this dish should sing of spring.

Der Haroutunian seasons his milky soup generously with nutmeg and black 
pepper, but a greener, more powerfully flavoured version needs less help in the 
spice department. A little salt is quite enough for me.

Garnishes
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F025df1b9bcae34f0a90e68a57c3ba7a2c3a1f854%2F0_256_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20asparagus%20soup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20asparagus%20soup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-asparagus-soup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F025df1b9bcae34f0a90e68a57c3ba7a2c3a1f854%2F0_256_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Arto der Haroutunian’s asparagus soup. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
Blanched asparagus tips make an excellent garnish, but if you’ve used them 
elsewhere, so do Berry’s chopped chives and Clancy’s grated pecorino. Grigson 
suggests garnishing the soup with tiny croutons, fried in butter, but I prefer 
it with brown bread and lots of butter. That, however, I shall leave up to you.

The perfect asparagus soup

(Serves 4)
500g asparagus (no need for the tips if you’d prefer to use them for something 
else)
50g butter
6 spring onions, roughly chopped
1 tbsp flour
2 tbsp double cream

Boil the kettle. Snap off the woodiest parts of the asparagus and roughly chop 
these, setting the stalks aside for the moment. Fill a saucepan with one litre 
of boiling water, then cook the asparagus trimmings for 20 minutes. Drain, 
saving the water and discarding the asparagus. Roughly chop the stalks.


Melt the butter in a medium saucepan and soften the spring onion. Stir in the 
flour and cook for a couple of minutes, stirring, then whisk in the cooking 
water from the asparagus. Add the chopped stalks, bring to the boil and cook 
for eight minutes. If you’re using the tips, cook them in boiling, salted water 
for three minutes, then set aside.

Take off the heat and puree. Stir in the cream and season to taste. Divide 
between bowls and garnish with the asparagus tips, if using.

Asparagus season: six weeks of gluttonous joy, or much ado about nothing? Do 
you like it cooked simply, or am I missing a trick – and will anyone persuade 
me that the white variety is anything but a poor continental relation?
 