


How to Eat <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> – the 
Guardian blog trying to analyse the best way to eat the UK’s favourite dishes – 
is, this month, turning its sharpened cutlery to the matter of fish pie. It is 
a dish that, in its ideal form is, arguably, our foremost comfort food – but 
one that, due its lack of a rigorous, specific format is open to all sorts of 
haphazard misinterpretation. HTE intends to put that right. BTL, please refrain 
from blatant codswallop. Such trawling will lead to you being mercilessly 
smoked by your fellow commentators. They have haddock up to here with such 
tiresome pollocks. Otherwise, this forum is your oyster.

Serving style

This is one of those dishes that primarily suits informal communal eating, 
where people sit around a table helping themselves from a huge, steaming vessel 
of pie. Each individual portion, meanwhile, requires freedom on the plate. The 
sauce must be able to flow into any accompanying veg – veg whichmust be served 
sideby side with the pie. Said sauce should also be allowed to lap around and 
further lubricate the buttery mash.

Therefore, fish pie must never be served in individual dishes (eg cast iron 
oven-to-table pots), as pubs tend to. Yes, it may look appealing – if mainly to 
the chef who, in such over-elaboration, is seeking to justify his title – but 
it entirely misunderstands what this meal is all about. It turns the fish pie 
into something prim and laborious (which requires you to then wrestle the pie 
out of a superheated pot, to marry it with the veg), when it should be a matter 
of easy, elbows-on-the-table, fork-in-one-hand, glass-in-the-other eating.Fish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fish> pie should be a dish of 
seamless comfort-troffing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fhow-to-eat-fish-pie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16b4058ebdd5966efa9fa77b041d10955ad94c12%2F0_0_7210_5410%2F7210.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20fish%20pie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fhow-to-eat-fish-pie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20fish%20pie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fhow-to-eat-fish-pie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16b4058ebdd5966efa9fa77b041d10955ad94c12%2F0_0_7210_5410%2F7210.jpg>
 The only acceptable topping for a fish pie is of course soft, creamy mashed 
potato. Photograph: Alamy 
Heaven forbid that this column should get above its station and start telling 
you how to make fish pie. That is the sainted Felicity Cloake’sdiocese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2011/jan/27/how-cook-perfect-fish-pie>
. But it would be remiss not to flag-up a few key points. Firstly, don’t be shy 
– get as much flavour and textural variety into that filling as possible. 
Boiled eggs, leeks, wine, anchovies, fish stock and mustard are all legit 
additions (if not necessarily all at the same time), alongside the more obvious 
seasonings, such as nutmeg, dill and parsley. The filling should also contain a 
healthy slug of double cream.

We all like (no?) a bit of smoked fish in there for depth and heft, and a few 
prawns, alongside the standard white fish and salmon. The only obviously 
unwelcome interlopers are those rubbery little oiks, mussels, and their more 
refined but equally unlovely mollusc cousins, oysters. Scallops are an entirely 
unnecessary gilding of this particular lily. It is a gross waste to include 
them in a fish pie.

However, if HTE is going to refrain from getting into the close detail of how 
to make a fish pie, it must be stridently vocal on one key point: the topping 
and, less often, the bottom (clue:it should not have one!). The only acceptable 
topping* for a fish pie is of course soft, creamy mashed potato, topped with 
browned, bubbling cheese or, ideally, a parmesan and breadcrumb mixture. That 
adds a final savoury, crunchy flourish that is the fish pie’s crowning glory.

[*Fish pie must always be served crust-up. Not on its side and certainly not 
crust-down, where that crust will quickly become soggy.]

Filo and puff pastry are less pleasant if vaguely logical alternatives to 
mash, but a shortcrust pastry topping (much less a fish pie entirely encased, 
meat pie-style in shortcrust), is several dimensions of wrong. This should, bar 
that thin, crisp layer of toasted breadcrumbs, be an entirely smooth, easily 
yielding eating experience. Pastry is not required.

On the side

It is key that the vegetables are served beside the fish pie and not in it. 
Adding peas and carrots to a fish pie means that the fresh vegetal contrast 
that you want them to provide, that clean, iron and mineral-rich tang, is lost 
in the creaminess of the pie. It is also crucial that any vegetables served are 
present in an uneven mound with lots of exposed surface area, so that the pie’s 
sauce can properly penetrate and coat them. This is one of the few (perhaps 
only) circumstances where that 1970s staple, diced mixed veg, still has an 
obvious use.

Certain vegetables (peas, spinach, shredded savoy cabbage, julienne or diced 
carrots, watercress*) lend themselves to partnering fish pie, both in terms of 
their sweetness or mineral flavours, and their shape. Others, such as broccoli, 
asparagus or cauliflower florets, obviously do not. You cannot effectively mop 
up sauce with purple sprouting broccoli.

[*You could in strict geometric terms include sweetcorn in that list – but, of 
course, sweetcorn is utterly vile. It ruins any other foods it comes into 
contact with.]
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fhow-to-eat-fish-pie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1950c406a3ec96cfffbc16db4e77565de850b966%2F0_0_4695_3723%2F4695.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20fish%20pie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fhow-to-eat-fish-pie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20fish%20pie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fhow-to-eat-fish-pie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1950c406a3ec96cfffbc16db4e77565de850b966%2F0_0_4695_3723%2F4695.jpg>
 This is not a meal where you need a knife. Photograph: Alamy 
Bread

As a blog of northern origin, it pains HTE to say this, but you do not need 
extra bread with a fish pie. We have all on occasion wiped the plate clean, but 
it is an action you immediately regret. This is a filling meal. You have 
probably already had a second portion. Put the white-sliced in play and it 
becomes a meal of gut-busting discomfort. And that is not –repeat, not – what 
we are aiming for.

Table sauces

It does not need any. This is a self-saucing meal. Moreover, any of those 
condiments that you might add as seasoning (Henderson’s Relish, Lea & Perrins, 
etc), would utterly overpower this dish. Only the very drunk would add tomato 
or brown sauce to a fish pie. Perhaps you could make a case for a sharp, spiky 
tartare, but it is not one that HTE is minded to push.

Drink

White wine or strong, rusty tea are both superior to tap water. You want 
something flat, not fizzy here, but you also need that tannic, dry edge to both 
cleanse the palate and distract you from that fact that (while you need to), 
drinking while eating fish pie turns the white fish into a mealy mush as you 
chew. If you insist on beer, cask pale ales work due to their low carbonation, 
but really any fizziness, allied to that aforementioned mealyness, tends to 
create a distinctly unpleasant sensation of lively, bouncing bittiness in the 
mouth.

Utensils

Fish pie should be served in shallow, wide-rimmed bowls with a fork and a 
spoon. The bowl will help that sauce collect around the vegetables. This is not 
a meal where you need a knife, but you require a spoon in order to scrape up 
every last scintilla of pie from around the bowl.

When

Ideal as a blowout Sunday-lunch alternative to a roast. Fish pie is both too 
fiddly and potentially expensive for a midweek tea.

So, fish pie, how do you eat yours?
 