
“It is impossible not to love someone who makes toast for you,” wrote Nigel 
Slater in his food-based memoir, Toast 
<http://http://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/oct/19/biography.foodanddrink>, a 
statement which is, of course, cobblers. From San Franciscans genuflecting 
before£2 slices of artisan sourdough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2014/jan/15/posh-toast-costs-250-slice>
 to those who swear by Utterly Butterly, we all have very definite opinions 
about what toast is. Due to its apparent simplicity moreover, we are never more 
dismayed than when people serve usthe wrong toast. How, we howl, can anyone not 
know how to make toast?

But of course it is not that simple. At its most basic, toast may consist of 
just two ingredients, bread and fat, but the variables in how it can be made 
and served are almost endless, as are the prejudices and personal preferences 
that swirl around it. Which is why, asHow To Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat>, Word of Mouth’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth> most dictatorial blog, 
tackles this quintessentially British snack, it does so fully aware that we may 
never settle on any general rules of good gastronomic conduct. Toast is simply 
too divisive.

 Despite passions running high, please keep it civil below the line: grilling 
each other is fine, buttering one another up would be better, but if you have 
someone on the rack, go easy. We don’t want anyone to get burned.

Bread

Essential, if of secondary importance to the fat used. Fundamentally, served 
straight from the toaster and sufficiently slathered with the right fat, any 
toasted bread will provide you with a frisson of exceptional pleasure. Even 
those gluten-free slices which could be used to protectively clad an exposed 
coastal property. The thickness of the toast is crucial, too. You want depth 
(no more than an inch, much less for denser breads), whereby almost 
instantaneously, in each mouthful, you get a crisp crunch, a brief sensation of 
pillowy cushioning beneath and then a flood of buttery goodness. Although, that 
is not to say that there is not a hierarchy among toasting breads.

As a broad rule of thumb, unless you are eating it with a very sweet jam or 
marmalade, where a dark bread provides a satisfying earthy contrast, avoid 
brown, wholemeal or seeded multigrain loaves for toasting – in favour of 
paler/white breads. A lot of the better, darker breads react very badly to 
toasting, as do their exposed seeds and grains. Heat can turn their surfaces 
into coarse, withered, carbon-scarred landscapes – like the Australian outback 
after a bush fire, obliterating any mineral, nutty flavour. For instance, when 
toasted, rye bread loses any of its depth and allure. It becomes a chore. 
Meanwhile, sliced supermarket brown breads invariably turn into brittle husks 
at the merest hint of heat. If I wanted to eat a crispbread (and I really do 
not), I would eat a crispbread.

If we are talking about toast as a paradisiacal comfort food, which it can be, 
then you have to go for a sourdough that is glossy, light, open textured and 
ultra-fresh*. There is something about the sour tang of proper sourdough, the 
way its acidic notes curl up – like smoke from a guttering candle - around the 
edges of all that rich buttery flavour that gives toast a new dimension. As a 
similar treat, a good rustic, lightly toasted white bread, like a Pugliese, is 
welcome. However, day-to-day, any robust Chorleywood toastie loaf will hit the 
spot. Regular readers of this blog (sorry,the regular reader) are bored of 
hearing me big-up Warburton’s toastie loaf, but it is the supermarket 
white-sliced king.

*Yes, you can give stale bread a second life by toasting it, but that is 
certainly is not ideal. The fresher the bread, the livelier and more engaging 
the toast.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhow-to-eat-toast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F9%2F1418121996711%2F1ca2f88d-0bb4-41c8-8127-a6892a16d98f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20toast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhow-to-eat-toast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20toast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fdec%2F09%2Fhow-to-eat-toast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F9%2F1418121996711%2F1ca2f88d-0bb4-41c8-8127-a6892a16d98f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In a toaster? Are you mad? Photograph: Alamy 
How

If you are serious about toast and it is, perhaps, the only thing you should 
be serious about, grilling it is the only option. The subtext of using a 
toaster, is this: “I am busy and important. My precious time is worth far more 
than good toast.” By not using a grill, you are buying into the pernicious myth 
that, as human beings, we can only assert our own agency by working and 
spending in such a blur of activity that we allow ourselves no time to perfect 
life’s simple pleasures. To do so feels frivolous. It is only toast. Yet, our 
consequent lack of enjoyment in the end-product, poor toast, not to mention the 
process of preparing it – and you could so say this about hundreds of 
activities – is why Western society, for all its choices, distractions and 
artisan breads, is gripped by a low-level, gnawing dissatisfaction. We consume 
but we do not enjoy. That is the paradoxical tumour at the heart of 21st 
century capitalism. Either that, or you use a toaster because you’ve got kids. 
One or the other.

If you are determined to get an even, complete-slice tan, one which guarantees 
crispness across the whole surface with no bready patches, then given the 
notoriously temperamental nature of toaster settings, the grill is essential. 
Certain barbarians love burned toast (for shame,Jay Rayner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/09/jay-rayner-secret-pleasures-dirty-food>
!), but civilised human beings should aim for a colour somewhere on the 
spectrum from golden brown through russet to, at most, autumnal leaf mulch. 
Anything darker than that and the toast is overdone.

Not only does grilling allow you to keep a close eye on the toast, so you can 
ensure it emerges the precise shade you desire, but also it focuses your 
attention, if only briefly (a blisteringly hot grill will toast bread in around 
30 seconds per side), on the important task-in-hand. In placing the grill on 
the wire rack and turning it (never trust anyone who only toasts bread on one 
side), you are building anticipation for the feast to come.

Fat 

There are a significant number of otherwise sane and rational people, who, 
whilst claiming to take an interest in what they eat and drink, nonetheless use 
laboratory margarines; unholy buttermilk, olive oil or vegetable “spreads”; 
and, almost as bad, spreadable butters. All of these are an abomination.

Yes, margarine is marginally cheaper, but use it in your baking or to grease 
an axle, never on toast. It is the ultimate false economy. Likewise, who cares 
if the vegetable oil spreads are “better for you”? They may contain (and, 
blimey, that is another debate entirely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/23/everything-you-know-about-unhealthy-foods-is-wrong>
) less saturated fats or, even, plant sterols that lower your cholesterol, but 
more importantly: they taste disgusting. Is that really how you want to eke out 
your time on earth? Joylessly, in greyscale, denying yourself one of life’s 
great pleasures, in the vain hope of living (if you can call it that), for 
another few years? Newsflash: we are all dying. Every day. Eat some butter 
before it is too late. And not that weird, unnecessary spreadable stuff, 
either. Who keeps butter in the fridge? It should be stored (not the whole 
pack, just some of it) at room temperature day and night, 24/7, ready for 
instant, emergency toast application. That edict should extend to hotels and 
restaurants, too. Serving toast with rock hard butter is the ultimate fail.

From handmade, small-batch butter that tastes as ripe as cheese to 
bog-standard Anchor, butter is the essential fat for your toast. Bland unsalted 
will do, at a push (it is lushly creamy), but its rise as a supposedly 
sophisticated alternative is bizarre. We are not French. And toast certainly 
loses some of its appeal without that lip-smacking, salty twang. The butter 
should be applied moreover (using a butter knife, you cannot spread butter with 
a serrated knife), to such a thickness that, as you lift it to your mouth, you 
can still see floating yellow islands of melting dairy that have yet to fizzle 
down into the hot toast.

Serving

Many people will view the rise of on-table toasters in cafes as a hipster 
affectation. “Look at those daft sods, paying to make the food themselves!” But 
it is perfectly sensible. Toast should be served as hot as possible. By the 
time you have finished buttering a piece it is at its optimum, and it should be 
eaten straight away.

That is not always practical however, for instance when sharing toast between 
a group of people. At those times, you are forced to choose between a toast 
rack and piled on a plate. Plate is preferable, by far. Yes, the bottom piece 
may get a little soggy with condensation, but if you are letting the slices 
stand for that long, then, frankly, you are not eating fast enough. In fact, if 
it has got too damp, just throw it away and make some more. Given that its 
temperature is key, allowing toast to huddle together is far preferable to 
laboriously cutting-up and/or buttering slices and filing them in a toast rack. 
That is a surefire guarantee of stone-cold toast and who, in their right mind, 
likes cold toast?

Shape

Again, practically, it may be necessary to sub-divide your toast into either 
two rectangles or two diagonally cut triangles. This is often over exaggerated 
as a huge schism that divides toast lovers, but, in reality, the two shapes 
have very different applications. If eating a piece of toast topped with a 
spread of some sort, triangles are obviously preferable, as they allow you to 
start at the thin end of the wedge and eat in – without getting said spread all 
over your face. If you are using the bread to pile stuff on (spoonfuls of 
boiled egg, for instance) then rectangular toast, with its sturdy, reliable 
right-angles, is clearly the logical choice.

Drink

Tea or coffee. Nothing else works.

When

Any time. That is the glory of toast. No matter how tired, drunk, distracted 
or harassed you are, whether it is 3pm or 3am, and particularly at times when 
you know you wantsomething to eat but not quite what, toast works every time. 

A short note on the tyranny of toast

Understandably, given how great it can be, there is a tendency to try and 
insert toast into situations where, frankly, it does not work. For example, 
very few sandwiches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2011/nov/16/toast-sandwich-economical-recipe>
 benefit from being served on toast, rather fresh bread. And even an apparent 
classic like beans-on-toast would benefit from coming with a far more 
manoeuvrable slice of bread on-the-side, to help you mop up the last bean 
juices. See also, soup. If you want textural contrast in your soup, throw in a 
few croutons, but how is toast (inflexible, relatively non-absorbent), a 
preferable accompaniment to bread? Can you wipe your bowl clean with a piece of 
toast? No. As much as we all love it, do not be afraid to critically question 
toast.

So, toast. How do you eat yours? 
 