
What did Brussels ever do for us? Well, waffles are a good start. Not that, 
strictly speaking, they’re Belgian at all. In fact, they’re a bit of a
pan-European project <http://www.foodtimeline.org/foodfaq2.html#waffles>, with 
their origins in the ancient Greekobleios, and a Dutch name with its roots in 
the old French for honeycomb, thanks to their distinctive dimpled surface.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb79f5847966df7311312692fd71b8a8d2b78cbf1%2F0_490_2736_2736%2F2736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20Belgian%20waffles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20Belgian%20waffles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb79f5847966df7311312692fd71b8a8d2b78cbf1%2F0_490_2736_2736%2F2736.jpg>
 Signe Johansen’s Belgian waffles. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Rich with butter and eggs, waffles are festive food, once sold in church 
doorways to catch the congregation on its merry way home, and now common fare 
at fairs, fetes and other places where it’s still acceptable to eat squirty 
cream in public. But try them hot and crisp from the griddle and you’ll never 
queue for a tepid flannel again; waffles may not be the kind of thing you knock 
up at 7am before work, but they’re a surprisingly, perhaps dangerously simple 
weekend treat.

Served up for breakfast topped with banana, at lunchtime with a fried egg, or 
for pudding with ice cream and chocolate sauce, there are very few occasions 
that aren’t improved by a waffle – they are awfully versatile.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F117562c7351d2b77a7933190aa2d616f5ff76b5e%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20Belgian%20waffles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20Belgian%20waffles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F117562c7351d2b77a7933190aa2d616f5ff76b5e%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Ruth Van Waerebeek’s Belgian waffles. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
Raising agent

Before the advent of chemical raising agents in the 19th century, waffles 
would always have been raised with yeast, as in Ruth Van Waerebeek’s family 
recipe, which “has kept us happy for as long as anyone can remember”; or Molly 
Katzen’s version <http://www.nytimes.com/2002/10/09/dining/091KREX.html> in The 
Essential New York Times Cookook. Baking powder is more common in modern 
iterations, however, both on its own or in combination with bicarbonate of 
soda, presumably because it springs into action immediately, allowing for 
spur-of-the-moment indulgence.

There’s no doubt that both do the job on the rising front, but the 
yeast-raised waffles have a more interesting flavour, and a fluffier, almost 
crumpet-like texture – plus, as Van Waerebeek writes in her book,A Taste of 
Belgium 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Taste-Belgium-Ruth-Van-Waerebeek/dp/1909808180>, they 
are both “lighter and crustier … than the baking powder waffles one usually 
finds elsewhere”. Using yeast might sound like a hassle but, in fact, Van 
Waerebeek only leaves her batter to rise for an hour – although the longer you 
leave it, the better it will taste; Katzen’s overnight versions are good enough 
to eat on their own and can be knocked up in minutes before going to bed, even 
after a few drinks. And, believe me, there’s little to touch the smugness of 
waking up to a bowl of bubbling waffle batter in need of a home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb4c13df57ebac2ddd9432fcc0a488a95567e2d5%2F402_0_3246_2736%2F3246.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20Belgian%20waffles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20Belgian%20waffles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb4c13df57ebac2ddd9432fcc0a488a95567e2d5%2F402_0_3246_2736%2F3246.jpg>
 Dan Doherty’s Belgian waffles. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Liquid

Buttermilk waffles – served at Daniel Doherty’s Duck and Waffle 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/food-and-drink/recipes/ultimate-belgian-waffles-with-chocolate-hazelnut-spread-and-bana/>
 as part of the restaurant’s signature dish, and also rated by my perfectionist 
pals across the pond atAmerica’s Test Kitchen 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=jRbaCwAAQBAJ&pg=PA630&lpg=PA630&dq=america%27s+test+kitchen+buttermilk+waffles&source=bl&ots=GvyghOjAkl&sig=dEGsAz8C54h6ETWcD3RPSV3oUoQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjW6t7n7LbNAhVKAsAKHXk6B7U4ChDoAQhUMAg#v=onepage&q=america%27s%20test%20kitchen%20buttermilk%20waffles&f=false>
 – are the breakfast equivalent of chargrilled steak or goose-fat roast 
potatoes: a culinary gilded lily that is impossible to resist. America’s Test 
Kitchen reckon the buttermilk is “absolutely crucial” because, when teamed up 
with baking soda, it creates a much thicker batter, and a thick batter means 
that the “outside can become crisp while the inside remains custardy”. I’m not 
using bicarbonate of soda, but this is the texture I’m seeking, and I’m curious 
to see whether the buttermilk can improve Katzen’s pretty unimpeachable recipe. 
And, it does. They’re even crunchier, with a subtle, but definite tang that 
reminds me of crumpets. (For the avoidance of doubt, this isa very good thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/mar/21/how-to-cook-perfect-crumpets>
.)

The acidity that makes buttermilk such an excellent catalyst for bicarb, 
however, is the very thing that makes it less than ideal when using yeast, 
which is prima-donna-ishly sensitive to the pH of its environment. As I find 
active dry yeast the easiest to work with on a day-to-day basis (fresh yeast 
being tricky to get hold of, and instant yeast coming in fiddly, pricy little 
packets), and given that it’s safest to activate this in warm liquid before 
use, I’m going to deploy a combination of milk and buttermilk instead. (If 
you’d like a richer, more indulgent result, I’d highly recommendSigne 
Johansen’s sour cream version 
<http://scandilicious.blogspot.co.uk/2008/07/sunday-brunch-mama-johansens-sour-cream.html>
 in her book Scandilicious: “a hybrid of my mother’s and the winning recipe of 
the Norwegian national waffle competition in 2008” – soft and fluffy inside, 
they’re gorgeous with nothing more than a sprinkling of berries.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ecf882bde89a6256c1deadb6f4fef90c2e53f2f%2F0_402_2736_2736%2F2736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20Belgian%20waffles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20Belgian%20waffles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ecf882bde89a6256c1deadb6f4fef90c2e53f2f%2F0_402_2736_2736%2F2736.jpg>
 Molly Katzen’s Belgian waffles. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The flour

All the recipes I try use plain flour, and America’s Test Kitchen adds a 
little cornmeal, too, for “extra crackle”. Though not strictly necessary, I 
would recommend it if you happen to have some to hand, because it makes an 
already crisp waffle positively crunchy.

They also caution against the usual practice of adding the wet ingredients to 
the dry in one go, explaining that this “necessitates overmixing and usually 
results in clumps of unmoistened flour”. The goal is not to eliminate all the 
lumps, but simply to combine all the ingredients: too much stirring will start 
to develop the gluten in the flour, and will make for tough results.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed88166789ec7c62f0d6d876bf8d232bc12f80b4%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20Belgian%20waffles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20Belgian%20waffles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed88166789ec7c62f0d6d876bf8d232bc12f80b4%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 America’s Test Kitchen’s Belgian waffles. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
Fat

Most people add melted butter to their batter, although Van Waerebeek goes for 
a retro mixture of butter and margarine, which confirms my prejudice against 
that much-maligned fat.

Many recipes that use baking powder also separate the eggs, whipping up the 
whites to add extra air to the batter and give the waffles a fluffier texture – 
but I don’t find this makes much difference to the finished result, 
principally, perhaps, because the pressing action of the waffle iron must 
surely expel most of this air. (It’s also a bit of a faff, if I’m honest.)

Flavouring

Like pancakes, waffles can be flavoured with just about anything, but a little 
sugar helps to crisp them up (I like the flavour of the light brown sort, but 
any kind will do), and salt helps to bring out their flavour. Johansen and Van 
Waerebeek both add vanilla, which is pleasing if you’re planning to use them in 
a sweet context, but I’ve also added nutmeg, smoked paprika, and a combination 
of fennel seeds and lemon zest with happy results, so feel free to play about 
as suits your fancy.

Cooking

If you have an electric waffle maker, this will do the hard work for you. If, 
like me, you have a stove-top version, heed America’s Test Kitchen advice: “A 
good waffle must cook quickly.” Placing it on too low a heat will mean the 
centre will overcook before the outside has had time to crisp and brown, so 
make sure you thoroughly heat your waffle iron before beginning to cook, and 
turn it regularly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20352ab86339bea26e395c8fec3fa5cfbcec50de%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20Belgian%20waffles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20Belgian%20waffles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-belgian-waffles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20352ab86339bea26e395c8fec3fa5cfbcec50de%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Felicity Cloake’s perfect Belgian waffles. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
Perfect Belgian waffles

(Makes 10)
180ml milk
1 tbsp active dried yeast
1 tbsp soft light brown sugar, or more to taste
245g flour
1 tbsp cornmeal or polenta (or another tbsp of flour)
1/2 tsp salt
240ml buttermilk
6 tbsp melted butter
1 large egg, beaten
Oil, to grease

Warm the milk in a small pan (you can use the same one you melted the butter 
in). Stir in the yeast and a pinch of the sugar, then leave until the surface 
is covered with tiny bubbles. Meanwhile, whisk together the remaining dry 
ingredients in a large bowl, and beat together the buttermilk, melted butter 
and egg in a jug.

When ready, whisk the yeasty milk into the jug, then slowly pour this into the 
dry ingredients, mixing gently with a spoon or spatula to incorporate as you 
go. Cover loosely and allow to sit at room temperature for between an hour and 
overnight.

Turn the oven to low to keep the waffles warm (unless you have a ready 
audience to eat them fresh from the grill). Lightly grease then heat your 
waffle iron. (Electronic ones will do the work for you from then on.) Pour in 
just enough batter to cover the base, spreading it out with a metal spatula, 
then turn down the heat slightly and close the lid. Cook for about 45 seconds 
until golden on the underside, then flip and repeat for about 4 minutes until 
golden and crisp on the other side.

Belgian waffles: what do you top yours with? And what other recipes make for a 
worthy breakfast treat you don’t mind putting a bit of work into?
 