
One of the undisputed classics of Greek cuisine, kleftiko is a 
special-occasion dish which showcases Hellenic cooking at its simple best. It 
demands no fancy ingredients or tricky techniques, just good raw materials … 
and a good deal of patience. Said to be named after sheep-rustling bandits 
known as the klephts, who would cook their ill-gotten gains in underground pits 
to avoid detection, the success of the dish depends on long, slow roasting 
until the meat fairly falls off the bone. That’s handy, no doubt, when your 
knives were all engaged in more nefarious activity.

How to cook the perfect pitta bread
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2016/jul/13/how-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread>
Though it’s no doubt at its best at a whitewashed island taverna, it’s also 
perfect for feeding a crowd when the circus of fire and knives that is our 
traditional Sunday roast feels like too much effort. Like many of the best 
summer dishes, kleftiko is happy to do its own thing while you get on with more 
important stuff – such as sunbathing and drinking ouzo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-kleftiko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2e28de50fac7d99b0bba6a7d6291760d52f7e06%2F318_274_3661_2196%2F3661.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20kleftiko&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-kleftiko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20kleftiko&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-kleftiko%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2e28de50fac7d99b0bba6a7d6291760d52f7e06%2F318_274_3661_2196%2F3661.jpg>
 Rick Stein’s kleftico. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The cut of lamb

Most recipes I try call for leg. Rick Stein 
<http://thehappyfoodie.co.uk/recipes/lamb-kleftiko> uses a whole one, while 
Sebastian’s Taverna <http://www.sebastians-taverna.gr/kleftiko.html> in Corfu 
and Eli K Giannopoulos 
<http://www.mygreekdish.com/recipe/lamb-kleftiko-recipe-greek-lamb-cooked-in-parchment-paper/>
 of the website My Greek Dish plump for pieces. The testing panel, however, is 
largely with Georgina Hayden, <http://georginahayden.com/easter-kleftiko/> 
author of Stirring Slowly, who describes kleftiko as her “achilles heel”… but 
calls for shoulder, as does Tonia Buxton’s <http://www.apple.com> recipe.

Though leg looks impressive, and one tester prefers its relative leanness, 
everyone else feels like it’s a cut better suited to cooking fast and serving 
pink; the tougher, fattier shoulder, meanwhile, really benefits from slow 
cooking, becoming wonderfully juicy and rich. It’s also cheaper, which is 
always a pleasing bonus.

Those short of time might prefer to use Buxton’s leg pieces on the bone, which 
only need cooking for a couple of hours, though I’m slightly of the opinion 
that this is a dish that deserves a bit of love, and you’re probably better off 
making something else.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-kleftiko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03e3a35c7dfa19bcd305c58b8401c38de78d13a5%2F0_605_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20kleftiko&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-kleftiko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20kleftiko&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-kleftiko%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03e3a35c7dfa19bcd305c58b8401c38de78d13a5%2F0_605_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
 Georgina Hayden. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The cooking

While we’re on the subject of time, Giannopoulos marinates his leg steaks for 
24 hours before cooking, which gives them a wonderfully deep flavour. If you 
don’t have that luxury, however, rest assured that it will still be delicious.

Sebastian’s Taverna is the only recipe to braise the kleftiko on the hob, 
rather than baking it in the oven. There’s no doubt that this keeps the meat 
beautifully juicy, but it doesn’t have the same intensity of flavour as the 
others, especially since the pieces are submerged in water. Adding less liquid, 
as Stein and Hayden recommend, gently steams the meat, so it’s moist, but still 
retains its distinctive flavour – rely on its own juices, as Buxton does, and 
you get a great-tasting kleftiko that’s just a touch dry.

Stein and Giannopoulos both bake their dishes at a high heat: 190C and 180C 
respectively, but for shoulder, I think Buxton and Hayden’s gentler 160C gives 
better, more tender results. Equally importantly, make sure it’s in a tightly 
sealed package, either in a heavy casserole dish, sealed with foil, as Stein 
recommends, or in a completely closed parcel of greaseproof paper sprinkled 
with water as in Hayden’s recipe, so no moisture can escape.

Though I suspect this is unorthodox, Giannopoulos’s final blast of heat, with 
the meat uncovered, does help boost the flavour, just as a melt-in-the-mouth 
sous-vide steak is made infinitely tastier by a brief dance on a hot grill.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-kleftiko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6ace6d4f6a5efce8cce15baa91d95bd4613f1db%2F75_279_3838_2303%2F3838.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20kleftiko&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-kleftiko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20kleftiko&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-kleftiko%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6ace6d4f6a5efce8cce15baa91d95bd4613f1db%2F75_279_3838_2303%2F3838.jpg>
 Eli K Giannopoulos. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Vegetables

The simplest recipe, from Sebastian’s Taverna, calls for nothing more than 
onions and garlic, and Hayden, though she uses more spice, sticks with garlic 
alone. But, as you’ve got the oven on anyway, it makes sense to cook a few 
vegetables at the same time. Stein, Buxton and Giannopoulos bulk the dish out 
with potatoes, which are gorgeously rich and soft after a few hours with a 
joint of lamb (and even better crisped up while the meat is resting as 
Giannopoulos suggests) – make sure you get the waxy kind, or you’ll be left 
with mush. Everyone peels them, but I think they’re even more delicious left 
whole, whatever Greek grannies might think.

Stein and Giannopoulos both also add peppers, and, like Buxton chuck a few 
tomatoes in there for good measure, which not only look colourful, but, as with 
anything given such a treatment, taste great too. They’re not absolutely 
necessary, but they do help make this dish into a one-pot treasure trove.

Garlic, however, is very much necessary – and the sharp flavour of the crushed 
kind is so different from the mellow sweetness of the roasted variety that I’m 
going to use it as both seasoning and vegetable. The sugary heat of 
Giannopoulos’s red onion works similarly brilliantly with the savoury lamb.

Stein adds crumbled feta to his kleftiko, inspired by the one served at a 
restaurant in Symi, and Giannopoulos goes for kefalotyri, a very versatile hard 
yellow cheese that, to my surprise, I find in the supermarket, though I’ve 
never noticed it before. Both have a tendency, however, to dissolve into the 
vegetables, prompting one tester to discreetly remove several blobs of what she 
believed to be lamb fat before I set her right. Cheese and lamb are not, to my 
mind, a marriage made in heaven, but if you fancy adding some, do so right 
before serving.

Hayden’s recipe has a non-traditional twist right at the end – it’s finished 
with a scattering of pomegranate seeds and mint tossed in a little red vine 
vinegar, which is a very pretty idea if you decide not to add any extra 
vegetables, and serve this with salads instead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-kleftiko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcaaa8b417e6127e8ba4873eb6f5dc9cc1d75b758%2F0_410_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20kleftiko&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-kleftiko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20kleftiko&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-kleftiko%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcaaa8b417e6127e8ba4873eb6f5dc9cc1d75b758%2F0_410_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
 Sebastian’s Taverna. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Seasonings

Oregano is an absolute must – I find the dried kind stands up better to long 
cooking than the fresh leaves – and a couple of bay leaves, as used by Buxton 
and Hayden, don’t go amiss either. A little acidity in the form of lemon juice, 
rather than Giannopoulos’ white wine, helps to cut through the richness of the 
meat and potatoes, so you can keep going back for more. Best followed by a 
glass of raki and a nap in the shade of a gnarly fig tree.

Perfect kleftiko

(serves 6)
1 lamb shoulder, about 2kg
Olive oil
1 tsp cinnamon
1 tsp dried oregano
1 tsp salt
1 1/2 heads of garlic
2 lemons
1 kg waxy potatoes
1 large red onion
1 red pepper
1 bay leaf
12 cherry tomatoes

Rub the meat with oil. Sprinkle over the cinnamon, oregano and salt, and peel 
and roughly crush half a head of garlic. Rub all this into the meat with your 
hands along with the juice of one lemon. Cover and leave for 12 hours.

Heat the oven to 160C. Cut the potatoes into wedges and use them to line the 
base of a large lidded casserole dish (or use a roasting tin lined with enough 
parchment paper to fold over the top of the joint on both sides – you’ll 
probably need two pieces at right angles). Cut the onion into wedges and the 
pepper into chunky strips, removing the seeds, then add the cherry tomatoes. 
Place the lamb on top. Cut the remaining garlic and lemon in half laterally, 
squeeze the lemon briefly over the potatoes, and tuck the shells and the garlic 
in around the joint along with the bay leaf. Pour 200ml water into the dish. If 
using a casserole dish, tuck a damp piece of greaseproof on top and cover, if 
using a roasting dish, sprinkle the overhanging paper with water and fold over 
and tuck in to form a sealed package. Bake for 4-5 hours until very tender.

Turn the oven up to 220C and roast, uncovered, for 10-15 minutes at this 
higher temperature, then lift the joint out and set aside. Put the vegetables 
back in for 15 minutes until starting to brown, then serve with the meat.

Kleftiko: Greek cooking at its best? Do you like to keep yours simple, or make 
it a meal in itself like this one? And what do you serve with it?
 