
Caprese salad is a dish so gloriously simple that you may wonder how on earth 
I’m going to squeeze an article out of it. Surely, I hear you scoff, no one 
could go wrong arranging tomatoes, basil and mozzarella on a plate? But before 
you decide that silly season has pitched its parasol on the food pages, think 
back to all the caprese salads you have had, and, if you live in Britain, 
you’ll realise it is indeed possible to ruin this Italian classic. According to 
Angela Hartnett: “While [it] appears on menus everywhere, very few places make 
it well.”

Mostly, of course, this is down to ingredients; if you’ve only got “cheap, 
rubbery mozzarella and watery, chilled tomatoes”, as Hartnett puts it, you 
should probably make something else instead, but even the best raw material 
still requires careful handling. It’s not a question of tweaking – as J Kenji 
Lopez-Alt puts it 
<http://www.seriouseats.com/2015/08/how-to-not-fuck-up-a-caprese-salad.html> on 
US site Serious Eats: “Working on a recipe for caprese salad is kind of like 
working on updating the Beatles’ classic If I Fell. It’s so damn near-perfect 
already, where is there to go with it?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3134887c941fea6397252ad2cc4cf28fe54239f%2F0_0_3024_3024%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20caprese%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20caprese%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3134887c941fea6397252ad2cc4cf28fe54239f%2F0_0_3024_3024%2F3024.jpg>
 Angela Hartnett’s caprese salad. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
A caprese doesn’t need quinoa 
<http://domesticate-me.com/caprese-quinoa-bake/#/>, strawberries 
<http://www.twopeasandtheirpod.com/avocado-strawberry-caprese-salad/> or even, 
God forbid, kale 
<http://www.flavourandsavour.com/kale-caprese-salad-with-fresh-mozzarella/>. 
Lopez-Alt puts it perfectly when he says: “A good caprese salad is a culinary 
endpoint. Like a Neapolitan pizza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2015/sep/06/world-pizza-championships-napoli>
 or a good old American hamburger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2014/apr/11/undress-impress-craft-ultimate-burger>
, it’s a dish that’s so well conceived, so balanced, so downright delicious in 
its most common incarnation, that to improve upon it by changing its basic form 
or structure is simply impossible.” No, it just needs to be faultless, and 
that’s this week’s mission.

The tomatoes

Lacking Capri’s sun-kissed climate, high summer is the only time of year you 
should consider making a caprese in Britain – although even then Hartnett is 
dubious, writing in her book Cucina that “the quality of the tomatoes in the UK 
is often pretty poor, so at the Connaught weroast the tomatoes in order to 
concentrate the flavour 
<http://www.olivemagazine.com/recipes/angela-hartnetts-tomato-mozzarella-and-basil-salad/3044.html>
”. For good measure, she chucks on a very generous amount of sugar, plus some 
thyme and garlic, and slow-roasts them for two hours, until they’re sweet 
enough to eat like candy. If you can only get hold of orange, watery fruit, 
then hers is definitely the best approach, but in season, it seems a shame to 
sacrifice the natural acidity of a ripe tomato in favour of this richer, 
jammier flavour. (As an aside, talking to the specialist greengrocers Natoora 
last week, I was informed that you could tell a good quality tomato by its 
seeds: they should be jellied, rather than watery, and it should feel heavy for 
its size.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecc145d28b7e0fe8d4671d6dd9e7681a5b65cdae%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20caprese%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20caprese%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecc145d28b7e0fe8d4671d6dd9e7681a5b65cdae%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Christopher Boswell uses semi-green tomatoes. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for 
the Guardian 
Interestingly, Christopher Boswell 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/dining/recipes/sc-food-0516-italian-vegetable-books-20140517-story.html>
, executive chef at the Rome Sustainable Food Project, and author of the book 
Verdure, explains that: “In southern Italy, caprese is almost always served 
with semi-green tomatoes, and this is intentional. Unripe tomatoes … have 
higher acidity than juicy red slicing tomatoes. Buffalo milk mozzarella is 
quite rich, and if served with a ripe sweet tomato and with sweet basil, the 
dish can just fall flat. A more acidic varietal, or the acidity of a slightly 
under-ripe tomato brings out the distinct flavour of each ingredient in the 
dish.” His caprese is crunchy and refreshingly sour – quite a different dish to 
one made with fully ripe tomatoes. My testers enjoy it while also regretting 
the loss of sweetness, so I think a mixture of different varieties is ideal if 
you can find them. Saveur magazine 
<http://www.saveur.com/article/Recipes/Classic-Caprese-Salad> suggests 
combining big beefy berthas and little cherry or grape tiddlers, while Jamie 
Oliver <http://jamiesdinners.co.uk/jamiesitaly_recipes_insalata.html> simply 
recommends “good mixed ripe tomatoes of different shapes and sizes”, which just 
about covers it, although try and include some tarter or greener ones in there 
if you can. Greengrocers, farm shops and markets should have a decent selection 
in August if you don’t grow your own.

Russell Norman’s book Polpo contains a recipe 
<http://www.esquire.co.uk/food-drink/news/a8462/russell-normans-insalata-caprese/>
 that starts by sprinkling the tomatoes with salt “to pull on the juices” 
before putting the salad together, a step that really seems to bring out their 
flavour, as well as creating an instant and intensely tomatoey dressing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59f35864523a72509cb57b9c866773e66a9551c3%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20caprese%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20caprese%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59f35864523a72509cb57b9c866773e66a9551c3%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Saveur suggests combining beefy berthas with cherry tiddlers. Photograph: 
Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Mozzarella

To be honest, before soft, tangy fresh mozzarella came into my life I was 
pretty happy with the milky vacuum-packed variety. Sadly, now I know better and 
it’s impossible to go back. You don’t need a lot here, so splash out on the 
good stuff. Saveur suggests burrata instead, which is mozzarella’s blingier, 
cream-filled cousin – undoubtedly decadent, and undoubtedly delicious, but too 
blandly rich here for my testers, who miss the lactic sourness of straight 
mozzarella.

Tear it, as Oliver suggests, rather than cutting it into uniform slices. It’s 
easier to dot around the salad, and looks, as he says in Jamie’s Italy, more 
rustic, which is rarely a bad thing in a salad.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F740f86cefa5e412bb61db2e9f206620f5141ee65%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20caprese%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20caprese%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F740f86cefa5e412bb61db2e9f206620f5141ee65%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Russell Norman’s caprese. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The basil

Another revelation last week – I finally realised why so many chefs, including 
Hartnett, Boswell and Saveur, call for basil “ideally with small leaves”.
Genovese basil 
<http://www.natoora.co.uk/shop/vegetables/herbs/fresh-genovese-basil-dop/prod16864.html>
, which is the proud holder of a European protected designation of origin, has 
tiny leaves, and an intensity of fragrance and flavour that makes it almost 
unrecognisable for those of us used to the standard sort. It’s so sweet it’s 
almost clove-like. That said, it’s also pretty expensive, and fiendishly hard 
to get hold of – and even the ordinary stuff is pretty good, especially if you 
save the larger leaves for pesto.

Oliver makes his into a “lovely smashed basil dressing” by grinding it up in a 
pestle and mortar with a good pinch of salt and some olive oil. It looks 
pretty, but the herb seems to lose some of its potency, which is a shame, so 
I’d mess about with it as little as possible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb0f78b56355218d8b0909f28b7fe6bd3d2a0d4d%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20caprese%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20caprese%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb0f78b56355218d8b0909f28b7fe6bd3d2a0d4d%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Jane Baxter and John Vincent add shallot and garlic. Photograph: Felicity 
Cloake for the Guardian 
The extras

Oliver adds a little finely chopped spring onion to the mix, while Jane Baxter 
and John Vincent’s Leon Happy Salads 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=tarBCwAAQBAJ&pg=PA38&lpg=PA38&dq=jane+baxter+leon+happy+salads+caprese+salad&source=bl&ots=0dkxd86S-l&sig=V0xH1TN7Klqjvfye8iT12dF5x3Q&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjkn7PBhaHOAhXHJcAKHRX-AcYQ6AEIMDAD#v=onepage&q=jane%20baxter%20leon%20happy%20salads%20caprese%20salad&f=false>
 opts for shallot and garlic; both excellent things with tomato, but they 
rather overpower the mozzarella, as does Saveur’s balsamic vinegar. Indeed, a 
debate rages as to whether vinegar, also used in various iterations by Baxter 
and Vincent, and Oliver, has any place in a caprese at all. Marcella Hazan, the 
grande dame of Italian food writing in the US, writes that, “in the classic 
caprese, there is no vinegar, but Victor [her husband] insists it is a required 
part of the juices in his version” – so clearly there’s some leeway. If you 
have a good mix of different tomatoes, however, including some sharper 
varieties, then I don’t think vinegar is really necessary, so taste before 
adding. Decent olive oil, however, is non-negotiable.

Finally, make sure all the ingredients are at room temperature before you 
start – not that you should be refrigerating your tomatoes or basil anyway.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3177b46af2c238e466c6d15d4c8fa578644c1f08%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20caprese%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20caprese%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-caprese-salad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3177b46af2c238e466c6d15d4c8fa578644c1f08%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Perfect caprese salad. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
(serves 4 with bread)

About 600g tomatoes of different shapes and sizes, including some slightly 
under-ripe or more acidic varieties
Extra virgin olive oil
250g buffalo mozzarella
Small bunch of basil, preferably with smallish leaves

Cut the tomatoes into different sized slices and chunks depending on their 
size and shape – large craggy fruit often looks better cut into cross sections. 
Cut out the core if it looks chewy. Put into a bowl and sprinkle with sea salt, 
leave to sit for 10 minutes, then add 1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil and gently 
toss with a couple of spoons.

Arrange the tomatoes on a platter, spooning over their juices. Tear the 
mozzarella over the top, and scatter with torn basil leaves. Drizzle with more 
oil and season with a little more salt. Serve.

Caprese: a classic that’s impossible to get wrong, or a recipe for disaster at 
the hands of creative cooks? Do you prefer to keep it simple, or have you got a 
special tweak you think improves on perfection?
 