
An unpromising name, for us Brits at least, calling to mind as it does a woman 
known more for herpeas <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qyAMBd_AC_Q> than her 
pasta, but one that’s utterly right for this time of year, when it’s finally 
safe to put away the potatoes and cast out the kale in favour of darkly glossy
aubergines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/sep/25/how-to-make-perfect-baba-ganoush>
 and plump redtomatoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/26/tomato-slow-roasted-soup-recipe-swap-felicity-cloake>
. A Sicilian speciality that’s disappointingly said to have been inspired by 
the beauty of theBellini opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/16/bellini-norma-eno-coliseum-london-translator-george-hall>
 of the same name, rather than theTory politician’s wife 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/john-walsh-meets-norma-major-the-significant-other-5599818.html>
, norma packs a serious summery punch, while also having enough heft to warm up 
the most unseasonably dreary of evenings. In short, you need this for dinner 
tonight.

Aubergines 

It is impossible to cook aubergines without wading into the debate on the 
merits ofsalting them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/feb/10/salting-aubergine-eggplant-crossing-sprouts>
 “to sweat out any bitter juices”, as Lucio Galletto writes inthe Art of Pasta 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/227647>, and ruefully 
reflecting that you would be lucky to find a modern variety with any bitterness 
left to remove. Others claim it stops them soaking up so much oil during 
cooking, which I’ve never found to be true either, but it does help to season 
this rather bland vegetable from the inside out, so it is a good idea, if time 
permits. Half an hour is quite sufficient but even 10 minutes, while you prep 
the rest of the ingredients, is better than nothing.

Galletto, and Ruth Rogers <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ruthrogers>
 and Rose Gray in the River Cafe Classic Italian Cookbook, thinly slice the 
aubergine, which looks prettier than the more common diced version, but proves 
less practical to eat; Caz Hildebrand and Jacob Kenedy’s 2cm cubes inthe 
Geometry of Pasta <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/geometry-of-pasta-2.html> 
are far easier to scoop up with a forkful of noodles than these rounds, or 
indeedMarcella Hazan 
<http://www.countrylife.co.uk/life-in-the-country/greatest-recipes-ever-aubergine-and-ricotta-sauce-sicilian-style-16171>
’s larger chunks. She peels her aubergine before use, which seems a shame, as 
its skin is such a beautiful colour, while Rogers and Gray call for the pale, 
round Italian variety which yields beautiful big rounds, but tastes, as far as 
I can tell, very similar to its longer cousin; so use whatever looks best when 
buying.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71296ac7c2cc4ee0cc02a6e58486f5b08b8c020b%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pasta%20alla%20norma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pasta%20alla%20norma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71296ac7c2cc4ee0cc02a6e58486f5b08b8c020b%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Lucio Galletto’s pasta alla norma. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian
Heretically, I am going to bake my aubergines, rather than frying them as 
Galletto and Hazan recommend, or even deep-frying like Rogers and Gray and 
Hildebrand and Kenedy; traditional it may be, but it does make things extremely 
oily. Not that I’m averse to a spot of oil, you understand (one of the reasons 
that many things taste much better in Italian restaurants is, I suspect, the 
amount of oil and salt they fling in), but the caramelised sweetness of the 
baked version in chefSara Jenkins 
<http://www.saveur.com/article/Recipes/Saveur-100-2011-Pasta-Alla-Norma-Pasta-with-Tomato-Sauce-and-Eggplant>
’s recipe in Saveur magazine swings it for me. Sacrifice me to yourGaulish gods 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TYl8GRJGnBY> if you must, conservative cooks, 
but please, give it a try first.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb06e17821b826efcce3521b34c2c4c001dd0fdf9%2F0_0_4032_2815%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pasta%20alla%20norma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pasta%20alla%20norma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb06e17821b826efcce3521b34c2c4c001dd0fdf9%2F0_0_4032_2815%2F4032.jpg>
 Sara Jenkins’s pasta alla norma/ Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Tomatoes

Aubergines may be the billboard star, but tomatoes hold this dish together. 
Galletto, Hazan and Jenkins use tinned (Italian San Marzano in the last case), 
Rogers and Gray call for the fresh sort, and the Geometry ofPasta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pasta> uses both.

At this time of year, it seems a shame not to take advantage of the widespread 
availability of tomatoes that actually taste of tomatoes, but I find the River 
Cafe recipe thinner and sharper than the rest, perhaps also thanks to the fact 
that it only warms the tomatoes through, rather than cooking them into a sauce. 
It is the one I would choose on a baking Sicilian summer’s day, fresh and 
fruity and halfway to a pasta salad (a quality accentuated by a sprinkling of 
red-wine vinegar). However, without access to their superb suppliers, I 
wouldn’t like to rely on fresh tomatoes alone. The sweetness of tinned is the 
perfect foil to the acidity of even the ripest fresh British kind, so I will be 
going down the Hildebrand and Kenedy route and using a combination of the two.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fede2b14de09ede40f8a74e41e64933f996238a29%2F0_371_2736_2711%2F2736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pasta%20alla%20norma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pasta%20alla%20norma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fede2b14de09ede40f8a74e41e64933f996238a29%2F0_371_2736_2711%2F2736.jpg>
 Marcella Hazan’s pasta alla norma Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
There seems to be little consensus on the best shape pf pasta to use for norma

Hazan drains her tinned tomatoes of their juice before use. I’m sceptical: it 
seems like a waste, though it does make a fine bloody mary for the cook. 
Actually, a thicker sauce, like the River Cafe one, works better here than 
Jenkins’s soupier version.

Flavourings 

Many of the dishes – Hazan’s and Hildebrand and Kenedy’s in particular – are 
very onion-heavy; the flavour dominates the sauce. Onion is, of course, 
delicious with tomatoes and aubergines, but it detracts from the freshness of 
the other flavours in a way that the River Cafe’s sharper garlic does not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec2a3eb85353328eb92cba2bab16083fb2dfcbfd%2F0_233_4032_2791%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pasta%20alla%20norma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pasta%20alla%20norma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec2a3eb85353328eb92cba2bab16083fb2dfcbfd%2F0_233_4032_2791%2F4032.jpg>
 Caz Hildebrand and Jacob Kenedy’s pasta alla norma. Photograph: Felicity 
Cloake for the Guardian 
Jenkins and Hildebrand and Kenedy also add a very Sicilian pinch of chilli 
which is a great optional extra, while basil is a must (though I’ve seen a 
suggestion online that mint makes a good substitute).


Pasta 

Unusually, there seems to be little consensus on the best shape to use for 
norma: Galletto calls for spaghetti, Jenkins bucatini, River Cafe smooth penne 
lisce, the Geometry of Pasta maccheroncini and Hazan ruote di carro or 
cartwheels, although she concedes that fusilli, rigatoni or even “plain old 
spaghetti” are also good. The art of matching pasta to sauce is a mysterious 
one: the sauce slips off, or through, the slippery penne and bucatini, while 
the maccheroncini feel too small for the aubergine chunks. Spaghetti works 
well, but the cartwheels do the best job of trapping Hazan’s thicker, jammier 
sauce, though I suspect twists or other larger round shapes would be equally 
successful.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65d6f4c2259429fffba951c0b39314257e03336a%2F0_98_3024_2744%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pasta%20alla%20norma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pasta%20alla%20norma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pasta-alla-norma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65d6f4c2259429fffba951c0b39314257e03336a%2F0_98_3024_2744%2F3024.jpg>
 Ruth Rogers and Rose Gray’s pasta alla norma. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for 
the Guardian 
Cheese

As with carbonara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/may/10/how-to-cook-perfect-spaghetti-carbonara>
, cheese is more than mere seasoning here: you can’t have norma without it. 
Properly speaking, it ought to be ricotta salata, a hard, salty, aged version 
of the soft, creamy fresh stuff found in tubs next to the mascarpone. Any good 
cheesemongers or Italian grocers should have it, or it is easily foundonline 
<http://www.natoora.co.uk/shop/cheesemonger/fresh-cheese/cacioricotta/prod8024.html>
 and lasts for ages.

It is not the only option: Galletto prefers parmesan. which he feels gives the 
dish “more harmony, because the ricotta can sometimes be too salty and you 
can’t control that”, adding fresh ricotta as a garnish, while Hazan specifies 
pecorino romano, which I think of as a halfway house between parmesan and 
salted ricotta, being tangier and sharper than the former, but cheesier and 
nuttier than the latter, and fresh ricotta.

Both have their merits (though I am not sure anyone should add 50g of cheese 
per person to a dish, as Galletto suggests; even my greediest testers are 
slightly overfaced by its outrageous cheesiness, though they bravely polish off 
a large bowl regardless). Neither goes as well with the creamy, caramelised 
aubergine and rich tomato as the simply salty ricotta. Get hold of some if you 
can.

Pasta alla norma

(Serves 2, easily multiplied)

1 large aubergine, cut into 2cm dice 

Salt 

4 tbsp extra virgin olive oil 

3 garlic cloves, finely chopped 

4 tomatoes (about a tin), drained and roughly chopped or 6 ripe plum or 
similarly sized tomatoes

25g basil 

150g-200g ruote di carro/cartwheels, fusilli or spaghetti, depending on your 
hunger

2 tbsp grated ricotta salata 

Put the diced aubergine in a colander in the sink and sprinkle with salt. 
Leave to sit for 30 minutes.

Heat the oven to 230C.

Rinse the aubergine in cold water, pat dry with kitchen towel and toss in a 
bowl with half the oil,then bake, well spread out, for about 15-20 minutes 
until caramelised, turning occasionally to make sure the pieces don’t dry out.

Meanwhile, heat the other half of the oil in a wide pan over a medium heat and 
add the garlic. Saute for a couple of minutes, then add the tomatoes and half 
the basil and bring to a simmer. Turn down the heat and cook slowly for about 
20 to 30 minutes until thickened (the exact time will depend on your tomatoes).

Once the sauce is almost ready, cook the pasta in plenty of boiling salted 
water to your liking. Add the aubergine to the sauce and discard the basil. 
Drain the pasta and toss in the sauce, then divide between plates and sprinkle 
with the ricotta and the remaining basil leaves, roughly torn over the top. 
It’s best allowed to cool slightly before eating.

Norma – the summeriest of pasta dishes … or do you have another warm-weather 
favourite? Am I a heretic for baking the aubergines, or using tinned tomatoes, 
and if not, which time-honoured culinary traditions are you happy to tweak in 
the name of improvement?
 