
It is not often How to Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> (HTE) – the 
Guardian blog defining how best to eat Britain’s favourite dishes – feels it 
necessary to refer to the yellowing cuttings of the arts’ archive. But, just 
occasionally, it happens thata spate of self-indulgent ad-libbing during a 2011 
National Theatre production of One Man, Two Guvnors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/jul/02/cast-one-man-two-guvnors> 
embodies, in one sentence, so much of the misunderstanding, nay prejudice, that 
surrounds this month’s topic: hummus.

How to eat: a sausage sandwich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/05/how-to-eat-a-sausage-sandwich>
Apparently, during their larking about, the One Man, Two Guvnors cast would 
regularly ask the audience for something to eat. Offered a hummus sandwich,
James Corden <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/james-corden> – the George 
Bernard Shaw <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/bernardshaw> of Generation 
Bantz – is reported to have exclaimed: “Oh God, is this a Guardian readers’ 
night?”

Please take a moment, dear reader, to fully LOLZ that one out. 

Now, there is a lot about hummus culture that HTE has neither the space nor 
the inclination to fully explore here. It will not, for instance, become mired 
in the quagmire of whether (sensible, egalitarian) hummus or (the unbearably 
affected) houmous is the correct spelling. It will not tread on Felicity 
Cloake’s well-worn kitchen lino by discussinghow hummus should be made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2011/aug/11/how-to-make-perfect-hummus>
. It will not seek to resolve the hummus wars that divide the Middle East. 
Suffice to say, HTE likesthe stance 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2010/WORLD/meast/05/09/lebanon.hummus/index.html> of 
hummus-obsessed Israeli blogger, Shooky Galili <http://humus101.com/EN/>: 
“Hummus is a centuries-old Arab dish – nobody owns it, it belongs to the 
region.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fhow-to-eat-hummus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F128f0dba143c96197207fb4e13ab0f21e3adaf19%2F0_156_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20hummus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fhow-to-eat-hummus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20hummus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fhow-to-eat-hummus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F128f0dba143c96197207fb4e13ab0f21e3adaf19%2F0_156_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 ‘Hummus is a centuries-old Arab dish – nobody owns it, it belongs to the 
region.’ Photograph: Getty Images/EyeEm/Kirsty Lee 
The British love affair with hummus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2013/aug/07/british-love-affair-with-hummus>
But … but … but there are certain egregious slurs that we cannot let slide. 
Primary here is the idea that we Guardianista are obsessed with hummus when, as 
any fule kno, it is not 1992. These days, we love quinoa, smashed avo and 
crispy kale. The notion that hummus is the preserve of a PC, sandal-wearing, 
left-wing vanguard is ridiculous when41% of Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2013/aug/07/british-love-affair-with-hummus>
 has a pot in the fridge. Worst of all, though, is Corden’s blithe acceptance 
of the concept of a hummus sandwich. What kind of world are we living in, where 
*voice rising to a fever pitch of indignation*people are putting hummus in 
sandwiches?



The hummus-sandwich interface

Insomuch as hummus has a role to play in sandwiches and wraps, it is as a 
garnish, deployed in a supporting role. Think Ernie Wise to Eric Morecambe’s 
falafel, grilled meats or Greek salad. HTE has read hummus described, 
incredibly, as a like-for-like replacement for butter or mayonnaise. It is not. 
Instead, it is better thought of as one of a number of broadly Levantine sauces 
(zhoug, tahini, tzatziki, harissa), which – when the (flat)bread is thin enough 
and its contents juicy enough that this will not become a stodgy slog – can add 
a further layer of flavour complexity to a sandwich.

However, the idea of adding often claggy, chunky hummus to a thick, sliced 
bread sandwich of turkey or chicken (how dry would that be?) or, for the 
non-meat eaters, using it as a major sandwich filling in endless combinations 
of avocado, tomatoes, egg, spicy carrot and feta, seems not just 
gastronomically questionable – how well do those ingredients gel,really? – but 
also a surefire recipe for a truly dreary, lumpen sandwich. That is a wad of 
mush that you will start eating at lunch and still be chewing at tea time.

Savoury dips are 'salt and fat traps', warns health group
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/28/savoury-dips-are-salt-and-fat-traps-warns-health-group>
Dipping

There is a lot going on in hummus, it is, variously, creamy, nutty, lemony, 
garlicky, savoury, salty (perhaps too salty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/28/savoury-dips-are-salt-and-fat-traps-warns-health-group>
). Therefore, it is essential to choose dipping implements that offer either a) 
a neutral carbohydrate base for the hummus or b) a clearly complementary 
flavour to it (sweet carrots being a prime example). Ideally, you should have a 
varied selection of these available every time you eat hummus.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fhow-to-eat-hummus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acb9af688060d550ca3fb3ae6c1dc0d4b11ca11%2F0_0_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20hummus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fhow-to-eat-hummus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20hummus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fhow-to-eat-hummus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acb9af688060d550ca3fb3ae6c1dc0d4b11ca11%2F0_0_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Sweet carrots are a prime example of complementary flavour. Photograph: 
Getty/Cat London 
Top dippers: warm, pliable flatbreads or pitta; carrots (raw for contrasting 
crunch, not par-boiled as is common); refreshing cucumber; bread sticks; plain 
crackers (nothing cheesy or onionflavoured etc); Ryvita or a similarly dark 
crackers, for extra earthy depth; overdone strips of barbecued beef or lamb (
burnt ends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jan/03/hipster-food-glossary-french-dip-burnt-ends>
, basically); celery (useful for getting into a supermarket pot’s nooks and 
crannies); raw white onion (conveniently curvedand complementary in flavour); 
red bell pepper.

Dysfunctional dippers: any fried vegetable (that layer of greasiness is just 
unwelcome); tortilla chips or, indeed, any crisps (frequently too salty, if not 
seasoned with jarring lime, etc); battered fish goujons (a bizarre textural 
car-crash); grilled halloumi fingers; woolly, buttered sliced white toast 
(unless you are a child under the age of seven); tomatoes (impractical); 
radishes (too overtly peppery).

The new vegetarian: Yotam Ottolenghi prepares hummus with ful
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/oct/18/hummus-with-ful> 
Hot or cold? 

HTE enjoys the cooling effect of fridge-cold hummus, while acknowledging that 
room-temperature is preferable if you want its flavours to shine.Warm hummus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/oct/18/hummus-with-ful> is a 
different matter altogether. It’s a texture thing. In its texture, warm hummus 
ranges from something that recalls lumpy porridge to a silken soup. It 
conspicuously lacks the smooth, reassuring density of cold hummus that we Brits 
have come to love.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fhow-to-eat-hummus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4c879e0621eac3328adeb0de0b166020d685cf1%2F0_307_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20hummus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fhow-to-eat-hummus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20hummus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fhow-to-eat-hummus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4c879e0621eac3328adeb0de0b166020d685cf1%2F0_307_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Why not jazz up hummus with whole chickpeas and olive oil? Photograph: 
fotosr/Getty Images/iStockphoto 
Hummus variations

There are, of course, numerous sensible ways to jazz up hummus: with whole 
chickpeas and olive oil, (toasted) pine nuts, smoky paprika and various Middle 
Eastern spice, herb and seed mixes (dukkah, za’atar, sumac). However, hummus is 
not endlessly versatile.

Topping it with slices of roasted red peppers or courgette presents an 
obstacle if dipping, while commercial versions topped with caramelised onions 
are, usually, way too sweet. Likewise, there are endless variations from the 
innocuous if mystifying (topping it with fried mushrooms or chopped hard-boiled 
egg) to the, shall we say, more challenging addition of dried mint.

As for those supermarket versions that augment the hummus itself by 
blitzing-in red peppers, “Moroccan spices”, coriander, roasted tomatoes, etc, 
they are, invariably, borderline inedible. They are topped only by those 
so-called “hummus” made with avocado, broad beans, beetroot, etc that dispense 
with the chickpeas altogether. They are labelled hummus only because the word 
“paste” is less sexy.

How to eat: chips 'n' dips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2015/nov/03/how-to-eat-chips-n-dips>
Sharing etiquette

On the vexed topic of double dipping, please refer to this entry on chips ‘n’ 
dips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2015/nov/03/how-to-eat-chips-n-dips>
. In brief, this blog does not share (pardon the pun) Western society’s 
bacteria hysteria. If your mates are people who freak out if you go in for a 
second dip with a half-eaten carrot stick, then the solution is simple: get new 
mates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fhow-to-eat-hummus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcebb620513d5eea6fce51b82dfb46d6312ce10e8%2F0_183_3781_2269%2F3781.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20hummus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fhow-to-eat-hummus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20hummus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fhow-to-eat-hummus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcebb620513d5eea6fce51b82dfb46d6312ce10e8%2F0_183_3781_2269%2F3781.jpg>
 The right way to hummus. Photograph: Marianna Massey/Getty Images 
When?

Lunch or as a snack. One that, as you warm that third flatbread and open a 
second tub of hummus, still feels vaguely virtuous. Such self-delusion is a 
dangerous, if delicious, thing.

Equipment

Ideally, you would give hummus the respect it deserves. You would generously 
top it with adornments and serve it in the centre of a large plate surrounded 
by your dipping vegetables of choice, sides of raw onion and pickles, and a 
separate pile of hot, fluffy pittas.

In reality, many of us regularly eat hummus quickly at a worktop, busily 
cutting carrots into batons and retrieving crackers from a box, while doing 
other jobs in the kitchen. It is not ideal. But at times it is very useful. 
Romanticise hummus all you like, but its popularity in the West is, to a great 
extent, down to its practicality.

So hummus, how do you eat yours?
 