
Contemporary Britain is weirdly ambivalent about paté. It is a restaurant 
staple and a Christmas favourite, yet the subject of this month’sHow To Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> has a distinct 
whiff of naff 1970s dinner parties about it. It is unfashionably rich and 
heavy, a hangover from a time when we blindly mimicked supposedly sophisticated 
French cuisine. From ethereally smooth parfaits to horny-handed slabs of minced 
offal, paté is seen as a complex technical challenge best left to chefs and, 
somehow, at the same time, a faintly suspect way of using up cheap meat. In 
2009, a team of UK scientists published a research paper that naysayers will 
appreciate: “Can people distinguish paté from dog food? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2009/may/26/improbable-research-pet-food>
”

This (literally paste in French) is a food that is simultaneously loved and 
loathed, and one which stopped being cool circa 1983. Never let it be said that 
How To Eat [HTE] is a slave to the latest trends as we explore, from smoked 
kipper to chicken liver, how best to eat paté.
 Chicken liver paté. Photograph: Diana Miller/Getty Images/Cultura RF 
Some notes on serving

We have put men on the moon. Boffins can grow you a penis in a lab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/04/penis-transplants-anthony-atala-interview>
 (kind of). Yet, remarkably, no one has come up with a reliable mathematical 
formula to ensure that a correct amount of toast and chutney is always served 
with paté.

In restaurants, despite the accompaniments being the cheap part of the dish, 
they are often lacking. Presumably, this aesthetic convention – minimal toast 
and a blob of chutney sat beside a far larger slice of paté – is meant to 
convey a sense of value-for-money. However, unless you greedily pile huge 
mounds of paté on to your toast, treating the toast as an irrelevant delivery 
mechanism (which would be misguided), you invariably have to beg the waiting 
staff for more. There is no excuse for such parsimony at home. Be generous with 
your toast.

Temperature 

In sloppy professional kitchens, it is commonplace for things such as paté to 
be served straight from the fridge when they should not be. In the home, 
meanwhile, a bacterial panic still attaches itself to paté, which means that 
someone is always fretting if it has been left out of the fridge for more than 
10 minutes. In reality –if it is made properly 
<http://tna.europarchive.org/20141204090942/http://www.food.gov.uk/news-updates/news/2011/4933/campypate>
 andyou are not pregnant <http://www.nhs.uk/chq/Pages/917.aspx> – depending on 
whoseadvice 
<http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Food/FoodborneIllnessContaminants/UCM328128.pdf> 
you follow 
<http://www.deliaonline.com/recipes/international/european/french/chicken-liver-pate-with-cognac-with-sweet-and-sour-red-onion-salad>
, you have a window of an houror two 
<http://www.cbc.ca/stevenandchris/food/buffet-table-food-safety> where that 
paté can be safely left out. Like any fatty food, paté certainly tastes better 
when allowed to warm at room temperature for a period before serving.

Equipment 

HTE is no harrumphing @WeWantPlates <https://twitter.com/@WeWantPlates> bore. 
But when eating paté – whether it is served in individual portions or shared 
from a board of meats, cheeses and tracklements –everyone needs a plate. A 
plate with a discernible raised lip at its edge, for ease of scraping.

Whether you paté-up your toast repetitively before each bite, or patiently 
coat the whole slice before you begin to eat, it is impossible to achieve the 
desired thickness without having some excess you will want to wipe off on the 
side of your plate. Hence the need for a lip and not a flat board or slate, 
which would leave you awkwardly angling your knife to smear inelegant skid 
marks of excess paté across that platform.
 A plate with a lip is essential. Photograph: travellinglight/Getty 
Images/iStockphoto 
Etiquette

If a paté is being shared by the table, take a slice or spoonful to your plate 
and assemble from there. Only a savage would top their toast directly from the 
central paté, hacking at it until that architecturally pristine terrine 
resembles reversed-over roadkill.

When?

There are those (paté retailers trying to sell you more paté), who insist you 
should be eating paté at every meal, stirring it into your breakfast eggs, 
topping lunch salads with it, slathering it on a baked potato for tea. But in 
this blog (with due respect tobanh mi and beef wellington), we are talking 
about paté as a meal rather than an ingredient. It is not one you want to wake 
up to.

Paté is a lunch dish, an evening starter or, possibly, a main component in a 
classic “picky tea”, that random assortment of meats, cheeses, breads, olives, 
chutneys, celery etc that, when you are too hungover to cook, is such a feature 
of the festive period.
 Paté is perfect when everyone is too hungover too cook. Photograph: 
zeleno/Getty Images/iStockphoto 
Varieties

All sensible people would surely agree that, although recipes exist for 
mushroom, sweet potato or feta “patés”, a paté is, in fact, a preparation of 
seasoned, minced meat or fish. There are endless, possibly terrific, vegetarian 
spreads and dips around (indeed, that smooth dippable consistency is a key 
point of differentiation), but they are not patés.

Within the realm of bona fide patés, there are certain rules that it is 
imperative you observe:

 * Bacon-wrapping a paté always gives it an unfortunate leathery exterior.

 * Dried fruits are never welcome in a savoury dish.

 * Stick to traditional French herbs and spices of the garlic and thyme ilk, 
none of thismulled nutmeg, cloves and ginger nonsense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2014/sep/10/how-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe>
. This is not a Christmas cake.

 * Ideally, confine yourself to one boozy ingredient and use it sparingly. 
That Grand Marnier or port should be a seasoning. This is not a meat-flavoured 
shot. It should not ignite near a naked flame.

Top three patés

1) Smoked mackerel or kipper. Impossible to dislike.

2) A country-style paté so chunky with real, discernible pieces of pork (or 
duck or game, if you must, bound in well-seasoned mince), that it starts a 
fractious, futile debate about whether technically it is a paté or a terrine.

3) Chicken liver judiciously spiked with madeira. 

Accompaniments

Accompaniments for meat patés, that is, as fish patés require little more than 
toast and a few refreshing celery sticks or radish slices. Even the ubiquitous 
lemon wedge is decorative.
 Smoked mackerel paté - just add toast. Photograph: lengel76/Getty 
Images/iStockphoto 
Yes

Toast and unless your paté is a “potted” version sealed under butter, that 
toastmust be buttered. There is nothing that cannot be improved by the addition 
of butter. A grilled, properly spiky sourdough bread would be the ideal here, 
but any decent, thick-cut real white or granary bread will do. Brown bread 
feels too worthy in this context. Likewise, limp, thin-sliced, industrially 
manufactured bread will not cut it in the regal presence of a paté.

Crusty bread, the go-to default for Francophiles. But HTE prefers the more 
strident textural contrast of toast.

Vinegar-pickled or fermented vegetables for acidity and crunch (classically 
cornichon, but sliced pickled onions, cold red cabbage etc). Veggies that can 
be picked up with your fingers or easily manoeuvred onto your paté with a knife.

Celeriac remoulade. Easy on the mayo, though.

Whole-grain mustard.

Chutneys and savoury marmalades. Although, given how sweet these are (the 
caramelised onion sphere is particularly dangerous), you must tread carefully.

No

Melba toast. Inexplicably once the classic paté partner. Thin, brittle, 
irritating.

Toasted pitta. Too doughy.

Crackers. Too dry. It turns paté into a masticating marathon.

Nuts and dried fruits. The former are bizarre way to punctuate paté’s 
meatiness, the latter an unwelcome, jarringly sweet garnish.

Green leaves (watercress, rocket, and so on). This garnish or the lack of it 
can causereal anguish 
<https://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/ShowUserReviews-g1096782-d8457781-r436533914-Burnt_Truffle-Heswall_Wirral_Merseyside_England.html>
. But leaves are both a logistical quandary (what do you do with them, eat them 
in alternative mouthfuls with a fork?), and, compared to a few zippy pickled 
vegetables, they are an unconvincing palate-cleanser. Fundamentally, you should 
be able to eat paté using just a knife and your hands.

So: paté – how do you eat yours?
 