
Sunday roast, the full English, Christmas dinner, How to Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> has been fearless 
in tackling the most contentious meals in the British culinary canon. This 
month, however, theWord of Mouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth> blog seeking to define 
the best way to eat our favourite foods is wolfing down arguably (we eat1.6m 
tonnes <http://chips.lovepotatoes.co.uk/facts-figures> of the things each 
year), Britain’s favourite foodstuff: chips.

Whether a “chippy tea” is a regular feature in your house or you limit 
yourself to a monthly treat, you love Burger King’s fries or Heston 
Blumenthal’s triple-cooked version, the mighty chip is a subject about which 
everyone has an opinion. But please keep it civil below the line. Frying off 
the handle or quick-tempered chippiness will make you look like a spud. Salty 
exchanges are welcome but unnecessarily vinegary insults will not be tolerated.

Which chips?

We will touch on chips as part of a meal below, but, primarily, How to Eat is 
concerned with chips as a meal in themselves – solo with garnishes. Which 
raises the question, which chips?

Cash in your chips

1) Skin-on: the adult chip, the chip that tastes of soil, honest toil, clean 
rain and clear country air.Patty Smith’s 
<https://www.facebook.com/PattySmithsBurgerCompany> in Leeds produce a peerless 
version.

2) Proper chip-shop chips: paler, uneven buttery beauties; each chip a 
profound journey from smooth core to its lightly chewy, caramelised tips.

3) Fries: essentially, a vehicle for the transfer of hot oil from fryer to 
your stomach. Yes, they’re a bit limp. Yes, they’re airy. But its carbs, its 
oil, you’ve dredged a handful in Tommy K. Don’t tell me that doesn’t taste 
sublime.

NB. I am not averse to the gourmet chip, seasoned with sea salt and rosemary, 
but easy on the latter, please. That is a big, bullying herb which, as Tom Jaine
once wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/dec/04/bestbooksoftheyear.houseandgarden?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 of Jamie Oliver, many modern burger kitchens use, “like a demolition-man uses 
a lump hammer”.

The chips are down

1) Oven chips, of all descriptions. A mealy, plasticky abomination against god.

2) Sweet potato fries. As David Bowie once put it, albeit not about chips (at 
least, I don’t think so): “This is not America.”

3) Crinkly, curly and, particularly, “spicy” fries. How old are you? Seven… 
eight? Oh, you’re 34 and you’re eating curly fries. Right. OK. Enjoy your 
chicken nuggets.

4) Chunky chips: hunky, handsome and manly, eh? The gutsy uber-chip. Or a big 
unwieldy lump of undercooked potato. See also, potato wedges.

5) Scallops. It may be amusing to watch the disappointment on a southerner’s 
face as they unwrap theirdiscs of potato, but, really, on their own or 
sandwiching aYorkshire fishcake <http://uktv.co.uk/food/recipe/aid/517551>, the 
scallop is a peculiar hanger-on, which never ceases to underwhelm.

An ambivalent word about triple-cooked chips

Produced by a skilled cook, they are, in their way, revelatory. As tanned as a 
60-year-old Mediterranean sunbather, the exterior shatters like spun sugar 
giving way to an impossibly fluffy interior. Like high-definition TV, however, 
the triple-cooked chip is so perfect, so precise in its detail, that it seems 
unreal somehow; a chip from outside our common frame of chip reference. Rather 
than wolf them down, slathered in gravy, they demand that you contemplate them 
like exquisite porcelain. Which is fine, occasionally. But oftentimes, you just 
want a pile of greasy, softening chips, not glassy crunch down to the last bite.

Toppings, sauces and condiments

Your chips require a light even salting, a generous dousing in real vinegar 
(ie notnon-brewed condiment <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-brewed_condiment>
), and, preferably, will be topped with a generous heap ofscraps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2007/jul/13/doyouknowwhatscrapsarean>
. That is the ideal. Always insist that you apply the condiments yourself, 
incidentally. I have never come across a chippy yet that, by my standards, 
isn’t a bit stingy with the vinegar.

Of course, salt and vinegar need not be the end of it – although, ALWAYS 
insist that they are applied first for maximum penetration. There are a variety 
of toppings and sauces you can add and three in particular which (if used 
individually, please no heinous mixing), form a holy trinity.

- Chips and curry sauce. The ultimate. Hot vinegar, that spicy, glossy khaki 
sauce (the hottest available, it is always footling) and a layer of salty 
carbs: it is irresistible in its logic, almost Goan (see, vindaloo) in its 
inspiration.

- Chips and gravy. A dish that speaks to my northern soul. The beefier the 
better of course and it needs to be reasonably thick; none of that pallid, 
light brown chicken gravy malarkey, please.

- Chips and beans. A comfort food classic. Sweet, almost creamy, tomatoy 
beans, irregularly interrupted by a sharp, vinegary twang, after which you 
immediately settle back into the warm, carby embrace of the now marginally 
moistened chips. How can you not love that? One clear advantage of beans over 
gravy, is that they augment your chips without rendering them so soggy you 
entirely lose the chips’ crunchiness and chew.

Note: I’m discounting mushy peas on the basis that the vast majority served in 
British chippies are an abject flavour fail, woolly and musty and also filling 
to the point that, halfway through a portion, you are likely to start begging a 
mate to shoot you – or, less dramatically, just take them away from you - to 
put you out of your gastric misery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-eat-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F23%2F1411482414849%2Fe11d21b7-6562-4253-bed4-d1365c4e0d70-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-eat-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-eat-chips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F23%2F1411482414849%2Fe11d21b7-6562-4253-bed4-d1365c4e0d70-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cheesy chips. Photograph: Lenscap / Alamy/Alamy 
Some thoughts on cheesy chips

There are, of course, cheesy chips and cheesy chips. For instance, Sticky 
Walnut in Chester serves parmesan and truffle chips which make your brain dance 
with serotonin. However, that is yer la-di-dah restaurant tucker, whereas we 
are talking about chips served as a stand-alone meal, generally in a café or 
chippy, where the choices are usually grated cheese grilled on fries (not 
unpleasant but inessential, and frequently OTT – no-one needs mozzarella on 
chips), or chips slathered in thick, processed, glow-in-the-dark 
cheese-type-cheese gunk (disgusting). Cheesy chips is one of those things (eg. 
a threesome; taking a year out to write a novel; the Smiths reforming), better 
left as an idle fantasy. It sounds exciting, but it could well end in disaster.

Dipping sauces

I would argue good quality chips are perfect simply dressed in salt and 
vinegar. Likewise, I would not add ketchup if eating chips and gravy, much less 
chips and curry sauce. Despite what the Germans claim, curry and tomato sauce 
is a head-on flavour collision.

However, there are plenty of occasions in which dipping sauces come into their 
own. They can transform a plate of tired fries into something triumphant.

Double dip: tomato sauce, the classic. Tartar sauce, the livener. Aioli, the 
oooh-get-him!, cosmopolitan choice. Sorry Belgium, but mayo on its own is 
utterly dull, a creamy layer of, so what? It needs garlic, paprika, something 
in there to make it interesting. Sadly, this doesn’t happen outside of 
restaurants (it should, it’d be brilliant), but there is nothing like 
mopping-up the last of your steak juices and Béarnaise with a few fries. 
Indeed, as anyone who has ever dipped their chip in a freshly blitzed tomato 
and sweet pepper sauce or a little chimichurri will tell you, Walthamstow’s
Chips with Dips <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Chips-with-dips/237864616386161>
 may be onto something. There surely needs to be greater creativity and 
boldness at the chip/ dip interface.

Dips to tip BBQ sauce, the devil’s work. Brown sauce, not with chips. Any kind 
of sweet chilli sauce, unless your chips are made out of chicken, in which case 
they are chicken-dippers not chips (take them back to the point-of-sale, you 
have been conned). Sour cream and chive or similar, too thin with chips. 
Anything involving the word salsa, particularly if it utilises tropical fruit.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-eat-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F23%2F1411482318159%2F43524bb3-9fce-4814-8f9d-e6ecc90ab8cc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-eat-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20chips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-eat-chips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F23%2F1411482318159%2F43524bb3-9fce-4814-8f9d-e6ecc90ab8cc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Chip butty. The DIY option. Photograph: Monkey Business Images/REX 
When, where and how?

As long as you are hungry (drunk and borderline-ravenous is the perfect 
state), then a portion of chips hits the spot any time after 10am. If taking 
away pure chips (salt and vinegar, no gravy etc), then the perfect if 
unfashionable serve would be in a paper bag/ wrapper. Obviously, with gravy or 
curry sauce you need some sort of tray.

A cone, however, is wholly unacceptable. Instinctively (granted, I haven’t 
done the maths), I suspect you get less per-portion, due to the way the chips 
stack. Secondly, the vinegar naturally collects at the bottom of the cone, 
creating an inedible, sour soggy mash. Yet, conversely, any gravy or such is 
impeded in its progress, so that you are left with an undressed core. It is a 
failure on all fronts.

On the street is the obvious place to eat chips. Not just because they are the 
ultimate street food* (great in the sun, yet a tonic on a cold, wet wintry 
day), but also because they are deteriorating from the moment they are served. 
Get them eaten. Cutlery? I say fingers all the way. Better curry sauce on your 
cuffs, than the frustration of trying to repeatedly lift a chip or two to your 
mouth, on a tiny fork, only for it to break-in-two millimetres from your gaping 
cakehole. If you must, use a wooden fork. There is something very satisfying 
about biting into one, a certain give and resistance in the wood. The cheap 
plastic forks, in contrast, introduce a note of prison food parsimony to 
proceedings.

*One clear advantage of heading home is that you can make yourself a chip 
butty or five, using white sliced bread and butter (no marg, no spreads). I 
reject both the chip barm and any attempt to serve a “posh” chip butty. A big 
floury barmcake, like real, dense, thick-cut bread, is too dry for a chip 
butty. It is carb overload. You will still be chewing three hours later, as the 
heartburn kicks-in.

Chips with everything?

In short, no. Lasagne? Pizza? Full English? These are just some of the already 
complete meals which do not require chips. Likewise, think about what you are 
partnering chips with. Fish, steak and chicken are all classics because – 
additional sauces or not – they in themselves offer enough lubricating juice 
and fat to off-set the potential dryness of the chips. This is not the case 
with, for example, a roast beef sandwich, quiche, a gammon steak, or any of the 
numerous things that you regularly see misguidedly paired with chips. At the 
risk of being marched to the Greater Manchester border and ordered never to 
return, I would also argue that the correct formulation is pie ’n’ mash not pie 
’n’ chips (cue: angry mob).

Drink

A can of pop. Or a strong cup of tea.

Chef, a word …

Jenga stacks, dinky stainless buckets, twee mini-frying baskets, fake 
newspaper cones, these all prompt one question: where are the rest of my chips? 
I count eight. This is a joke.

Dudes, can you all stop just piling stuff, anything, on chips … and calling it 
food

One of the most pernicious aspects of the rise of “dude food” has been the 
emergence of chips as a bed for anything: pulled pork, chilli, ground beef, 
chorizo and onions, hotdogs, bacon bits and mustard sauce, mac ’n’ cheese, 
chocolate ice-cream (I jest, but …). Do not try and pass-off that sorry mess as 
food. And, please, do not try and tell me thatpoutine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2014/sep/07/poutine-the-posh-chips-and-gravy-taking-over-the-world>
 is, essentially, chips and gravy. The Canadians use a, ahem, paltry gravy 
(usually chicken or turkey) and they put fresh cheese curds on it. In the name 
of all that is holy, why?

So, chips, how do you eat yours?
 