
For those of us smitten with their saline charms, oysters are one of few 
foodstuffs immediately evocative of celebration. Whether borne aloft through a 
noisy restaurant on a silver platter, or slurped from the shell on a pebbly 
beach, they scream special occasion – yet even among their many fans, they 
remain anoccasional treat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/23/oysters-dating-jay-rayner>
 in Britain, despite the fact our waters contain some of the finest bivalves in 
the world.

A survey conducted by Morrisons 
<http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/bills/article-3433817/Cheap-date-Morrisons-sell-Oysters-25p-time-Valentine-s-Day.html>
, which put them on sale at 25p each earlier this year, found that a quarter of 
people were put off oysters by the perception they were expensive (generally 
they tend to come in between 50–80p a pop), and I suspectworries about food 
poisoning <https://www.fishforthought.co.uk/oysters.htm> must deter a few more 
(although, in truth, as long as they’re tightly closed, and you keep them 
somewhere cool, with a damp tea towel over the top until you’re ready to eat 
them, it’s pretty low-risk stuff).


Bringing oysters back home to Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/25/bringing-home-oysters-restore-british-fishing>
It’s hard to beat them on the half shell, perhaps with a dash of Tabasco or 
shallot vinaigrette if you must but, for a luxurious Christmas treat for a 
select group of friends (because, even at 50p each, four oysters are definitely 
better than one), I can’t think of a better upgrade than oysters Rockefeller, a 
New Orleans classic so named, according to its creator Jules Alciatore of
Antoine’s 
<http://www.saveur.com/article/Travels/Interview-with-Charles-Carter-Antoines> 
restaurant, “because I know no other name rich enough for their richness”. 
Simon Hopkinson describes these gratinated green shellfish as “the best hot 
oyster dish I know. Period.” That’s tha, then.


The original recipe is a closely guarded secret, however – and one which many 
have tried to replicate. Including, of course, me.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a53bb26e3e0a4831ac613a42555c5cabb44fbbe%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20perfect%20oysters%20Rockefeller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20perfect%20oysters%20Rockefeller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a53bb26e3e0a4831ac613a42555c5cabb44fbbe%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Simon Hopkinson’s oysters Rockefeller. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
The oysters

In New Orleans, they would use Gulf oysters, meaty and sweet, without the keen 
briney snap of cold-water varieties, but, as it’s a case of the fresher the 
better when it comes to oysters, I’d recommend going for whatever’s best in 
your locale. That said, it would seem a crime to do anything to ourdelicate 
native oyster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/25/bringing-home-oysters-restore-british-fishing>
 before savouring its subtly lovely flavour – even a squeeze of lemon feels 
like sacrilege.


The more assertive rock variety, however, is fair game, and its deeper shell 
is also a better shape for grilling, allowing the animal itself to stay almost 
raw while the topping melts and bubbles on top. (Folklore has it that the 
recipe was developed as a substitute for escargots, which proved less abundant 
on the Louisiana coast than oysters, so if anyone knows of a bivalve with a 
peculiarly muddy, vegetal flavour, it might be worth a try.)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6787cd5483031ba135d04f6b81c2530915d5b055%2F0_0_3024_2692%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20perfect%20oysters%20Rockefeller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20perfect%20oysters%20Rockefeller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6787cd5483031ba135d04f6b81c2530915d5b055%2F0_0_3024_2692%2F3024.jpg>
 Pierre Franey’s oysters Rockefeller. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
The greens

The most striking thing about oysters rockefeller is its vibrant colour – 
often achieved, as in chefsSimon Hopkinson 
<http://www.simonhopkinson.tv/recipe/2/oysters-rockefeller.aspx>, Richard 
Corrigan,Pierre Franey 
<http://cooking.nytimes.com/recipes/11034-oysters-rockefeller> and Bon Appétit 
magazine <http://www.bonappetit.com/recipe/oysters-rockefeller>’s recipes, with 
pureed spinach, although purists insist this is not authentic. Indeed, food 
writerMalcolm Hebert 
<http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:L5Qrf09v5tIJ:www.gumbopages.com/food/app/erstas-rock.html+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=uk>
, the son of New Orleans restauranteurs, claimed “I was told by Bernard Guste 
of Antoine’s that the original recipe does not have spinach in it”.

Instead, Jane Eddington, an early-20th-century journalist who, after visiting 
Antoine’s in 1912 (and not greatly enjoying the experience by the sound of it, 
given her response: “to dine at Antoine’s is, after all, to learn by contrast 
that you would rather have simpler things, but that a name means a great deal 
when it comes to foods”) published therecipe supplied on a souvenir pamphlet 
<http://www.foodtimeline.org/foodlobster.html#oystersrockefeller>, which claims 
to have been given by Monsieur Jules himself while “sipping on a cognac after 
luncheon” and uses only parsley and tarragon to give the dish its distinctive 
hue. My old mucker Chuck Taggart of the Gumbo Pages site – which proved so 
invaluable in the matter ofjambalaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/20/how-to-cook-the-perfect-jambalaya>
 – has a formula that purports to be very close to the original and “rather 
than using bunches of spinach … has lots of herbs plus celery leaves, which is 
true to the rumour that Jules created the dish out of what happened to be lying 
around the kitchen, including scraps. It seems to me that the secret of this 
dish is the herbs – tarragon, of course, and chervil.”


Looking at the photos of Antoine’s oysters Rockefeller 
<http://www.antoines.com/gallery/food-photos>, it seems more than likely that 
no spinach is involved – the topping is more the hue of grilled mushy peas (NB 
should the Louisiana tourist board like to send me to try it for myself, I’d be 
more than happy to). That’s the thing about recipes, though: even if you can 
pinpoint an “original” version, it’s not always the best, and testers come down 
emphatically on the side of the greener, more vegetal versions, which, they 
say, not only look more enticing, but work better with the saltiness of the 
oyster beneath.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e77452b73e84b3efd46a2ca87edb79044d03c00%2F0_0_3024_2609%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20perfect%20oysters%20Rockefeller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20perfect%20oysters%20Rockefeller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e77452b73e84b3efd46a2ca87edb79044d03c00%2F0_0_3024_2609%2F3024.jpg>
 Gumbo Pages’s oysters Rockefeller. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian
That said, herbs have a part to play: aniseedy tarragon and grassy parsley 
both help to add a bit of zing to the bland sweetness of the spinach, and I’m 
also rather taken with the spicy mineral flavour of Bon Appétit’s watercress, a 
classic pairing with oysters. Celery leaves, or indeed Hopkinson’s chopped 
stalks, prove too savoury for the panel, competing, they say, with the bivalve 
itself, which seems to have suffered too much to be overshadowed by a mere 
vegetable.

Hopkinson and Franey are the only ones to cook their greens before use, but, 
though doing so sacrifices some of their vivid colour, it also rids them of 
much of their moisture content, giving the topping a better texture.


Alliums

Eddington and Hopkinson both use shallots to flavour their toppings, while 
Gumbo Pages, Bon Appétit and Franey favour spring onions, with the last two 
also adding garlic for good measure. This is classically rich French-style 
cooking, however, thus sweet, winey shallots, softened in butter, feel more 
appropriate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F457303609ac2ac2895868f0cdccfff28e6a0b9a7%2F229_0_2795_2803%2F2795.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20perfect%20oysters%20Rockefeller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20perfect%20oysters%20Rockefeller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F457303609ac2ac2895868f0cdccfff28e6a0b9a7%2F229_0_2795_2803%2F2795.jpg>
 Bon Appétit’s oysters Rockefeller. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian
Flavourings

According to Howard Mitcham’s book, Creole Gumbo and All That Jazz 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Y_SZ0CbsfqkC&pg=PA24&lpg=PA24&dq=green+onions+creole&source=bl&ots=W8sAHKzbPo&sig=AhQUtIfixTG9sdtWQiCaCmCfG4I&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjNiL3bocnQAhVLAcAKHbMJCrkQ6AEITDAL#v=onepage&q=rockefeller&f=false>
, Rockefeller would originally have been made with a drop of absinthe, but 
these days, an anise liqueur such as pastis is more popular – which makes sense 
given that Alciatore’s father retired to Marseilles, home of the aperitif, 
suggesting the family had connections there. And with pastis and tarragon, 
there seems little need for Bon Appétit’s fennel seeds as well.

More local is the Tabasco often added to the mixture, too, which cuts through 
the rich creaminess of the butter and bivalve nicely. Less necessary, in our 
opinion, is the salty anchovy or parmesan cheese favoured by Franey and Bon 
Appétit – cheese, in particular ,seems an unhappy partner for an oyster. I am 
quite taken, however, with Franey’s notion of adding the oyster liquor – so 
often discarded before cooking – to the butter itself as seasoning, adding a 
pleasing briny quality, and saving on salt, too. Two birds, etcetera.

Fat and crumbs

Most Rockefeller recipes are based on a kind of compound butter, but Franey 
uses a roux finished with double cream, which, looking atpictures of the 
Antoine’s version <http://www.antoines.com/gallery/food-photos> seems truer to 
the original, which is clearly piped on top of the oyster. The cream dulls the 
other flavours, however, so butter seems preferable – although I’ll be using 
less than usual because oysters are rich enough on their own, especially if 
coming before dinner.


Eddington’s recipe includes walnuts, which I can find no mention of in more 
modern accounts. The walnut butter itself is delicious, but, in combination 
with an oyster, proves unpleasantly rich.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcec346aa84c59f8d25362ea362d57cdb211a4b11%2F0_0_3024_3024%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20perfect%20oysters%20Rockefeller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20perfect%20oysters%20Rockefeller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcec346aa84c59f8d25362ea362d57cdb211a4b11%2F0_0_3024_3024%2F3024.jpg>
 Jane Eddington’s Oysters Rockefeller. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
Breadcrumbs

Some recipes mix breadcrumbs into the compound butter, but I think they’re 
better sprinkled on top, as Hopkinson suggests, so they brown and crisp under 
the grill.


The cooking

And it will be a grill – although baking is more common, with times varying 
from 3 to 25 minutes (Franey clearly liked his oysters very well cooked), 
testers overwhelmingly prefer versions, like the one from Gumbo Pages, which 
are grilled very briefly, just so the topping bubbles and browns, while the 
oyster beneath remains silky cool. If you’d like them cooked more, however, 
8-10 minutes in a 220C oven, as Hopkinson suggests, should do the trick.


Serve with good bread for mopping up all the delicious juices … and maybe a 
sazerac 
<http://www.esquire.com/food-drink/drinks/recipes/a3876/sazerac-drink-recipe/> 
for good measure.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1e04bc56d01185d84d4420597af8535ed450a00%2F0_199_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20perfect%20oysters%20Rockefeller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20perfect%20oysters%20Rockefeller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-oysters-rockefeller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1e04bc56d01185d84d4420597af8535ed450a00%2F0_199_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Felicity Cloake’s perfect oysters Rockefeller by Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
for the Guardian 
The perfect oysters Rockefeller

Makes 12
12 rock oysters
150g spinach
100g watercress (or 100g more spinach)
75g butter, at room temperature
1 small shallot, finely chopped
2 tbsp pastis
Leaves from 4 sprigs of tarragon
10g parsley
Tabasco
Rock salt, to serve
5 tbsp dried breadcrumbs

Carefully shuck the oysters and pour the liquor into a jug.


Blanch the spinach and watercress in boiling water for 1 minute then rinse 
under cold water and squeeze out well.

Melt 1 tbsp of the butter in a small pan and soften the shallots until golden. 
Add the pastis and half the oyster liquor (passed through a sieve) and bubble 
until reduced by half. Allow to cool a little.

How to cook the perfect jambalaya
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/20/how-to-cook-the-perfect-jambalaya>
Puree the squeezed-out greens, shallot mixture and herbs with a food processor 
or a hand blender, then add the remaining butter and a good shake of Tabasco 
and pulse to combine. Taste and add more hot sauce if necessary.

Heat the grill and arrange the oysters on a heatproof platter covered in rock 
salt (this will keep them steady). Top each with a spoonful of the butter and 
flatten down to coat. Sprinkle with breadcrumbs and then grill for about 3-4 
minutes, watching all the time, until the breadcrumbs are golden and the butter 
is bubbling.

Oysters Rockefeller – New Awlins decadence at its best, or a shameful waste of 
an innocent bivalve? And, for someone just coming round to cooked oysters (i.e. 
me), which other recipes would you recommend?
 