
‘There was a ball of fire that almost had a look of evil within it. I can 
still hear the sound of it now. I wish the sound would go away, but I 
anticipate, along with others, that it is with me for life.” On 11 May 1985, 
15-year-old Paul Town went to Valley Parade with his father to watch hisBradford
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> City play Lincoln City, and 
collect the Third Division championship trophy. In the 40th minute, however, 
the fire broke out.

Fifty-six lives were lost that day. There were 11,020 survivors, each with 
their own story to tell about the horrors they saw and how they have tried to 
cope with the trauma since. Paul, who is now 45, is no different apart from, 
perhaps, the fact that he has turned to painting football stadiums to help ease 
the anxiety.

When we meet at his West Yorkshire home, Paul, dressed in a commemorative “56” 
hoodie, is in a pensive mood. The fire broke out while Paul’s father, Barry, 
had gone to the tea bar to beat the half-time rush, and joy of the prospective 
trophy soon turned to absolute fear.

“As any normal naive teenager would do, I started to panic as Dad had not 
returned and the flames were travelling along the timber roof more rapidly than 
anyone could imagine,” he says. Moments later Paul felt a thump to his back 
followed by the words “move, Paul – get over those walls and run”. His father 
had returned and Paul fled – managing to navigate two 6ft-high walls while 
shaking with fright.

“I ran to the other side of the pitch with all the energy I had left,” he 
says. “I couldn’t take in what was happening in front of me. People who were so 
badly injured were laid in the goalmouth being treated and comforted by the 
ambulance crews, players and fans alike.”

After what felt like hours, Paul eventually left the stadium, again without 
his father, whom he had been unable to find. There were no mobile phones back 
then, so he made the two-mile journey home to his terrified mother, Maggie, who 
had witnessed the events unfold on the news. Following numerous visits and 
phone calls from concerned friends and neighbours, Barry, thankfully, arrived 
home later that evening. The Towns were safe, but other families had not been 
so lucky.

“I’ve tried to package up the memories of this terrible event and place them 
into the back of my mind,” Paul says. “However, for many years I have 
personally struggled with the effects of what happened in front of my eyes that 
day. The scars are not visible, they’re embedded within.”

Paul’s career, and indeed life, began to change in 2013, following an 
intervention by Maggie, who had become wary of her son’s ongoing anxiety. “My 
mum – an artist herself – bought me a selection of paints and brushes and 
encouraged me to paint as a way of relaxation,” says Paul, who had been a 
builder up until then. “I’ve always enjoyed drawing, but hadn’t painted 
anything until this point.”

His first painting captured memories of Bradford FC’s former home, Horton Park 
Avenue. Described by Paul as the most beautiful sporting arena he had ever seen 
in decay, it proved the catalyst for his work today. “After a few attempts I 
began to gain more confidence with mixing colours and brush strokes,” he says. 
“I then started posting a selection of my paintings on social media, from which 
I received mostly positive feedback.”

In the meantime Bradford City had advanced to the League Cup final, where they 
would face Swansea City. With this in mind Paul decided to paint Vetch Field – 
the Swans’ defunct former home. He travelled to London the night before the 
game, and it was in his hotel where his new venture would truly begin. “Within 
five minutes of my arrival I’d made my first sale to a Swansea fan – before I 
had even checked in. With some much welcome beer tokens in my hand, and the 
total buzz from my first sale,Stadium Portraits was born 
<http://www.stadiumportraits.com/>.”

The 5-0 thrashing Bradford would receive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/24/nathan-dyer-swansea-bradford-capital-one>
 the following afternoon now seems almost irrelevant in Paul’s tale. Since that 
day demand for his work has soared, with stadium portrait requests coming from 
as far afield as Canada and Australia. Even former footballers such as 
Chelsea’s Robert Isaac and Bradford’s own Bobby Ham are among Paul’s clients.

It is the 30th anniversary of the disaster on Monday and recent focus has been 
on theallegations surrounding the late Stafford Heginbotham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/15/bradford-fire-stafford-heginbotham-martin-fletcher>
, Bradford City’s then chairman, published last month in Martin Fletcher’s book 
Fifty-Six: The Story of the Bradford Fire. The book disclosed that the fire at 
Valley Parade was one of at least nine fires at businesses owned by or 
associated with Heginbotham.

Paul, however, encourages a more positive discussion such as the importance of 
raising funds for the Bradford burns unit, who treated casualties and survivors 
of the disaster.

“The current allegations are really upsetting for a lot of people locally,” he 
says. “While the painting has eased some pain and anxiety personally, I didn’t 
do it for this reason. I did it to help others and help raise funds for people 
who are less fortunate.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F09%2Fbradford-city-fire-1985-paul-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F8%2F1431100613838%2F47082c8a-6b6f-4d06-a87d-e02377c7e6c9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20brushstrokes%20helped%20balm%20the%20scars%20of%20Bradford%20City%20fire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F09%2Fbradford-city-fire-1985-paul-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20brushstrokes%20helped%20balm%20the%20scars%20of%20Bradford%20City%20fire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F09%2Fbradford-city-fire-1985-paul-town%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F8%2F1431100613838%2F47082c8a-6b6f-4d06-a87d-e02377c7e6c9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Paul Town’s painting commemorating the Bradford City fire. Photograph: Gary 
Calton for the Observer 
One of Paul’s most popular works, entitled “Broken Souls” illustrates 56 
football supporters (in memory of those of who lost their lives) heading 
towards an imaginary football ground. The memorial painting depicts a northern 
town stricken with grief from his mind’s eye. Paul has recently produced 56 
prints of the original painting, and sales of these have raised more than 
£3,300 for the burns unit.

“Painting mostly lost or much-changed stadiums is now my passion. I’m here to 
bring back those lost bygone memories in an atmospheric style to the true 
football supporter. Many supporters would give their right arm to see just one 
more fixture at their old stomping grounds.

“It has changed my life. In fact I’d go as far as to say it has saved me. 
Little did I know that those paints my Mum brought home from work would shape 
my future to what it is today.”

For more information on Paul Town’s work visit stadiumportaits.com 
<http://www.stadiumportraits.com/> and follow him on Twitter @StadiumPortrait 
<https://twitter.com/stadiumportrait>
 