
These barely leavened breads, known to us by their Israeli name, but common 
throughout the Arab world, are some of the most ancient in existence 
<http://www.foodtimeline.org/foodbreads.html#pitta>. Although flat in 
appearance, they are designed to puff up during baking and then sink, creating 
a hollow interior that makes a handy repository for fillings. Quick to make, 
and easy to eat, it’s little wonder they’re popular, in various forms, from 
southern Europe to north Africa, not only for stuffing 
<http://www.kitchenofpalestine.com/arayes/>, but also as utensils for dipping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/sep/25/how-to-make-perfect-baba-ganoush>
 or scooping food, and bulking out soups 
<http://withaspin.com/2013/08/03/lentil-soup/> and salads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/aug/15/angela-hartnett-fattoush-salad-recipe>
.

Sealed in long-life packaging, pitta can be picked up at most supermarkets for 
mere pennies – so why bother to make your own? Because, unless you’re lucky 
enough to be able to find them freshly baked, shop-bought pitta is a very poor 
relation, just like pizza bases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2011/sep/08/how-to-cook-perfect-pizza>
, or indeed hummus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2011/aug/11/how-to-make-perfect-hummus>
. The real thing is soft and chewy, rather than tough, with a fluffy interior 
perfect for soaking up sauces – they’re well worth the pretty minimal effort.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5404b95c33cd1381ae2580e184e45f763d418b16%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pitta%20bread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pitta%20bread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5404b95c33cd1381ae2580e184e45f763d418b16%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Yvonne Ruperti’s pitta bread. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The flour

Most pitta recipes call for white flour, and generally of the high-protein, 
strong variety, although Yvonne Ruperti 
<http://www.seriouseats.com/recipes/2015/08/perfect-pita-bread-recipe.html> on 
the US-based Serious Eats website uses plain flour, both white and wholemeal, 
explaining that “using 20% wholewheat flour [makes] the dough much more 
flavourful and nutty than one made with just all-purpose flour, while also not 
compromising its structure”.

Pitta is a bread that depends on gluten development for its distinctive form; 
without it, the dough will not be strong enough to puff up in the oven, 
yielding a simple flatbread, rather than one with a pocket. (Pitta breads get 
their characteristic form from a combination of heat and moisture. When the 
thin round of dough goes into the oven, the heat sets the top and bottom while 
turning the liquid in the dough into steam, which is then trapped between these 
layers of cooked dough, causing the bread to expand. Although it will rapidly 
collapse when removed from the heat, the pocket inside remains intact.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F469f420be35867e80ca909a8e25d25cbb2cebfa9%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pitta%20bread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pitta%20bread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F469f420be35867e80ca909a8e25d25cbb2cebfa9%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Pitta bread by Belinda Harley. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Most of Ruperti’s breads do rise (and fall), but I find the dough requires 
more initial kneading, and that the results lack the chewiness of some of the 
others. Belatedly, I realise that the American “all-purpose” flour she refers 
to tends to be harder than our own, so the difference between strong and plain 
flour over there will be less marked. In any case, British readers are best 
advised to splash out on bread flour.

The flavour and slightly nubbly texture that the wholemeal flour gives the 
breads is popular with testers, although as Ruperti notes, this doesn’t produce 
gluten as easily as its white counterpart, so it’s best used in moderation. 
Strong wholemeal is ideal, but in such small amounts, plain will also do if 
that’s what you have to hand. If you prefer a smoother, paler pitta, replace 
the wholewheat with more white flour.

The fat
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe43a6c34dbffd4ef3af76ab4a988a9fb794d8cf0%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pitta%20bread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pitta%20bread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe43a6c34dbffd4ef3af76ab4a988a9fb794d8cf0%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 The Herbet brothers use rapeseed oil. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
It is certainly possible to make pitta without any fat at all, although why 
you would want to is beyond me; not only does it add flavour, but it keeps the 
bread fresher for longer. Tom and Henry Herbert uses rapeseed oil in their book
The Fabulous Baker Brothers 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Fabulous-Baker-Brothers-Tom-Herbert/dp/0755363655>, 
and Belinda Harley’s Roast Lamb in the Olive Groves goes for butter instead, 
both of which work just fine texturally, but the former gives the bread a rich 
flavour that puts me more in mind of naan, while the latter is boringly 
neutral. Grassy and quintessentially Mediterranean, olive feels like the 
natural choice.

Sarit Packer and Itamar Srulovich’s recipe 
<http://cookbookclub.uk/pitta-breads-from-the-honey-co-cookbook/> in the Honey 
& Co cookbook, which several people recommend to me as the only one I should 
try, adds the fat towards the end of the kneading process. Although their 
pittas are delicious, it’s definitely harder to incorporate the oil at this 
point, and I would be interested to know the reason behind it; some research 
suggests that not adding it at the beginning encourages gluten formation in the 
dough. If anyone can confirm this, I would be grateful, but I don’t find it 
makes a significant difference, so I’m going to stick with the easier method.

Seasoning

You don’t have to look very far to find recipes for flavoured pitta (garlic 
and thyme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/nov/24/foodanddrink.baking20>, 
for example, or black onion seed 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/food/recipes/pitta_bread_97296>), but I don’t think these 
little breads need any help in that department. That said, it’s common to add 
sugar to kickstart the action of the yeast, and although a pinch would be 
sufficient, using the same amount as salt gives the breads a more well-rounded 
flavour: add too much, as Ruperti does, and they lose the plainness that is 
their chief virtue; add too little, or none at all as the Herberts do, and 
they’re a bit underwhelming.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd77b068200d5b8785f178884c3cfe18de70964c6%2F0_95_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pitta%20bread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pitta%20bread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd77b068200d5b8785f178884c3cfe18de70964c6%2F0_95_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 A great puffed pitta from Sarit Packer and Itamar Srulovich. Photograph: 
Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The method

Pitta dough must be sufficiently hydrated to generate steam when it meets the 
heat of the oven, and strong enough to trap this steam, and thus puff up, so 
the mixture must be both fairly wet and well-kneaded. Don’t be tempted to flour 
the work surface unless the dough is so sticky as to be completely 
unmanageable; it will come together eventually and, in the meantime, a palette 
knife or dough scraper will make life easier. If you have a food mixer, then by 
all means use that; mine’s currently on the blink.

Packer and Srulovich recommend resting the dough overnight if you have the 
time, as “it helps the flavour develop and makes the pitta fluffier”, and 
they’re right; if homemade pittas are noticeably more delicious than 
shop-bought ones, slow-risen ones are even better.

Even if you can’t wait that long, do let the individual breads rest before 
shaping; just 10 minutes makes the process much easier. The Herberts recommend 
rolling it out “in one direction only”, but this is another fiddly step I can’t 
fathom the thinking behind – as with the oil, if anyone knows why, please 
explain.

However you roll them out, make sure they are thin enough to puff up in the 
short time they take to cook, and evenly so, too, or they will blister in 
places, rather than blowing up like a balloon. Ruperti, who noticed “a tendency 
for the pitta to end up with a much thinner top than bottom after it comes out 
of the oven”, suggests flipping the breads over before putting them in the 
oven, so the pocket of air that rises during the final proofing stage is at the 
bottom when the dough enters the oven.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3219fb00b4a078c45aca33c414a53264c7cba949%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pitta%20bread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pitta%20bread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3219fb00b4a078c45aca33c414a53264c7cba949%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Pan-fried pitta bread by Rebecca Seal. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
The cooking

Like most breads, pittas are traditionally baked at temperatures that can be 
difficult to replicate at home. Packer and Srulovich advise cranking your oven 
up to maximum, on the fan setting if possible, and heating a baking tray or 
stone along with it, to give the breads the hottest start possible and 
encourage the creation of steam.

Although the oven is certainly the best cooking option for pitta, as the heat 
from both top and bottom helps to set the dough quickly, it’s not the only one; 
Rebecca Seal’s book The Islands of Greece gives anexcellent recipe 
<https://www.cooked.com/uk/Rebecca-Seal/Hardie-Grant-Books/The-Islands-of-Greece/Breads--pastries/Flatbreads-recipe>
 using a frying pan. Harley also uses this method, which she recommends topping 
with a thick tomato sauce and “crisp brown cubes of pork or lamb, a spoonful of 
thick tzatziki [and] some raw onion and tomato” (pitta porn alert). The 
interior pockets are less reliable, but it’s much quicker if you’re in a hurry, 
or it’s just too hot to switch the oven on.

Ruperti suggests 
<http://www.seriouseats.com/2015/08/how-to-make-perfect-homemade-pita-bread.html>
 finishing off the breads in a hot pan to give them that delicious charred 
flavour that can be hard to achieve in a domestic oven – “Not only do the 
pittas look a lot better that way, but the charring adds a layer of smoky 
flavour.” She’s right, but it isn’t traditional (Packer and Srulovich warn that 
“they are not supposed to colour much”) and it will crisp up the outsides of 
the breads, making them less pliable and amenable to stuffing. For me, it 
depends on what I’ll be eating them with. Plainer fillings, such as hummus or 
salad, cry out for a little char, while barbecued meats or vegetables don’t 
need it. The jury is out on my current favourite filling, however: Marmite and 
banana. In my defence, I’ve had an awful lot of pitta to put away this week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37b6d3776f965264aa38a350bf66e5771d30717d%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pitta%20bread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20pitta%20bread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-pitta-bread%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37b6d3776f965264aa38a350bf66e5771d30717d%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Perfect pitta bread by Felicity Cloake. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
(makes 10)
400ml warm but not hot water
10g active dried yeast
2 tsp sugar
400g strong white flour
100g wholemeal flour (optional, or use 500g white)
2 tsp salt
2 tbsp olive oil, plus extra to grease

Put 100ml warm water in a jug and whisk in the yeast and half the sugar. Leave 
until the surface is covered in froth. Meanwhile, combine the flours, remaining 
sugar and salt in a large mixing bowl.

Mix the oil and yeasty water in the flour with your fingertips, then add just 
enough of the remaining water to give you a “shaggy dough” – it should be soft, 
but not too sticky (note if you’re using all white flour, it probably won’t 
need as much as a wholemeal/white mix). Turn out on to a clean work surface and 
knead for about 10 minutes (or about 8 in a food mixer on a low speed) until 
smooth and elastic. Put into an oiled bowl, turn to coat in oil, then cover and 
refrigerate overnight, or leave somewhere warmish until doubled in size (about 
an hour to an hour and a half).

Heat the oven to maximum, preferably fan, with a baking stone or heavy baking 
tray in there. Meanwhile, divide the dough into approximately 80g balls, cover 
with a damp tea towel and allow to rest for 10 minutes, then roll out on a 
floured surface to rounds about 0.5mm thick, making sure they are evenly thick 
all over. Cover with a damp tea towel and leave for 20 minutes.

Operating as quickly as possible, put as many pitta as will comfortably fit on 
the hot stone or baking tray while it’s still in the oven, flipping them over 
as you pick them up, so the side resting on the work surface is now on top. 
Cook until they balloon, then carefully remove and keep warm in a tea towel 
while you cook the rest (how long this takes will depend on how hot your oven 
gets). Make sure to keep the oven door closed as much as possible to conserve 
heat. Eat the same day, or freeze.

Pitta, pide, khubz … which version of this very versatile flatbread is your 
favourite, and how do you like to eat it? And has anyone had any success baking 
it with other flours?
 