
Blue cheese dip may seem an odd choice so soon after Christmas excess, but 
it’s the perfect last hurrah for any odds and ends still hanging around after 
the festive season, and a very painless way to ease yourself into the 
inevitable new year resolutions – after all, raw broccoli and carrot batons 
never taste better than when smothered in cheese. A stalwart of the classic 
supermarket selection back in the days when, for most of us,hummus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/nov/04/how-weeds-heal-bare-soil>
 was something half heard on Gardeners’ Question Time and guacamole was very 
rarely mistaken for mushy peas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/aug/12/how-to-make-perfect-guacamole>
, blue cheese dip is definitely due a revival. Just make sure you remember the 
crudites to go with it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20d373270159bc711eeb09be3d5afa06990e8cee%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blue%20cheese%20dip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blue%20cheese%20dip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20d373270159bc711eeb09be3d5afa06990e8cee%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Jamie Forrest’s blue cheese dip. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The cheese

Given this is a recipe designed to use up leftovers, it would feel wrong to 
get too prescriptive about specific varieties. However, if when that seasonal 
weight has lifted, you do wish to purchase some cheese specially, I would 
recommend a gorgonzola piccante, as suggested by Jamie Forrest on the Serious 
Eats website 
<http://www.seriouseats.com/2008/02/the-best-blue-cheese-for-the-ultimate-super-bowl-blue-cheese-dip.html>
 as being “not too mild but not too assertive either, and with a characteristic 
twang that really made the dip something special”. You may be relieved to hear 
that the last of the Christmas stilton will also work well, although some 
testers found it slightly bitter, whileBBC Good Food 
<http://www.bbcgoodfood.com/recipes/1803654/celery-sticks-with-blue-cheese-dip>
’s more assertively salty roquefort also had its fans. Creamier St Agur, which 
I thought would be a shoo-in, proved too shy and retiring for most of us, and 
the fourme d’ambert, used by chef Alessandro Grano in Alex and Leo Guarneri’s 
book A Year in Cheese, was deemed similarly disappointing. Play around with 
what you have, but I reckon meek and mild blues are best deployed elsewhere.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53ee3bebfbb001cee9a7680c7217dad8826558f7%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blue%20cheese%20dip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blue%20cheese%20dip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53ee3bebfbb001cee9a7680c7217dad8826558f7%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Alessandro Grano’s dip uses fourme d’ambert. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for 
the Guardian 
The foundations

More important than your choice of cheese, I think, is what you mix it with; 
the base of the dip will dictate the consistency and, to some extent, the 
flavour profile of the finished product. Use a mixture of cream cheese, double 
cream and thick labneh yoghurt, as Forrest suggests, and your dip will be both 
solid enough to wreak some serious deforestation on the unwary broccoli floret, 
and so rich and creamy that you might not feel like going back to clean up the 
damage. BBC Good Food’s mixture of creme fraiche and mayonnaise, by contrast, 
is almost runny enough to qualify as a salad dressing. Some testers find the 
tang of the mayonnaise, which also comes through in the Bon Appetit recipe 
<http://www.bonappetit.com/recipe/blue-cheese-dip-2> using sour cream, comes 
through too strongly, preferring a more neutral base, such as Grano’s fromage 
blanc (Greek yoghurt makes a good substitute) or Forrest’s cream cheese. This 
is also used by Jane Nickerson, whose 1953 recipe is collected in the New York 
Times Cookbook. Her mix of cream cheese and sour cream is the most successful 
combination for both texture and flavour, although if you’re looking for a 
slightly lighter version, equal parts Greek yoghurt and sour cream are rather 
nice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F560e70b1676166289c4a51c017d05fee5ad79dbd%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blue%20cheese%20dip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blue%20cheese%20dip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F560e70b1676166289c4a51c017d05fee5ad79dbd%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Bon Appetit’s sour cream version. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Although I’m sceptical about the use of anything mechanical here, given how 
easy it is to crush the cheese with a fork, as Bon Appetit suggests, if you 
happen to have a stick blender or a small food processor, it does help to 
aerate the dip, giving it a more moussey consistency. Keep some of the crumbled 
cheese back to stir in after blending for a more interesting texture and 
flavour.

The extras

Bon Appetit and Grano both flavour their dips with garlic, Forrest prefers 
spring onion, while Nickerson seasons it with “onion juice” which, a note 
explains, “mid-century cooks used … the way we now use garlic”. Not only is it 
more of a faff to prepare (really, who enjoys grating an onion?), but it has a 
harsher, more one-dimensional flavour than its modern counterpart, while spring 
onions, much as I love them, remind us all of cheap cheese and onion 
sandwiches. Garlic and the chives Grano uses seem to blend better with the 
other ingredients. He also adds chervil, and Bon Appetit pops in thyme, but 
testers can’t pick up either, and with a flavour as strong as blue cheese, it 
seems pointless to try to compete.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09db4cbd9868d7ffb5a328c2467db171c0f579ab%2F0_128_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blue%20cheese%20dip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blue%20cheese%20dip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09db4cbd9868d7ffb5a328c2467db171c0f579ab%2F0_128_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 BBC Good Food adds Worcestershire sauce. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
Many recipes use vinegar to balance the richness of the other ingredients, 
whether red or white wine, or sherry; I happen to think cider works best. 
Nickerson stirs in a generous amount of dry sherry itself, which gives her dip 
a confusing, if not entirely unpleasant, savoury flavour somewhere between an 
amuse bouche and an aperitif. BBC Good Food adds a similar, if slightly sweeter 
note with Worcestershire sauce, which you may like to consider if you make your 
dip with Greek yoghurt, or your chosen cheese turns out to be milder than you 
expected – it adds a bit of oomph to proceedings. Which, given the year we’ve 
got ahead of us, you might well need. Happy 2017!

The perfect blue cheese dip
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb826ef413ef6372b71f94d1f0cbcfde8f90d2ea2%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blue%20cheese%20dip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20blue%20cheese%20dip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-blue-cheese-dip%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb826ef413ef6372b71f94d1f0cbcfde8f90d2ea2%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Perfect blue cheese dip. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
(Makes 1 bowl)
1 garlic clove, crushed
75g cream cheese
3 tbsp sour cream
110g strong blue cheese (I like gorgonzola piccante), crumbled
1 tbsp cider vinegar
2 tbsp chives, finely chopped

Put the garlic, cream cheese and sour cream in a bowl with two-thirds of the 
blue cheese and whiz with a stick blender until fairly smooth. Stir in the 
vinegar and taste, adding a little more if necessary, and then fold in the 
remaining cheese and the chives, reserving a pinch for the top.


If you don’t have a stick blender, put the garlic and vinegar in a bowl and 
add two-thirds of the blue cheese. Mash hard with a fork until it breaks down 
into tiny pieces. Beat the cream cheese to loosen it, then fold in the sour 
cream and stir both into the cheese mixture. Fold in the vinegar and most of 
the chives, reserving a pinch for the top, then taste and add a little more 
vinegar, if necessary.

Serve with lots of raw vegetables.

Blue cheese dip: a forgotten classic or the last thing you fancy at this time 
of year? Does anyone still buy those supermarket dip quartets? And which other 
festive leftovers are you currently struggling to find a home for?
 