
Plans for a new fleet of UK nuclear power plants are under way. Last month, 
for example, Hitachi and the Japanese governmentconfirmed a plan to construct 
5.4 gigawatts of generating capacity at UK sites 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-nuclear-hitachi-idUKKBN1440B7>. But 
what about thewaste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/13/nuclear-waste-protection-thousands-years>
? And what happens when, in thousands of years, our descendants – who may not 
read any current human language – find a store, and put themselves in danger?

A panel of scientists and linguists asked this question in 1981 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_Interference_Task_Force> when the US 
Department of Energy commissioned them to find a method of ensuring that 
whatever is left of humanity in 10,000 years’ time is warned off the sites 
we’ve been filling with radioactive sludge.

The panel reasoned that since few people can read texts that are only 1,000 
years old, written warnings guaranteed to be understood by future humanity 
could be difficult to create.

The answer may lie in “nuclear semiotics” – future-proof signs. Other options 
include hostile architecture, obelisks – or cats.

In 1984, writer Françoise Bastide and semiotician Paolo Fabbri 
<http://www.wow.com/wiki/Human_Interference_Task_Force> suggested the answer 
could lie in breeding animals that “react with discoloration of the skin when 
exposed 
<http://www.semiotik.tu-berlin.de/menue/zeitschrift_fuer_semiotik/zs_hefte/bd_6_hft_3/>
” to radiation. “[Their] role as a detector of radiation should be anchored in 
cultural tradition by introducing a suitable name (eg, ‘ray cat’).”

In short: cats that turn, say, green <https://vimeo.com/138843064> when near 
radioactive material. A legend, passed on through the millennia, would trigger 
a response in humans to get out as soon as possible.

The idea has recently gained fresh traction: the Ray Cat Solution 
<http://www.theraycatsolution.com/#10000> movement, formed in 2015, is working 
to “insert ray cats into the cultural vocabulary”. They say it may be possible 
to harness some animals’ innate capacity to become fluorescent, or to absorb 
and emit light – but cats don’t have the physiology to do that. Another way 
would be to engineer cats to glow using enzyme interaction – a mechanism used 
to study cellular activity. Far fetched, but it could just work.
 