
Tonight sees the final final of The Great British Bake Off as we know it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/21/bbc-gets-ready-for-last-ever-slice-of-bake-off>
 – and I’ll be celebrating, albeit with tears in my eyes, with a jaffa cake, 
which, fellow obsessives will recall, was the technical challenge posedto the 
bakers in the first episode of this series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/25/great-british-bake-off-review-blood-innuendo-drizzle-cake>
. Let it never be said that this column is not achingly topical. But you don’t 
have to be a fan of Mary, Mel and Sue* to enjoy this quintessentially British 
treat. Introduced by biscuitmaker McVitie and Price in 1927, and named after 
the famous orange, it was the subject of a legal dispute in 1991. Its 
fundamental identity was dissected in court, in orderto prove it was indeed a 
chocolate-covered cake rather than a biscuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/dec/14/letuseatzeroratedcakes>, 
as the Inland Revenue maintained, and thus not subject to VAT. Far be it from 
me to wade into such complex legal territory, but I will say that, partial as I 
am to the odd packet, the classic mass-manufactured jaffa cake is hard and dry 
enough to feel, to my mind, rather more like a biscuit. Make your own lighter, 
fluffier base and the taxman wouldn’t have a leg to stand on – and you can top 
it with as much tangy jelly and chocolate as you like. Stick it to the man … 
along with a nice cup of tea.

* Let’s be honest, no one’s going to admit to liking he who shall not be named.

Jaffa cakes: Ruby Tandoh and Marcus Wareing on how to make them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/25/jaffa-cakes-ruby-tandoh-and-marcus-wareing-on-how-to-make-them>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F311fe9bcc3d2fc22add40bdf8b4479fc53a64674%2F0_398_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20jaffa%20cakes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20jaffa%20cakes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F311fe9bcc3d2fc22add40bdf8b4479fc53a64674%2F0_398_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Mary Berry’s jaffa cakes Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The sponge 

Despite its homely reputation, the jaffa cake is actually made from the rather 
fancily named genoise sponge, a featherlight confection involving eggs, minimal 
amounts of fat and an awful lot of elbow grease to produce the principal 
ingredient: air. Rather than creaming together butter and sugar, the genoise 
begins with eggs and sugar whisked together until pale and billowing; you then 
gently fold in flour and, sometimes but not always, a little melted butter, 
too, while striving to keep as much volume in the batter as possible.

Mary Berry, whose recipe the bakers used on television, uses no butter at all 
in her sponge, which makes it more robust than some of the others, but, testers 
feel, a little bit tough. Although, as one said: “I expect that’s you rather 
than Mary. Mary would never serve me a tough sponge.” Be that as it may, Bake 
Off veterans Ruby Tandoh and the first champion Edd Kimber’s versions are more 
popular, the difference between them being that Kimber uses slightly more 
butter in his, and Tandoh an extra egg yolk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fdb89574a2e669a50f30d3c1befdfc802533cfc%2F0_116_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20jaffa%20cakes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20jaffa%20cakes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fdb89574a2e669a50f30d3c1befdfc802533cfc%2F0_116_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Ruby Tandoh’s jaffa cakes. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
In fact, they’re so close that I make up a second batch of both, so they can 
be tested without the distraction of jelly and chocolate, and Tandoh’s version 
wins by a whisker thanks to its slightly softer texture. To be honest, though, 
we really are splitting hairs. I consider using Berry’s self-raising flour for 
extra volume, but it doesn’t really seem to need it. Marcus Wareing adds ground 
almonds to the flour, making his runty cakes too dry and dense to impress my 
panel of experts. The Meringue Girls, meanwhile, eschew flour altogether for a 
gluten-free version – based around ground almonds and a boiled orange puree – 
that is dense, yet anything but dry. In fact, it’s delicious – moist, 
bittersweet and nutty … but it’s not a jaffa cake. Disqualified. I do like the 
flavour combination, however, so I’ll be adding a little almond essence to the 
batter in place of Tandoh’s orange zest. As this is a shocking deviation from 
the classic recipe, feel free to leave it out if you prefer.

The jelly 

To my mind, a jaffa cake stands or falls on its jelly – get it wrong, and you 
may as well buy a packet from the all-night garage. As if the almond outrage 
wasn’t enough, Wareing adds insult to injury by using marmalade in his. The 
disqualification klaxon sounds again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4160bc3faec481df4491f6e30154da3a765a484%2F0_241_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20jaffa%20cakes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20jaffa%20cakes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4160bc3faec481df4491f6e30154da3a765a484%2F0_241_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Edd Kimber’s jaffa cakes. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
To my slight surprise, Berry and the Meringue Girls both use shop-bought 
jelly, admittedly with less water than the packet suggests to concentrate the 
flavour – if you really must, go with Berry’s suggestion of a mere 150ml water 
as opposed to the 285ml recommended by the leading brand – but believe me when 
I say it’s hardly more work to make your own jelly from fresh juice. Come 
January, when blood oranges come into season, Kimber’s blood-orange version 
would be lovely, not only for its vivid colour, but its slightly bitter 
flavour, but in October, when the only thing available is pricey juice, it’s 
hard to beat Tandoh’s bog-standard recipe, which also includes lemon juice for 
extra tang.

Chuck in some zest, too, as Berry and the Meringue Girls suggest, both for 
texture and a hint of bitterness. A confession: although it tasted great, I had 
a disaster setting Tandoh’s jelly because hers is the only recipe to recommend 
pouring it straight on to the cooled cakes – whereupon it promptly soaked in, 
leaving me with a round of deliciously moist, citrussy genoise. I can’t work 
out where I’ve gone wrong, but it seems safer to set the jelly separately, as 
the other recipes do, and then place it on top in discs slightly smaller than 
the cakes themselves for that authentic ring of plain chocolate around the 
edge. (The Meringue Girls cleverly suggest setting it in another bun tin, which 
is easier than cutting out the circles of jelly, but unless you have a slightly 
smaller tin to hand, this doesn’t work sizewise.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b74e497ae19e0b19d9c9e541826e5fe1512c700%2F91_529_3385_2031%2F3385.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20jaffa%20cakes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20jaffa%20cakes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b74e497ae19e0b19d9c9e541826e5fe1512c700%2F91_529_3385_2031%2F3385.jpg>
 Marcus Wareing’s jaffa cakes. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The chocolate 

Not much to say here except take a word of advice from Berry and the Meringue 
Girls and allow the melted chocolate to cool before decorating the top of the 
cake, or it will melt the jelly – as I discover the hard way when making 
Kimber’s recipe. I can’t agree with Berry, however, that the chocolate layer 
should be as thin as in the McVities version; there’s no need to be quite so 
parsimonious at home, and more jelly surely demands more chocolate. Wareing 
tops his cakes with a piece of peel from the marmalade, but he can’t save 
himself at this stage. The jaffa cake is a classic for a reason – remind 
yourself why this weekend.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f9665002bd5cc47e97ab086ec3dbc2c6ca328e9%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20jaffa%20cakes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20jaffa%20cakes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-jaffa-cakes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f9665002bd5cc47e97ab086ec3dbc2c6ca328e9%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 The Meringue Girls’ jaffa cakes. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The perfect jaffa cakes

(Makes 12)
2 medium oranges 
Juice of 1 lemon 
1 tbsp caster sugar 
2 sheets of gelatine 
200g dark chocolate

For the sponge 
15g butter 
1 large egg, at room temperature 
1 large egg yolk, at room temperature 
40g caster sugar 
40g plain flour 
Drop of almond extract (optional) 

Zest one of the oranges into a measuring jug, then squeeze one of them in 
there, too. Add the juice of the lemon, then enough extra juice to make the 
total volume up to 160ml. Put in a small pan with the sugar and heat gently, 
stirring occasionally to dissolve the sugar. Take off the heat.

Meanwhile, soak the gelatine leaves in cold water until soft, then wring out 
well and stir into the warm juice. Line a 20cm cake tin with clingfilm, then 
pour in the juice and chill until set.

Heat the oven to 180C and grease a 12-hole muffin tin very thoroughly. Melt 
the butter and set aside to cool slightly.

Whisk the egg and yolk with the sugar at high speed for 5-8 minutes until very 
thick, and a little dribbled on to the surface forms a solid ribbon for a few 
seconds before sinking. If using a food mixer for such a small amount, it’s 
wise to stir it all together very well first.

Sift the flour over the top (trust me, it’s worth the effort) and very gently 
fold in with a large metal spoon in a figure-of-eight motion, making sure you 
get to any pockets that might have sunk to the bottom while retaining as much 
air in the mixture as possible. Pour in the butter and almond extract if using, 
plus a pinch of salt, and fold to combine.

Divide between the muffin tin holes, making sure you don’t fill them 
completely, then bake for about 8 minutes until lightly golden and set. Leave 
to cool completely.

Cut out 4cm rounds of jelly (if you don’t have a cutter small enough, cut 
around a small jar lid or similar) and place in the middle of each cooled cake. 
Put in the fridge while you melt the chocolate.

Put the chocolate in a heatproof bowl set over but not touching a pan of 
simmering water and stir to melt. Allow to cool until still liquid, but just 
warm, then spoon over the cakes, smooth the top as best you can and leave to 
set slightly. Use a fork to create the criss-cross pattern on top of the jelly, 
but be gentle! Allow to set before eating.

The jaffa cake: as much of an institution as Bake Off, or a dry biscuit with 
ideas above its station? Which similar teatime favourites are better made at 
home ... and will anyone admit to dunking them, like Paul Hollywood?
 