
If you’ve never heard of it, don’t worry – until about two months ago, neither 
had I. Then, suddenly, cacio e pepe was everywhere, virtually speaking at 
least, a million slick strands of cheesy spaghetti clogging up social media 
like a vast hipster hairball.

Those who claim a longer familiarity with the idea probably have some 
connection with Rome, where it’s an old favourite – its simplicity means that 
it’s rarely found in restaurants abroad, at least until recently. Then, 
suddenly, the once humble primi launched its quest for world domination – it 
pops up as the eternal city’s“trendiest pasta dish” 
<http://www.buzzinrome.com/2012/05/19/whats-the-trendiest-pasta-dish-in-rome-cacio-e-pepe-and-here-is-our-top-10/>
 in 2012, and by the beginning of this year, Time Out was already declaring it
New York’s “trendiest dish of 2016” 
<https://www.timeout.com/newyork/blog/cacio-e-pepe-is-already-the-trendiest-dish-of-2016-031816>
.

And where America leads, Britain follows. London restaurateur Russell Norman 
claims 
<http://www.esquire.co.uk/food-drink/advice/a10370/how-to-cook-caio-e-pepe-russell-norman/>
 he first came across cacio e pepe on holiday in Tuscany last summer, put it on 
the menu as a special and then, he told Esquire: “I noticed something odd – it 
had simultaneously started to appear on other restaurant menus in London with 
alarming frequency. On a subsequent trip to New York, I saw it everywhere 
there, too. Cacio e pepe has fully entered the collective psyche of foodies. It 
is part of the restaurant zeitgeist. It has become a trend.”

Trendy for good reason: beautiful in its three-ingredient simplicity, cheap 
and quick to put together – but very easy to get wrong. As Rachel Roddy notes 
<https://racheleats.wordpress.com/2014/11/26/best-shown/>, there is a fine line 
between clump and cream, and making a smooth sauce from dry cheese and water is 
a skill that needs to be learned, as I realised on my first, second and seventh 
attempts. Once you’ve mastered it, however, cacio e pepe is a dish for life; 
one that can be knocked up in minutes with the most basic of store cupboard 
ingredients. So, don’t hate it because it’s hip, make it because it’s good.

The pasta
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F358e1bbaf8969759e0888c44788887fba0b9eaac%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20cacio%20e%20pepe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20cacio%20e%20pepe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F358e1bbaf8969759e0888c44788887fba0b9eaac%2F0_274_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Rose Gray and Ruth Rogers’ cacio e pepe. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
Norman says that in his experience, cacio e pepe is generally served with 
pici, “short, clumsily rolled, thick spaghetti”. Roddy reckons that tonnarelli, 
or square-cut spaghetti, is a favourite in Rome – indeed,Marco Baccanelli and 
Francesca Barreca <http://luckypeach.com/recipes/cacio-e-pepe/>, chefs of that 
city’s Mazzo restaurant, make their own.Caz Hildebrand and Jacob Kenedy 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/recipes/7614503/Recipes-from-Bocca-di-Lupo-Three-Roman-pastas-with-rigatoni.html>
 recommend rigatoni in the Geometry of Pasta, andChristopher Boswell 
<https://food52.com/blog/9530-christopher-boswell-on-all-things-pasta>, the 
chef behind the Rome Sustainable Food project, prefers wholemeal paccheri or 
rigatoni in his book Pasta, on the basis that “the flavour of the whole grain 
is strong enough to stand up to the sharp and salty sheep’s milk cheese” (as I 
can find neither easily, I have to content myself with brown penne instead).

As with that other Roman favourite, carbonara, the principal pleasure of cacio 
e pepe is in the slurping up of slippery strands of saucy pasta, which, to my 
mind, rules out rigatoni or paccheri – long noodles are required. Tonnarelli is 
great if you can find it (spaghetti alla chitarra is similar, and slightly more 
widely available in the UK), but for the common or garden non-Roman, spaghetti 
will do just fine. Although the flavour works, I don’t find the wholemeal sort 
smooth enough for this particular dish, and testers agree they prefer the more 
robust texture of dry pasta with such strong flavours.

J Kenji López-Alt of the website Serious Eats 
<http://www.seriouseats.com/2016/02/spaghetti-cacio-e-pepe-roman-snack-pasta.html>
 breaks with ancient tradition by cooking the pasta in the bare minimum of 
water in order to concentrate the starch which, in this case, will help to 
thicken the sauce. Though I might be smitten by Jupiter himself for such 
heresy, the theory makes sense – and, as long as you stir the noodles 
occasionally during cooking, they don’t seem to suffer for lack of space.

The pepper
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcab6b3ec16264b5df2ba3f5e0a380c45f8101d13%2F0_0_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20cacio%20e%20pepe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20cacio%20e%20pepe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcab6b3ec16264b5df2ba3f5e0a380c45f8101d13%2F0_0_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
 Rachel Roddy’s cacio e pepe. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Again, as with carbonara, this should be added in quantity – Roddy toasts the 
peppercorns before crushing, which brings out their flavour beautifully. 
López-Alt fries them in oil, which he reckons helps to distribute their flavour 
more evenly throughout the dish, and Baccanelli and Barreca make a peppercorn 
broth to “enhance [the spice’s] lighter, more delicate qualities”. I’d prefer 
not to add any extra fat, and the broth doesn’t seem to make enough difference 
to justify the – very slight – faff; outside the restaurant kitchen, this is a 
dish that should be kept as simple as possible.

The cheese
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bbdb4351d46fe7f1f6cce4fea00f6adc937447c%2F0_198_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20cacio%20e%20pepe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20cacio%20e%20pepe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bbdb4351d46fe7f1f6cce4fea00f6adc937447c%2F0_198_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Caz Hildebrand and Jacob Kenedy’s cacio e pepe. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
for the Guardian 
It is traditionally made with sharp, salty pecorino romano, but Rose Gray and 
Ruth Roger’s recipe in River Cafe Easy 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=BImPi48NOv4C&pg=PA85&lpg=PA85&dq=river+cafe+easy+cacio+e+pepe&source=bl&ots=IGEZ7ranS6&sig=dUMpbLyw7TXDzH0QlAR8TjCCbGQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiaocWS0IPQAhVYF8AKHeMFDSYQ6AEIPzAF#v=onepage&q=river%20cafe%20easy%20cacio%20e%20pepe&f=false>
 adds parmesan too – delicious, of course, but it lacks pecorino’s distinctive 
tang, and makes the dish too aggressively cheesy for some testers.

It’s vital to grate the cheese as finely as possible and, as Michael Price 
helpfully informs me online 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BMJQFfWA-D-/?taken-by=felicitycloake>, ensure it 
is as close to room temperature as possible to reduce the difference in 
temperature between it and the pasta.


Hildebrand and Kenedy sprinkle the cheese on top of the hot rigatoni, as is 
apparently traditional, rather than melting it into the sauce in the modern 
style. It’s nice (of course it’s nice, it’s cheesy fried pasta), but lacks the 
satisfying creaminess of the others.

The fat
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F173d8dabfeb755c2468ac23705f243c931aa5e12%2F0_357_3508_2105%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20cacio%20e%20pepe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20cacio%20e%20pepe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F173d8dabfeb755c2468ac23705f243c931aa5e12%2F0_357_3508_2105%2F3508.jpg>
 Christopher Boswell’s cacio e pepe. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
Adding extra fat in the form of oil (Roddy), butter (Gray and Rogers) both 
(López-Alt), or even Cook’s Illustrated’s double cream 
<https://www.cooksillustrated.com/recipes/5031-spaghetti-with-pecorino-romano-and-black-pepper-cacio-e-pepe>
, “whose lipoproteins encourage the protein and fat molecules in the sauce to 
bond rather than separate”, make life easier for the cook, because they help 
the sauce to emulsify, rather than split, as it yearns to do. Plus, who doesn’t 
love butter in everything?

The problem is that they also dull the flavour of the cheese and pepper, and 
this is a dish that should be almost aggressively sharp and hot. So, although 
it is making a rod for your own back, I’d recommend trying it without extra 
help, just once – it’s well worth it.


The method
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bf4a689ee85993582b7e39ed81a718f7b67d0a9%2F0_295_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20cacio%20e%20pepe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20cacio%20e%20pepe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-cacio-e-pepe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bf4a689ee85993582b7e39ed81a718f7b67d0a9%2F0_295_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Marco Baccanelli and Francesca Barreca’s cacio e pepe. Photograph: Felicity 
Cloake for the Guardian 
A cacio e pepe recipe stands or falls by its method, the alchemy that turns 
dry cheese and water into creamy sauce. I have no problem believing that all 
the recipes I try work well in the hands of an expert – my job, I think, is to 
work out which one gives the rest of us the best chance of success.

Temperature is crucial: not only must the cheese be at room temperature, but 
the cooking water that is added to loosen it must not be too hot, or “the 
cheese will start to coagulate and the fat will separate, creating gummy lumps 
on one side and watery casein on the other”, as Baccanelli and Barreca explain. 
Scooping it out halfway through cooking, as Roddy recommends, seems to work a 
treat, as does allowing the drained noodles to cool for a minute before adding 
them to the sauce, as in Baccanelli and Barreca’s recipe. López-Alt is not 
alone in combining sauce and spaghetti in a cool pan, as opposed to that the 
pasta was cooked in, in order to control the temperature better, although 
unless you’re very slow, you shouldn’t need to reheat it afterwards, as he 
suggests.

Katie Parla and Kristina Gill, authors of Tasting Rome, who share a recipe 
<http://www.splendidtable.org/recipes/leonardo-vignoli-s-cacio-e-pepe> from 
chef Leonardo Vignoli, whisk the cheese and water together to make a paste 
before adding the pasta, as do Baccanelli and Barreca, while Roddy and Boswell 
both prefer to stir in the noodles and cheese at the same time. This latter 
method seems fraught with danger for the amateur; I’m definitely not 
co-ordinated enough to vigorously beat pasta with one hand while adding cheese 
with the other, so the staggered approach works better for me.

Perhaps the most helpful advice I read on the subject is Roddy’s admission: 
“With dishes like this, it is all about practice, about trying, possibly 
failing and trying again in order to discover how much pasta, cooking water, 
how much cheese and pepper, how vigorous is vigorous. In short, finding your 
way of doing things.” How saucy you want it, how peppery, how bouncy the pasta, 
how sharp the cheese.


Fortunately, it’s a happy subject for experimentation; even my worst failures 
were wolfed down. Cheese, pasta and pepper; really, it’s hard to go wrong.

Perfect cacio e pepe

(Serves 2)
2 tsp black peppercorns
200g spaghetti (or pici, or tonarelli, if you can find them)
80g pecorino romano, at room temperature, finely grated

Toast the peppercorns in a very hot, dry pan until fragrant, then roughly 
crush.

Bring a wide shallow pan of well-salted water to the boil, then add the pasta; 
it should be covered but not by much. Stir occasionally during cooking and, 
five minutes into the cooking time, scoop out 250ml water into a wide bowl to 
allow it to cool slightly.

Drain the pasta and leave it to cool for a minute. Meanwhile, put the cheese 
and most of the pepper in a large, heavy bowl or pan and beat in some of the 
pasta water very gradually to make first a paste, and then a sauce the 
consistency of bechamel. Add the pasta and toss furiously while adding enough 
of the water (you shouldn’t need it all) to make a sauce that coats each 
strand. Don’t worry if it takes a while to come together – keep beating and it 
should happen.

Divide between warm bowls, sprinkle over a little more pepper, and serve 
immediately.

Cacio e pepe: old favourite, new love or hipster fad? What’s your secret, and 
which other simple pasta dishes should every good carb-lover have in their 
repertoire?
 