
There have been a number of awful football competitions organised throughout 
the history of the sport, from the Anglo-Scottish Cup to the Zenith Data 
Systems, taking in such delights as the Texaco Cup, ScreenSport Super Cup and 
Watney Cup along the way. Fortunately my club, Arsenal, have managed to steer 
clear of most of these, but in 1988 the club qualified for a cup competition 
that was organised by theFootball League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> to commemorate their 
100th anniversary.

The Football League were naturally eager to celebrate their 100th year as the 
1987-88 campaign kicked off. In August 1987, aFootball League Representative 
side defeated a World XI 3-0 at Wembley 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ywifamQPis>. Maradona was roundly booed every 
time he touched the ball, with the majority of the 61,000 crowd unable to 
forgive or forget his Hand of God goal from the previous summer. But this would 
not be the only chance to mark the Football League’s centenary.

In April 1988, a whole set of League fixtures were cancelled to allow the 
staging of the Mercantile Credit Football Festival, which turned out to be as 
naff as it sounded. Hosted at Wembley and contested by 16 teams that had 
qualified through a pre-defined set of matches, attendances were low; 41,500 on 
the Saturday and only 17,000 for the Sunday. Matches played between 40- and 
60-minute periods resulted in nine of the 15 contests going to penalties, as 
the party fell flat in a big way.

The Joy of Six: flawed sporting competitions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/the-joy-of-six-flawed-sporting-competitions>
The Football League were determined to stretch out their landmark anniversary, 
though and, as the 1988-89 season commenced, there was one final tournament to 
mark the occasion. The Mercantile Credit Centenary Trophy, involving the top 
eight Division One clubs from the previous season, would bring the curtain down 
on the underwhelming centenary celebrations.

Stuart Jones put it well in the Times when he described the Mercantile Credit 
Centenary Trophy as “the closing debacle of the embarrassing League centenary 
celebrations.” Arsenal went on to win the tournament, beating Liverpool and
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
along the way, but the fact that it isn’t listed on the club website honours 
page says a lot.

Arsenal’s first match in the eight-team tournament was away at Queens Park 
Rangers, who had finishedfifth in the First Division in the 1987-88 season 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1987%E2%80%9388_in_English_football#First_Division_3>
, making them London’s top club. Arsenal had just beaten Wimbledon 5-1 on the 
opening day of the campaign and came to Loftus Road – which had lost its 
skin-shredding artificial pitch in the summer – as favourites. QPR boss Jim 
Smith said it was good to be in the tournament but the “vast sea of upturned 
blue seats,” to quote Jones again, told a different story. Just 10,019 people 
attended the match, which Arsenal won 2-0 thanks to goals from Tony Adams and 
Brian Marwood.

Squad rotation was still a distant concept back in 1988 and there was no 
European football to overload the players, so strong teams were fielded. 
Nevertheless, fans voted with their feet. Only 16,439 people watched Manchester 
United beat Everton in their quarter-final; only 17,141 went to St James’ Park 
for Newcastle’s 1-0 win over Wimbledon; and Liverpool could only bring in 
20,141 for their 4-1 victory against Nottingham Forest.

The semi-final between Arsenal and Liverpool attracted the highest gate of the 
tournament, with 29,135 fans coming through the turnstiles at Highbury. In 
truth, Liverpool were massively weakened by injuries – Bruce Grobbelaar, Alan 
Hansen, John Aldridge, John Barnes, Steve McMahon, Jan Molby, Nigel Spackman 
and Barry Venison were all missing – but in a season whenthe two clubs battled 
it out for the league title 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liverpool_F.C._0%E2%80%932_Arsenal_F.C._(26_May_1989)>
, Arsenal took the opportunity to score the first blow.

Both Arsenal goals involved key components of the glorious season ahead. A 
near-post flick-on from a corner resulted in the opener for Perry Groves and a 
Marwood volley secured Arsenal’s place in the final. It may not have been the 
most significantArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> victory 
ever but any win over Liverpool was to be enjoyed in the 1980s.

Great goalkeeping gaffes: from John Lukic to Erik Thorstvedt via Pat Jennings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2016/oct/06/great-goalkeeping-gaffes-lukic-thorstvedt-jennings>
Manchester United beat Everton and Newcastle United en route to the final and, 
withtheir feisty FA Cup tie at Highbury earlier that year 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.com/2016/02/1988-fa-cup-fifth-round-arsenal-v-manutd.html>
 still in the memory, the contest developed into a committed and sometimes 
bruising affair. This was the case off the pitch too, with fans involved in a 
number of running battles in and around the stadium, as Andy Townsend might put 
it.

United originally wanted the final played at either Highbury or Old Trafford, 
but Villa Park was chosen as the neutral venue. “The whole point is that 
William McGregor, of Villa, was the instigator of the Football League, which is 
the reason for the competition,” George Graham pointed out before the match. It 
wasn’t as if the stadium was ill-equipped to deal with the final; the match 
would be watched by just 22,182 spectators.

Watching the highlights <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e7yKzFcwyiQ>, it is 
impossible to ignore the empty terraces, although the atmosphere inside the 
ground still sounds better than any stadium you will visit in England now. 
Played in wet conditions, the match was ultimately settled by two contributions 
from Paul Davis. For a man who entered the match heavily under the media 
spotlight, the final proved a welcome positive.

A few weeks before, Davis had been caught punching Southampton midfielder 
Glenn Cockerill squarely on the jaw 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rxCKczfG-r4>, breaking it in the process, and 
earning a nine-match ban for his troubles. Davis signed off in style, though.He 
volleyed home a Marwood cross after 36 minutes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e7yKzFcwyiQ&t=13m45s> to give Arsenal the lead 
and then, four minutes later, spottedMichael Thomas charging through the 
midfield <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e7yKzFcwyiQ&t=16m09s> and set him up 
for the second goal. Thomas’ goalmay not have been as important as the one he 
scored on 26 May 1989 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cFo1eyWbTtc>, but his 
flip celebration was a lot better on this wet Sunday in Birmingham.

United had the better of the second half, Clayton Blackmore halving the 
deficit after 84 minutes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K4wGxYTe0J8&t=4m46s>, 
but Arsenal held on to win an exhilarating match. Tony Adamsclimbed up what 
looked like temporary scaffolding to lift the strange trophy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K4wGxYTe0J8&t=12m43s> and the players looked 
slightly embarrassed passing it around, but Steve Curry was spot-on in his 
assessment in the Express: “The League’s centenary celebrations have, overall, 
been a shambles, but this rousing finale at least left one worthwhile memory.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Farsenal-centenary-trophy-title-football-league-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea186a4d73131bd4fec49717f889cd4ce88bea8d%2F0_85_3727_2508%2F3727.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Arsenal%20won%20the%20Centenary%20Trophy%2C%20the%20least%20celebrated%20title%20in%20their%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Farsenal-centenary-trophy-title-football-league-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Arsenal%20won%20the%20Centenary%20Trophy%2C%20the%20least%20celebrated%20title%20in%20their%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Farsenal-centenary-trophy-title-football-league-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea186a4d73131bd4fec49717f889cd4ce88bea8d%2F0_85_3727_2508%2F3727.jpg>
 Michael Thomas and Paul Davis kiss the trophy. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Getty 
Images 
Arsenal were awarded £50,000 in prize money but perhaps the biggest bonus was 
that it kept the winning habit going. “I know it’s been criticised. But if 
you’re going to enter a competition, win it,” said Graham firmly. Very true. 
Brian Clough said Nottingham Forest’s triumph in the Anglo-Scottish Cup in 1977 
started something big at the club. The Mercantile Credit Centenary Trophy was 
not as important to Arsenal under Graham but winning the competition didn’t 
hurt.

I’ve visited the Emirates for a couple of stadium tours in recent years and 
can’t recall seeing the Mercantile Credit Centenary Trophy in the trophy 
cabinet. Maybe I’ll take my son again and see if we can spot it. He’s bound to 
ask me a few questions about the competition and I can proudly say this is a 
trophy that cannot be taken from us. However, I might just be able to stop 
myself from singing: “We’ve won it one time, we’ve won it one time, the 
Mercantile Credit Centenary Trophy, we’ve won it one time.”

• This article appeared first on That 1980s Sports Blog 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/>
• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter <https://twitter.com/1980sSportsBlog>
 