


This month, How to Eat is turning up the heat under the omelette. It’s an 
enduring classic but, like many other enduring classics, the omelette is 
regularly abused and widely taken for granted. How to Eat is here to put that 
right with all the precision for which, of course,omelette fans are renowned 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/9573822/A-persons-way-of-eating-eggs-can-predict-personality-type.html>
.

Please refrain from eggs-treme arguments below the line. Abuse is no yolk. We 
do not wish to scramble the moderators. But we will if the thread overheats, 
coagulates and hardens into inedible harsh curds.

When is an omelette not an omelette?

When it is a frittata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/26/easy-frittata-recipes-for-your-packed-lunch-box>
. This is not a difficult philosophical question; it is as plain as the 
tortilla on your plate. Despite this, everywhere you look, frittatas are 
categorised with, or referred to as, omelettes.

An omelette must be rolled or folded. You are aiming for a solid outer shell 
and – although the filling may contain ingredients with a certain resistant 
bite to them – the interior should be ethereally fluffy, gooey or even ever so 
slightly runny. The omelette’s core should be what foodies callbaveuse, if you 
want to get all ooh-la-la about it.

What an omelette is not is a mixture of eggs and multiple other ingredients 
cooked as a whole disc in the pan and then, when solid, turned out. That is a 
frittata. The rules are simple. Do you cut it into slices to serve it? That is 
a frittata. Does it contain potato? That is a frittata. Does it need finishing 
in the oven or under the grill? Then, 99.9%* of the time, that is also a 
frittata.

* Yes, omelette Arnold Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2015/jun/04/how-to-cook-perfect-omelette-arnold-bennett-recipe>
, arguably Britain’s finest contribution to the breakfast canon, breaks several 
of these strictures, but it is the exception that proves the rule. Kind of.

Eggs

Absolutely necessary. And not just any old eggs. How to Eat hates to disagree 
with such a learned kitchen colossus asHarold McGee 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harold_McGee>, but his assertion, in On Food & 
Cooking, that omelettes are “a good fate for fragile, runny lower-quality 
eggs”, certainly runs contrary to this column’s experience. In any dish where 
eggs are the primary ingredient, the fresher they are the better. If you can 
afford it, free-range is preferable and organic is ideal. Indeed, eggs are one 
of the few ingredients where the organic version (for, no doubt, complex 
reasons of feed, breeding and husbandry) tastes demonstrably better than 
non-organic.

Pan v microwave

An omelette takes about 60 seconds to cook in a frying pan. That a device 
exists to cook themin a microwave 
<http://www.lakeland.co.uk/18401/L%C3%A9ku%C3%A9-Microwave-Omelette-Maker> 
probably says something horrifying about the insidious nature of kitchen 
technology (it not, capitalism itself). However, itdefinitely says something 
unflattering about the tastebuds of anyone who would use one. What is an 
omelette without the nutty surface flavours achieved by lightly browning its 
exterior in foaming butter? How to Eat will tell you: it is a bland, 
parsimonious, colourless (literally and metaphorically) excuse for an omelette. 
If you do not have time – what, five minutes? – to grate some cheese and make 
an omelette in a pan, you do not have time to eat an omelette. Have some toast. 
Or, if convenience is your kink, a Pop Tart.

A word on the egg-white omelette

No.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fhow-to-eat-omelettes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd898dca12c12671dd934018d97f41418583976dd%2F0_358_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20omelettes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fhow-to-eat-omelettes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20omelettes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fhow-to-eat-omelettes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd898dca12c12671dd934018d97f41418583976dd%2F0_358_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Careful with those fillings! Photograph: Alamy 
Filling

And filling is the correct word, incidentally. How to Eat does not want to 
see, for instance, bacon bits lazily scattered on top of an omelette or, 
generally speaking, the filling added to the mix so that it is evenly 
distributed through the omelette. That is borderline frittata territory.

The whole point of an omelette is that you have a creamy, outer-layer of not 
overly dense egg and you then have to dig, calzone-style, into the central 
filling. It builds, if nothing else, anticipation. It also means that if you 
have evenly and generously distributed those ingredients across the omelette 
before folding it, you should get a hefty dose of that fillingin each mouthful. 
Adding the ingredients to the pan first, cooking them, then adding the eggs (or 
adding them to the raw egg mix) makes that far more of a lottery. Of course, 
this means you may have to prep and cook your ingredients first, rather than 
just chucking everything into a pan, but so be it.

Like topping a pizza (see also, the self-explanatory pizza omelette 
<http://www.bbcgoodfood.com/recipes/3451/pizza-omelette>), there is a tendency 
with an omelette to fill it with anything and everything,just because you can. 
Obviously, that is ludicrous. There are a limited number of ingredients that 
will work texturally and, whatever angle of attack you take in terms of flavour 
– broadly, the main three are: salty and/or creamy; light, cleansing and 
vegetal; and mildly spicy – there are only a small number of ingredients which 
genuinely complement the flavour of eggs. There are some truly maverick 
creations out there (ploughmnan’s lunch omelette, complete with pickled onions, 
or various suggestions for using cooked pasta in an omelette), but How to Eat 
will stick to those broadly within the realms of acceptability.

Bad fillings: roasted vegetables; particularly loathsome bell peppers (oily 
and acrid); chicken (awful textural contrast); halloumi, feta and mozzarella 
(three cheeses that do not work in an omelette); asparagus spears (how are we 
supposed to eat this again?); all fruit; the constituent elements of a full 
English breakfast; salad ingredients such as tomatoes, basil and olives which 
are often added from the fridge, no one wants a stone-cold omelette core.

Good fillings: Cheese – preferably a mix of parmesan, gruyere and cheddar; 
ham, bacon, chorizo; smoked salmon (this is one instance where itsoften mushy 
texture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/16/supermarket-smoked-salmon-best-worst-christmas-taste-test>
 barely matters); white crab meat; prawns; smoked haddock, particularly with a 
béchamel, creme fraiche or hollandaise sauce; mushrooms; peas (weirdly); 
caramelised onions; mixed herbs; fresh chilli and coriander; finely sliced, 
grilled/steamed courgette .
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fhow-to-eat-omelettes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1873367d667206aa8ae5d400b6e4e7048240e8c%2F0_1500_4426_2655%2F4426.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20omelettes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fhow-to-eat-omelettes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20omelettes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fhow-to-eat-omelettes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1873367d667206aa8ae5d400b6e4e7048240e8c%2F0_1500_4426_2655%2F4426.jpg>
 What, no chips and salad? Photograph: Alamy 
Accompaniments

Normally, the choice is between chips and salad? But why not both? There is 
something magnificent about the interaction of all that rich egg, a hot, 
rustling pile of glossy, well-seasoned fries (theymust be thinner fries, not 
hulking great Brit-chips), and then the palate-refreshing coolness of a crisp, 
green salad. Something toggling around watercress, rocket, fennel or such. Keep 
the dressing minimal; a drop of oil is fine (anything mustardy-lemony may jar 
and mainstream balsamic vinegar is vile). Watery salads have no role here, nor 
salsas, nor – it is a creamy addition too far – coleslaw.

Beans and toast/bread and butter are, of course, more suitable at breakfast*. 
New potatoes or, much less, jacket potatoes are far too domineering (and 
worthy) in this context. The accompaniments should bring subtle new dimensions 
of flavour to the plate, but they are not the stars of the show. They should 
not detract from or skew the central flavour of the omelette.

*Omelettes can make interesting sandwich fillings.

When

Breakfast, lunch or dinner. An omelette can set you up for the day, fill a 
hole at lunch or satisfy, without over-facing, at 8pm. It is ready in a minute 
or two, and can be assembled, often, from whatever you have in the fridge. It 
is the ultimate utility food.

Drink

Curiously, there is something about the bitter compounds in coffee which make 
it a preferable counterpoint to tea. Otherwise, white wine, sparkling water, 
lighter, pales ales etc.

So, omelettes, how do you eat yours?
 