
Saddle up, Word of Mouth <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth>
! This month,How to Eat  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat>– the blog 
attempting to define the ideal way to enjoy Britain’s favourite dishes – is 
moseying on down the trail, crossing from Texas into Mexico in order to settle, 
once and for all, what constitutes the ultimate chilli con carne. The
International Chili Society 
<http://www.chilicookoff.com/History/History_of_Chili.asp> insists that this 
cannot be done. “From the time the second person on Earth mixed some chile 
peppers with meat and cooked them, the great chilli debate was on; more of a 
war, in fact,” proclaims its website. But what do they know? Being American, 
they can’t even spell “chilli”. And, clearly, they have never encountered How 
to Eat, where, each month, after the moderators have sieved out the threats of 
violence and the dust has settled, a nation invariably comes together as one 
and, smiling wryly to itself, admits: “You know what? That weird, bald fella 
who writes How To Eat? He was right.”* So, without further ado, let’s get to 
rustling up the perfect chilli.

*This may be a slight exaggeration. Subs, could you check back and make sure 
that I am always right? Cheers.

Base

How low can you go? Jacket potato, that is how low. Or chips. Or even mash. 
Like Paul McCartney and Kanye West, “potatoes” and “chilli” are two 
individually brilliant things which, when brought together, produce something 
deeply unpalatable. Texturally, it is all wrong. When combined, minced meat, 
beans and potato morph into an unedifying slop, both lumpy and granular, that 
feels far too filling. You need crampons, not a spoon, to conquer this rapidly 
solidifying, stodge-mountain of carbs, meat and thick sauce.

No, there is a reason why white (longer grain, eg basmati) rice is the go-to 
chilli accompaniment. That is because in its light, clean, toothsome blandness, 
it is the perfect palate-cleansing foil for that relatively heavy meat sauce. 
Unlike potato, rice takes on a coating of sauce, but does not become 
waterlogged by it. You can play around with wild rice etc, but please do not 
pretend that using brown rice is a nutty new taste sensation. Serving anything 
on brown rice is like being forced to eat from a hessian sack full of sawdust.

Rice, similarly, trumps nachos, tortilla or bread. Served over nachos or with 
them lining the rim of bowl in a childish turret formation, the nachos become 
soggy and unappetising. Serve those nachos on the side, as de facto cutlery, 
and you are providing someone with loads of tiny misshapen spoons patently 
unsuitable to the task of scooping up chilli. Tortillas are an equally 
impractical delivery apparatus, and only remain popular because they seem to be 
a thematic Tex-Mex fit. As for bread, on an arc from brittle, parsimonious 
pittas to crusty farmhouse loaves, it all pairs poorly with chilli. Just as you 
should not eat bread with a chunky bean soup, so too, if combined with chilli, 
bread forms a bloating, oddly woolly and (like potato) texturally odd mouthful. 
In short, it feels too much like hard work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjan%2F20%2Fhow-to-eat-chilli-con-carne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F19%2F1421692381439%2Ff080eb0c-2cdd-4994-b87e-74b54cd3bcd6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20chilli%20con%20carne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjan%2F20%2Fhow-to-eat-chilli-con-carne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20chilli%20con%20carne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjan%2F20%2Fhow-to-eat-chilli-con-carne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F19%2F1421692381439%2Ff080eb0c-2cdd-4994-b87e-74b54cd3bcd6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Chilli con carne with bread: too bloating. Photograph: Alamy 
Toppings 

Chilli should be a one-bowl meal: no avocado side salad. And no serving the 
sour cream, cheese etc in dinky little ramekins which a) force you to assemble 
your own meal, and b) because bars and restaurants serve them in such tiny, 
miserly quantities, always leaves you desperately scraping at the sour cream 
pot with a knife. Everything you serve with your chilli should be thick enough 
to sit on top of it, around the plate (so they can be used, in effect, as 
dipping sauces), and should be deposited in generous dollops. Basically, if you 
can still see the surface of your chilli, that is a fail.

Cheese: Grated straight from the fridge, any reasonably good mild cheddar is 
perfect. The stronger flavours of mature cheddar are wasted here – it is too 
domineering, as is sweaty, pungent parmesan. Any cheese must be added at the 
last minute as, particularly if using monterey jack, if it sits on the hot 
chilli for too long it will melt into an unedifying greasy quagmire. Some 
people favour feta or crumblier lancashire cheese with chilli, but both lack 
the pleasing meltability of supermarket cheddar.

Sour cream: Yes, yes, yes. God bless its fresh, acidic twang. Of course, any 
half-fat, fat-free or bizarre almond-milk alternatives are strictly verboten.

Refried beans: No. 

Guacamole: A bone of contention. One (misguided) party argues that guacamole 
adds colour and that its lime, onion and coriander flavours cut a zingy swathe 
across the chilli. On the other wing, there are (righteous) people adamant that 
there is something deeply and unpleasantly incongruous about having this cold, 
thickly blitzed gunk on top of a plate of hot food. Sour cream is a soothing 
emollient to the chilli. Guacamole is a course in itself; a starter best eaten 
with nachos.

Salsa: See guacamole, but even worse, as even the freshest salsas do not hold 
together in a way that you can blob them atop your chilli. Finely diced tomato 
and onion will tumble about, introducing clanging conflicts of temperatures and 
flavour at every turn. As for the more viscous, gluey jarred salsas, they are 
invariably a ludicrously sweet gloop that would be an insult to your chilli.

Fundamentally, rice + chilli x cheese ÷ sour cream = perfection. It leaves you 
with heat, meat and rich, rib-sticking flavours, but also cooler, fresher 
components, held together in a taut complementary tension. It allows everything 
to shine, particularly the chilli. Adding anything else would upset this 
equilibrium.

Garnishes and condiments

There is almost nothing that requires garnishing with chopped 
parsley/coriander. It is like someone emptying their hedge trimmings over your 
tea. Finely sliced fresh chillies and/or jalapeños should also be avoided, as 
should adding chilli sauces, such as Tabasco or sriracha, at the table. If you 
cook heat into your chilli, it is smoothly amalgamated into the the dish, 
whereas dressing it with fresh chillies and chilli sauces introduces 
unpredictable, destabilising raw heat. If you have patiently created a chilli 
with real depth and complexity of flavour, why jeopardise that? The only 
garnish a chilli needs is a handful of crushed nachos, for salty, crunchy 
contrast.

The chilli

Meat: Mince is fine, but if you really want to go to town, there is something 
far more satisfying – in terms of fibrous bite and muscular resistance (hat tip,
Jamie Oliver 
<http://www.jamieoliver.com/recipes/beef-recipes/chilli-con-jamie/#Ob4hsJTFVprE1hUW.97>
), about slow-cooking a piece of beef brisket or stewing steak, then shredding 
the meat in the sauce before you serve it. “But it feels like pulled pork,” 
people howl, as if the world has shifted on its axis. But have no fear. You are 
not doing a sponsored skydive for charity. You are just eating some 
different-shaped meat. If you want to a chuck in some chorizo too, who could 
object? Chorizo makes everything better. (NB In food, that is. I am not a 
qualified medical doctor.)

Seasonings: Getting busy with the ground cumin, cinnamon sticks, paprika etc 
is definitely worth it, as is investing in ancho and smoky chipotle chillies, 
rather than just using plain old blunt, brutish chilli powder.

Beans: It is difficult to go wrong here: pinto, black beans, borlotti for the 
mavericks, the more the merrier. Kidney beans are vital.

Vegetables: Beyond the obvious (onions, tomatoes, garlic), there is little to 
add and certainly no role – unless you roast and skin them and cook that plump 
flesh to a disintegrating tenderness – for the ubiquitous bell pepper. Nothing 
ruins a chilli more than bulking it out with great, bitter, watery chunks of 
red or green pepper. Essentially, any veg in a chilli should have melted 
indistinguishably into the sauce.

Veggie chilli
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjan%2F20%2Fhow-to-eat-chilli-con-carne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F19%2F1421692459648%2F44c381e4-c6c3-49d9-8c38-6b128c214bfc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20chilli%20con%20carne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjan%2F20%2Fhow-to-eat-chilli-con-carne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20chilli%20con%20carne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjan%2F20%2Fhow-to-eat-chilli-con-carne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F19%2F1421692459648%2F44c381e4-c6c3-49d9-8c38-6b128c214bfc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Chilli on potato? No, no, no. Photograph: Alamy 
This is an entirely different beast to a meat chilli: naturally brighter and 
lighter in its flavours, and one where, conversely, you want some of the 
ingredients to retain their structural integrity. Veggie chilli stands on its 
own merits, particularly when no attempt is made to directly substitute the 
meat (Quorn has all the character of polystyrene packing material). It is also 
versatile in that, with every ingredient you throw in, you are building in 
flavour. Which is not to say that anything goes – see below. Cooking a veggie 
chilli also requires significant patience, given that ideally you will need to 
add the vegetables in stages, in order to ensure that they all emerge cooked to 
a T (the commonplace crime here is undercooked ingredients).

Acceptable: Onion, tomato, celery, carrot, broccoli or cauliflower (stems, no 
florets), finely sliced kale/cabbage, peppers (with above proviso), butternut 
squash, assorted beans: kidney, pinto etc but also chickpeas, cannellini, 
butter beans.

Unacceptable: Leeks, peas, mushrooms, snotty, sludgy courgettes, aubergine, 
lentils (pulse overkill and they lack the beany heft you expect in a chilli), 
sweetcorn (wrong in any hot food), sweet potato (the clue’s in the name, twice) 
and standard potato.

How to serve

Rice, chilli, sour cream, cheese, crushed nachos (optional), guacamole (if you 
really must). Dinner plate or wide, shallow bowl. Some people have conniptions 
if you serve the chilli and rice together. Why? Do they want to sprinkle the 
rice on top? Serve each side by side? Lunacy! Make a well in the rice and ladle 
the chilli in, so that it lubricates the grains. And, crucially, do not serve 
too much bloating rice (around 40% rice, 60% chilli).

Chilli abuses

Potatoes (eg chilli-topped fries) we have covered above. Like Celebrity Big 
Brother, it is dumb junk. Exciting for a couple of mouthfuls; a slog to finish. 
Topping burgers or hotdogs with chilli is also bizarre, given that any 
reasonably potent chilli will swamp the flavour of the patty or dog, which 
would only be positive were you attempting to mask a crap product.

When

Lunchtime or evenings; chilli is not a breakfast dish … is it?

Drink

Cold beer, room-temperature red wine, iced water or even milk, if you 
accidentally dropped the chilli powder as you were cooking.

So, chilli con carne: how do you eat yours?
 