
Expect Arsenal to have the ball. Expect Olympiakos not to care. The joke in 
Greece goes that Olympiakos’s desire to play on the break creates the 
impression the thought of passing straight to their opponents has crossed their 
mind and, if Arsenal are to secure the two-goal margin of victory they need to 
qualify for the last 16 of theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> on Wednesday, then 
Arsène Wenger will have to come up with a cunning tactical plan against a team 
who will be happy to sit back and soak up pressure.

Playing at home will not compel Olympiakos to attack or distract them from 
their primary task, which will be to contain and frustrate Wenger’s side. Nor 
will they allow themselves to be lured out of their defensive shape because of 
Arsenal’s sprawling injury list. They will not be quite as defensive as José 
Mourinho’s Internazionale were when they drove Barcelona madin their 2010 
semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/apr/28/barcelona-internazionale-champions-league>
. Yet even if Olympiakos decide to test a depleted Arsenal’s nerve in the 
opening exchanges at the intimidating Karaiskakis Stadium, it is unlikely they 
will be gung ho.

Arsenal’s Aaron Ramsey could hold key in crunch Olympiakos match
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/06/arsenal-aaron-ramsey-olympiakos-champions-league-sunderland>
Marco Silva is a pragmatist who does not mind conceding possession and the 
Olympiakos manager decided at the start the best way for his unfancied team to 
get out of a group containing two of Europe’s strongest sides was to adopt a 
cautious mentality.Olympiakos <https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos> 
are seen as the Manchester United of Greece and their supporters expect 
attractive football whenever possible but that has often been their undoing in 
the Champions League. They have been guilty of approaching games against 
European giants as they would cannon fodder in the Greek Super League, often 
with dire consequences.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Farsene-wenger-arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F9%2F1449661206493%2FKP_709156_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%3A%20Arsenal%20can%20win%20anywhere%20in%20Europe%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Farsene-wenger-arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%3A%20Arsenal%20can%20win%20anywhere%20in%20Europe%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Farsene-wenger-arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F9%2F1449661206493%2FKP_709156_crop_640x360.jpg>
Arsène Wenger: Arsenal can win anywhere in Europe – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/dec/09/arsene-wenger-arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-video>
Olympiakos have learned from their mistakes, repeated disappointments forcing 
them to lower their sights and to play with a little more pragmatism in Europe. 
Their mindset has become more realistic. It was already changing before Silva 
arrived from Sporting Lisbon in the summer but the Portuguese has intensified 
Olympiakos’s organisation. They have even been counterattacking in the big 
domestic matches and the style brought them a 2-0 victory at PAOK Salonika and 
a 4-0 win over AEK Athens in October, scoring goals without being overly 
attacking.

Arsène Wenger confident Arsenal can defeat Olympiakos to progress
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/25/arsene-wenger-arsenal-olympiakos-dinamo-zagreb>
After 12 games they are 10 points clear of AEK at the top of the league – with 
a game in hand – having won every match, even if they increased their number of 
goals conceded from five to eight on Saturday, when they let a comfortable 4-1 
advantage over Panthrakikos with three minutes to play turn into a nervy 4-3 
victory. Their record is testament to their superior resources: Olympiakos have 
won the title in 17 of the past 19 seasons, although their record leaves a sour 
taste in the mouth of their opponents.

Olympiakos have been embroiled in Greek football’s match-fixing crisis, with 
their president, Evangelos Marinakis,one of the accused in the scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/04/sixteen-charged-greek-football-match-fixing-investigation>
. However Marinakis denies all claims he conspired to fix domestic matches and 
Olympiakos were cleared to play in the Champions League after allegations made 
by their rivals Panathinaikos were rejected by the court of arbitration for 
sport. Uefa said neither the Greek football federation “nor the criminal courts 
in Athens have rendered any final decision against Mr Marinakis or the club”.

Olympiakos’s reprieve has left Silva to implement a playing system that has 
served them well in the Champions League. Like Bayern Munich Olympiakos’s 
near-invincibility at home means their seasons are defined by their 
performances in the Champions League.

When Olympiakos hosted Bayern in their opening group match in September, the 
38-year-old Silva knew there was no chance of victory. It was an opportunity 
for his players to test their defensive qualities against the elite and,
although Bayern won 3-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/16/olympiakos-bayern-munich-champions-league-match-report>
, he was satisfied with the performance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fmarco-silva-olympiakos-arsenal-champions-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7dee7237be3e3287234d1766bca217673b6f76b%2F0_179_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Marco%20Silva%E2%80%99s%20Olympiakos%20plan%20to%20oust%20Arsenal%20from%20Champions%20League%20%7C%20Jacob%20Steinberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fmarco-silva-olympiakos-arsenal-champions-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Marco%20Silva%E2%80%99s%20Olympiakos%20plan%20to%20oust%20Arsenal%20from%20Champions%20League%20%7C%20Jacob%20Steinberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fmarco-silva-olympiakos-arsenal-champions-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7dee7237be3e3287234d1766bca217673b6f76b%2F0_179_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
 Marco Silva, the head coach of Olympiakos, is a pragmatist who does not mind 
conceding possession. Photograph: Alexander Hassenstein/Bongarts/Getty Images 
Silva’s optimism was justified when Olympiakos visited Arsenal in their second 
matchand won 3-2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report>
 thanks to a measured performance.Arsenal contributed to their own downfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league>
 with their lethargy out of possession in a match when Wenger’s decision to 
play David Ospina instead of Petr Cech backfired.

Olympiakos deserved credit for the way they slowly asserted themselves, taking 
the sting out of the occasion and waiting for openings to appear before 
pouncing. They scored three goals without playingArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> off the park. It has been a 
recurring theme this season.

If there is a problem with their reactive style, it appears when Olympiakos 
are expected to take the game to their opponents. Arsenal would not be in such 
a quandary if Olympiakoshad not grabbed late winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/20/dinamo-zagreb-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report>
 in both oftheir matches against Dinamo Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/olympiakos-dinamo-zagreb-champions-league-match-report>
.

They have scored 35 goals in the league and what they lack in prolific 
individuals they make up for in their teamwork, understanding and work rate. 
Kostas Fortounis, the former Asteras Tripolis prodigy, has been revitalised 
after struggling to impress at Kaiserslautern and the 23-year-old has scored 10 
league goals this season, four of them penalties. Felipe Pardo’s runs offer 
thrust on the flanks and, although Alfred Finnbogason, who scored the winner 
against Arsenal in September, was expected to start up front, Brown Ideye’s 
unselfish link-up play means he is perfectly suited to playing in a lone role.

Esteban Cambiasso has not played as much as he would have liked because of a 
couple of minor injuries but, instead of complaining about sitting on the 
bench, the midfielder has used his vast experience to guide Olympiakos’s young 
players. Having played for Mourinho’s Inter, Cambiasso knows what it is like to 
turn down possession. Arsenal will have the ball. Will they have the ingenuity?
 