
“Meatballs are the ultimate cure-all for anything that ails you,” declared 
Daniel Holzman and Michael Chernow <http://www.themeatballshop.com/team/>in The 
Meatball Shop Cookbook. Medically misleading as that statement is (for 
instance, penicillin is considerably more effective in fighting syphilis), it 
is, nonetheless,spiritually true. Hence the meatball’s extraordinary popularity.

Globally, it is not so much cloudy with a chance of meatballs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/18/cloudy-with-chance-of-meatballs> 
as permanently raining spherical flesh. The subject of this month’sHow To Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat>, may, in the west, 
be closely associated with the mystifyingly popular spaghetti with meatballs, 
but meatballs are, in fact, universally popular.Every tribe 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kofta> has a version: from Spanish albondigas to 
Swedish köttbullar, fiery Levantine kofte to ethereal Italian polpette, the 
rubbery Vietnamese bo vien found bobbing in pho tokoofteh tabrizi  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/dec/05/persian-meatballs-recipe-sabrina-ghayour-cook-residency>
(an XXL Persian version made with split-peas and fruit).

And why? Because meatballs are the ultimate comfort food. They are fuss-free 
eating that in each hot, savoury, flavour-packed, lubricious ball offers 
instant feel-good gratification.

Naturally, that ubiquity does not necessarily foster harmony. Instead everyone,
everywhere thinks they know how best to make and eat meatballs. The only thing 
that meatball aficionados in Beijing and Bologna would agree on (possibly), is 
that the tinned ones are rubbish.

What is a meatball?

Thankfully, the how of meatballs (bread or none, whole egg or yolk, raw onion 
or puree?), falls outside HTE’s remit. It is a Sisyphean debate. That said, we 
can settle on some broad rules of meatball engagement, plainly obvious dos and 
don’ts:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fhow-to-eat-meatballs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dd2f388f507c62e99e779775ec63fa123891514%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20meatballs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fhow-to-eat-meatballs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20meatballs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fhow-to-eat-meatballs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dd2f388f507c62e99e779775ec63fa123891514%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Traditional Swedish meatballs with mashed potatoes. Photograph: Getty 
Images/iStockphoto 
1. Meatballs must be made with pork, beef, lamb or some combination of the 
three. Duck, venison, pheasant and turkey (heavens above!) are not nearly fatty 
enough.

2. The clue is in the name. You cannot make meatballs with vegetables. 
Linguistically,there may be a precedent  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/jul/03/how-to-make-perfect-kofte>
for veggie kofte and meat-free balls are eaten globally, but, plainly, a sphere 
of lentils and mushroom is, in its every characteristic, not a meatball.

3. Same goes for fish.

4. Meatballs are not canapés. They are not a dainty finger food.

5. Do not hide nuggets of mozzarella in them. We are not five years-old.

A note on spaghetti and meatballs

For reasons of US cultural dominance rather than culinary common sense, this 
dish has, certainly in the west, asserted itself as the pinnacle of meatball 
appreciation. Yet, this Italian-American creation 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/is-spaghetti-and-meatballs-italian-94819690/?no-ist>
 is a faff that lacks true cohesion in its flavours and peculiar textures.

Fundamentally, the meal “meatballs” should be the last word in informal eating 
– a meal you can eat one-handed, elbows-on-the-table, fork or spoon in one mitt 
(no knife) and bread in the other. It should require no more effort than the 
splitting of a readily yielding meatball with your cutlery and, next, scooping 
that meat up with whatever is around it on the plate. Spaghetti or any long 
ribbon pasta, in contrast, is a right palaver.


Even if the meatballs are tiny, you have to either a) laboriously mash them 
into the spaghetti or b) skewer each one and then try to twirl the pasta on to 
the end of your already laden fork. Not easy. Then there is the dull uniform 
texture of smooth meatballs and silky pasta and the further issue that, after 
ladling your balls and sauce on to the pasta, that sauce never penetrates and 
adheres to the pasta in the comprehensive way you would like. You are left 
eating a dish that, though the pasta, meatballs and sauce are in close 
proximity on the plate, never quite comes together as one. Those components 
exist almost independently of one another, rather than cohering in a thoroughly 
amalgamated, complementary way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fhow-to-eat-meatballs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd10551f9ff8514953ef3342250dd58d2c3ffafb1%2F0_0_6666_4992%2F6666.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20meatballs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fhow-to-eat-meatballs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20meatballs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fhow-to-eat-meatballs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd10551f9ff8514953ef3342250dd58d2c3ffafb1%2F0_0_6666_4992%2F6666.jpg>
 Just don’t do this, please. Photograph: Brian Macdonald/Getty Images 
No, if you want to eat pasta and meatballs, then bake small ones into a 
cheesy, oozing ovenproof dish of penne or,as the Romans do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/oct/31/meatballs-tomato-sauce-recipe-roman-food>
, serve the pasta with the cooking sauce first and then meatballs in more of 
that sauce asil secondo piatto.

Good and bad meatballs

Unless they are unusually fat-laced and juicy, meatballs need some 
lubrication, a condiment, sauce or gravy. As discussed, what they are added to 
or served with should all be easily edible with a fork or spoon. You should not 
need to cut anything.

Good ways to serve meatballs: With tomato sauce and crusty bread; with mash, 
gravy and either conveniently bite-sized veg (peas, shredded cabbage) or 
pickled vegetables, eg red cabbage or beetroot; in a modest pool of, 
essentially, a dipping sauce – tahini sauce, tzatziki, sour cream; solo in a 
creamy sauce or one threaded with a readily wilting leafy veg (eg spinach); 
with jazzed-up rice; baked, shakshuka-style, with eggs; in hearty soups and 
smoky stews; with salads that offer contrast, crunch and sympathetic flavours 
(panzanella); in a pasta bake; with al dente pearl barley; with potato salad.

Additional toppings: Many of the above combinations will be further improved 
by a sprinkling of fried onions, chopped herbs (a rare instance in which such a 
layer of greenery is an active positive), breadcrumbs, parmesan, smoked paprika,
 dukkah <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duqqa> or toasted nuts.

Bad ways to serve meatballs: With spaghetti; with cous cous (which, on contact 
with any sauce, turns to inedible silt); with polenta (an abomination against 
God); with Jamie Oliver’s “smashed celeriac mash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2010/apr/26/jamie-oliver-swedish-meatballs-recipe>
” (an abomination against language); with courgetti or any spiralised 
vegetables; with great grated mounds or lumps of cheese, particularly hard 
cheeses (it just becomes a slog); with chips or sautéed potatoes (too greasy 
and there is an odd “squeaky” textural contrast between the meatballs and fried 
potatoes); with mash and random garden vegetables of the will-this-do British 
variety; with brown rice, because life is short.

A note on the meatball sandwich
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fhow-to-eat-meatballs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79c57eccdcff9938f9ebc8b753d6d6351c40df59%2F388_616_6485_3893%2F6485.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20meatballs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fhow-to-eat-meatballs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20meatballs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fhow-to-eat-meatballs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79c57eccdcff9938f9ebc8b753d6d6351c40df59%2F388_616_6485_3893%2F6485.jpg>
 Maximum meatball for minimum effort. Photograph: Martin Lee / Alamy/Alamy 
 Given HTE’s stance – that eating meatballs is all about getting that 
delicious hot meat into your face with minimum effort – then, understandably, 
it wholeheartedly approves of stuffing them into a sandwich. It may be the 
ultimate delivery method. That said, the eastern Mediterranean-style pita/ wrap 
stuffed with a little crumbled feta, hummus, tzatziki, garlic sauce and loads 
of fresh salad, or the German way on dark rye with mustard or horseradish, are 
both far superior – to name but two examples – tothe commonplace meatball sub 
<http://www.seriouseats.com/2015/01/how-to-make-the-best-italian-american-meatball-sandwich.html>
. In its sweet, lumpen combination of onions, cheese and meat, the meatball sub 
offers a peculiarly limited spectrum of flavours, with little to lighten that 
stodgy load. Plus, putting all but the tiniest dot of gravy or marinara sauce 
on a sandwich is lunacy. No one likes wet bread.

Drink 

Red wine, beer, sparkling water (still water often dilutes saucy dishes; it 
kills the flavour on your palate). Keep any soft drinks within the realms of 
common sense – Irn Bru and Dr Pepper do not go with polpette. And, northerners, 
accept that, for once, this is not a tea that you would drink tea with.

When

Lunch or dinner. In many ways, meatballs is the ultimate modular meal. It has 
no set weight or size. Peckish? Eat a couple. Hungry? Eat a bucket load.

So, meatballs, how do you eat yours?
 