
It’s that time of year when Britain is besieged by little green veg. As any 
kitchen gardener who has ever tenderly bedded in a courgette plant, fondly 
envisaging a couple of gratins 
<http://www.bbcgoodfood.com/recipes/2369639/summer-courgette-and-tomato-gratin>
, will ruefully attest, they are more prolific than Barbara Cartland, and 
similarly long-lived. After a couple of weeks of courgettes with everything, 
even the most committed cucurbitophile might feel the romance turning sour.

The solution? Well, you can turn them into chutney 
<http://www.olivemagazine.com/recipes/spiced-courgette-chutney/4953.html> or 
pickle <http://www.bbcgoodfood.com/recipes/681665/crunchy-courgette-pickle>, of 
course, to keep your relationship alive even when the plants are finally 
exhausted. You can freak your kids out with a courgette cake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/aug/16/nigel-slater-courgette>. 
Or you can save yourself a lot of time and effort, and turn them into fritters 
– because it is scientifically impossible to tire of hot, crisp little cakes, 
fresh from the frying pan.

While they might seem like the easiest thing in the world to put together, as 
a reader who put forward the idea in the first place has found, there’s an 
awful lot of sub-standard recipes out there that make a mockery of your 
homegrown bounty. Courgettes may be easy to grow, but they are not always that 
easy to cook.

The courgettes
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e5576168c96d6639afabb20c208a1bae081c3ad%2F0_492_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20fritters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20fritters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e5576168c96d6639afabb20c208a1bae081c3ad%2F0_492_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Vefa Alexiadou’s fritters. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Opinion is divided as to whether the courgettes should be salted to draw out 
their liquid before use: Janet MacDonald, author of the magnificently specific 
recipe book Pumpkins and Squashes (sadly the even more niche title Cooking with 
Courgettes, which I also have in my possession, is silent on the subject of 
fritters) expressly cautions against this step, on the basis that “your batter 
will get diluted before you’ve finished cooking”.BBC Good Food magazine 
<http://www.bbcgoodfood.com/recipes/2249638/courgette-fritters>, food writer 
Katy Salter 
<http://www.theclerkenwellpost.com/food-drink/386-cook-like-a-clerkenwell-chef-courgette-fritters-with-eggs>
 and Greek cookery iconVefa Alexiadou 
<http://ellenbcookery.blogspot.co.uk/2012/07/zucchini-fritters-grated-and-awards.html>
 are of the same opinion. In the opposite camp, chef Bill Granger, Deb Perelman 
of theSmitten Kitchen blog 
<https://smittenkitchen.com/2011/08/zucchini-fritters/>, and Martha Rose 
Shulman of the New York Times <http://www.apple.com/> all recommend not only 
salting the grated courgette, but squeezing out the liquid as vigorously as 
possible before use. Perelman writes: “You’ll be shocked (I was!) by the amount 
of liquid you’ll lose, but this is a good thing as it will save the fritters 
from sogginess.”

While it’s certainly possible to make decent courgette fritters without this 
step, should you be in a tearing hurry, the extra liquid imparts a slightly 
sloppy quality that requires delicate handling in the pan, and makes them 
obstinately averse to crisping up. Wring them out, and you will have more solid 
foundations for your fritters, which means you can use more courgette and less 
batter – which has to be a good thing in a dish designed to make the most of 
them (and use them up). An initial salting, of course, helps to season this 
undeniably bland vegetable more effectively than doing so after cooking.

Perelman also writes that she prefers to use a food processor rather than a 
grater on her courgettes: “I’m convinced it creates the coarsest and most 
rope-like strands and frankly, I like my fritters to look like mops.” Unless 
you’re making a lot, however, I find it creates too much washing up – and 
there’s something oddly satisfying about grating something as soft and obliging 
as a squash.

The batter
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06283f18dd1599156bea9a64881343aed77aca5d%2F0_320_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20fritters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20fritters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06283f18dd1599156bea9a64881343aed77aca5d%2F0_320_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 BBC Good Food’s fritters. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The simplest recipes, from MacDonald and Granger, bind the courgette strands 
together with a mixture of flour and beaten egg. BBC Good Food makes a wetter, 
more pancake-like batter with milk as well as eggs, that gives a firm, almost 
frittata-like result – pleasant enough, but not as crisp as I would like.

Alexiadou’s recipe comes from her book of vegan recipes, Sunny Mediterranean 
Cuisine, “inspired by the tradition of theNistia – the Christian church fast”, 
and as such, uses water, rather than eggs, which would probably work better for 
a more stridently flavoured vegetable, but leaves testers reaching for the hot 
sauce here.

Shulman substitutes flour for breadcrumbs to make what she describes as “a 
Greek version of latkes” – not bad if you also happen to have a heel in need of 
using up, but a bit soggy if not – and Salter swaps it for fine polenta in her 
book Dairy-Free Delicious, which, as she observes, not only makes them 
gluten-free, but adds “extra crunch”. They are indeed utterly delicious, 
though, for the gluten-tolerant among us, I think a mixture of flour and 
polenta would work even better; hers are quite delicate to manoeuvre, and not 
only does flour act as a more effective glue, but it will also make the cakes 
slightly softer inside, as a contrast to the crunchy outer layer.

After eating their body weight in fritters, the panel concludes the best are 
those in which the stands of courgette are just held together with the bare 
minimum of batter – too much and they become doughy and heavy.

Raising agent
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc58d4112a2c89346e72b08be11e2347b30a4316b%2F0_224_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20fritters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20fritters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc58d4112a2c89346e72b08be11e2347b30a4316b%2F0_224_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Katy Salter’s fritters Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
You certainly don’t need a raising agent in a fritter – Shulman, Granger and 
MacDonald make perfectly good ones without any such thing, but as Perelman, who 
uses baking powder, enthuses: “You wouldn’t believe how amazing it makes them, 
how they just lift off the pan when they’re flipped.” It also gives them a 
fluffier texture.

Interestingly, Alexiadou’s fritters are yeast-risen, like little green-flecked 
crumpets. They’re not fritters as I know them but, with a little fat in the 
batter, they could be a very tasty alternative.

Flavourings
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd13ba2d6c063ef4355af4e3580d8d3b1dd1a23b6%2F0_198_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20fritters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20fritters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd13ba2d6c063ef4355af4e3580d8d3b1dd1a23b6%2F0_198_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Martha Rose Shulman’s fritters. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
BBC Good Food keeps its fritters plain, but courgettes are crying out for some 
help in the flavour department. Not too much, though – Granger and Shulman’s 
feta cheese, though it pairs well with the vegetable, is very much the dominant 
partner in the relationship, which seems a shame unless you’re actively trying 
to disguise their presence.

The same goes for Alexiadou’s dill, Granger’s mint and parsley, and even the 
basil in MacDonald’s Italian-accented version – they’re lovely, and this is the 
kind of blank canvas of a dish that can take any of them, but if you want to 
taste the courgette go easy on the herbs. A similarly delicate hand is required 
on the spice rack: Salter uses smoked paprika, and Shulman cumin, but to my 
mind, the sweeter, gentler spice of MacDonald’s nutmeg is more complementary to 
the subtle, slightly creamy flavour of the courgette.

For exactly the same reason, the greener, fresher flavour of spring onion is a 
better match for a summer squash than MacDonald’s more pungent shallot. Like 
Salter’s fresh chilli, I think it would be best saved for the accompanying dip, 
though, truth be told, I could, and do, eat these on their own, hot from the 
pan. After a week of wall-to-wall courgette, that’s quite some boast.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1daf4f35227a9556348436210d9b46435b529ad%2F0_547_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20fritters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20courgette%20fritters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fhow-to-cook-perfect-courgette-fritters-recipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1daf4f35227a9556348436210d9b46435b529ad%2F0_547_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Bill Granger’s fritters. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Perfect courgette fritters

(Makes 10)
500g courgettes
½ tsp sea salt
40g plain flour
½ tsp baking powder
20g fine polenta or cornmeal
4 spring onions, finely chopped
2 eggs, beaten
Grating of nutmeg
Optional: 15g fresh herbs, chopped (I like dill), and 100g crumbled feta
Oil, to cook

Coarsely grate the courgettes into a colander and toss with the salt. Leave to 
drain for between 30 minutes and an hour, and then squeeze out very thoroughly 
and put into a large mixing bowl.

Mix the flour, polenta and baking powder together well, then stir into the 
courgettes, along with the spring onions, beaten eggs and a good grating of 
nutmeg (and the herbs or feta, if using). Season again lightly.

Coat the base of a frying pan with a decent layer of oil and put on a 
medium-high heat. When hot, dollop spoonfuls of the batter around the base and 
flatten slightly. Cook for a couple of minutes until golden brown, then flip 
and repeat. Blot with kitchen towel and serve immediately, while hot.

Are fritters the single most delicious way to deal with a glut in the garden, 
or do you have other, more exciting tricks up your sleeve for courgettes and 
other seasonal veg?
 