
On 15 September 2016, the small town of Sassuolo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sassuolo> in the north west of Italy 
geared up for something special. With a population of 41,000, the town in the 
Province of Modena is not accustomed to major sporting events. But last month 
they welcomed Athletic Bilbao to the Stadio Città del Tricolore for Sassuolo’s 
first ever European outing – something the town could never have imagined a 
decade ago.

The story of the club’s transformation will make you believe in miracles. They 
were playing in the fourth tier of Italian football in 2006 with little or no 
ambition of making it this far, this quickly. But on that fine evening last 
month, reality hit and the 7,000 fans who gathered in the stadium created an 
atmosphere that will not be forgotten in a hurry. As the town mayor Claudio 
Pistoni put it: “The image that Sassuolo Calcio is giving to the town is huge. 
It is a matter of pride for all, even for those who do not love football.”

Sassuolo won 3-0 
<http://www.uefa.com/uefaeuropaleague/video/highlights/videoid=2405293.html> 
and announced their arrival on the European stage in fine fashion. Having 
wandered between Serie C2 and Serie D in the 1980s and 1990s, the club’s 
dramatic upswing had grown men in tears that night.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c343199ec7071c4df03b484b6b4625e5e9d5389%2F0_0_3000_2167%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Sassuolo%20went%20from%20Italy's%20fourth%20tier%20to%20the%20Europa%20League%20in%20a%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Sassuolo%20went%20from%20Italy%27s%20fourth%20tier%20to%20the%20Europa%20League%20in%20a%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c343199ec7071c4df03b484b6b4625e5e9d5389%2F0_0_3000_2167%2F3000.jpg>
 Sassuolo fans watch their club play European football for the first time. 
Photograph: Giuseppe Bellini/Getty Images 
Sassuolo were in Serie C2 – Italy’s fourth tier – as recently as 2006 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2005%E2%80%9306_Serie_C2>. They earned promotion 
to Serie C1 that summer and, after a season of consolidation, they brought in 
current Juventus boss Max Allegri to take them further. Allegri joined the club 
in August 2007 and left the following April with promotion already secured. By 
taking Sassuolo to Serie B for the first time, he had made enough of an impact 
for Serie A club Cagliari to appoint him as their head coach. He would later win
Scudetti with Milan and Juventus – and help Sassuolo achieve their European 
dream.

Sassuolo adapted to Serie B quickly. After finishing in seventh in the 2008-09 
season <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2008%E2%80%9309_Serie_B>, they improved 
again and made the promotion playoffsthe following season 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2009%E2%80%9310_Serie_B> under the guidance of 
former Juventus and Fiorentina centre-half Stefano Pioli, only to lose out in 
the semi-finals to Torino over two legs.

The club suffered similar disappointment in the 2011-12 season 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2011%E2%80%9312_Serie_B>, when they finished 
third in the league and lost in the playoff semi-finals, this time to eventual 
promotion winners Sampdoria. The side were consistent and determined but they 
couldn’t find the right leader to take them to the promised land of Serie A. 
The club’s owner, Giorgio Squinzi, an avid Milan supporter and CEO ofMapei 
Industries <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mapei>, made a move and appointed 
former Roma and Italy midfielderEusebio Di Francesco 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eusebio_Di_Francesco>.

Di Francesco is often compared to Jürgen Klopp for his enthusiasm for the game 
and exuberant dress sense. He turns up for matches in hipster glasses and 
finely tailored suits. Named after the legendary Portuguese footballerEusébio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/06/eusebio-a-life-in-video>
, Di Francesco’s skill and talent as a manager reflect his name. He has 
inherited some qualities from his old Roma manager and mentor Zdenek Zeman, 
such as the effective use of the Dutch-inspired 4-3-3 formation. A pragmatist, 
optimist and disciplinarian, Di Francesco made Squinzi certain that he was the 
right man to take the club forward.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed3fcae08a5a950963242c7c11f711516a0de76d%2F433_52_1664_2235%2F1664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Sassuolo%20went%20from%20Italy's%20fourth%20tier%20to%20the%20Europa%20League%20in%20a%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Sassuolo%20went%20from%20Italy%27s%20fourth%20tier%20to%20the%20Europa%20League%20in%20a%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed3fcae08a5a950963242c7c11f711516a0de76d%2F433_52_1664_2235%2F1664.jpg>
 Sassuolo coach Eusebio Di Francesco. Photograph: Marco Bertorello/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Di Francesco brought a blistering style of football to Sassuolo in the 2012-13 
campaign <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2012%E2%80%9313_Serie_B>. With players 
such as Domenico Berardi (who became the club’s all-time top-scorer at the age 
of 21), midfielder Simone Missiroli and the evergreen Francesco Magnanelli, the
Neroverdi dominated the second division and were on top of the table for most 
of the season. While Sassuolo were making waves on the pitch, Di Francesco was 
being talked up in boardrooms across Italy, with Milan and Fiorentina 
reportedly interested.

On the final day of the season Sassuolo needed to beat Livorno to seal their 
promotion to Serie A. Simone Missiroli scored in thesixth minute of stoppage 
time <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VssDAQDk_Pg> to take them up as 
champions. The goal prompted jubilant celebrations from the staff and fans. 
What had seemed impossible just a couple of years before had just been achieved 
with maximum drama. The very next day, almost every Sassuolo native was present 
at theGaribaldi Square 
<http://www.visitsassuolo.it/visit-sassuolo/en/piazza-garibaldi-sassuolo/> to 
celebrate their heroes. Mayor Claudio Pistoni proudly declared Sassuolo as “a 
Serie A town”, sending the cheering crowd wild.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c7bcce0dabc56c8f3cf6d363ef8eeb5c17645b3%2F98_271_2974_1784%2F2974.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Sassuolo%20went%20from%20Italy's%20fourth%20tier%20to%20the%20Europa%20League%20in%20a%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Sassuolo%20went%20from%20Italy%27s%20fourth%20tier%20to%20the%20Europa%20League%20in%20a%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c7bcce0dabc56c8f3cf6d363ef8eeb5c17645b3%2F98_271_2974_1784%2F2974.jpg>
 Sassuolo players celebrate after winning the Serie B title in May 2013. 
Photograph: Elisabetta Baracchi/EPA 
With the club now in Serie A, they wanted a secure home. In December 2013, the 
club acquired full rights to the nearbyMapei Stadium in Reggio-Emilia 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mapei_Stadium_%E2%80%93_Citt%C3%A0_del_Tricolore>
 after owner Giorgio Squinzi bought it at a public auction. They became the 
first of three Serie A clubs, along with Juventus and Udinese, to have complete 
control of their own arena. Many of the fans were unhappy about having to 
travel to games but the purchase was a statement of intent from the owner. 
Squinzi also showed his willingness to spend when he signed a€22m-a-season 
shirt sponsorship deal with Mapei 
<http://www.football-italia.net/74140/sassuolo-top-shirt-sponsors>.

Visiting the most historic clubs and stadiums in the country became the norn 
for Sassuolo fans in the 2013-14 season but the results were unfamiliar. In 
Sassuolo’s first season in the top flight, they lost to the traditional 
powerhouses of Italian football; Lazio, Roma, Juventus and Inter all overcame 
the Sassuolo challenge, with the latter coming to Modena and trouncing them 
7-0. However, there was one memorable win over Milan in a game that finished 
4-3, with the ever-presentDomenico Berardi scoring all four Sassuolo goals 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bGktqIMw834>. The result was a bittersweet 
pill to swallow for their Milan-supporting owner.

The Milan scalp was a morale-booster for the fans but, when the team followed 
it up with consecutive defeats to Torino and Livorno, Di Francesco was given 
the boot. Giorgio Squinzi phoned up his friends at Milan in the hope that he 
could lure Filippo Inzaghi to Sassuolo but the advances were rejected. Squinzi 
had to settle for Alberto Malesani, who is best known for winning theUefa Cup 
with Parma in 1999 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1999_UEFA_Cup_Final> and a 
spectacular rant he delivered <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ysnoRO7MYlQ> 
while in charge of Panathinaikos that contained more than 20 uses of the 
Italian curse word “cazzo 
<https://www.google.co.uk/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=cazzo%20translation>
”. Sample line: “I’m here 24 hours a day, 24 hours a day I’m here – EVERY 
SINGLE FUCKING DAY.”

Sassuolo: Serie A alternative club guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2015/mar/02/sassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide>
His stint didn’t last long – five games, in fact, with no wins. He was out of 
the door, and in came Di Francesco once again, proclaiming that he had never 
unpacked his bags. Sassuolo were four points away from safety upon his arrival 
and he guided them to an impressive 17 points in the final 12 games, wrapping 
up survival with a match to spare. The Sassuolo story in the top division would 
carry on for one more season, at least.


Having ended the previous campaign in scintillating form, Sassuolo went into 
the 2014-15 season with great optimism. They now had a united side that was 
blooming with talent and aspiration. In defence they hadPaolo Cannavaro 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paolo_Cannavaro>, brother of the legendary 
Fabio, and Francesco Acerbi, who rose to become one of Italy’s most improved 
defenders after being diagnosed with testicular cancer and going through a 
course of chemotherapy. In midfield,Magnanelli 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francesco_Magnanelli>, the legendary captain who 
has been with the club since they were in the fourth division, was still the 
star attraction. In front of him wereBerardi 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domenico_Berardi> and Simone Zaza 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simone_Zaza>, who were creating a formidable 
partnership in attack.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01cf488279c6bb6427a811ecb3f9d9b631653f49%2F0_96_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Sassuolo%20went%20from%20Italy's%20fourth%20tier%20to%20the%20Europa%20League%20in%20a%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Sassuolo%20went%20from%20Italy%27s%20fourth%20tier%20to%20the%20Europa%20League%20in%20a%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01cf488279c6bb6427a811ecb3f9d9b631653f49%2F0_96_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Sassuolo captain Magnanelli after their defeat of Lazio in 2015. Photograph: 
Giuseppe Bellini/Getty Images 
The squad was dominated by Italians, which is a rarity in Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>, and they were ready to 
take on the biggest clubs in the country. With a smart boardroom and a gifted 
manager, Sassuolo kicked on in the 2014-15 season. Despite a poor start, which 
included another humiliating 7-0 thumping at the hands of Inter, Sassuolo 
finished 12th, an improvement of five places on the previous year. They claimed 
two wins over Milan as well as one over Inter in the reverse fixture, much to 
the delight of the owner. The side could easily have finished in the top half 
of the table had it not been for late goals against them in several games; 
Roma, Genoa and Palermo all got the better of their defence in the final 
minutes of games. Nevertheless, there were positives to be taken from that 
season.

Sassuolo strengthened further last summer by signing 22-year-old midfielder 
Matteo Politano <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matteo_Politano> from Pescara. 
He had grown up in the Roma youth system, before moving on to Pescara and 
catching the eye of the Sassuolo staff. Politano was joined in midfield by
Alfred Duncan <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfred_Duncan>, a Ghanaian who had 
been part of the Inter youth team before he moved on to Sampdoria. He was an 
immense addition and would prove crucial as the team pushed up the table. The 
young full-back Sime Vrsaljko was improving and was tipped for great things by 
local and Croatian media, who saw the as the long-term successor to the 
distinguished Darijo Srna.

Unlike previous seasons, Sassuolo made a good start to the 2015-16 campaign, 
going unbeaten for the first six games, including a win over Napoli at home on 
the opening day. They lost their unbeaten status at Empoli at the start of 
October but recovered well, beating Lazio and then, famously, Juventus by the 
end of the month.

Their home was becoming a fortress and, bloated with confidence, they went on 
achieve further morale-boosting victories over Sampdoria, Milan and Torino as 
the season developed. Remarkably, they banished the sour memories of conceding 
seven against Inter and did the double over them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F206b925ea9e5ba94688b276f9e9784b6ee6a3efb%2F0_131_3000_1915%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Sassuolo%20went%20from%20Italy's%20fourth%20tier%20to%20the%20Europa%20League%20in%20a%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Sassuolo%20went%20from%20Italy%27s%20fourth%20tier%20to%20the%20Europa%20League%20in%20a%20decade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsassuolo-italy-europa-league-serie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F206b925ea9e5ba94688b276f9e9784b6ee6a3efb%2F0_131_3000_1915%2F3000.jpg>
 Sassuolo players celebrate after their win against Inter in May 2016 
Photograph: Giuseppe Bellini/Getty Images 
Sassuolo finished in sixth place 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2015%E2%80%9316_U.S._Sassuolo_Calcio_season>, in 
front of traditional powerhouses Milan and Lazio and just three points behind 
Fiorentina and an automatic place in the Europa League group stage. When 
Juventus (led by their former coach, Allegri) beat Milan in the Coppa Italia 
final, they claimed a place in the Europa League qualifiers. Sassuolo would be 
bringing European football to Modena.

Francesco Totti at 40: the eternal man
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/these-football-times/2016/sep/27/francesco-totti-40-roma-italy-eternal>
The sales of Sime Vrsaljko to Atlético Madrid 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C5%A0ime_Vrsaljko#Atl.C3.A9tico_Madrid> and 
Nicola Sansone to Villarreal 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicola_Sansone#Villarreal> over the summer gave 
them sizeable profits and showed that the Sassuolo plan was working. They 
overcame FC Luzern and Red Star Belgrade in the Europa League qualifying 
rounds, both by aggregate scores of 4-1, to qualify for the group stage. And, 
despite a relatively slow start to the Serie A season, the management remains 
calm.

Right now, Sassuolo are being talked up as Italy’s reply to the rise of 
Leicester City. Unbreakable desire in the dugout, an owner who is willing to 
spend money and the right blend of experience and youth on the pitch have made 
Sassuolo the talk of the country. The club is stable on and off the field and, 
if they continue in this vein, they could cause a few surprises in Europe.

• This article is from These Football Times <http://thesefootballtimes.co/>
• Follow These Football Times <https://twitter.com/thesefootytimes> and Karan 
Tejwani <https://twitter.com/karan_tejwani26> on Twitter
 