
In the City of London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, it’s the 
ultimate sartorial faux pas. “Never wear brown in town,” runs the adage about 
what shoes the gentlemen of London’s financial district must eschew in order to 
escape the opprobrium of colleagues.

This unwritten rule works to the disadvantage of people from less affluent 
backgrounds, according to a study by the government’s social mobility 
commission.

The commission found that graduates with first-class degrees from elite 
universities are being“locked out” from jobs in investment banking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/01/top-graduates-missing-out-on-banking-jobs-for-lacking-polish>
 if they commit the cardinal sin of wearing brown shoes. The same goes for 
those who appear uncomfortable in a suit, wear a loud tie, or lack esoteric 
qualities such as “polish” or “aura”.

According to the report, catchily titled Socio-Economic Diversity in Life 
Sciences and Investment Banking 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/less-affluent-kids-are-locked-out-of-investment-banking-jobs>
, such rigid criteria have “set up barriers for individuals from non-privileged 
backgrounds”.

Leadenhall Market, in the heart of the City, is where hundreds of financial 
hotshots spend their lunch breaks, grabbing gourmet sandwiches from a clutch of 
hole-in-the-wall cafes or sinking pints of lager in one of its historic pubs.

Top graduates missing out on banking jobs for lacking 'polish'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/01/top-graduates-missing-out-on-banking-jobs-for-lacking-polish>
While there are plenty of brown shoes in evidence, most people passing through 
are well aware of the unwritten regulatory framework governing footwear.

“Brown in town isn’t done, it’s just sartorially wrong,” says Mark Baker, who 
works with many financial services firms for IT company IPsoft. “The guys in 
Savile Row would turn in their graves. It’s important to dress appropriately 
based on the clients you work with.”

Jason Meyers, 43, whose design and construction firm counts several financial 
services companies among its clients, is aware of the rulebook but isn’t a fan. 
Referring to a pair of high-end shoemakers, he says: “If you work in insurance 
they won’t let you through the door of [insurance market] Lloyd’s of London 
without a pair of black Church’s or Cheaneys.”

“I’ll put on my black shoes if I’m meeting a client in finance or insurance. 
You’re looked at like a bit of a spiv if not.”

When it comes to job interviews, he says some employers discriminate against 
those who weren’t raised in an environment where the colour of one’s shoe 
leather was deemed important. “It’s the City, so of course there’s a class 
issue.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fcity-of-london-dress-code-brown-shoes-finance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f50a7cc0145f086d1dbccd464102eb6071da418%2F0_192_5374_3224%2F5374.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20well-heeled%20City%20types%20leave%20you%20brown%20and%20out%20in%20finance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fcity-of-london-dress-code-brown-shoes-finance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20well-heeled%20City%20types%20leave%20you%20brown%20and%20out%20in%20finance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fcity-of-london-dress-code-brown-shoes-finance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f50a7cc0145f086d1dbccd464102eb6071da418%2F0_192_5374_3224%2F5374.jpg>
 Dress down Friday? Nope. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
And where class is an issue, schooling is never far behind. Meyers adds: “If 
you’ve been to Eton or Winchester the interview is practically a formality 
anyway. If one candidate has been to Eton and the other to a comprehensive, the 
guy from Eton gets the job. If both candidates have been to Eton but one is 
wearing brown shoes, the other guy will get it. Of course it’s unfair, it’s 
bullshit. But the City will never change.”

Among some younger City workers though, there is a belief that the sartorial 
code is slowly becoming more relaxed. Charles Courtney, 23, a broker with 
currency trader Sigma Trading, is sporting a natty pair of what could be 
accurately described as brown hybrid slip-on tasseled brogues.

“The City is an old established place and there are a lot of rules that go 
back hundreds of years,” he says. “It comes with the territory. But 
up-and-coming firms tend to be more chilled, so it’s definitely changing. Back 
in the 80s, if you were wearing brown shoes you’d get booed off the trading 
floor.”

To those not steeped in the traditions of the London financial milieu, the 
brown shoe rule is an idiosyncratic quirk of Britishness. Frank van der Korput, 
37, works for a Lloyds of London insurer and has had to get used to watching 
what he puts on his feet.

“In Holland and Italy, it’s fairly normal to wear brown shoes but here it’s 
like a little bit of history. The first time I came here I felt like being the 
Dutchman and just saying, ‘fuck it’ and wearing the brown shoes. It’s not 
accepted in London, not yet.

“It will work against you if you’re applying for a very good job. That’s 
unfair, it doesn’t say anything about how skilled you are.”

Not everybody in this part of the City knows the rules though. Rohan Chaffey, 
of communications firm AVMI said: “I’ve never heard of it. I work in sales and 
brown shoes with a blue suit is almost the uniform.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fcity-of-london-dress-code-brown-shoes-finance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba0ffce0add8089f3a75f9e2b8c1ce76d5660b4f%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20well-heeled%20City%20types%20leave%20you%20brown%20and%20out%20in%20finance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fcity-of-london-dress-code-brown-shoes-finance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20well-heeled%20City%20types%20leave%20you%20brown%20and%20out%20in%20finance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fcity-of-london-dress-code-brown-shoes-finance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba0ffce0add8089f3a75f9e2b8c1ce76d5660b4f%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Loafer or brogue? No matter, it’s brown. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the 
Guardian 
He believes interviewers judging people based on their shoes “does suggest 
elitism” but says that it is “important to dress for the job you want”. He 
adds: “It would definitely put you off if someone came in wearing a 
Winnie-the-Pooh tie.”

One City worker, swaying gently atop a pair of brown brogues, was even less 
aware of the dress code. “I’ve been on a bender for the last nine days mate, so 
I’m not really caring about what I’m wearing,” he says.

“My jacket doesn’t match my trousers … I’ve just put this on to show up for 
work. Shoes are the least of my worries.”
 