
In the summer of 1889, the playwright Henrik Ibsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ibsen> went to Gossensass in the South 
Tyrol for the fifth time. He was at the height of his fame, and his holidays in 
the little town had provoked a boom in its tourist trade. In recognition of 
this, a square was named after him, an event celebrated with much pomp and 
ceremony.

According to his biographer Robert Ferguson, “there is a picture of him 
enjoying the occasion from a bench, a dishevelled gnome looking older than his 
61 years, resting his hands atop the rolled umbrella he always carried, rain or 
shine”.

David Hare: how I learned to love adaptation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/23/david-hare-adaptations-the-master-builder-chekhov-old-vic>
Neither his gnomish appearance nor that umbrella prevented a significant 
encounter at the party that evening with Emilie Bardach, an 18-year-old from 
Vienna who was visiting Gossensass with her mother. She later wrote in her 
diary: “I got to know him after the concert, it was pleasant. But now that his 
wife and son have arrived we can barely manage a conversation.” In spite of the 
obstacles, however, an intense flirtation developed, with Ibsen revelling in 
the admiration of a young, impressionable girl, and she in the attentions of a 
famous man.

When the summer ended, they continued to correspond, but in February the 
following year, Ibsen, perhaps troubled by his conscience, asked her to stop 
writing. She did, breaking her silence only in 1898, when she sent him good 
wishes on his 70th birthday. Ibsen’s short reply is full of suppressed regret. 
“The summer in Gossensass was the happiest, loveliest time of my whole life. 
Scarcely dare think of it. And yet I must, always. Always!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fruth-wilson-hedda-gabler-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb5665bc73cb2fc493111072e81f40582bed7eec%2F124_32_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Ruth%20Wilson%20discovered%20the%20heart%20of%20Hedda%20Gabler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fruth-wilson-hedda-gabler-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Ruth%20Wilson%20discovered%20the%20heart%20of%20Hedda%20Gabler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fruth-wilson-hedda-gabler-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb5665bc73cb2fc493111072e81f40582bed7eec%2F124_32_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Glenda Jackson and Timothy West in the 1975 film adaptation. 
Bardach was the first of a number of young women who, Ferguson says, “played a 
significant role in the creation of the works of Ibsen’s final years as a 
dramatist”. She ended up a rather pathetic Ibsen-bore, unmarried, impoverished 
and trading sadly on her memories. Yet that almost affair was the catalyst for
Hedda Gabler, Ibsen’s troubling, tortured masterpiece of 1890 about the 
general’s daughter, Hedda, who, bored and unhappy with her life, deliberately 
destroys the masterpiece written by her one-time lover Eilert Løvborg before 
shooting herself.

Ivo van Hove, who is directing a production of the play for the National 
Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre> starring Ruth 
Wilson as Hedda, is convinced of Bardach’s importance to the play’s genesis. 
“It is clear to me thatHedda is very personal to Ibsen. I think this feeling of 
having lost the most important, the most intense moment in his life is 
[represented on stage by] Løvborg and Hedda. It is a very personal cry, a 
scream like Munch’sScream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/interactive/2012/may/03/edvard-munch-scream-interactive>
. Hedda is Ibsen in this case. I feel he totally identified with her.”

Van Hove, one of today’s most exciting directors, has mounted this radical 
contemporary production ofHedda twice before – in New York and Amsterdam – 
although this time he is using a new translation byPatrick Marber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/marber>. In revisiting the work, he is 
finding new aspects to it. “You know the house very well but there are all 
these corners to discover,” he explains.

The great quality of the play, the reason it has become probably Ibsen’s most 
performed work worldwide, is the mystery at its heart, he says. “The main 
character is like an enigma, a sphinx. Even after all the productions you have 
seen, there is still something that makes you think: ‘Why this, why that?’ It’s 
a little bit likeMedea. Whatever explanation you try to find, there is 
something deep down that you will probably never guess. That is characteristic 
of a great masterpiece.”

By the time Hedda was first performed, Ibsen had an international reputation, 
so its 1891 premiere in Munich was swiftly followed by productions in Berlin, 
London and Copenhagen – all between January and April – and one in Paris in 
December that year. In England, the play was simultaneously admired for its 
dramatic power and greeted with outrage at what was seen as the perverse 
psychology on display.

As Angela V John points out in her biography of Elizabeth Robins, the first 
Hedda in England, the character “was especially unsettling for the late 
Victorian male since she challenged ... what was felt to constitute a feminine 
woman. Critics therefore tried to question her very identity.” For the Stage 
newspaper, for example, she was “not a woman but a thing; a beast degraded from 
womanhood”. In the Daily Telegraph, Clement Smith cried: “What a horrible 
story! What a hideous play!” Such reactions did nothing to dent the play’s 
popularity – both on stage and as a written text – but they did promote the 
view that Hedda was evil, an unsympathetic woman manipulating those around her.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fruth-wilson-hedda-gabler-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F377a8bd62fd32ede0f06452dfa4e62300c275fab%2F0_1_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Ruth%20Wilson%20discovered%20the%20heart%20of%20Hedda%20Gabler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fruth-wilson-hedda-gabler-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Ruth%20Wilson%20discovered%20the%20heart%20of%20Hedda%20Gabler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fruth-wilson-hedda-gabler-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F377a8bd62fd32ede0f06452dfa4e62300c275fab%2F0_1_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Sheridan Smith and Daniel Lapaine in Hedda Gabler at the Old Vic in 2012. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
That’s not a perspective Patrick Marber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/marber> shares. “I think society has moved 
towards her, and a headstrong, powerful, unhappy woman is much less shocking 
nowadays. I also embrace the character’s occasional incoherence: it is a 
pleasure to give the actor the material to dazzle in different colours.”

Historically, actors have been drawn to Hedda’s many faces, from tragic 
heroine to conniving monster. It is a part that, in its complexity, is often 
called the female Hamlet and has become, as directorKatie Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/katie-mitchell> says, “one of the rings of 
fire you have to jump through if you are a serious female performer”. Writing 
about Hedda, Janet Suzman observes: “Hedda cannot equate compromise with living 
and in that sense is more true to herself than anyone else in the play.” In 
1975, Glenda Jackson told Irving Wardle: “Hedda isn’t simply a capricious, 
bad-hearted, interfering femme fatale. In her own mind, she does everything for 
the best, but she’s committed to a very old-fashioned set of principles and 
totally out of her depth with the other characters.”

Juliet Stevenson, the last Hedda at the National in 1989, broke new ground 
according to the writer Sandy Richards, by “making the drive for power over her 
situation conquer her fear of exposure”. Charles Spencer’s review described Eve 
Best in Richard Eyre’s production at theAlmeida in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/mar/17/theatre> as presenting “a vain, 
shallow, dangerously irresistible young woman hurtling towards disaster that 
will embrace both her and those who are fatally under her spell”.Michael 
Billington noted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/sep/13/hedda-gabler-review> that 
Sheridan Smith in Anna Mackmin’s Old Vic production in 2012 “shows a woman 
slipping into total despair as her options narrow”.

Perhaps fortunately, Ruth Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ruth-wilson> had never seen the play before 
she agreed to the part. “People told me about Hedda and lots of people said 
you’ve got to play it one day, but I’m always a bit reluctant to play things 
people tell me to.” It was only when she began to talk to Van Hove that she 
decided to take on the challenge. “I thought, ‘If I’m going to do it, I’m going 
to do it in a very different way to what is perceived.’ And I thought, ‘If 
there is going to be someone who deconstructs it and makes it alive for a new 
audience, it will be Ivo.’”

In early read-throughs she noted the danger of making Hedda too clever and 
knowing. Now she is stripping away all preconceptions, trying to live the role 
from moment to moment. “You can’t contain her or put her in a box,” she says. 
“That’s unusual for a female character – more often you know what the angle is 
from the start.

“She is not a nice character. She’s deeply lonely and wants to bring everyone 
down to her level. She is deeply sad and you feel isolated as an actor playing 
her. She doesn’t quite know herself, and when she is on her own she can’t bear 
it. You get to play every version of her. One minute she is this, then she is 
that. All the facets of a human are in her, and she expresses herself in 
different ways.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fruth-wilson-hedda-gabler-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb82c87821af14b77ccb63e44b817ea55632e2d64%2F0_540_2632_1579%2F2632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Ruth%20Wilson%20discovered%20the%20heart%20of%20Hedda%20Gabler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fruth-wilson-hedda-gabler-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Ruth%20Wilson%20discovered%20the%20heart%20of%20Hedda%20Gabler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fruth-wilson-hedda-gabler-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb82c87821af14b77ccb63e44b817ea55632e2d64%2F0_540_2632_1579%2F2632.jpg>
 ‘It was not my desire to deal in this play with so-called problems’ … Henrik 
Ibsen in 1900. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
This is precisely what Ibsen intended. In a letter written in December 1890, 
he said: “It was not my desire to deal in this play with so-called problems. 
What I principally wanted to do was to depict human beings, human emotions, and 
human destinies, upon a groundwork of certain of the social conditions and 
principles of the present day.”

A comparison with A Doll’s House, written a decade earlier, in 1879, makes his 
point for him. That play was a direct result of his concern about the position 
of women: when Nora slams the door of her home and walks out into an uncertain 
future, you can hear a defiant clarion call for liberation.Hedda Gabler is 
infinitely more subtle, not least because the men surrounding Hedda are 
convincingly drawn, and in Thea Elvsted, Hedda’s old school friend who has 
actually left her husband to live and work with Løvborg, there is a woman on 
stage who has made a different choice from Hedda.

“Nora is much more logical,” Van Hove says. “There Ibsen wrote about a woman 
who is able to make a decision in her life and able to make a change and close 
the door on her marriage. In the first act, Hedda is immediately confronted 
with Thea, with somebody who does what she craves to do.

“So Hedda is not about leaving your husband. For me this play is not about a 
woman being in prison, because she imprisons herself; she is not a woman caught 
in social conventions because she gives in to that herself. It’s like an 
existential condition of a person. So for me, it is like an existential play, 
not a social drama – it is deeper.

“In theatre we have a tendency to explain everything. But which person in the 
world can you reduce to one thing? Nobody. That’s what this play gives. It is 
like life itself.”

• Hedda Gabler is at the National Theatre, London SE1, from Monday. 
nationaltheatre.org.uk <https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/>.
 