
Alistair McGowan <http://www.alistairmcgowan.co.uk/> immediately senses how 
tense and scared I am. As an impressionist, after all, it’s his job to observe. 
“Is it something in my voice?” I ask. “No, the body language,” he says. This 
doesn’t bode well. I’m here to learn how to be an impressionist with the two 
best in the business, McGowan andRory Bremner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/25/coalition-government-comedy-rory-bremner>
. I’m only starting to realise what an ordeal this is going to be. A horribly 
public one, too, since my efforts will be filmed.

Edinburgh festival 2016: the shows we recommend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/09/edinburgh-recommended-shows-from-the-festival-2016-fringe>
McGowan and Bremner had supplied me with a list of subjects. McGowan chose 
Andy Murray, Boris Johnson and Dara Ó Briain; Bremner went for David Cameron, 
Louis Walsh and Ant and Dec. I had spent a day researching on YouTube, running 
through their speeches and routines, but in truth I was hopelessly ill-prepared.

“Are you musical?” Bremner asks. “Are you a good singer?” I claim I am. “We 
can work with that,” he says gallantly. “If you can hold a note ... ” He never 
finishes the sentence, but I hope he means that if I can hold a note, I can do 
a perfect Ant and Dec.

McGowan, who trained as an actor, has had a career that embraces acting, 
writing, standup and music 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comedy/comedians/alistair-mcgowan-why-i-dont-do-donald-trump-or-jeremy-clarkson/>
, but he still loves doing impressions. “The kick you get when you think, ‘Ah 
yeah, that’s that person’s voice coming through my mouth.’ There’s nothing like 
it.” He’s excited about Sam Allardyce becoming England manager. “He’s got a 
very unusual accent, Sam. He’s from Wolverhampton, but he worked in Nottingham, 
then Bolton, so he’s got a bit of all three.”

“You’re very forensic,” Bremner tells McGowan, clearly enjoying this chance to 
discuss their trade, on the eve of their Edinburgh shows. Bremner, who started 
doing impressions in comedy clubs while studying modern languages at university 
in London, says his approach is more instinctive. McGowan is fascinated by the 
shape of the mouth, the way it produces sound; Bremner will study a subject and 
aim to capture the essence without obsessing about component parts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fimpression-alistair-mcgowan-rory-bremner-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e96a4e7a449d1569104fadc275f6f2fdf7fdf3c%2F627_502_808_1011%2F808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20I%20made%20an%20impression%20on%20Alistair%20McGowan%20and%20Rory%20Bremner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fimpression-alistair-mcgowan-rory-bremner-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20I%20made%20an%20impression%20on%20Alistair%20McGowan%20and%20Rory%20Bremner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fimpression-alistair-mcgowan-rory-bremner-edinburgh-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e96a4e7a449d1569104fadc275f6f2fdf7fdf3c%2F627_502_808_1011%2F808.jpg>
 Almost lisping delivery … Dara Ó Briain. Photograph: Production/BBC 
One danger they both highlight is “voice bunkers”: where one voice can slide 
into another that it resembles. “We used to find that with John Major,” says 
Bremner. “You’d suddenly lurch into Julian Clary. It sounds unlikely, but a 
trainspotter voice plus Julian Clary gives you John Major.”

It’s time to try some impressions. I choose to start with Dara Ó Briain, 
because I’ve been studying one of his routines closely and have a three-page 
script to work with. I launch in – fragmented sentences delivered in stage 
Oirish, with rapid hand movements to disguise the awfulness of the impression. 
McGowan, suddenly realising just how tough this is going to be, tells me to 
forget the three-page routine and concentrate on a couple of sentences. “You’ve 
got this incredible thing with Dara – he stretches out words,” says McGowan, 
demonstrating exactly that.

“Impressions are very closely related to caricature,” adds Bremner. 
“Cartoonists will pick out particular features and exaggerate them. That’s what 
you’re doing with the voice. You start off with exactitude, then you realise 
what people identify him with and concentrate on that. That’s the beauty of 
it.” The impression becomes more satisfying than the real person, because the 
essence is captured and intensified.

Bremner tells a funny story about the impressionist Chris Barrie, who did a 
run-through for an ad that was to feature TV presenter Russell Harty. The ad 
agency then got the real Russell Harty to come and read the script, but the 
clients weren’t happy. “That’s not Russell Harty,” they insisted.

The key with Ó Briain is the rhythm, says Bremner: the pace and the fact that 
his sentences never seem to end. McGowan brings his tongue to the front of his 
mouth to produce the strange, almost lisping delivery. I have another go – at 
least I have the physical bulk for the part – but it’s beyond me. We mark it 
down as a failure. I just don’t sound anything like him. I don’t even sound 
Irish.

On the Edinburgh fringe you’re never too young – or old – to do standup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/06/edinburgh-festival-fringe-comedy-young-old>
The next impression seems more within my range: Boris Johnson. Again, I have 
the bulk, as well as a posh voice that lends itself to the part. “That’s very 
good – you’ve got the job!” says Bremner to my surprise when I read the speech 
Johnson gave immediately after David Cameron’s resignation. “You’ve got where 
the voice comes from.”

Bremner tells me to add even more “enthusiasm and irrepressibility”. McGowan 
points out Johnson’s peculiar love of the “ou” sound, and his strangulated 
vowels. The new foreign secretary is a gift to impressionists (and to British 
comedy generally). He has certainly saved my bacon today. This is going to be 
my party piece, and I hope it forms 95% of the video, with all the assorted 
disasters left on the cutting-room floor.

One good piece of advice is to keep a picture of whoever you are impersonating 
in your mind. I can just about do that with Johnson, but I really struggle with 
some of the others: Louis Walsh is especially underwhelming. I can neither see 
him nor hear him as I make my feeble attempt at yet more stage Oirish. I also 
struggle with Ant and Dec: what McGowan refers to as “the perpetual laughter in 
their voices” defeats me.

Cameron, another posho, is relatively straightforward. I find it helps to do 
him standing on tiptoe, rocking forward a little. He speaks as if he’s a home 
counties vicar delivering a sermon. The former PM was a Bremner speciality – 
how sad he must be to lose him. Bremner says he arrived at the voice by 
starting with Peter Mandelson and adding the slight rasp of the smoker (Cameron 
used to like a puff). He also points out a peculiarity: instead of saying “I 
think”, Cameron says something close to “Oink”. This amuses McGowan, who says 
he’d never noticed it before.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fimpression-alistair-mcgowan-rory-bremner-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0b393ed4324593f65f8f55e377212f05e81946e%2F1412_0_3940_4157%2F3940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20I%20made%20an%20impression%20on%20Alistair%20McGowan%20and%20Rory%20Bremner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fimpression-alistair-mcgowan-rory-bremner-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20I%20made%20an%20impression%20on%20Alistair%20McGowan%20and%20Rory%20Bremner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fimpression-alistair-mcgowan-rory-bremner-edinburgh-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0b393ed4324593f65f8f55e377212f05e81946e%2F1412_0_3940_4157%2F3940.jpg>
 The slight rasp of a smoker … David Cameron. Photograph: Ben 
Pruchnie/AFP/Getty Images 
In truth, my Cameron is less effective than my Johnson. I start to tire: his 
voice is just too elusive. We move on to Andy Murray, whom I was convinced I 
could do as a kind of young Sean Connery. But when I attempt it, my mind goes 
blank. I can’t think of anything to say, and the voice sounds ... well, what? 
Not Scottish, that’s for sure. It might as well be Ant and Dec, or even Louis 
Walsh.

I run through my observations about Murray: deadpan humour, occasionally 
mocking, sometimes emotional. But Bremner says I’m approaching it too 
journalistically, that I should trust my ear. “Take a moment to picture him and 
hear him in your head,” he says.

McGowan, a tennis fan, shows me how it’s done: slow, sleepy, slightly cracked 
delivery, taking for ever to say: “Novak played really, really well today.”

“Just growl,” he advises. “Do it like you don’t really want to do it. He’s 
always defensive. It’s -almost as if someone is having a go at him, which they 
often are. ‘Why would you ask me that?’ is his attitude.”

I growl. “That’s practically the whole impression right there,” says McGowan. 
The growl – more an extended gargle – works pretty well, but when I attempt 
actual words, it’s as hopeless as ever. The impression dies in the air. I sound 
more like John McEnroe, with a hint of Dara Ó Briain. Something transatlantic 
anyway and nothing remotely like Andy Murray. Thank God for comedy Englishmen.

• Rory Bremner Meets 
<https://edinburghfestival.list.co.uk/event/578854-rory-bremner-meets/> ... is 
at the Gilded Balloon, Edinburgh, 13-19 August; Alistair McGowan is inErik 
Satie’s-Faction 
<https://edinburghfestival.list.co.uk/event/578946-erik-saties-faction/> at the 
Pleasance Courtyard from 3-28 August and12th Impressions 
<https://www.ents24.com/edinburgh-events/gilded-balloon/alistair-mcgowan/4703033>
 at the Gilded Balloon from 16-28 August (no show on 23rd). Box office: 
0131-226 0000.
 