
When it was announced in April 1986 that a promotion play-off system was to be 
introduced in the English league structure many observers thought this was a 
positive move for football. Stuart Jones, writing in the Times before the 
1986-87 season, made the case for the new development: “The welcome change in 
the antiquated system will clearly introduce added tension and excitement at 
the season’s end”. Teams that previously had nothing to play for would now have 
an opportunity to gain a play-off place and earn promotion via this back-door 
route.

Only when the play-offs began at the end of the 1986/87 season did the penny 
drop. Entertaining they may have been, especially to the neutral, but the major 
flaw in the system was that a team could finish in the last play-off place and 
be promoted at the expense of a club that had finished a significant distance 
ahead of them. Although the league chairmen agreed to the proposal, and each 
club knew the situation at the start of the campaign, it didn’t stop the 
complaints as the first end of season nail-biters commenced in May 1987.

And what a set of play-offs they were. Twenty matches spread over 15 days; 45 
goals; over £1m in gate receipts; more than 310,000 spectators through the 
gates; 12 of the matches bringing grounds their highest attendance figures for 
the season. The matches provided the first signs of the drama we now take for 
granted, as fallen giants had their noses bloodied, Peter Shirtliff became a 
Charlton hero, and late goals, extra-time and replays were required to sort out 
the final promotion spots.

Division One: Charlton complete the Great Escape

The first two seasons of the play-offs involved three teams from the lower 
division contesting the last league position with a team that finished just 
above the relegation zone in the higher league, partly a necessity of the 
restructuring programme which would see the First Division reduced to 20 teams 
by 1988 (the threat of a breakaway league had temporarily been quashed once 
this agreement was reached).

A 2-1 home win over QPR on the final day of the season saw Charlton secure the 
crucial 19th position in Division One at the expense of Leicester – taking 
their tally to 10 points from the last 15 available – meaning they were now 
thrust into the unknown quantity of an end-of-season play-off to preserve their 
top flight status.

In the two-legged semi-final, Charlton met Ipswich, who had finished fifth in 
Division Two. The glory days of the early 1980s were now a distant memory for 
the Suffolk club, the departure of manager Bobby Robson at the start of the 
decade and an exodus of key players eventually leading to an inevitable 
relegation in 1986. One of the few remaining players from their heyday did his 
best to keep his club in the tie, Paul Cooper saving his fifth penalty of the 
season, as Colin Walsh failed to convert one of the rare chances during the 
goalless first leg at Portman Road.

The lack of an away goal may have been a concern to Lennie Lawrence, but a 
brace from Jim Melrose in the first half gave Charlton breathing space in the 
second leg. Steve McCall gave Ipswich brief hope with an 85th minute strike but 
Charlton deserved their place in the final. For Melrose the win came at a cost; 
a planned holiday had to be cancelled after the League had told Melrose the 
dates for the play-offs, only to then helpfully move the fixtures after he had 
booked his family break to Marbella.

Lawrence had voiced concerns over the rough tactics employed by Ipswich in the 
second leg, with Walsh in particular on the receiving end of some robust 
tackles. He implored the League to appoint some strong officials for the final, 
especially as Billy Bremner’s Leeds awaited. Bremner’s Leeds were built very 
much in the mould of the side he had played in under Don Revie – who would be 
in attendance at the first leg at Elland Road against Oldham – and this was in 
full evidence during the play-offs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Ffirst-football-league-play-offs-1987-charlton-swindon-aldershot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432142284254%2F00e289c8-ecf3-47b4-9f79-2d122da5be28-2060x1291.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Charlton%2C%20Swindon%20and%20Aldershot%20triumphed%20in%20the%20first%20play-offs%20in%201987&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Ffirst-football-league-play-offs-1987-charlton-swindon-aldershot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Charlton%2C%20Swindon%20and%20Aldershot%20triumphed%20in%20the%20first%20play-offs%20in%201987&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Ffirst-football-league-play-offs-1987-charlton-swindon-aldershot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432142284254%2F00e289c8-ecf3-47b4-9f79-2d122da5be28-2060x1291.jpeg>
 Charlton Athletic’s Garth Crooks is brought down by Leeds United’s Ian Baird. 
Photograph: PA 
The Times’ Martin Searby commented that the semi-final first leg “was a match 
that had plenty of passion but little football.” The game, which was delayed by 
15 minutes due to a crowd of 29,472 leading to congestion problems, was played 
out in a frenetic atmosphere. Oldham looked to have survived the Leeds 
bombardment until substituteKeith Edwards scored a vital winner 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KrTQ8sdEj6s&t=37s> in the 89th minute. It 
would not be the last impact Edwards would make in the tie.

With the second leg to be played on the plastic pitch at Boundary Park, Leeds’ 
late goal was priceless, although they had in fact been only one of two teams 
to win at Oldham in the regular league season. But all looked lost for Leeds 
when Gary Williams levelled the tie after 18 minutes, and with just 90 seconds 
remainingMike Cecere headed in a Denis Irwin cross 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iZ8b1DdP3ss&t=3m24s> to send the Oldham 
players and fans into raptures.

Super sub Edwards would have his say again though, scoring as the celebrations 
had barely finished <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iZ8b1DdP3ss&t=4m>, to send 
the match into extra-time. With Oldham unable to find another goal, Leeds won 
on away goals, and their travelling support (reported to be between 6,000 and 
10,000) could look forward to two matches against Charlton which could possibly 
see them returning to the First Division after a five-year absence.

Not everyone was happy with the play-offs, though. “We finished seven points 
clear of Leeds, so to go out on away goals to them means there is something 
unjust,” bemoaned Oldham boss Joe Royle. “I welcomed the play-offs but possibly 
hadn’t considered the long-term ramifications,” he added. The debate that 
started in 1987 has not really gone away since.

The drama was only just beginning. Melrose was Charlton’s matchwinner again in 
the first leg of the final, his 88th-minute strike at Selhurst Park giving the 
First Division side the edge, but with a daunting trip to Elland Road still to 
come, things were too tight to call. “It will take a team of great character to 
emerge unscathed,” wrote Clive White in the Times, and so it would prove.

In a bone-shuddering encounter played out in front of Leeds’ best crowd of the 
season (31,395), the second leg of the final at times threatened to become a 
violent scrap, the enormity of what was at stake proving too much for some. 
Charlton withstood the best of the Leeds onslaught, but were unable to prevent
skipper Brendan Ormsby from snatching a goal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KrTQ8sdEj6s&t=2m6s> through 20-year-old 
striker Bob Taylor – who had been recalled by Bremner from a holiday after John 
Pearson had been injured. After 180 minutes of nerve-shredding tension, the 
teams had to do it all over again at Birmingham City’s St. Andrews stadium in a 
replay.

On police advice the deciding match would be limited to an 18,000 crowd, with 
300 police placed on duty for the Friday night meeting, as an estimated 16,000 
Leeds fans descended upon Birmingham. One thing was certain though; if the 
match ended level after extra-time, then the seasons of both clubs would be 
decided on penalties, something that Lawrence thought was a complete nonsense.

For a while, it looked as if the dreaded penalty shootout was looming as the 
match drifted into extra-time, until a fantastic free-kick from £1m-rated John 
Sheridangave Leeds the lead after 99 minutes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kJsMomtzQyg&t=8m3s>. As the stadium swayed 
with ecstatic Leeds fans, Charlton looked down and out, but in a second period 
of extra-time that seemed to reflect their whole season, they simply refused to 
give up, captain Peter Shirtliffcalmly slotting home an equaliser 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KrTQ8sdEj6s&t=6m8s> with just seven minutes to 
go,before his header <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KrTQ8sdEj6s&t=6m32s> from 
an Andy Peake free-kick sent the small pocket of Charlton fans delirious. 
Captain Marvellous, as the Daily Express called him, had preserved Charlton’s 
First Division status.

“Over the season’s 42 games, there was no way Charlton deserved to be 
relegated,” said the two-goal hero, who had not even trained for three weeks 
due to fitness concerns. However, the plain fact was that Charlton had just 
seven minutes left in the First Division before Shirtliff popped up. As others 
discovered from 1987 onwards, the play-offs were not necessarily a guarantee of 
a team getting what they deserved over the course of a season.

Division Two: The rise of Swindon continues

If the once mighty Leeds were to experience pain, then spare a thought for 
their 1973 FA Cup final opponents, Sunderland. The disastrous reign of Lawrie 
McMenemy had seen the club drop towards the basement of the Second Division. 
Not even the appointment of Bob Stokoe in a caretaker capacity could stop the 
rot. A home defeat on the final day of the season to Barnsley consigned 
Sunderland to 20th place, setting up a semi-final play-off withGillingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham>.

The effectiveness of Tony Cascarino and a shaky display by Sunderland keeper 
Iain Hesford helped Gillinghamwin the first leg 3-2 at Priestfield 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yDaTllXmTPo&t=10s>, with Cascarino scoring a 
second-half hat-trick in the space of 26 minutes. Sunderland had taken the lead 
in the first half through a Mark Proctor penalty, and despite Cascarino’s 
heroics, another goal from Proctor helped Sunderland back into the semi-final, 
as the two teams prepared to meet again just three days later at Roker Park.

If ever a match would sum up just how thrilling and agonising the play-offs 
can be, then thesecond leg between Sunderland and Gillingham 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yDaTllXmTPo&t=2m17s> was as good an example as 
any. The 25,470 crowd were stunned early on when a Howard Pritchard header 
extended Gillingham’s lead, only for an Eric Gates double to level proceedings 
on aggregate. Crucially Proctor would miss a 32nd-minute penalty, slowing the 
Sunderland momentum and giving Gillingham a lifeline. It would prove costly.

When your luck is out, it’s out. Gillingham missed their own penalty, Hesford 
saving from Colin Greenall, before the resultant scramble led to another 
Cascarino goal, leaving Sunderland with a little under 40 minutes to find a 
goal that would take the match to extra-time. On a day of gripping theatre, 
Gary Bennett’s looping header with just two minutes left meant that both sets 
of players and supporters would have to go through another 30 minutes of 
torture.

The final nail in the Sunderland coffin arrived in the familiar shape of 
Cascarino, his 92nd-minute goal giving Gillingham an extra away goal, and 
although Keith Bertschin would score a winner on the day with 12 minutes 
remaining, Gillingham progressed to the final on the away-goals rule (the 
aggregate score ended at 6-6, in case you lost count). Sunderland slipped into 
the Third Division for the first time in their history as a tearful Stokoe left 
the club after ultimately failing to arrest the slide started by the McMenemy 
regime.

Most of the action in the other semi-final, between Wigan and Swindon 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z-6Rj3zdf-M>, took place in the first leg. In 
the stereotypical game of two halves, Wigan raced into a two-goal lead after 
just 16 minutes at Springfield Park through goals from Chris Thompson and David 
Lowe, before an important Fraser Digby save kept Swindon in the tie during the 
second half. But then three strikes in the last 19 minutes changed the 
complexion of the tie completely, with Dave Bamber, Jimmy Quinn, and Peter 
Coyne – who had been released four years previously by Wigan – putting Swindon 
firmly in charge.

A relatively dull 0-0 draw in the second leg gave Swindon the chance to gain 
promotion for the second season on the bounce, but this looked a distant dream 
as the matches with Gillingham progressed. Swindon may have been the superior 
team in the first leg at Priestfield, Gillingham keeper Phil Kite keeping his 
side in the match, yet a lateDavid Smith free-kick 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hpEISOWnHe0&t=5m25s> proved decisive, and when 
Karl Elsey scored a screamer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hpEISOWnHe0&t=5m53s> after 15 minutes of the 
second leg, Swindon would again need to come from two goals back to avoid 
heartbreak.

It looked like one of those days for Lou Macari’s side, as a combination of 
Kite, the woodwork and awful finishing put Gillingham just 29 minutes away from 
the Second Division for the first time in their history. Eventually the 
pressure told, asCoyne came back to haunt his former club once more 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hpEISOWnHe0&t=6m53s>, and an 81st-minute 
Charlie Henry strike <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hpEISOWnHe0&t=7m6s> (his 
first of the season) brought the sides level. With no away-goals rule in the 
final, the two teams would now face a replay at Selhurst Park four days later.

The Times’ Ian Stafford was definitely a convert to the play-offs, writing of 
the second leg: “Yet another exhilarating match last night added further weight 
to the argument supporting the controversial play-off system.” Lou Macari was 
less convinced though, even after two Steve White goalsearned Swindon a place 
in Division Two <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AVhDl41xMG4&t=1m10s>. “This is 
one of the greatest moments of my career,” said the Swindon boss. “But I never 
want to go through a game like this again. The League should scrap the 
play-offs”.

Unfortunately for Macari and the other complainants, the very fact that a lot 
of the matches had provided such entertainment and had been so well attended 
suggested that the new play-off system was here to stay.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Ffirst-football-league-play-offs-1987-charlton-swindon-aldershot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432142219268%2Fcdb4ff34-fff7-443a-ae14-a62300ec85ab-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Charlton%2C%20Swindon%20and%20Aldershot%20triumphed%20in%20the%20first%20play-offs%20in%201987&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Ffirst-football-league-play-offs-1987-charlton-swindon-aldershot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Charlton%2C%20Swindon%20and%20Aldershot%20triumphed%20in%20the%20first%20play-offs%20in%201987&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthat-1980s-sports-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Ffirst-football-league-play-offs-1987-charlton-swindon-aldershot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432142219268%2Fcdb4ff34-fff7-443a-ae14-a62300ec85ab-1020x612.jpeg>
 Swindon Town manager Lou Macari looking downcast. Photograph: Colorsport/Rex 
Shutterstock 
Division Three: Former greats stunned by Aldershot

The fall and fall of Wolves during the 1980s was simply staggering. From the 
top flight to the Fourth Division in just three seasons, the club was massively 
in debt and had parts of their Molineux ground shut during the 1986-87 season. 
For a while it looked as if the club was endlessly digging to new levels of 
rock bottom, as anembarrassing defeat to Chorley in the FA Cup 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.com/2013/11/1986-87-fa-cup-first-round.html>
 highlighted just how far they had sunk. But Steve Bull’s arrival in November, 
and hissubsequent partnership with Andy Mutch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/that-1980s-sports-blog/2013/aug/13/seven-sporting-partnerships-1980s>
, helped Graham Turner turn things around. Although the club narrowly missed 
out on automatic promotion, they were heavily fancied to triumph in the 
play-offs.

A comfortable 2-0 aggregate win over Colchester – Rob Kelly and Bull scoring 
in the first leg at Layer Road – set up a final meeting with Aldershot, who had 
already taken care of a former giant in their semi-final. Bolton Wanderers’ 
fall to the Fourth Division for the first time in their history was not 
entirely unexpected, a poor campaign under Phil Neal after a couple of seasons 
down the wrong end of Division Three leading to their relegation.

Gary Johnson scored Aldershot’s winner in the first leg but Bolton won the 
second leg 2-1 at Burnden Park, and with the away-goals rule only counting 
after extra-time, the home team had a further 30 minutes to stave off 
relegation. Alas, it was not to be for Bolton. Aldershot’s Glenn Burvill scored 
the clincher in extra time, leaving Phil Neal to announce the end of his 
playing days and Bolton fans to face the very real fact that they were now a 
Fourth Division outfit.

Wolves were undoubtedly the favourites for the final, after all they had 
beaten Aldershot twice in the league, and had finished 9 points in front of 
their opponents. But in teeming rain on a semi-waterlogged playing surface at 
Aldershot’s Recreation Ground, the underdogs won 2-0 with goals from Ian 
McDonald and Bobby Barnes (pen), a significant lead to take to a dilapidated 
Molineux. Manager Len Walker must have been delighted, even if he did trot out 
the usual “it’s only half-time” message that is the norm during any two-legged 
affair.

The enormity of the second leg was evident when 19,962 supporters crammed into 
the two sides of Molineux that were open - the corresponding league fixture in 
February had seen a paltry 3,357 turn up - yet for the majority of the crowd it 
would be a night of despair.Barnes’ 83rd minute strike 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uhaq6iCWYyU&t=58s> ended any hope of a Wolves 
comeback, the frustration spilling over at the conclusion of the match, with 
home fans attacking Aldershot’s jubilant following, leading to 41 arrests 
involving Wolves supporters (out of a total of 42).

“I’m bitterly disappointed,” declared Turner. “We ended nine points clear of 
Aldershot in the table with a better goal difference, so that makes it even 
harder to swallow at the moment”. Walker sympathised with his managerial 
counterpart: “It’s sad Wolves finished fourth and we finished sixth, but we all 
knew the rules to start with”. There could be no doubting that the play-offs 
had been a success, but try telling that to Joe Royle and Graham Turner after 
their first experience of the new system.

It wasn’t all good news for Aldershot; after the match Giorgio Mazzon, Glenn 
Burvill and Darren Anderson were badly injured in a car crash. Mazzon was 
forced to retire in 1988 due to the injuries he suffered. And things were about 
to go downhill on the pitch too. They were relegated in 1989 and the club went 
out of business in 1992.

As Aldershot were returning to the Fourth Division, Wolves were going the 
other way. Their resolve after the disappointment of losing the 1986-87 
play-off was admirable, with the partnership between Bull and Mutch inspiring 
consecutive promotions to the Third and then Second Division. It was probably 
for the best that they gained both of their promotions by topping the Fourth 
and Third Division tables though, given their first taste of play-off anguish.

• This blog first appeared on That 1980s Sports Blog 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/>
• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter <https://twitter.com/1980sSportsBlog>
 