
Hair splitters! Finicky folk! The unbearably anally retentive! Please assemble 
in the e-meeting room that is theguardian.com. ForHow To Eat  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat>– the blog series 
charged with identifying the ideal version of Britain’s favourite dishes – is 
back and, this month, we’re tackling that controversial classic, tuna salad. It 
is the star of a million at-desk lunches (so long asno one nicks yours from the 
fridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/nov/15/liz-kendall-tuna-salad-row>, 
that is), and the perfect quick fall-back meal on a hot summer’s evening, but 
it comes in 1,001 varieties and all but one of them is completely and utterly 
wrong. So, without further ado, lettuce commence. As ever, keep it cool BTL: no 
flakiness, no raw language, no overly salty exchanges.

The tuna 

Way back in the mists of time (1998), when we were all obsessed with the 
perceived sexiness and health-giving properties of the Mediterranean diet, 
there might have been an excuse for using seared, thinly sliced tuna steak in a 
salad. We were young, we were foolish and this novelty wasn’t (from memory) 
£30-a-kilo. But, in 2015, to do so would be a flagrant waste of that precious 
rosy flesh. Its delicate flavour is best savoured as a rare treat, rather than 
leaving it to jostle for attention in a salad of competing flavours.

Instead, tinned tuna will do the job - which is not to say that all tinned 
tuna is created equal. There is a self-evident hierarchy of quality, both for 
the tuna itself (flaked useless, chunks marginally better, steaks best), and 
the liquid it is preserved in. Tuna in spring water or brine is dry, mealy, 
abominable stuff. Sunflower oil is better, but for maximum flavour it has to be 
in olive oil.

I trust it goes without saying that you should never a) use smoked tuna, b) 
mix tuna with mayo if it is going in a salad, or c) resort to any of the 
infused or pre-mixed tunas that (in a damning indictment of late capitalism) 
proliferate in our supermarkets. A salad is no place – if, indeed, one exists – 
to be experimenting with tuna dressed with tomato and herbs or infused with soy 
and ginger.

Leaves

Let he who has never bought a supermarket bagged salad cast the first stone, 
but you cannot dispute that these sad sacks are a rip-off, and that they are a 
particular waste of money when it comes to tuna salad. All you want and need, 
here, is some clean, sweet base crunch. Cos or baby gem lettuce are the way to 
go; shredded or chopped in chunky hunks that are neither too small nor so big 
that you need to unhinge your jaw to eat them. Save your swankier salad leaves 
– peppery watercress, bitter radicchio, that homegrown crop of woody, horrible 
rocket that never seems to end – for salads where they will make a genuinely 
effective contribution.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhow-to-eat-tuna-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd11b5a5adbd0f667949f2d162af80f0347d0354a%2F0_425_1148_689%2F1148.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20tuna%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhow-to-eat-tuna-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20tuna%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhow-to-eat-tuna-salad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd11b5a5adbd0f667949f2d162af80f0347d0354a%2F0_425_1148_689%2F1148.jpg>
 Anchovies can be a useful addition, as long as they are chopped for thorough 
distribution. Photograph: Andrew Twort/Alamy 
The salad ingredients

Were this a band, you now have your star lead singer (the tuna) and your tight 
rhythm section (the leaves) in place. It is time to add some mid-range colour: 
a lead guitarist, a keyboard player, backing singers, perhaps a flautist for 
that unexpected prog-rock interlude. Now, some of you will read the ingredients 
listed below and think: “Hang on, this is just a bastardised salad niçoise”, 
but what of it? The not-quite-salad-niçoise is – to extend this rock group 
metaphor way past its breaking point – like a band’s classic first album. 
Later, they will dabble in jazz-funk and start naming their tracks with runic 
symbols. Which will be interesting. In a way. But that first album,Not Quite 
Salad <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/salad> Niçoise, is the one you 
will always come back to.

Why? Because, primarily, a great tuna salad is a fine balancing act between 
sharp, salty, fishy flavours and those fresher, spritzier vegetable components 
– which function almost as an ongoing palate cleanser, as you eat. And, while 
there is no need to stick faithfully to the original, the salad niçoise remains 
our most reliable outline guide as regards how to achieve that balance. 
Moreover, it determines the additional ingredients you might use in an 
eminently sensible way.

The full list of acceptable/unacceptable ingredients is as follows:

YES: slices of waxy/new potatoes (boiled); anchovies (chopped for thorough 
distribution, never whole); halved, not overly ripe baby plum tomatoes; 
cucumber, deseeded and sliced; a small amount of finely chopped sweet red or 
spring onion; capers; jarred, brined green olives (save those fresh, buttery 
nocellera to enjoy on their own); chopped or sliced boiled egg; it’s creaminess 
is a fantastic contrast. A handful of finely chopped leafy, green herbs 
(parsley, chives, chervil, basil even) is also welcome, but not essential.

NO: French/green beans (vile cold, and invariably boiled to a mushy 
consistency); raw white onion; carrot and beetroot (whose flavours are jarring 
in this context); croutons (this is not a caesar salad); any chilli or feta 
stuffed olives (it pains me that this needs pointing out); dull black and/or 
shrunken purple kalamata-like olives; sliced bell pepper (whose presence inany 
salad should rightly prompt a lengthy outburst of vociferous “industrial” 
language).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhow-to-eat-tuna-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b4da5a26b7c4daf358669726d8688eaf69349b0%2F0_65_5760_3460%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20tuna%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhow-to-eat-tuna-salad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20tuna%20salad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhow-to-eat-tuna-salad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b4da5a26b7c4daf358669726d8688eaf69349b0%2F0_65_5760_3460%2F5760.jpg>
 Not quite right: carrots, feta and dull black olives should be avoided. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Also, on the egg-front, please note that no one wants a tepid-to-warm, still 
runny poached egg on their tuna salad. There is something deeply unappetising 
about rogue “hot” ingredients in cold salads and/or salad leaves covered in 
stringy trails of translucent albumen. Moreover, that running yolk turns any 
tuna present into gluey, indigestible lumps. You may think a soft poached egg 
on a tuna salad is sophisticated, clever even. It isn’t.

Dressing

Step away from the pesto (it makes everything taste of, well, pesto), and 
dispense with that sharp-elbowed white wine vinegar. All you need here is olive 
oil, salt, pepper, lemon juice and dijon mustard, all smoothly emulsified in 
such a way that the character of each ingredient is clear, but elegantly 
reconciled. Whisk, taste, go.

Assembly and plating 

Serving a salad in a deep cereal bowl makes it difficult to eat. Serving it on 
a plate always looks wrong. Serving it on slate, meanwhile, is a clear sign 
that chef needs to stop browsing inspirational tableware catalogues and 
actually think, practically, about how people eat.

Instead, line a shallow, wide-rimmed bowl with leaves, and separately (you 
want those leaves to retain their distinct flavour and crunch) dress and mix 
the other ingredients, minus the tuna. That, similarly, should be broken into 
substantive chunks on top and left as a separate complementary dimension of 
flavour, not doused in vinaigrette.

When

Lunch or tea – also known, in some part of the UK, as dinner. NB. If anyone in 
your circle every refers to tuna salad as a “light mid-week supper” you can – 
after your toes have uncurled from that sudden, excruciating cramp – happily 
kill them in any gruesome manner you think fitting. There is not a court in the 
land that would convict you.

Drink

Crisply bitter pale ales; dry, flinty white wines; water. 

So, tuna salad – how do you eat yours?
 