
It was perhaps inevitable but certainly ironic that one of the first things 
that followed the arrival atWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> of the family known above all 
others for employing legions of scouts was the sacking of all the scouts. What 
use, after all, is a small-scale focus on the search for English-based bargains 
when you already have access to the world’s largest global scouting network?

“As soon as we first heard the rumours I just felt: ‘There’s going to be mega 
change here,’” says Brian Greenhalgh, the club’s chief scout until the Pozzo 
family, already owners of Udinese in Italy and Granada in Spain,took control in 
2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jun/29/watford-takeover-pozzo-family>
. “When new owners come in they either buy into what’s going on or they adapt 
it to a degree, or they come in and change everything. It’s my mentality to 
check things out – as a chief scout you tend to delve a little bit – and as 
soon as I saw how they operated I could see there was going to be a totally new 
system. We had six scouts working at the club and everybody went. Everybody.”

Premier League fans’ verdicts part 2: Newcastle United to West Ham United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/01/premier-league-fans-verdicts-part-2-newcastle-united-to-west-ham-united>
Greenhalgh’s first impressions were not wrong and there has been mega change. 
Though Watford retain a three-man local recruitment team, the man in charge of 
the scouting operation does not live in England or even speak English. As a 
player Andrea Carnevale spent two seasons atUdinese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/udinese> but more famously won a scudetto 
with Napoli alongside Diego Maradona, played for Italy in the 1990 World Cup, 
and soon afterwards was banned for a year after testing positive for 
amphetamines. Now he is in control of perhaps world football’s most highly 
regarded scouting unit, a world away from the low-cost, low-key team once 
overseen by Greenhalgh.

“We run an operation on a global scale, a well-oiled, highly professional 
team, using many former players,” Carnevale tells the Guardian in his first 
interview with an English newspaper. “We cover every significant competition 
around the world – regional championships at every level from under-17 to 
under-21, domestic leagues in Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Colombia and also 
across Europe: Belgium, Sweden, Serbia, Croatia. In all there are perhaps 25 or 
30 of us. We’re constantly looking for players. Our ambitions have no limit.”

Player recruitment is the most famous part of the Pozzo family’s increasingly 
complex international operation. Their greatest success remainsAlexis Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/16/alexis-sanchez-arsenal-premier-league>
, signed for £1.5m from the Chilean club Cobreloa as a 17-year-old, loaned back 
to South American clubs for a couple of seasons until considered ready to make 
an impact in Europe, eventually sold to Barcelona for £30m and now at Arsenal. 
The same formula remains in active use: clubs who sent scouts to this year’s 
South American Under-17 Championship in Paraguay found they had turned up too 
late to snaffle its star and top scorer, the 16-year-old Ponte Preta forward 
Leandro.

Udinese had already secured his signature, although he will spend at least 
another season on loan in his native Brazil before boarding the plane to 
Europe, with Spain likely to be his first stop. “Our secret on the 
international transfer market is simple, or at least it sounds simple when you 
say it,” Carnevale says. “We have to get there before everybody else.”

If the classic Pozzo signing is young, obscure and wildly promising, Watford 
have trodden a different path this summer. The first eight arrivals were aged 
between 27 and 31, all but one of them full internationals and very much
established 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/06/watford-sign-etienne-capoue-tottenham-club-record-fee>
. Only one, the right-back Allan Nyom, who had spent the past six seasons on 
loan from Udinese to Granada, was already under the Pozzo umbrella. “It is one 
thing selecting players for the Championship but choosing players for the 
Premier League is another thing entirely,” Carnevale says. “So we made some 
cautious choices. We signed players of some importance, who were already 
playing with big teams. It’s not easy to remain in the Premier League and that 
is our priority.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fpozzo-family-fuelled-watford-premier-league-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35de72e81ad3dc4b83a65f827bd9c3ecdd4915da%2F82_56_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Pozzo%20family%20have%20fuelled%20Watford%E2%80%99s%20Premier%20League%20dreams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fpozzo-family-fuelled-watford-premier-league-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Pozzo%20family%20have%20fuelled%20Watford%E2%80%99s%20Premier%20League%20dreams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fpozzo-family-fuelled-watford-premier-league-dreams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35de72e81ad3dc4b83a65f827bd9c3ecdd4915da%2F82_56_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Andrea Carnevale, right, draws up shortlists of potential signings for Gino 
Pozzo. Photograph: Claudio Villa/Getty Images 
The number of high-profile signings Watford have made since their promotion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/25/brighton-watford-championship-match-report>
 has led to mutterings in Udine that the family’s focus has moved away from 
Italy. Franco Soldati, Udinese’s executive president, reassured supporters. 
“Watford will be our engine room, to create a team that will take us to Europe. 
The very best young players, players of potentially world-beating quality, will 
go to England, where they will gain the experience that will eventually bear 
fruit in Friuli,” he said.

“The Pozzos’ heart remains here,” Carnevale says: “Udinese fans can chill out 
because this summer we’ve bought four new players, each one better than the 
last. It’s a great team. The Pozzos make sure all three teams get the same 
focus.”

I don’t think there could be a better owner in the world than Gino Pozzo

There are three key figures in the Pozzo family. Giampaolo, now 74, bought 
Udinese in 1986 using money from his family’s tool-making business, which was 
sold in 2008, allowing them to turn their attentions fully towards football. 
His wife, Giuliana, is the granddaughter and the cousin of former Udinese 
presidents and keeps such a close eye on football that, whenWatford’s promotion 
to the Premier League was secured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/25/watford-promoted-wigan-staring-at-relegation>
, she made the first congratulatory phone call, narrowly pipping Sir Elton John.

The key man, however; the one who fielded those phone calls, is their son 
Gino, whose arrival on Udinese’s payroll following his graduation in 1993 
coincided with the adoption of the scouting-reliant model that has sustained 
their success ever since.

He has also led the family’s international expansion. The idea may have come 
about because Udinese found themselves with too many players for one club 
reasonably to use but Granada and Watford are more than just finishing schools. 
A presence in Spain allows the Pozzos to bring to Europe players who could not 
get a work permit in Italy, while success in England brings financial rewards 
beyond compare elsewhere.

Gino masterminded both acquisitions, first identifying Granada after moving to 
Spain with his Catalan wife. At the time the club were €12m in debt and 
struggling in the third division; two years later they ended a 35-year absence 
from the Primera Liga. Gino then moved to London, where he has again dragged 
what was a heavily indebted club to the top flight – and financial security.

“Our model is to look for a project that will be sustainable in the medium and 
long term,” he told the Friuli newspaperIl Gazzettino 
<http://www.ilgazzettino.it/> last month. “We pay close attention to 
expenditure, to making the clubs self-sufficient. We sawwhat happened to Parma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jun/23/parma-the-football-club-milked-for-all-their-worth>
, where the moment they stopped spending the wheels fell off. We try to install 
proper management and then we add value by developing young talents.”

Premier League 2015-16 big kick-off: 11 things to look forward to | Observer 
Sport
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/aug/01/premier-league-manchester-united-new-ball-radamel-falcao-harry-kane>
The aim, in short, is for league tables and balance sheets to offer 
encouraging reading. In Watford’s last accounts, for 2013-14, the club made a 
£0.3m loss, the fourth-best headline figures in a Championship where more clubs 
lost in excess of £20m (five) than turned a profit (three). Meanwhile, in 
2012-13 only six Serie A clubs reported an operating profit and Udinese’s 
£32.3m was almost exactly four times larger than anyone else’s. All three Pozzo 
clubs will play in their country’s top flight this season, Udinese for the 20th 
year in succession.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fpozzo-family-fuelled-watford-premier-league-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc559b796dc5a610ab39914cda47abe20435564c%2F21_97_2889_1734%2F2889.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20Pozzo%20family%20have%20fuelled%20Watford%E2%80%99s%20Premier%20League%20dreams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fpozzo-family-fuelled-watford-premier-league-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20Pozzo%20family%20have%20fuelled%20Watford%E2%80%99s%20Premier%20League%20dreams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fpozzo-family-fuelled-watford-premier-league-dreams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc559b796dc5a610ab39914cda47abe20435564c%2F21_97_2889_1734%2F2889.jpg>
 Giampaolo Pozzo, right, also owns the Italian club Udinese and Granada in 
Spain. Photograph: Lancia/EPA 
“I don’t think there could be a better owner in the world than Gino Pozzo,” 
Carnevale says. “He is very professional but he also really understands 
football. He has been around the game for so long that he has great expertise, 
even if he never played professionally. We have known each other for more than 
30 years – we met when we were both young and I was playing – and he’s now a 
great, competent, intelligent president.”

Carnevale’s job is to draw up shortlists of potential signings but it is Gino 
who makes the decisions. “Udinese receive up to 300 reports a year,” says Carlo 
Piazzolla, the club’s former general manager. “Players are watched by the 
scouts and, after they sort out the chaff, profiles of the best players are 
sent to Gino Pozzo. In recent years he has made good decisions.”

We have acquired some important players; players who are good enough to play 
in the Champions League

His influence is not confined to transfers and balance sheets. He is at 
Watford’s training ground most days, from where he monitors the efforts of his 
family’s three squads. All of their players wear GPS devices in training and it 
was by analysing and comparing this data last year that Pozzo noticed the 
training sessions he was witnessing in Hertfordshire were significantly less 
intense than those taking place simultaneously in Friuli and Andalucía.

Watford’s then manager, Beppe Sannino, had gone within weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/31/watford-beppe-sannino-resigns>
. It was also Pozzo who decidedBilly McKinlay, eight days after his appointment 
last October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/07/billy-mckinlay-to-leave-watford-manager-reports>
, wasnot after all the right man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/07/billy-mckinlay-to-leave-watford-manager-reports>
 to manage the team,replacing him with Slavisa Jokanovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/07/watford-slavisa-jokanovic-fourth-manager-of-season-billy-mckinlay>
 and insisting the focus on success over sentiment “cannot be compromised – 
whatever the circumstances”.

That single-minded approach has resulted in Watford stretching some transfer 
regulations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/mar/23/watford-premier-league-financial-future>
 to their logical limits. In their first season under the Pozzos they brought 
so many players in on international loans theFootball League legislated to stop 
the practice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/07/watford-foreign-loans-loophole>
, so Watford handed out permanent contracts instead.

At times players switch between Pozzo-controlled employers with alarmingly 
casual frequency. So when Watford decided to keep the Nigerian striker Odion 
Ighalo last October they first cancelled his loan, then Udinese released him 
from his contract and finally he returned to Watford on a free transfer, all 
within 24 hours – this summer Udinese’s president has suggested they may have 
him back again. The Ecuador right-back Juan Carlos Paredes and the Mexico 
midfielder Miguel Layún joined Granada on permanent deals and then signed 
different permanent contracts at Watford within days and without ever playing 
for the Spanish side.

The number of signings Watford, under new head coach Quique Flores, have made 
this summer has reminded some observers of the ultimately unsuccessful sprees 
recently undertaken at Queens Park Rangers, and they will start the season as 
the bookmakers’ favourites for relegation, but in Udine they insist that there 
is method in the apparent madness. “The Premier League is a really hard 
competition,” Carnevale says. “We have acquired some important players; players 
who are good enough to play in the Champions League. It won’t be easy and it 
will take some time before the players get to know each other but let’s hope 
the team click and they have a great season. Safety is our first goal but there 
is the potential to do even better.”
 