
In the theatre, work in progress is fiercely protected from journalists. Write 
even so much as a preview, and its establishment is likely to come down on you 
with all the weight of a full props cupboard. At the very least, you can expect 
a firm tweet from Sam West. But the performance artist and director Bryony 
Kimmings is not yet a fully paid-up member of the theatrical establishment, for 
all that her new show, a musical calledA Pacifist’s Guide to the War on Cancer, 
will shortly arrive at the National Theatre. And so it is that, one afternoon 
in early September, I’m invited to a “share” of several scenes from the 
production in a windowless South Bank rehearsal room alongside some of the 
cancer patients who helped her research it and – oh, yes – two leading 
representatives of the aforementioned theatrical establishment:Rufus Norris, 
the National Theatre’s artistic director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/31/rufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview>
, and Simon McBurney, the actor and artistic director ofComplicite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/complicite>, the company that is producing 
the show.

Norris and McBurney, both of whom can be said to be taking something of a 
gamble on Kimmings, appear tantalisingly impassive, at least at first, and as I 
find my seat, I have to tell myself to look at the actors rather than at them. 
The problem is, though, that I’m nervous of looking at the actors. Forty-eight 
hours ago I was at the funeral of a friend who died from leukaemia – my 
second-oldest school friend – and while I know not to expect mawkishness from 
Kimmings, who is nothing if not fierce and plain-speaking, there is still every 
possibility I will burst into tears. Sure enough, this is exactly what happens. 
The cast are singing a riotous song calledEven C***s Get Cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> (this production includes, 
audiences will be warned, “adult content”). It’s very funny, the tune is great, 
and there is tap-dancing, which never fails to make my heart soar. Even so, 
something about it – a particular combination of vulnerability and determined 
optimism – has me leaking like a colander, the lump in my throat the size of 
Scafell Pike. At which point, I find myself thinking: this is going to be a 
hit. Are others thinking the same? I can’t believe that they’re not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmusical-about-cancer-bryony-kimmings-judith-dimant-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faaac78af96dbf25b1d7464ca303333085719b414%2F0_270_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20a%20musical%20about%20cancer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmusical-about-cancer-bryony-kimmings-judith-dimant-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20a%20musical%20about%20cancer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmusical-about-cancer-bryony-kimmings-judith-dimant-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faaac78af96dbf25b1d7464ca303333085719b414%2F0_270_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 Rehearsals for A Pacifist’s Guide to the War on Cancer. Photograph: Sarah 
Ainslie 
The atmosphere in the room, it seems to me, has shifted from coiled 
nervousness – after all, it’s only two weeks, now, untilA Pacifist’s Guide to 
Cancermakes its debut at Home in Manchester – to relieved excitement. Norris is 
smiling;Ben Power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jul/24/ben-power-national-theatre-hush>
, his deputy, seems not to be able to stop jiggling his knee; McBurney is about 
to urge the cast to eat the cakes – “sugar!” – he has brought with him. 
Kimmings wanders through the audience, the huge black and white bow in her hair 
flopping over her forehead, shaking hands and smiling, receiving compliments in 
the way only she can (“Yeah, it’s going to be brilliant”). I look over my 
shoulder, in the direction of Judith Dimant, the Complicite producer to whom 
this singular show owes its miracle birth. Her eyes, like mine, are red. But 
she exudes a kind of steely happiness, too. For her, this is a hugely 
significant moment. This production is certainly about bums on seats, not to 
mention the triumph of a certain kind of creativity. But it also marks the 
point when she decided that, for her, the post-cancer world – if such a thing 
can ever be said to exist – would be replete with new possibilities, new 
energy, new life.

Dimant has worked at Complicite, a company described by Emma Thompson as the 
“most trailblazing in our theatrical history”, for more than two decades, a job 
that has given her nerves of steel, and allowed her to build up a production 
company that thinks nothing at all of taking on difficult work (one definition 
of “difficult”, in case you’re wondering, might be a production that lacks a 
script until the very last moment).

Three years ago, however, it occurred to her that it was time to think about 
the next generation. The question was: where would she find this particular 
unicorn? Having been sequestered with McBurney for so long, she wasn’t exactly 
sure. “But the young people I work with are very well informed, and they said: 
you should see Bryony Kimmings. She is just fantastic. You’ll love her. So I 
went to seeCredible Likeable Superstar Role Model 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/19/credible-likeable-superstar-role-model-edinburgh-review>
 [Kimmings’s hit 2013 show about the sexualisation of childhood, in which she 
co-starred with her nine-year-old niece], and it was incredible. Her work is 
very different from what McBurney makes, but there are similarities, too, 
particularly in the creative process. So, we met, and we decided we’d do a new 
programme of work – only by that time, I had got ill.” Dimant had recently been 
told that she had breast cancer.

Performers Bryony Kimmings and Tim Grayburn on their unusual romance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/09/bryonny-kimmings-and-tim-grayburn-special-romance-fake-it-til-you-make-it>
Kimmings interjects (the three of us first meet at the National Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre> in early August). “No, 
what happened was that I pitched loads of ideas at her, and she didn’t like any 
of them, and she kept backing away from me every time I coughed. I was 
thinking: what is wrong with this woman? Finally, she said: ‘I might as well 
tell you, I’m having treatment for cancer.’ So I said: ‘Would you ever want to 
make something about that?’ She said: ‘Yes, but not my own story.’ And I knew I 
had always wanted to make a musical. So, it was agreed: Judith would produce my 
musical about cancer, and it would be the next stage in my practice.”

Kimmings’s work has always, until now, been highly autobiographical. In Sex 
Idiot <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/aug/22/sex-idiot-edinburgh-review>
 (2010), she tracked down her ex-boyfriends after discovering she had 
chlamydia; in7 Day Drunk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/19/7-day-drunk-review> (2011), 
she spent a week intoxicated to see if it would improve her creativity; and 
last year’sFake It ’Til You Make It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/08/fake-it-til-you-make-it-edinburgh-festival-review-traverse-bryony-kimmings-tim-grayburn-depression>
 was about her partner Tim Grayburn’s depression (he co-starred). Has she had 
experience of cancer? “Not direct experience, no. But my last two shows really 
told the stories of other people, so I just carried on with that. I thought: 
I’ll work with real cancer patients. We had a group of about 10 who helped us, 
all with different stories. One had had cancer seven times; one had late-stage 
terminal ovarian cancer; one was a lad with lymphoma who was in denial and out 
raving all the time; one had bowel cancer and was pissed off with everyone 
saying breast cancer is sexy and bowel cancer is disgusting; one was living 
with long-term cancer. Basically, the kind of alternative cancer stories you 
don’t see in films likeWit, or whatever.” She also spoke to doctors and 
scientists.

“I hate musicals,” says Kimmings. “Well, when I was young [she’s 35], I really 
likedHairspray and Little Shop of Horrors, but that was it. I like camp 
musicals, not ones that take themselves really seriously.” So why did she want 
to create one? “I thought I could do them better. I mean, I like themnow. OK, 
there are some that I hate. No, I’m not going to say which ones… OK, I hatedThe 
Book of Mormon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/24/book-of-mormon-review>. But I 
likedLondon Road  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/11/london-road-film-review-gripping-macabre-verbatim-musical>
 [the National Theatre’s show about the 2006 Ipswich murders]. So I started off 
with the idea that I’d use verbatim text, like they did inLondon Road. We tried 
for a whole week! But in the end, we couldn’t do better thanLondon Road. So we 
had to start again.” By “we”, she means her collaborators Brian Lobel, with 
whom she wrote the book ofA Pacifist’s Guide to Cancer, and Tom Parkinson, who 
wrote the music (she wrote the lyrics). “Brian has been making shows about 
cancer for years, and he’s one of my friends anyway, so it would have been 
weird not for him to be involved, especially since he loves musicals.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmusical-about-cancer-bryony-kimmings-judith-dimant-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4b6ecc1cf58df42caf717650b3544ea923aa2d6%2F0_376_5563_3338%2F5563.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20a%20musical%20about%20cancer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmusical-about-cancer-bryony-kimmings-judith-dimant-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20a%20musical%20about%20cancer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmusical-about-cancer-bryony-kimmings-judith-dimant-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4b6ecc1cf58df42caf717650b3544ea923aa2d6%2F0_376_5563_3338%2F5563.jpg>
 The company rehearsing A Pacifist’s Guide to the War on Cancer. Photograph: 
Sarah Ainslie 
In the end, she came up with the idea of a narrative in which someone is 
trying to write a guide to cancer, for which reason she must poke around inside 
the kingdom of the sick – a concept she borrowed from the US intellectualSusan 
Sontag <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/jan/19/politics>, who in her 
1978 book,Illness as Metaphor, suggests that we are all of us born with two 
passports: one for the kingdom of the well, and one for the kingdom of the 
unwell. “This narrator poses the question: why don’t we know about illness 
until we have it? But then, her kid gets sick, and everything changes: her 
pragmatism, her ability to be non-emotional about it. It’s very funny and it’s 
very silly in places, but it’s also quite sad. My work’s always like that. It’s 
super-bonkers. It starts as a musical, but it ends up being just a lot of 
people sitting in a room talking about death. That’s what it’s really about: 
death. It deconstructs itself. In the end, the stage gets cancer, and the 
performers are pushed off it, and into the auditorium.” It sounds clever. 
“Well, I’m a clever person.” Kimmings, you soon gather, doesn’t go in for false 
modesty.

What particularly fascinated her about cancer? “I was interested in people 
who’ve caused their own cancers. There’s a character in the show who smokes 
while he’s ill. I was interested in Li-Fraumeni syndrome [a hereditary 
predisposition to cancer]. There’s a character in the show who has it, and 
she’s pregnant and thinking: ‘Do I keep this baby?’ I was interested in people 
who look for miracles, in the way cancer can make you non-rational. And I’m 
very interested in afterwards. Earlier, you asked Judith if she was well again. 
She is, but that doesn’t mean she is ever going to be the same again. She’s 
never not going to have had cancer. That’s a very important theme in the play.”

Dimant is nodding. “Everyone wants you to go back to normal, but you never do, 
even if you look the same, wear the same clothes. The impetus to work with 
Bryony became even stronger after being ill because I suddenly thought: I’ve 
got to do something completely different. I’ve had an amazing career, but I’ve 
still got so much to give to something else.” Does the show replicate some of 
her own experiences? “It is very, very accurate.” They both hate the language 
of cancer: the talk of courage, of battles won, or lost. “Our characters aren’t 
brave,” says Kimmings. “They don’t have that choice. Cancer is outside their 
control. That’s what’s so terrifying about it.”

Rufus Norris's National Theatre ushers in new generation of writers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/03/national-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation>
To say that all this has been an intense experience for them both is an 
understatement. As they worked on the show, Dimant underwent chemotherapy, 
radiotherapy and surgery (sometimes, Kimmings accompanied her); meanwhile, 
Kimmings had a son, Frank, who was diagnosed with epilepsy when he was just a 
few months old (he is the main reason she’s glad not to be appearing in it 
herself; she no longer wants to go on the road). It has made them close, and 
they are certain they’ll work together again: Kimmings wants to do a musical in 
which all the performers are in their 80s; Dimant wants to make a piece about 
suffrage.

For Kimmings, though, this is also a gear change; plucked from the smaller 
fringe venues she’s used to filling, her creation will soon land bang, smack in 
the NationalTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>. (Every theatre 
with whom, early on, they shared the work wanted to stage it; she and Dimant 
chose the National simply because “it is the biggest”.) Does she feel under 
pressure? I can’t tell if she is being blithe, or merely pretending to be. “I 
feel under pressure when people talk to me about budgets,” she says. “I’m just, 
like,whatever. But I don’t come from a world where this was my dream. I didn’t 
start making small studio pieces so I could have a musical at the National, so 
it’s not blowing my mind.” She pauses, has a little rethink. Ah, so shewas 
pretending. “Look, I’m really pleased about it, of course. I’m super-psyched. 
Fuck, yeah, I’m excited. I hope it gets bigger and bigger, and goes into the 
Olivier [it will be staged first in the National’s smallest space, the 
Dorfman], and then into the West End. That’s what should happen. That’s what I 
want. That’s what I’m imagining.”

A Pacifist’s Guide to the War on Cancer is at Home in Manchester 
<http://homemcr.org/production/a-pacifists-guide-to-the-war-on-cancer/> 20-24 
September;Exeter Northcott 
<https://exeternorthcott.co.uk/calendar/a-pacifists-guide-to-the-war-on-cancer/>
 28 September-2 October; and theNational Theatre 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/a-pacifists-guide-to-the-war-on-cancer>
 14 October-29 November
 