
I must confess that I’ve been avoiding pâté de campagne. It’s not that I don’t 
like the stuff – loaded on to hunks of bread in great meaty wodges, it’s a 
pretty unbeatable lunch – yet I had a sneaking suspicion that making it myself 
wasn’t going to be quite as easy as knocking upa silky chicken liver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/nov/29/how-make-perfect-chicken-liver-pate>
 or acreamy smoked mackerel pâté 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/may/24/how-perfect-smoked-mackerel-pate>
. A coarsely textured terrine of pork, offal and fat seemed a more daunting 
proposition, somehow.

For a start, pâté de campagne contains all sorts of mysterious chunks beneath 
its jellied crust which I rightly surmised would be hard to come by in 
21st-century Britain. For another, I had a horrible feeling I might need to 
invest in a mincing machine. Admittedly, this gadget had been on my list for 
some time, ever sinceI embarked on the perfect burger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/aug/05/how-to-make-perfect-hamburger>
 and discovered how inconsistent supermarket mince could be, but still, it 
wasn’t a project that was going to be doable in an afternoon. So is homemade 
pâté de campagne worth the effort, or is it one of those dishes best left to 
the professionals?

The meat
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410349324253%2F89cb7856-2ba2-4c51-a7f9-a1290c2855b5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20country%20p%C3%A2t%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20country%20p%C3%A2t%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410349324253%2F89cb7856-2ba2-4c51-a7f9-a1290c2855b5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Our Daily Brine’s pate de campagne. Photograph: Felicity Cloake/Guardian 
As Julia Child explains in Mastering the Art of French Cooking, pâté de 
campagnes “vary in content and flavour throughout France, but always contain 
pork liver, pork, and sometimes other meats, as well as pork fat, a binder and 
the usual seasoning”.

Pork shoulder, a flavourful cut well marbled with fat, is the most popular 
base in the pâté recipes I try, used by Raymond Blanc’s Foolproof French 
Cookery andAnthony Bourdain’s Les Halles Cookbook 
<http://leitesculinaria.com/984/recipes-french-country-pate.html>. Michel 
Roux’s The Essence of French Cooking suggests pork neck and Julia Child 
“fat-and-lean fresh pork” such as sausagemeat. Blanc also uses pork belly and 
Child adds lean veal or chicken. I suspect Blanc’s pork belly is a goodwill 
gesture towards his readers, because almost all the other recipes use pork fat, 
which is somewhat more difficult to get hold of on its own, though your butcher 
should be able to find you some if you give him or her notice. (He and Our 
Daily Brine, the other recipe to omit it, also add bacon to the mixture, which 
helps to up the fat content.)

I think that, sadly, some pure fat is essential – it gives the pâté a 
surprising lightness of texture particularly evident in Roux and Bourdain’s 
versions, without adding too much salt, as the bacon tends to.Pork 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pork> shoulder, which is far easier 
to get hold of than pork neck, will form the bulk of the pâté. Roux and 
Bourdain both marinate their meat overnight before use, which definitely seems 
to help in the flavour department if you’ve got the time; this is not instant 
gratification. Blanc whizzes his meats up in the food processor, which I’d love 
to say works just fine, but in fact makes it rather mushy; you need to mince 
it, preferably fairly coarsely, to give that authentic chunky texture. As 
you’re going to have to go to the butcher anyway, ask him to do the hard work 
for you.

The offal
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410349392701%2F81472537-240d-472a-b4ec-8ffb1e5e6e99-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20country%20p%C3%A2t%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20country%20p%C3%A2t%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410349392701%2F81472537-240d-472a-b4ec-8ffb1e5e6e99-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Michel Roux’s pate de campagne. Photograph: Felicity Cloake/Guardian 
That’s not all, though – a great variety of offal goes into pâtés, as befits 
their rustic roots. Blanc, Bourdain and Roux use pig’s liver, Child andOur 
Daily Brine <http://ourdailybrine.com/pate-de-campagne-sous-vide-recipe/> calf 
and chicken liver respectively, and the last also pops in a pig’s kidney for 
good measure. I’m not sure the kidney contributes much to be honest, unless 
you’ve got one in need of using up, but the slightly sweet, earthy flavour of 
liver is essential. The stronger flavoured pig’s version worked better with the 
other porky ingredients, if you can find some (and given you’ll probably have 
to order in the pork fat, asking for this too shouldn’t be a problem), but if 
not, substitute the subtler chicken variety instead. (And, should you be put 
off by the notion of a strongly flavoured liver, if you like French pork pâtés, 
you’ll like it, trust me.)

Binder
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410349441229%2Ff3f73092-6a46-4846-a209-0ea061cee627-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20country%20p%C3%A2t%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20country%20p%C3%A2t%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410349441229%2Ff3f73092-6a46-4846-a209-0ea061cee627-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Julia Child’s pate de campagne. Photograph: Felicity Cloake/Guardian 
Child makes a rice “panade” to bind her pâté – rice cooked with butter and 
stock, then minced along with the rest – but egg alone is a more common choice. 
Roux and Our Daily Brine also add double cream, which gives the whole thing a 
really gorgeous richness. This is a special occasion dish, after all, so we may 
as well push the boat out.

Spices

Sweet spices are a popular choice, with Roux and Our Daily Brine using nutmeg 
and cloves, and Roux popping in ginger and Our Daily Brine mace, while Blanc 
puts in Chinese five-spice and juniper berries, and Bourdain and Child 
allspice. Our Daily Brine adds a generous amount ofpiment d’espelette 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Espelette_pepper>, which, though it works well 
with the pork, I find a bit strident in flavour and colour. My testers also 
observe that they’ve been too generous with the salt – I’m not shy of the 
stuff, but you should be able to taste the sweetness of the meat and spice too. 
I settle on Roux’s nutmeg, ginger and cloves as a well-rounded, warming 
combination.

Other flavours
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410349533910%2F14532845-152b-4f2e-ac44-bd30c0477d78-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20country%20p%C3%A2t%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20country%20p%C3%A2t%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410349533910%2F14532845-152b-4f2e-ac44-bd30c0477d78-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Anthony Bourdain’s pate de campagne. Photograph: Felicity Cloake/Guardian 
Most people add garlic and either onions or shallots – I prefer the sweetness 
of the shallot to the sharper onion, especially when softened in butter as 
Child and Roux suggest. Herbwise, aromatic thyme seems more in keeping with the 
rest of the flavours than Bourdain’s peppery parsley.

Roux, Bourdain and Blanc all put white wine into their terrines, with Blanc, 
Bourdain and Our Daily Brine putting in some cognac for good measure. I like 
the stronger, sweeter flavour of the brandy; it seems more luxurious and again, 
country or not, this isn’t a dish you’re going to make every day. Our Daily 
Brine, which has a brilliantly geeky post on the serious business of pâté, 
mentions that many recipes deploy what they refer to as “an interior garnish … 
nuts, such as walnuts or pistachios, dried fruits such as cherries, figs or 
apricots, or the classic and coveted truffle”.

They and Blanc nominate pistachios, which look pretty, though I’m not too keen 
on them with the other flavours here. They find more favour with some of my 
testers. They also use green peppercorns, which, though their colour is less 
vivid, work far better – you could go for the pink variety if you’re feeling 
particularly jaunty.

Cooking
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410349599808%2Fd289c3d1-3d21-4c2f-9975-e4ae9f1c3d66-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20country%20p%C3%A2t%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20country%20p%C3%A2t%C3%A9&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhow-to-make-perfect-country-pate-recipe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410349599808%2Fd289c3d1-3d21-4c2f-9975-e4ae9f1c3d66-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Raymond Blanc’s pate de campagne. Photograph: Felicity Cloake/Guardian 
Our Daily Brine lines the terrines with bacon, Child and Roux with more pork 
fat and Bourdain with caul fat, the peculiarly beautiful lacy membrane that 
comes wrapped around the stomach of animals including pigs. This is super easy 
to use, as it comes in large sheets, but as long as you use some sort of fat to 
aid the turning out of the terrine, it doesn’t matter whether it’s caul, strips 
of back fat or just lard. Bacon looks pretty, but such long, slow cooking 
renders it chewy and disappointing. Bourdain also tops his with duck fat, which 
provides a helpful seal, but proves rather unpleasant at room temperature.

Traditionally, pâtés are baked in a bain-marie to moderate the temperature and 
prevent them overcooking and drying out. Cleverly, Our Daily Brine suggests 
using a sous-vide machine as a modern alternative, explaining that “one of the 
benefits of sous vide, literally ‘under vacuum’, is that a vacuum is used to 
seal and compress the farce – both as it cooks and as it cools. Additionally, 
sous vide allows for more precise cooking; we are able to set the water bath to 
a precise 65.5C and cook the pâté to equilibrium.”

As I’m lucky enough to have a sous-vide machine 
<http://www.lakeland.co.uk/15918/SousVide-Supreme-Demi> leftover from (what 
else)perfect fried eggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/nov/08/how-to-cook-the-perfect-fried-egg>
, I give this a try with half their mixture, and find that indeed the results 
hold together better than their oven-baked counterparts. It is certainly more 
precise, given the inevitable fluctuation in oven temperatures, but rest 
assured that you don’t need to splash out on one; the traditional method works 
just fine too. Make sure you weight down the terrine after cooking to compress 
the pâté, though. Blanc reckons this is “best prepared about two days in 
advance, so the flavours have time to mature”, and he’s right – it’ll keep for 
at least a week in the fridge. In theory, at least.

The perfect country pâté

(Serves 10)

500g pork shoulder, coarsely minced

250g pork back fat, minced

250g pig’s liver (or chicken), minced

5 tbsp brandy

¼ tsp ground ginger

¼ tsp ground nutmeg

¼ tsp ground cloves

½ tsp freshly ground black pepper

2 sprigs of thyme, leaves only, chopped

2 cloves of garlic, crushed

Knob of butter

2 shallots, finely chopped

1 egg, beaten

2 tbsp double cream

1 tsp salt

2 tbsp green peppercorns

Caul fat, extra back fat cut into thin strips, or lard, to line the dish

Put the mince in a large bowl and sprinkle with the brandy, spices, thyme and 
garlic. Mix well, cover and refrigerate overnight, removing from the fridge an 
hour before going on to step two.

Melt the butter in a small frying pan and cook the shallots over a gentle heat 
until soft. Stir this into the meat mixture along with the egg, cream, salt and 
peppercorns.

Heat the oven to 170C/325F/gas mark three and boil the kettle. Fry a small 
blob of the mixture in the pan to check the seasoning and adjust if necessary. 
Line a 20x10x6cm terrine dish or loaf tin with fat and spoon in the mixture. 
Cover tightly with foil or greaseproof paper and put in a roasting tin on the 
middle shelf of the oven. Pour in boiling water to two thirds of the way up the 
terrine.

Bake for about 70 minutes until the internal temperature reaches 65-70C or 
until a skewer inserted into the centre comes out warm all the way through. Put 
a plate on top of the terrine, weigh down with a couple of tins and allow to 
cool. Refrigerate, still with the tins on top, at least overnight, before 
serving.

Pâté de campagne: best meat paste ever, or not a patch on Shippam’s? What is 
your favourite style of pâté, and is it one dish you would prefer to leave to 
the professionals?
 