
By crediting Christopher Marlowe this week as the previously unacknowledged 
co-writer of Shakespeare’sHenry VI trilogy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/23/christopher-marlowe-credited-as-one-of-shakespeares-co-writers>
, the New Oxford Shakespeare’s editors have added another portrayal of Marlowe 
– the handy helpmeet working with a less experienced writer, and apparently not 
seeking recognition for the results – to the wildly contrasting other versions 
of him (and of his relationship, if any, with Shakespeare) offered by novels, 
plays and screen fiction. Here are some of them:

Seminal but solo


In the conventional account of his career, Marlowe had written at least five 
plays, starting with his 1587 smash hitTamburlaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/oct/15/theatre.art>, and the 
narrative poem Hero and Leander, by the time of his much-speculated-about death 
in a knife fight in Deptford in 1593 – but, unlike most of his Elizabethan 
peers, idiosyncratic Kit is not viewed as having added to his CV as a 
team-writer. Shakespeare, also born in 1564 but a comparatively late starter 
(he staged his first play in 1590/91), paid graceful homage to him in As You 
Like It and was clearly influenced by him in choice of subject and individual 
passages. But there is no documentary evidence of them meeting, let alone 
pooling resources.

Dream team collaborator


In the Oxford complete Shakespeare, published on 27 October, Marlowe is 
credited as co-writer on the title pages of all three parts of Henry VI for the 
first time in a Collected Works; and reportedly is regarded as the lead writer 
on Part One, the debut covering England’s defeats in France after Henry V’s 
death that gave the young Shakespeare a deceptive reputation as a jingoistic 
chronicler of war (hitherto Marlowe has been cited among possible collaborators 
on it, but with others seen as more likely). How the partnership worked is 
unclear: the academic editors behind the project have said the playwrights may 
have written together, or a draft could have been handed on or around (like 
team-authored scripts in Hollywood today) for additions and rewrites.

Masterclass mentor

The idea that the playwrights collaborated is anticipated in John Madden’s 
Oscar-winningShakespeare In Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/sep/08/shakespeare-in-love-reel-history>
, scripted by Tom Stoppard, where Marlowe is Elizabethan theatre’s undisputed 
No 1 (“there’s no one like Marlowe”, says Henslowe, and almost all the audition 
scene hopefuls choose the same speech fromDoctor Faustus). Yet to pen a single 
word of “Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate’s Daughter”, Joseph Fiennes’s Shakespeare, 
a struggling wannabe with writer’s block, is set on the course to greatness 
when Marlowe, played by Rupert Everett, suggests an Italian setting, romance 
entangled with a family feud and the death of Romeo’s best friend in a fight. 
Anthony Burgess’s Marlowe bio-novel, A Dead Man in Deptford (1993), similarly 
sees them as star writer and occasional sidekick, and specifically as partners 
on Henry VI Part One.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fbrush-up-marlowe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa05a9f34e6833b1cef0f57861b1bf5308885a3ee%2F0_40_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20close%20were%20Marlowe%20and%20Shakespeare%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fbrush-up-marlowe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20close%20were%20Marlowe%20and%20Shakespeare%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fbrush-up-marlowe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa05a9f34e6833b1cef0f57861b1bf5308885a3ee%2F0_40_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Rhys Ifans as the Earl of Oxford inAnonymous, 2011. 
Death-faking ghost writer

First advanced in the 19th century, the “Marlovian theory” – that the story of 
his death in 1593 was a ruse, and he continued writing plays billed as by 
Shakespeare – was turned into docu-fiction inRos Barber’s verse novel The 
Marlowe Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/15/marlowe-papers-ros-barber-review>
, winner of the 2013 Desmond Elliott prize. Facing a trial for heresy, Marlowe 
flees across the Channel and becomes an exile creating works supposedly 
conjured up by a merchant from the Midlands – and somehow it works. A 
comparable arrangement is talked about in Peter Whelan’s 1992 RSC play The 
School of Night (where they are friends but also rivals as both playwrights and 
suitors of a Dark Lady figure) as a solution to Kit’s arrest for his atheistic 
views and links to the titular free-thinkers; but in the end the official 
version of his death turns out to be true.

Bumped off by the Bard 

Based on the best-known variant of the so-called “anti-Stratfordian” theory - 
that the plays attributed to Shakespeare were written by Edward de Vere, Earl 
of Oxford, Roland Emmerich’s 2011 filmAnonymous  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/10/anonymous-film-review-william-shakespeare>
posits that Marlowe stumbled on the secret and was killed by the provincial 
nobody (a boozy, devious young actor paid to be the De Vere conspiracy’s 
frontman once Ben Jonson declined the role) after confronting him. But not in 
1593, apparently, as Kit is seen still alive in the late 90s.

Pseudo-playwright


Ben Elton’s BBC2 sitcom Upstart Crow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/10/upstart-crow-review-ben-elton-comedy-shakespeare>
 wittily inverts the Marlovian theory, depicting Shakespeare as authoring 
Marlowe rather than vice versa. Marlowe, a philandering, swaggering Elizabethan 
007 resembling Rik Mayall’s Lord Flashheart in Blackadder, needs to be seen as 
a poet as a cover story for his spying; so David Mitchell’s verbose 
Warwickshire family man produces plays for the playboy spook who gave him his 
break in the theatre including Tamburlaine and Doctor Faustus.
 