
Though a surprising number of you 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/29/truffles-toffee-crisps-guilty-pleasures-felicity-cloake-a-z-eating-flavour-map-adventurous-cook>
 share my mistrust of mushrooms and ambivalence towards the lobster, I’m fairly 
sure I’m theonly person in the western world 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/food-and-drink/features/world-nutella-day-10-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-choc-spread/>
 not to be nutty about a certain Italian chocolate and hazelnut spread. Even 
before the recent revelation that the stuff is 55% pure sugar 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/foodanddrink/did-you-know-that-a-jar-of-nutella-contains-57-cubes-of-sugar-a3192501.html>
 (the second largest ingredient being palm oil), it’s always tasted cloyingly 
sweet to someone more used to Marmite in the mornings.

I was quite content in my ambivalence (with so many other vices to choose 
from, I can afford to be) until I realised there was more to chocolate spread 
than Nutella – and that it was perfectly possible to make a version that 
contained more nuts and chocolate than it did added sugar and palm oil. At this 
point, all was lost. If you’d prefer to keep sugar off the breakfast table, 
look away now. If you’re tempted, or you have Easter eggs to use up, read on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc3887a35d6b80a6ff3efafae08b60e884df16f5%2F0_56_3648_2680%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc3887a35d6b80a6ff3efafae08b60e884df16f5%2F0_56_3648_2680%2F3648.jpg>
 Chantal Coady’s chocolate spread. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The chocolate

Well, perhaps I’m not alone in finding the commercial chocolate spreads too 
sweet, because most homemade recipes demand dark rather than milk chocolate. 
Only chocolatierChantal Coady 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=M-d5aex1dC4C&pg=PT165&lpg=PT165&dq=chantal+coady+donna+tella+the+kids+spread&source=bl&ots=wG_ZwBnrcP&sig=wU1iRNspSVscTTXv6aRf7C6FH8U&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiW69rcvfDLAhWEtxQKHTE4DK8Q6AEIHzAA#v=onepage&q=chantal%20coady%20donna%20tella%20the%20kids%20spread&f=false>
’s “very posh Nutella” in Rococo: Mastering the Art of Chocolate, and pastry 
chef and food writerDavid Lebovitz 
<http://www.davidlebovitz.com/2011/02/homemade-nutella-recipe-chocolate-hazelnut-spread/>
 use milk, the latter mixed with dark chocolate, and Coady in combination with 
cocoa powder. Lebovitz’s version is slightly too sweet for my taste – a 70% 
cocoa chocolate suits me better. This is a very personal thing; if you’d prefer 
a more authentic Nutella-like flavour, you may be better off with a 
good-quality milk variety instead, and if you’re determined to use up those 
eggs, stick in whatever comes to hand (I had some very nicechocolate chip 
cookies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2012/apr/25/how-to-cook-perfect-chocolate-chip-cookies>
 recently, made by my eight-year-old niece with half a Santa Claus and some 
chocolate coins).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F431c08b271c00eb5eaf6c9c30fe804750063cefe%2F0_144_3648_2526%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F431c08b271c00eb5eaf6c9c30fe804750063cefe%2F0_144_3648_2526%2F3648.jpg>
 Ella Woodward’s chocolate spread. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Ella Woodward <http://deliciouslyella.com/nutritious-nutella-vegan-sugar-free/>
 and anti-sugar campaignerSarah Wilson 
<https://iquitsugar.com/recipe/sugar-free-nut-ella/> both use raw cocoa powder 
in their spreads in the belief that it’shealthier than ordinary roasted cocoa 
<https://iquitsugar.com/raw-cacao-vs-cocoa-whats-the-difference/>. It may well 
be, but the problem with cocoa powder, raw or not, is that it’s pretty bitter. 
Most chocolate contains sugar to balance this flavour, as well as natural cocoa 
butter, which helps to give the spread body – replacing this with other fats 
makes little sense unless you, too, prefer your cocoa raw.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff57aaec85c2db189810f69d50b0c80d4bffd0afd%2F0_203_3648_2365%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff57aaec85c2db189810f69d50b0c80d4bffd0afd%2F0_203_3648_2365%2F3648.jpg>
 Sarah Wilson’s chocolate spread. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The nuts

Hazelnuts are the backbone of Nutella – the Ferrero group uses almost a 
quarter of the world’s supply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/may/07/nutella-shortage-rumours-need-spread-no-longer>
. The recipe Lebovitz uses adds a few almonds, too, but I can’t taste them, and 
suspect he’s right when he suggests an all-hazelnut version would be equally 
satisfactory. Whichever nuts you use, toast them beforehand; it brings out the 
flavour. A dry pan is quicker and no doubt more energy efficient, but you’ll 
get a more even result in a hot oven, so if you plan ahead, bake them when 
you’ve got it on for something else.

Blanched hazelnuts are easy to find in supermarket baking sections, and will 
save you the slightly tedious task of rubbing off those papery skins, which can 
be bitter in quantity. If you use the unpeeled variety, Lebovitz recommends 
rubbing them in a tea towel to loosen the skin; I like to shake them vigorously 
in a tightly closed container for a minute or so.


Grind them until they break down into a paste – you can scoop out and reserve 
a few spoonfuls halfway if you’d prefer a crunchy version, but if you don’t 
process them enough you’ll end up with a grainy, almost gritty consistency 
likely to send you back into the welcoming arms of the Ferrero family. Should 
you doubt your food processor’s ability to cope, I’d suggest going down the 
Hotel Chocolat route, and buy hazelnut butter instead: you’ll find it in health 
food shops and larger supermarkets. (It’s not cheap, so give the homemade 
version a try first.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b52a87e0ba490ce72353ad3d249100f91955472%2F0_299_3648_2267%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b52a87e0ba490ce72353ad3d249100f91955472%2F0_299_3648_2267%2F3648.jpg>
 Hotel Chocolat’s chocolate spread. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian
Coady makes a hazelnut praline, which she grinds to stir into her paste. This 
gives it a lovely sugary crunch, more like something you might find in a box of 
fancy chocolates than anything you’d waste on ravenous children (hence, 
perhaps, the recipe’s name: Donna Tella the Kids).

The sweetener
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81edd21909011da8e3756a1a204958e55a80854f%2F0_102_3648_2533%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81edd21909011da8e3756a1a204958e55a80854f%2F0_102_3648_2533%2F3648.jpg>
 Bon Appetit’s chocolate spread. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Hardcore cocoa fans probably won’t need any sweetener here, but I find the 
natural bitterness of dark chocolate too much first thing in the morning. If 
you’ve lost your sweet tooth, Wilson’s scant tablespoon of brown rice syrup 
will no doubt be sufficient, but all my testers found it far too austere. Use 
whatever kind of sweetener you like (Lebovitz suggests honey, Woodward maple 
syrup, and Coady, Hotel Chocolat and America’s Bon Appétit magazine all use 
refined cane sugar of various kinds, which I like for its otherwise neutral 
flavour), but add it to taste – only you know what floats your boat.

The fat

Nutella describes itself in the US as a “hazelnut spread with skim milk and 
cocoa”, which suggests that the manufacturers believe dairy is an important 
part of its identity. And as you also need some sort of fat to give it that 
creamy, spreadable consistency, it may as well be something delicious, rather 
than Hotel Chocolat’s vegetable oil. Bon Appétit suggest butter and double 
cream, which gives it a solid, slightly crumbly texture, and Coady goes for 
extra cocoa butter and clarified butter, which works well. However, neither can 
match Lebovitz’s soft, spreadable, and surprisingly light version using whole 
milk and whole milk powder. It works a treat: once it’s firmed up, it almost as 
easy to apply to toast as the real thing, and tastes far better.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F715a3da2d85eb903cbc5f7da45b50336e27e0b9d%2F0_82_3648_2598%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F715a3da2d85eb903cbc5f7da45b50336e27e0b9d%2F0_82_3648_2598%2F3648.jpg>
 David Lebovitz’s chocolate spread. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian
If you would prefer to keep it vegan, I would suggest Coady’s cocoa butter, 
which can befound online <http://www.souschef.co.uk/cocoa-butter.html>, is a 
better choice than Wilson’s coconut milk and oil, which gives it a strong hint 
of Bounty bar. Woodward, meanwhile, doesn’t add extra fat, and I think you can 
taste it – her spread lacks the richness of the others.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc97d059bbc810eac6e6e416bd384c48ce21f7902%2F0_115_3648_2562%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc97d059bbc810eac6e6e416bd384c48ce21f7902%2F0_115_3648_2562%2F3648.jpg>
 Hemsley and Hemsley’s chocolate spread. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
The extras

Jasmine and Melissa Hemsley bulk out their “deliciously rich and decadent … 
wholefood” Bbtella with cooked black beans. This is not as bad as it sounds. It 
tastes quite nice, in an earthy, beany way. You are unlikely, however, to 
mistake it for Nutella, so it’s likely to work best with small children who 
have no expectations of chocolate spread. The sisters, like Wilson, also add 
vanilla, which is indeed an ingredient of Nutella, though it contains the 
synthetic variety. A dash of real vanilla extract seems an appropriate homage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7141a583a77f532a70dc207ee639bde7dc6dd413%2F0_223_3648_2193%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20chocolate%20spread&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fapr%2F07%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-chocolate-spread-nutella%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7141a583a77f532a70dc207ee639bde7dc6dd413%2F0_223_3648_2193%2F3648.jpg>
 The perfect chocolate spread. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Perfect chocolate spread

(makes 1 x 350ml jar)
140g hazelnuts, preferably blanched
225g chocolate, about 70% cocoa (or see above) 
25-50g sugar of your choice (granulated, honey, maple syrup)
3 tbsp powdered whole milk 
350ml whole milk
Dash of vanilla extract
Pinch of salt

Heat the oven to 180C and spread out the nuts in a single layer on a baking 
sheet. Bake for about 12-15 minutes until golden, then allow to cool.

Grind into a smooth paste in a food processor, scooping out and reserving a 
couple of spoonfuls early on if you’d prefer a crunchy texture. Depending on 
your machine, this will take about 10 minutes and you’ll need to keep scraping 
down the sides; be careful the motor doesn’t overheat.

Meanwhile, melt the chocolate in a heatproof bowl set over, but not touching a 
pan of simmering water, or in the microwave. Stir together the milk, milk 
powder and 25g sugar in a small pan, and heat to a bare simmer.

With the processor still running, pour the hot chocolate into the hazelnut 
paste, followed by the hot milk, vanilla and a pinch of salt. Taste, and add as 
much of the remaining sugar as you wish, then when you’re happy, stir in any 
reserved part-ground nuts.

Pour into a clean container, allow to cool, then chill until set. 

Nutella outsells Marmite in the UK – do you love or hate it, and is this a 
sign we should get out of the EU? If you’re one of the spread’s many fans, what 
else do you use it for apart from slathering on bread? I have several jars to 
use up and I need inspiration.
 