
Have you ever found yourself flummoxed by the question, “How do you like them 
apples?” Would it trigger an existential crisis as you realise, in a rising 
panic, “Actually, now that you mention it, I don’t know. Why have I never 
thought about it? Whatdo I think about them apples?” If so, then you are in the 
right place. This month, How To Eat – the Guardian blog that analyses the best 
way to enjoy Britain’s favourite food stuffs – is considering the apple, a 
fruit so powerful that it occasioned man’s Biblical fall from grace, is central 
to America’s mythic self-image and, of course, connects the Wurzels,William 
Burroughs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/nov/01/william-burroughs-the-cat-inside>
and Mr Kipling. Below the line, please get to the core of your argument 
quickly. Prevarication will give your fellow contributors the pip. As will any 
unnecessary aggression. “It makes you look,” as my Granny Smith used to say, 
“like a bit of a Cox.”

To wash … or not?

Apparently, apples are among the top three fruits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/mar/15/organic-produce> when it 
comes to retaining pesticides (yay, go apples!), whichprobably – hey, if you 
came here looking for hard science, then you are reading the wrong blog, friend 
– means you should give them a rinse. I give any apple I eat a quick rub on my 
T-shirt … if I remember. This is probably shaving minutes off my life, but 
isn’t everything?

Peel deal? 

There is no reason why anyone over the age of five should want an apple peeled 
and, even then, you should not pander to the little darlings. In discarding the 
skin you lose most of the apple’s free radical-fighting flavonoids (if you are 
into that kind of thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2002/oct/27/shopping.foodanddrink>). 
But, perhaps more importantly, it ruins the flavour of the apple and you miss 
out on that exquisite pleasure of piercing that cool, taut skin with your 
teeth. That repeated crisp-crack as you work way around the apple is one of the 
most sensually and sonically satisfying aspects of eating an apple. If you do 
not like that then, frankly, you do not like apples. You need to stick to 
bananas or mangos. There is no shame in that. Apples are not the only fruit.



Chilling out

Broadly, storing fruit and vegetables in the fridge is, at best, a necessary 
evil and, at worst, a culinary crime. For instance, refrigeration kills 
tomatoes. It, and this is true of all fresh items, inhibits the activity of the 
volatile chemical compounds that produce flavour. But, and it is a big but, 
there is something so refreshing about a cold apple straight from the fridge 
that it trumps what you lose in flavour. A good apple should slake the thirst 
as effectively as a pint of iced water.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Fhow-to-eat-apples%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443173557341%2F09845487-91da-4a2e-af15-b7b71516cfad-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20apples&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Fhow-to-eat-apples%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20apples&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Fhow-to-eat-apples%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443173557341%2F09845487-91da-4a2e-af15-b7b71516cfad-1020x612.jpeg>
 Crunch time: as a general rule, the pinker and smaller the apple, the better 
it tastes. Photograph: Yutthana Teerakarunkar/Getty Images/EyeEm 
Variety … and the spice of life

Theoretically, it would be nice to be able to buy more of the 2,000 or so 
apple varieties that once thrived in Britain, such as the yorkshire goosesauce, 
blenheim orange and egremont russet (or was that a now-neglected Victorian 
novelist?), but harrumphing about it will not change anything.

Fundamentally, in recent decades, the apple choice in Britain could be broken 
down between: deeply unpleasant and deeply boring. Apples were something to be 
endured rather than enjoyed. In the 80s, there was still a macho cachet in 
eating unpalatably acidic apples on a spectrum from rock-hard granny smiths to 
hulking great knobbly cooking apples, in their abrasive, bark-like skins. Waste 
not want not and all that. Meanwhile, the big-hitting commercial alternatives, 
golden delicious and red delicious, were and are so dull that, but for the 
mechanical movement of your jaw, you could forget that you are eating one.

People still hymn <http://www.boynegrove.ie/dessertapples.htm#cox>, with some 
justification, the complexity of the cox’s orange pippin, which is, variously, 
credited with spice-like, honeyed and subtle tropical fruit flavours, but how 
often have you eaten a genuinely outstanding one? Most commercially grown 
cox’s/variants offer no more than a brief, watery echo of that historic 
intensity.

Things changed when those sweet and juicy, downright apple-ier Antipodean 
varieties such as braeburn, jazz, gala and Pink Lady (a brand name for the 
cripps pink variety), started to arrive in the UK andrapidly established 
themselves as the market leaders <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-24578762>. 
And why not? Raymond Blanc may rail against the “mono flavour 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/healthyeating/11171530/Why-we-are-eating-the-wrong-kind-of-apples.html>
” of modern apple varieties, but, frankly, how much acidic complexity do you 
want in an apple? Generally, people do not eat tart foods in isolation. They 
are ingredients, not snacks. The idea, moreover, that sweeter apples are, 
somehow, infantile or that their rise is a damning manifestation of Britain’s 
deleterious sweet tooth is patronising and misleading. Some acidic apple 
varieties contain more sugar than their sweeter counterparts 
<http://www.nature.com/ejcn/journal/v60/n9/full/1602430a.html> and, hell, what 
is wrong with that sweetness anyway?

Pink Lady et al are perfectly balanced. The bitter tannins in their skins 
gently offset that burst of sweet, chin-dribbling juiciness from their 
just-soft-enough flesh which, albeit not as dramatically as some heritage 
varieties, delivers a more variegated range of fringe flavours (melon, pear 
etc), than its critics would like to admit. Such apples also tend to be 
smaller, which means eating one does not turn into a chore.

We are where we are, and where we are is a world in which, as a general rule 
of thumb, the pinker and smaller the apple, the better it tastes. The bigger 
and greener they, are the best they are avoided.


Core values

There are some people who chomp through the whole apple, core and all, without 
a second glance. For some, this is habit, for others, a matter of principle – 
they want to minimise food waste. But you have to draw the eco-line somewhere. 
And eating that woody, unpalatable core is both bizarre from a taste and 
texture point of view and, of course,highly dangerous. Not because of the 
amygdalin in apple seeds which, when digested, release (a harmless trace amount 
of)hydrogen cyanide <http://www.snopes.com/food/warnings/apples.asp>, but 
because, as your mum should have told you, if you swallow those seeds, an apple 
tree will grow in your belly. That is A Matter Of Medical Fact. Ask any doctor.

When

Eating (as opposed to cooking) apples are technically referred to as dessert 
apples, but does anyone really consider an apple a “treat” after a meal? No, of 
course not. Apples are an everyday snack food to be eaten between meals when 
you need something sweet but virtuous to fill a hole and pep you up around 11am 
or 3pm.

Not near me

The apple is the ultimate mobile handheld snack. It can be eaten anywhere – 
train, office, street – and at any time, one-handed, while completing other 
tasks. For those of us who find listening to other people eat unbearable, this 
is horrifying. The apple is not only everywhere, but it is also one of the 
loudest sources of gustatory noise pollution. Prior to writing this piece, I 
was unaware of the condition,misophonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/feb/22/i-have-phobia-of-sound-experience>
. Its sufferers are, apparently, brought to a state of high anxiety by 
intrusive noises – I fear I may be a sufferer. Those with a low tolerance of 
background noise are also thought to be (cough!) hyper-intelligent 
<http://metro.co.uk/2015/03/08/find-your-colleagues-noisy-eating-annoying-then-you-could-be-a-genius-research-shows-5094168/>
. For the record.

Drink

Nothing. What is an apple but apple juice in solid form? This is not thirsty 
work. Moreover, most drinks, from water (which leaves the apple tasting bland 
and mealy) to wine (an unholy clash), taste vile with an apple. Have you ever 
drunk tea with one? Lord knows what is going on there chemically, but it 
creates a whole world of astringent wrong.

So apples, how do you eat yours?
 