
Friends! Small children! Mortally drunk students! One and all, lend me your 
brains, forHow to Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> – the Guardian blog
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth> that explores how best 
to eat the nation’s favourite foods – is, this month, taking on one of the 
great unifying dishes of British cuisine, the fish finger sandwich.

Sixty years after fish fingers were launched in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2015/sep/15/fish-fingers-60-britain-taste-of-childhood>
 (using a slogan that could be said to encapsulate the British psyche: “No 
bones, no waste, no smell, no fuss”), we still eat more than 1.5m of these 
breaded beauties each day, often slapped between two slices of bread. From the 
gussied-up versions that issue from gastropub kitchens to those thrown together 
at 4am, the fish finger butty is everywhere. Given all that practice, you might 
imagine that we long ago settled on its ideal form. Far from it. Debate rages 
on about every tiny detail. BTL, please refrain from trawling your fellow 
commentators or talking provocative pollocks. Light grilling of each other is 
fine. Even salty language. But unnecessarily vinegary attacks may lead to the 
aggressor being frozen out.

The impossibility of perfection?

The fish finger “scene” is divided into two often mutually antagonistic camps: 
posh and traditional. However, neither can claim to have produced the perfect 
fish finger sandwich. In fact, in their militant defence of their entrenched 
positions, both groups fail to see the flaws in their own methodology or the 
valuable lessons they could learn from one another.

For instance, no one really wants a fish finger sandwich served on huge 
doorstep slices of bread. In this instance, using great plateaux of loaf is a 
pose, a foodie affectation. Similarly, it is inverted snobbery of the worst 
kind to maintain that a “proper” fish finger sandwich can only be made with 
budget fish fingers, which offer a tiny, grey inner core of mulched, 
fish-derived protein matter at the centre of a limp, greasy lump of breadcrumb. 
They may bring on Proustian memories of school dinners/late-night adventures in 
bedsit cookery, but they cannot, in any objective sense, be said to taste 
“nice”. Hopefully, this blog will lay out the case for a third way forward.

Bread
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fhow-to-eat-fish-finger-sandwiches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd370a5e5b75a6da90b8b9c4a6b839942bc8f787d%2F0_210_6300_3780%2F6300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20fish%20finger%20sandwiches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fhow-to-eat-fish-finger-sandwiches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20fish%20finger%20sandwiches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fhow-to-eat-fish-finger-sandwiches%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd370a5e5b75a6da90b8b9c4a6b839942bc8f787d%2F0_210_6300_3780%2F6300.jpg>
 Save your thickly cut artisan sourdough spelt flour loaf for someone who 
cares. Photograph: Alamy 
Scientists (working on behalf of Nasa, no less 
<http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/12/15/the-myth-of-comfort-food/?_r=0>) may 
insist there is no such thing as comfort food, but they are American and have 
probably never eaten a “fish stick <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fish_finger>” 
butty. That is why for all their so-called empirical evidence, they do not 
understand that sinking your teeth into a fish finger sandwich – this 
carb-on-carb bear hug – is like flopping down on to your favourite sofa. In 
food terms, it is a return (give or take the tartare sauce) to the simplicity 
of childhood, and you certainly do not want any of those new-fangled breads – 
granary, ciabatta, sourdough, bagels even – coming between you and those 
luscious, golden (OK, orange) fingers of fish.

This is a sandwich that requires the use of soft and superbly fresh, still 
malleable (we’ll come to that) white bread, cut into slices that – as a general 
rule – should be around half the thickness of your fish fingers. Any thicker 
(are you listening pub kitchens?) and this becomes a slog of a sandwich, a 
large inedible wodge of crusty bread seasoned with a bit of fish and sauce. 
Such thick bread also makes your sandwich difficult to control (see below). By 
all means, use proper bread, but your homemade and/or artisan loaf (seethe 
bacon butties at St John Bread & Wine 
<https://www.stjohngroup.uk.com/spitalfields/menu/breakfast/>) needs, in 
essence, to be a high-class, slow-proved doppelganger for white sliced 
supermarketChorleywood <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chorleywood_bread_process>
 bread. This sandwich needs sweet, silky white bread and, in the absence of an 
obvious upgrade, Warbie’s will do just fine.

Butter

Obviously, and lots of it. Spreadable butters, margarines or any of that 
“low-fat, healthy heart” malarkey are verboten. If you are watching your diet 
that closely, the fish finger sandwich is not for you. You need something else. 
Such as granola. Or an apple.

Fingers

The second way in which foodie pubs over-engineer the fish finger sandwich is 
in producing “fingers” that threaten the structural integrity of the sandwich. 
This occurs in two ways. Often those fingers are nothing of the sort. Instead, 
they are glossy goujons of battered, fried fish that – never mind the blithe 
mis-selling or semantic laxness – consequently slip out of your sandwich every 
time you lift it to your mouth. Even when those fingers are correctly breaded, 
they can be such large, irregularly shaped specimens that they, likewise, 
wriggle free from the two foam mattresses of bread from which your sandwich has 
been made. Thick bread compounds the problem, in that it makes it very 
difficult to get a firm grip on the sandwich and its contents.

Fish fingers don’t just have a regular rectilinear shape because it is easily 
replicated on a factory production line. It also makes them perfect to build 
into a sandwich. You want to make your own, you say? Well, crack on. It iseasy 
enough to produce fish fingers at home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/sep/23/foodanddrink.recipes1> or 
in a pub kitchen that have right angles in all the right places.

In reality, there is no dire need to make your own, nice as that may be. The 
thicker, cut-from-fillet supermarket fish fingers (as opposed to those made 
from reconstituted protein) are perfectly adequate and minimise the faff in 
what should be the ultimate faff-free meal. In many ways, the fish finger 
sandwich is a celebration of processed food; jazz it up too much, as so many 
pub kitchens illustrate, and you ruin it.

That is not to say, however, as some adherents of “filthy food” do, that a 
fish finger sandwich must only be made with dodgy, budget fish fingers. If that 
is all you can afford, they will do a job. Ultimately, there is no such thing 
as an unenjoyable fish finger sandwich. But to claim that cheapo fish fingers 
are superior is misguided nostalgia. If we are talking about the ultimate fish 
finger sandwich, there is a sweet spot, an overlap, between the upper echelons 
of what you can buy in the supermarkets and what you can make at home.

Sauces
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fhow-to-eat-fish-finger-sandwiches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F8%2F1449573166686%2F2f36f2d0-9da5-451b-bbc3-6a74dbb379a9-712x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20fish%20finger%20sandwiches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fhow-to-eat-fish-finger-sandwiches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20fish%20finger%20sandwiches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fhow-to-eat-fish-finger-sandwiches%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F8%2F1449573166686%2F2f36f2d0-9da5-451b-bbc3-6a74dbb379a9-712x2040.jpeg>
 Never use salad cream. Not for anything. Except possibly embalming. 
The use of brown sauce is a heresy (what is this, kedgeree?), as are new-wave 
hipster chilli sauces. In both cases, those are bullies that will bustle in and 
take over your sandwich. The use of mayo* and/or ketchup is less offensive, but 
a bit childish. Yes, it is sweet and lubricating and it offers a dim-wattage 
flash of tart spiciness, but it is all a bit dull and one-note. The obvious 
enduring classic that you should be using here is a thick and spiky tartare 
sauce. And that is something which you should definitely try to make at home 
(shop-bought versions, particularly jarred, are, generally, vile). Finally, 
judiciously sprinkle your fingers with a little vinegar.

*Never salad cream. I would sooner put WD40 on a sandwich.

Garnishes

Does it really need any? Pickle or onion are unnecessary if you opt for 
tartare sauce; watery tomatoes are unwelcome as is, for the same reason, 
iceberg lettuce. Rocket or watercress is a more obvious choice, but it tends to 
be overdone to the point where you feel as if you are chewing through a garden 
hedge to get to the good stuff. A little goes a long way. As for chips or a 
fried egg? This is not a three-course meal. The only serious contender in this 
category is cheese, which, although it makes sense from a flavour perspective, 
introduces a claggy layer into the sandwich that (particularly if you cut the 
cheese too thickly) can make it a little hard-going. Conclusion? Go naked. The 
sandwich, that is, not you.

Patience and packing

Like steak, a fish finger sandwich benefits from being allowed to rest before 
you serve it. A minute or two should do it. The hot fish steams the bread a 
little, and that dampness helps the bread mould itself around the fingers. 
Complete that process by gently pressing the sandwich down with the flat of 
your hand to squish everything together.

When?

This really is the ultimate anytime snack. Drunk at 2am? Fish finger sandwich. 
Hungover at 10am? Fish finger sandwich. Hungry at lunch but don’t quite know 
what you want? Fish finger sandwich. Quick tea?Fish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fish> finger sandwich. And so on.

Equipment

Plate or (let’s give the pub chefs a break) a wooden board. Frankly, any flat 
surface will do. Napkin or a piece of kitchen roll; you’re going to need it. 
One, possibly two hands. Note: if you feel the need to eat your fish finger 
sandwich with a knife and fork you are either a) an editor at Debrett’s or b) 
eating in a pub or restaurant where you have been served something that does 
not fulfil its handheld function as a sandwich.

Drink

Pale/golden beers, white wine or champagne. Tea (never coffee) or sparkling 
mineral water for the teetotallers. The latter’s bubbly, tongue-scrubbing 
qualities are useful in this oily context. However, most sparkling soft drinks 
are too aggressively flavoured to partner with a fish finger sandwich.

So, fish finger sandwiches: how do you eat yours?
 