
Quarrelsome cooks! Pernickety portion-controllers! Gimlet-eyed gastronomes! 
Your attention, please. It is time forHow to Eat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/how-to-eat> to hand down its 
verdict on the transcendent comfort food, macaroni cheese.

Please note, we will refer to it as “macaroni cheese” throughout – not mac, 
not mac ‘n’ cheese, not crack ‘n’ cheese, in a stand against the constant 
renaming of foods in order to fuel the gastro-industrial complex and its 
appetite for novelty. In the UK, the reinvention of macaroni cheese as the 
spuriously hip mac ‘n’ cheese illustrates how juvenile and creatively spent our 
food culture is. Molecular gastronomy was a genuine paradigm shift for 
restaurant food; slopping pulled pork on macaroni cheese is barely doodling in 
the margins of history.

Below the line, as ever, we offer a penne for your thoughts. But please, think 
before you post. By all means, grill your fellow contributors, but no going off 
half-baked, no salty language and, of course, no cheesy puns.

Where?

Before you can discuss the how of macaroni cheese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2011/oct/06/how-to-cook-perfect-macaroni-cheese>
 you must define your terms. You must establish when and where it is 
acceptable. You have to assertwhat it is.

Macaroni cheese is now often described as street food. It is not. People may 
sell it from stalls and vans (although its resurgence is part of a far broader 
rise in “dude food”), but if we accept that this is a dish whose primary 
attraction is effortlessness, who wants to eat it from a Styrofoam container or 
a cardboard tray, while standing in the cold? Where is the comfort in that?

It is not a restaurant dish, either. Just as the Man v Food generation felt it 
necessary to pimp (eugh!) and fiddle with macaroni cheese – not to improve it, 
but to justify their own existence – so, too, chefs are incapable of serving a 
straight version of this essentially domestic dish. They make endless additions 
from lobster to butternut squash, over-complicating the dish without finding 
any interesting new angles of attack (one exception is Hawksmoor’s glorious 
shortrib macaroni).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhow-to-eat-macaroni-cheese%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb19d85e8f5d6b28476e868815c44b9234dc3d20%2F0_173_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20macaroni%20cheese&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhow-to-eat-macaroni-cheese%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20macaroni%20cheese&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhow-to-eat-macaroni-cheese%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb19d85e8f5d6b28476e868815c44b9234dc3d20%2F0_173_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
 Macaroni, uncooked. Photograph: Getty Images/Image Source 
Fundamentally, macaroni cheese is a simple dish. In terms of its textures and 
flavours, it should be a gently layered mouthful of creamy, spoonable pleasure 
that demands nothing more than you relax, sit back and enjoy it. This is a dish 
for the home. This is a dish for exhausted midweek nights, when you want to 
spend 30 minutes in the kitchen decompressing, before flopping down in front of 
Coronation Street. There may be restaurants in America that sell only macaroni 
cheese <http://nymag.com/listings/restaurant/smac/>, but they certainly won’t 
be showing ITV.

When?

Apparently, actor Mark Wahlberg likes macaroni cheese for breakfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/23/breakfast-of-champions-mark-wahlberg>
. Which is, erm, maverick. Likewise, HTE is taken aback by the idea that 
lunchtime sales of macaroni cheese have been asignificant factor  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/21/pret-a-manger-expand-france-us-profit-rise>
in Pret A Manger’s recent increased sales. If this is true, is UK productivity 
slumping alarmingly between 3pm and 4pm as we collectively suffer a 
mid-afternoon carb crash? In HTE’s experience, eating macaroni cheese at lunch 
would mean mainlining caffeine to make it through to 5pm. That is another 
reason why it is preferable to eat macaroni cheese at home in the evening– you 
have a selection of familiar soft-furnishingson which to slump afterwards.

Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall refers to macaroni cheese as a “high-tea treat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/nov/29/hugh-fearnley-whittingstall-pasta-sauces>
”. Due to How to Eat’s humble origins in the north of England, it has no idea 
what this means. Is high-tea“yer tea”, as it would be understood in Rochdale or 
Ramsbottom?

Just add sauce: Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall on pasta
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/nov/29/hugh-fearnley-whittingstall-pasta-sauces>
Preparation

In its purest form, in perhaps its highest expression, macaroni cheese 
requires no more thanal dente pasta (macaroni or penne, rigatoni is too big); a 
white sauce spiked with mustard and flavoured with mature cheddar and a little 
gruyere or Lincolnshire Poacher (Lancashire cheese is too tart and often melts 
oddly; mozzarella is too oily and stringy); and a topping of parmesan and 
breadcrumbs. There, you have everything you need: crunchiness, slippery pasta 
with a residual bite, a luxuriously unctuous sauce, logically interlocking 
layers of salty, cheesy savouriness and, in the background, a hint of heat to 
stop it becoming too overbearingly rich.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhow-to-eat-macaroni-cheese%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9de1d486c9c6ced59df7216733e1767821b3c5%2F0_284_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20macaroni%20cheese&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhow-to-eat-macaroni-cheese%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20macaroni%20cheese&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhow-to-eat-macaroni-cheese%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9de1d486c9c6ced59df7216733e1767821b3c5%2F0_284_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Penne and cheese. Photograph: Photo by Rick Hebenstreit/Getty Images/Flickr RF 
In the name of variety, you might add a few sweet leeks or, to provide a hot 
and/or meaty counterpoint, smoked bacon, chorizo or spicy ground pork. But 
really, the list of acceptable additions is so short as to be barely worth 
mentioning.

Unacceptable additions

But will the world leave it there? Will it accept the perfection of this dish? 
No. Like an anthemic 1990s house tune given the full double-pack 12-in remix 
treatment, cooks keep tinkering with macaroni cheese, oblivious to the way 
that, with their metaphorical dubs and bonus beats, they are frittering away 
the magic of the original.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhow-to-eat-macaroni-cheese%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5210a592e0376aad8957112a4fb4f7c5f1be312%2F0_288_6048_3629%2F6048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20macaroni%20cheese&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhow-to-eat-macaroni-cheese%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20macaroni%20cheese&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhow-to-eat-macaroni-cheese%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5210a592e0376aad8957112a4fb4f7c5f1be312%2F0_288_6048_3629%2F6048.jpg>
 Essential… crunchy topping Photograph: burwellphotography/Getty Images 
Most of the bullying base seasonings used (garlic, cayenne, chilli, anchovies) 
take this dish in a challenging direction it was never meant to go in. It is 
not meant to be a complex enigma. It is not meant to taste primarily of nutmeg. 
Herbs are also verboten. Finishing it with everything from pine nuts to pumpkin 
seeds is an entirely unnecessary attempt to reinvent the wheel (or breadcrumb). 
Topping it with sad, shriveled slices of grilled tomato is also unacceptably 
retro.

People will insist on putting vegetables in there, too: sweet potato, 
mushrooms (!), peas, broccoli, kale. But what you have there is a pasta bake; 
an increasingly worthy and healthy pasta bake, that sacrifices comfort in 
favour of vitamins, fibre and unwelcome textural variations. As for the 
reductive logic that sees people merge cauliflower cheese and macaroni cheese, 
all that does is ruin two incredible dishes.

Kraft Macaroni & Cheese chemical additives targeted by food bloggers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/mar/12/kraft-maracroni-and-cheese-bloggers>
There is, likewise, no requirement for a protein here, least of all a woolly 
mound of pulled pork or gelatinous strands of ham hock that require you to 
chew, rather than essentially slurp it down. Using lobster and crab meat in 
macaroni cheese, in an attempt to take it upmarket, is a heinous waste of both. 
Particularly when the macaroni cheese is then slathered in that thunking fungal 
effluent, truffle oil.

Serving 

Macaroni cheese is not a side-dish. It stands alone. Like fish pie, it should 
be served from a huge, ovenproof dish (make much more than you need, you will 
be back for seconds and thirds), and ladled out in great, steaming clods with, 
of course, the crunchy topping facing upwards. Failure to serve macaroni cheese 
upright does not so much suggest you are a clumsy cook as prove you have no 
soul. Like an inverted cross, upside-down macaroni cheese is the sign of the 
devil.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhow-to-eat-macaroni-cheese%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4105e658db24e17f1e715c1caf812c818f552b1c%2F0_851_7214_4330%2F7214.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20eat%3A%20macaroni%20cheese&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhow-to-eat-macaroni-cheese%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20eat%3A%20macaroni%20cheese&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fhow-to-eat-macaroni-cheese%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4105e658db24e17f1e715c1caf812c818f552b1c%2F0_851_7214_4330%2F7214.jpg>
 Serving suggestion… deep bowls work best. Photograph: Getty Images 
Serve it in large, deep bowls, the kind you might serve stew in. It must be a 
bowl, not just to ensure that the sauce laps around the pasta, but also because 
that circular bowl is like a visual representation of the deep, all-enveloping 
hug that this dish is about to give you. A plate, flat and stand-offish, sends 
entirely the wrong message.

If eating a large portion (a given, surely?), a little green salad on the side 
is no bad thing. You do not want to mix the two or eat them in the same 
mouthful, but you can dip into the salad periodically for a livener. It is 
there as a palate-cleanser.

Some things you should never do with macaroni cheese

Do not put it in a toastie or grilled cheese sandwich. It sounds great in 
principle, but in reality, it is an ungodly carb overload, a greasy step too 
far. You will feel queasy (if not spiritually unclean) for hours. Do not put it 
on a burger, deep-fry it in little balls (it is not amorsel) or use it chilled, 
segmented and reheated in dinky little sliders.

Drink

Pale US-style ales, sticky, stridently bitter IPAs or flinty, mineral white 
wines. You want something that will act as a gently abrasive counterpoint, a 
drink that, like that green salad, will periodically reset your palate for more 
superlative stodge.

So, macaroni cheese. How do you eat yours?
 