
The hot dog is as much a part of American Independence Day celebrations as 
fireworks and the Star-Spangled Banner, a holiday that sees this humble snack 
elevated to star turn at celebratory barbecues and picnics throughout the land. 
Indeed, Coney Island’s annual Nathan’s Famous Hotdog Eating Contest 
<http://www.apple.com/> bills itself as “a physical manifestation of the 
concept of freedom”, representing “the spirit of July 4th itself”. And there 
were we thinking it was all about the bangers.

Amateurs like me might think there’s not much debate about the best way to 
cook a hot dog – frankfurters come ready cooked or cured, and simply require 
heating up, which is why they are such a popular snack at that most American of 
places, the ballpark. Baseball fans like them poached, movie theatres favour 
the heated roller approach, while Eleanor Roosevelt preferred to grill them for 
George VI <http://www.foodtimeline.org/presidents.html#fdrhotdogs>. Hell, you 
could probably fry a passable hot dog on the bonnet of your car in Death Valley 
if you wanted, but what gets the best results?

Casing the joint

Before I fire up the barbecue and prep the steamer, however, we must consider 
the matter of the sausage itself. According to the American National Hot Dog 
and Sausage Council 
<http://www.hot-dog.org/sites/all/themes/hotdogs/pdf/Hotdog-Facts-Figures-Folklore-Brochure.pdf>
, the hot dog is a “cooked and/or smoked” sausage “prepared from one or more 
types of muscle meat or poultry” – frankfurters tend to be made from beef, and 
wieners also contain pork. To be honest, this definition need not concern 
British readers too much, because it’s hard enough to get a decent hot dog over 
here, let alone a choice, though I have no reason to doubt my esteemed colleague
 Tony Naylor when he writes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2014/jan/27/hotdogs-beef-pork-mustard-beer>
 that all-beef hot dogs are “too tightly compacted, too meaty and … a bit dry … 
Sausages need the sort of lubrication that pork readily supplies.” That said, 
millions of Americans swear by them, so if you find an all-beef version, by all 
means give it a try.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bc744548ccb2f0e662e7c9b1ac3a907b6ef0a68%2F457_0_2761_2504%2F2761.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20hot%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20hot%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bc744548ccb2f0e662e7c9b1ac3a907b6ef0a68%2F457_0_2761_2504%2F2761.jpg>
 Skinless sausages cooked whole, slashed and spiral cut. Photograph: Felicity 
Cloake for the Guardian 
Most hot dogs, both here and in the States, are sold skinless – the kind of 
uniformly textured, smoky vacuum-packed tubes familiar to me from childhood – 
but gourmands prefer the “snappy shell” 
<http://www.seriouseats.com/2014/05/the-best-way-to-grill-hot-dogs.html> of a 
natural casing. They’re harder to find in shops (though easy to order online 
<http://www.turnerandgeorge.co.uk/sausages/butchers-dog.html>), but it’s well 
worth the effort for the pleasing textural contrast and juicy filling.

Grilling

The most obvious way to cook a hot dog, but one that’s fraught with danger: 
though there’s little doubt that the intense heat and smoke of the barbecue, or 
even a well primed griddle, is the best bet flavourwise, it also has a tendency 
to split the skins before the insides are hot, drying out the sausage. The 
infamous Katz’s deli 
<https://www.saltedtv.com/skills/the-secrets-to-a-perfect-nyc-hot-dog-by-jake-dell>
 uses this method with puzzling success, apparently achieving a “nice char” on 
a sizzling hotplate without a single casualty, but if you haven’t had years of 
practice, I wouldn’t recommend it. Slashing the skins, to cook them faster, as 
Serious Eats’ Joshua Bousel 
<http://www.seriouseats.com/2014/05/the-best-way-to-grill-hot-dogs.html> 
recommends for a skinless sausage, or even spiralising them with a knife, 
simply speeds up the leakage. Definitely room for improvement.

Baking

Doug Sohn of Chicago’s legendary, and now shuttered, Hot Doug’s, recommends 
<http://www.foxnews.com/leisure/2012/05/24/5-tips-for-making-perfect-hot-dog/> 
baking hot dogs at 180C to firm up the casing before chucking them on a hot 
grill. This might be economical in a restaurant, but at home heating the oven 
so briefly feels like a waste – and the casings still split on the griddle. As 
we’re looking to retain as much moisture as possible, it seems to make more 
sense to look to a water-based method.

Steaming
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F155f3bb32f40c9aeb3f17c8a31a87fe72ce0c313%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20hot%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20hot%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F155f3bb32f40c9aeb3f17c8a31a87fe72ce0c313%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Steamed in half a pan of water then fried with butter, a la Blake Royer of the 
Paupered Chef. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Curiously, though a steamer is not the first tool that springs to mind when I 
think of a sausage, it’s a popular option, though caution is necessary; unless 
you have a temperature-controlled version, it’s easy to split the sausage 
before it has heated through, thus sacrificing some of its juices.

Blake Royer of the Paupered Chef prefers to simmer and steam the sausage 
<http://www.thepauperedchef.com/2007/10/the-proper-way.html> in half a pan of 
water allowed to boil dry, then fry it in butter – delicious, but it’s 
impossible to get the pan hot enough to allow for any charring without burning 
the butter, and in any case, I’m not convinced a good hot dog requires anything 
in the way of extra fat.

Poaching
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b7408933d3f9f3efa7b8b4322acb126f935f840%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20hot%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20hot%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b7408933d3f9f3efa7b8b4322acb126f935f840%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Poached in beer and finished on grill, as  
<http://www.seriouseats.com/2014/05/the-best-way-to-grill-hot-dogs.html>Serious 
Eats’ Joshua Bousel recommends. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
Order a hot dog on a New York sidewalk, and, chances are, it will be plucked 
out of a vat of so-called “dirty water” – the gentle heat of a water bath is 
ideal for keeping the sausages firm and juicy, especially if you have the 
patience to heat them as slowly as the poster psychicmidget on the food site 
chow, who writes that “the best way, in my opinion, is to take your pot of 
boiling water off the heat, add the dogs, cover and wait 25 minutes.” 
<http://www.chowhound.com/post/cook-hot-dog-289779?page=4>

The resulting sausages have lost none of their glorious heft during cooking, 
but they don’t have the same flavour of a grilled version – a more direct, 
intense heat is necessary to caramelise the skins, which is why Chicago food 
writer Nick Kindelsperger recommends poaching hot dogs at 68C 
<http://www.epicurious.com/expert-advice/the-best-method-for-cooking-hot-dogs-article>
, then finishing them under a hot grill, which I find fiddly – it’s difficult 
to keep them moving so they char evenly. Chef Michael Chiarello 
<http://www.foodnetwork.com/recipes/michael-chiarello/best-hot-dogs-recipe.html>
, meanwhile, puts the sausages into a pan of salted water, brings it up to the 
boil, then, “for an added kick of flavour”, cuts them in half and fries them in 
olive oil, which again adds unnecessary grease to proceedings.


Bousel prefers to poach them in a “flavourful liquid” on top of the barbecue 
before giving them a quick char on the hot grill. The method makes sense, but I 
can’t taste the beer and beef stock I use in the finished dish; the smoky, 
salty flavour of the sausage wins out, even before any condiments are added. 
Better, and easier, to slow cook them in plain old water.

Deep-frying
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faec94fc15fd0962cb8ce5c8e452c24bec199830b%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20hot%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20hot%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faec94fc15fd0962cb8ce5c8e452c24bec199830b%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Deep-fried … split hazard. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The deep-fried hot dog, or ripper, is particularly popular in New Jersey, and 
is named after the violence that hot oil wreaks on the skin of the sausage. 
Frankly, I’m terrified the whole thing is going to explode and set my kitchen 
on fire, but, happily, it contents itself with a yawning chasm that proves the 
ideal home for a line of mustard. There’s a certain pleasing crispness about 
the thing, but I don’t think it’s worth the oil, or the heart palpitations, 
involved in its creation.

Flame-grilled
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2e377dd79cc866ee7cbefa0f3ff11974b483605%2F0_398_2736_2728%2F2736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20hot%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20hot%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2e377dd79cc866ee7cbefa0f3ff11974b483605%2F0_398_2736_2728%2F2736.jpg>
 Cooked over an open flame. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
A hot dog cooked over an open flame sounds like a wonderful idea – and far 
less risky than attempting the same thing with a raw sausage. The problem is, 
however, that it’s far too easy to incinerate the outside before the middle is 
even warm; if you want to do this round a campfire, then I’d recommend taking 
along a primus to poach the sausages first. It may not be romantic, but it will 
at least be edible.

The perfect hot dog

After eating enough hot dogs to make me a serious contender for next year’s 
Coney Island contest, I can confirm that slow poaching is the best bet for a 
juicy hot dog, followed by a quick blast on a smoking hot grill for flavour. 
Given the brevity of this final char, it’s hardly worth firing up the barbecue 
for, but if you’re cooking other things, that’s certainly the best bet; 
otherwise a super-heated griddle will do a pretty decent job with a little less 
in the way of smoky seasoning.

Far be it from me to wade into the far more contentious area of toppings and 
condiments 
<http://firstwefeast.com/eat/2013/05/united-states-of-franks-a-guide-to-regional-american-hot-dog-styles/sonoran-dogs>
 – in Chicago, they’ll eat you alive for asking for ketchup, while in New York 
it’s not a not a hot dog without sauerkraut, and in the south, you might well 
get it topped with chilli coleslaw. Poppy seed bun, pizza bread or steamed 
Mexican roll, barbecue sauce, ketchup or mustard … embrace the spirit of 
American Independence, and mix and match to your heart’s desire. A word of 
warning, though – you might want to keep that HP to yourself.

Hot dogs in natural casings

Oil, to grease

Heat the barbecue if using. Bring a pan of water up to the boil, then add the 
sausages, cover and take off the heat. Allow to sit for 20 minutes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15f011c2b09a1bc42ce10632987a2760057e5578%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20hot%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20cook%20the%20perfect%20hot%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fhow-to-cook-the-perfect-hot-dog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15f011c2b09a1bc42ce10632987a2760057e5578%2F0_0_3648_2736%2Fmaster%2F3648.jpg>
 Poached in hot water off the heat for 25 minutes. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
for the Guardian 
Meanwhile, if you’re going for the griddle-pan option, lightly grease it and 
heat until smoking hot. When the sausages are done, grill briefly, keeping them 
moving, until lightly charred on all sides – (it doesn’t matter too much if 
they split a bit at this point). Pop into a bun, top as desired, and devour.

Are hot dogs hot stuff, or just a bit of a flop? Do you prefer a German 
bratwurst to a Detroit Coney, are you all about the beef or do you prefer pork 
or even chicken, and, most importantly of all … ketchup or mustard? (And, for 
those celebrating the fourth of July, if you’re not doing so with hot dogs, 
what will you be eating?)
 