
Let’s face it, the end of summer is faintly depressing for most of us. The 
year is half over, the days are drawing in, the weather is only getting worse, 
and soon we won’t be able to move for bad mince pies. But September does have a 
few good things going for it, and the plum one is, in my opinion, the damson. 
This inky hedgerow fruit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/19/beginners-guide-to-autumn-foraging>
 is to its cultivated cousins as a gamey wild rabbit is to a fat farmed bunny – 
there’s a similar, almost savage intensity of flavour to both.

Indeed, though fruit varies from tree to tree, it’s relatively rare to find a 
damson sweet enough to be eaten straight from the branch, yet it is this very 
tartness that makes them an excellent candidate for cooking. While other plums 
can exude so much water that they turn even the sturdiest of pastries into a 
soggy pink mess, the damson comes into its own with a little heat and sugar. 
Damson crumble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2004/oct/17/foodanddrink.shopping>, 
damson pie 
<http://www.britishlarder.co.uk/damson-and-bramble-plate-pie/#axzz4K9l29QhX>, 
damson sorbet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2004/oct/17/foodanddrink.shopping> 
and, quickest and easiest of all, my personal favourite, damson fool, whose 
creaminess is the perfect foil for this powerful little fruit. Don’t take my 
word for it, though – Nigella herself considers them “glorious” and says of 
damson fool: it’s “the recipe for which I wait most greedily”. And she knows a 
thing or two about pudding.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-damson-fool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bba5bb9d44c8d3742bcf57d54508723eaac5dd9%2F432_136_3070_1842%2F3070.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20damson%20fool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-damson-fool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20damson%20fool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-damson-fool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bba5bb9d44c8d3742bcf57d54508723eaac5dd9%2F432_136_3070_1842%2F3070.jpg>
 Damson fool by Nigella Lawson. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The fruit

The price of this utterly delicious dish is that damsons have stones which 
seem utterly disproportionate to their size, and are a massive faff to remove. 
Only Lindsey Bareham 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/life/food/recipes/article3531916.ece> does so 
before cooking, writing that “the best approach … is to settle down with some 
good music or an engaging radio play, or share the job over a gossip with a 
friend, and just get on with it. I use a small but not overly sharp knife to 
slice the fruit off the stone in three large pieces (an elastoplast over the 
thumb will avoid the inevitable criss-cross of almost-cuts).” Other sources 
suggest using a cherry stoner (a tool I accepted as inevitable after adventures 
in clafoutis), which I find easier than a knife, but which ejects an annoyingly 
large amount of flesh along with the stone.

How to cook the perfect apricot tart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2016/sep/08/how-to-cook-the-perfect-apricot-tart>
Lawson, however, writing in How to Eat <http://www.apple.com>, warns readers 
that if they try to stone the fruit before cooking, “you’ll go really mad”. 
Indeed, most recipes ask you to pass the fruit through a sieve to remove both 
stones and tannic skins, though the website Foods of England removes the stones 
after cooking and then purees the whole fruit, skins and all. It’s certainly 
easier to pop them out once the fruit has softened, but I don’t detect a great 
flavour benefit from including the skins in the finished dish, and, as my 
testers will confirm, unless you laboriously sieve the puree, the bits do have 
a tendency to get stuck in the teeth.


This is also the point to tame the damson’s aggressive tartness with the 
judicious application of sugar. Good Housekeeping magazine 
<http://www.goodhousekeeping.co.uk/food/recipes/damson-ripple-fool-with-hazelnut-shortbread>
 and Skye Gyngell 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/food-and-drink/recipes/damson-fool-1796247.html>
 use simple caster, with the latter also adding a pinch of salt, the Foods of 
England website <http://www.foodsofengland.co.uk/damsonfool.htm> goes for 
demerara and a squeeze of lemon juice, and Lawson uses caster, dark and light 
muscovado. Irish chef Denis Cotter, who favours a similar mix, writes in his 
book Wild Garlic, Gooseberries … and Me, that “the three different sugars … 
might seem overkill. However, the toffee flavour of muscovado sugar goes very 
well with damsons”. I’m inclined to agree – though we can’t pick out the three 
different sugars in Lawson’s puree, the sweetness does seem deeper and richer 
than in those versions made with just white sugar, so it makes sense to use 
that.

Chef Adam Gray 
<http://www.greatbritishchefs.com/recipes/chocolate-doughnuts-with-damson-fool> 
is the only one to substitute water for apple juice, which makes his puree 
taste great, but distinctly of apples which, given we’ll be eating the things 
for the next six months, while damsons are already on their way out, seems a 
shame.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-damson-fool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F629ba79b09c772c6ea530f439ac696285ce44578%2F481_308_2972_1783%2F2972.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20damson%20fool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-damson-fool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20damson%20fool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-damson-fool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F629ba79b09c772c6ea530f439ac696285ce44578%2F481_308_2972_1783%2F2972.jpg>
 Damson fool by Skye Gyngell. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The dairy

Leaving the obvious political jokes aside for fear of introducing ill-feeling 
into an otherwise straightforwardly joyful recipe, fools fall into two main 
camps: custard-based, or pure whipped cream. Simon Hopkinson, who I would trust 
with my life, or at least my beloved cherry stoner, is of the opinion that 
custard is unnecessary, writing in Roast Chicken and Other Stories that “the 
perfect fool, for me, is just cream, fruit and sugar”. Lawson and Gyngell 
agree, folding the puree (or syrup in Gyngell’s case) into double cream whipped 
with a little icing sugar, while Foods of England lightens the cream with a 
couple of stiffly beaten egg whites.

How to make the perfect blood orange sorbet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2016/feb/25/how-to-make-the-perfect-blood-orange-sorbet>
Certainly Hopkinson is right in terms of effort – the time saved by leaving 
out the custard is perfect for stuffing your face with fool, as I discover when 
I make the Good Housekeeping version, with its vanilla-infused, cornflour 
thickened number, and have to wait, not with the best of grace, for it to cool 
before I can fold in the puree.


That’s nothing to Gray’s recipe, however, which involves a cooked egg yolk and 
sugar mixture flavoured with reduced apple juice, and set with gelatine. This 
is then folded into an Italian meringue and some whipping cream to give a firm, 
mousse-like texture with an intense sweetness that doesn’t allow much contrast 
with the fruit itself. The custard has a similar problem – it just has too much 
egg and vanilla flavour of its own. Cream, therefore, seems the way to go, but 
unless you’re eating it right away, it has a tendency to set rather firm, which 
is where the egg whites come in; they give the fool a lovely light, foamy 
texture which, testers greedily note, makes it all too easy to eat. Which, I 
must confess, is the general idea here.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-damson-fool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f341cfe332663cb509b4cd877c0ac6d63d49f4d%2F659_425_2751_1651%2F2751.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20damson%20fool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-damson-fool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20make%20the%20perfect%20damson%20fool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fhow-to-make-the-perfect-damson-fool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f341cfe332663cb509b4cd877c0ac6d63d49f4d%2F659_425_2751_1651%2F2751.jpg>
 Damson fool by Adam Gray. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the Guardian 
The extras

Damsons don’t really need much in the way of help in the flavour department, 
though this never stops us cooks trying to add our own stamp. Lawson sprinkles 
in a little mixed spice, which tastes a little too Christmassy at a time of 
year when we’re all in denial about that festival’s approach, and Good 
Housekeeping goes for sloe gin, to my slight annoyance given I’m carefully 
eking out last year’s stash until someone is kind enough to gift me another 
bottle (hint hint, friends). To add insult to injury, no one can taste it in 
the finished dish. Janet Street-Porter 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/food/article-2753355/Janet-s-great-British-Feast-Damson-fool.html>
 adds the slightly less autumnal elderflower cordial, which falls into the same 
category as Gray’s apple – a nice, but unnecessary extra flavour. This is a 
dish that should be all about the damsons. Damsons, cream, and a very big spoon.

(Serves 4)
500g damsons, well washed
2 tbsp light muscovado sugar
Lemon juice (optional)
300ml double cream
2 tbsp icing sugar
2 egg whites

Put the fruit in a saucepan with the sugar and 125ml water. Bring to the boil, 
then turn down the heat a bit and simmer until soft and pulpy (about 15 
minutes). Push through a sturdy sieve or fine strainer (a conical chinois is 
ideal if you have one) into a bowl, getting as much pulp through as possible. 
Allow to cool then taste and add more sugar if necessary, or a spritz of lemon 
juice if you feel your fruits need it.

Stir the icing sugar into the cream then whip into soft peaks. In a separate 
bowl, whisk the egg white until stiff. Very gently fold this into the cream, 
then swirl the cooled puree through this. Served immediately, or refrigerate.

Damsons, bullaces, or sloes – what’s your favourite wild plum, and what’s the 
crop been like near you this year? And once you’ve had your fill of fools, 
what’s next on the menu? (Damson negroni 
<http://www.discoverthewild.co.uk/damson-gin-recipe-cocktails/4590735552>, 
anyone?)
 