
When I think of an artist obsessed with dance, it’s Edgar Degas 
<http://www.edgar-degas.org/> who comes to mind, a figure forever haunting the 
wings and rehearsal studios of theParis Opera 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris_Opera_Ballet>, trying to capture the 
elusive, impossible image of a dancer moving through space. Yet dance was no 
less important toAuguste Rodin <http://www.rodinmuseum.org/>, especially in the 
late phase of his career when he became fascinated by the rich possibilities of 
shape, tension, musculature and expressiveness contained within the 
professionally trained body; and inspired by the challenge of representing the 
dynamics of motion and flight.

Rodin and Dance review: soft porn takes flight in show of sensual strength
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/19/rodin-and-dance-review-courtauld-gallery>
 The role that dance played in Rodin’s art is explored in a superb cameo 
exhibition at the Courtauld Gallery 
<http://courtauld.ac.uk/gallery/what-on/exhibitions-displays/rodin-and-dance-the-essence-of-movement>
, and it’s illuminating to see how widely his response to the subject differed 
from Degas’ more familiar works. The latter, created mostly in the last three 
decades of the 19th century, reflect the degree to which Degas was as 
interested in the social and theatrical context of his models as he was in 
their bodies. His paintings captured the bleak schoolroom atmosphere of the 
studio and the heated intensity of the stage, where dancers, lurid under gas 
light, sweaty under greasepaint, strove to create the illusion of 
weightlessness and ease.

Even in his most famous dance sculpture, The Little Dancer 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/degas-little-dancer-aged-fourteen-n06076>, 
Degas brought some sense of back story to the solitary figure of the teenage 
student. Something in the determined thrust of her chin, the sturdiness of her 
legs, makes vivid the fact that this precocious child was already a worker, a 
seasoned professional; we can almost imagine her calculating the odds of making 
it up the ranks of the Paris Opera, of finding a rich “protector” to supplement 
her meagre wages.

 By contrast, Rodin’s images of dance have little sense of theatre or 
biography but are stripped back to sinew, flesh, muscle and bone. Nearly all of 
them have an improvisatory quality, lightning sketches, dashes of colour, 
sculptures that are roughly finished.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fauguste-rodin-dance-sculptures-courtauld-institute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf02aa5747289f24b8634b79ae64467bf42bce69%2F0_384_5747_3449%2F5747.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Rodin's%20radical%20dance%20sculptures%20captured%20the%20shock%20of%20modernity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fauguste-rodin-dance-sculptures-courtauld-institute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Rodin%27s%20radical%20dance%20sculptures%20captured%20the%20shock%20of%20modernity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fauguste-rodin-dance-sculptures-courtauld-institute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf02aa5747289f24b8634b79ae64467bf42bce69%2F0_384_5747_3449%2F5747.jpg>
 Stripped back to sinew … Rodin and Dance: The Essence of Movement, The 
Courtauld Gallery. Photograph: Guy Bell/Rex/Shutterstock 
One of the dominating images of the exhibition is that of the acrobat Alda 
Moreno <https://musartboutique.com/shop/casts-sculptures/rodin-3/>, whom Rodin 
sculpted and drew in her signature pose; balanced on one leg with the other 
touching the crown of her tilted-back head. Rodin was thrilled by the play of 
angles, the torsion and power of that pose; he enjoyed too the fact that it so 
frankly exposed the secret parts of Moreno’s body – her breasts, belly and 
genitalia.


 Inspired by Moreno, he instructed his mould-maker to create a series of 
disparate body parts, limbs, torsos and heads, with which he could play 
artist-choreographer, assembling these pieces into his own sequence of jumps, 
stretches, and tip-tilted balances.

Lined up in a glass vitrine in the Courtauld gallery, these Mouvements de Dance
 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance> make for disconcerting viewing, 
especially in conjunction with the parallel series of sketches that Rodin drew. 
Several of the poses here are more like extreme anatomical studies than dance; 
several have a blatant erotic focus. Yet he himself rebuffed the suggestion 
that they were an ageing man’s pornography – claiming that he was simply 
studying the “mathematics” of these naked, acrobatic bodies. More to the point, 
I think, he was responding with excitement to the liberating physicality that 
he saw among the new dance forms that were coming into play at the beginning of 
the 20th century.

 While Degas had studied ballerinas, Rodin was enthralled by an emerging 
generation of dance radicals such as Isadora Duncan andVaslav Nijinsky 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vaslav_Nijinsky>, who’d rejected the academic 
syntax of ballet in favour of a more visceral language of dance; a language 
that embraced rather than denied the force of gravity, that explored the 
thrust, propulsion and flow of the body rather than pure decorative line. One 
of the most telling sketches of this period is of the proto-modern dancerRuth 
St Denis, <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruth_St._Denis> which represents only 
her uplifted torso and outstretched arms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fauguste-rodin-dance-sculptures-courtauld-institute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdef6603f4f70effd97efc77b96409d4dc5a067e4%2F0_189_5665_3399%2F5665.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Rodin's%20radical%20dance%20sculptures%20captured%20the%20shock%20of%20modernity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fauguste-rodin-dance-sculptures-courtauld-institute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Rodin%27s%20radical%20dance%20sculptures%20captured%20the%20shock%20of%20modernity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fauguste-rodin-dance-sculptures-courtauld-institute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdef6603f4f70effd97efc77b96409d4dc5a067e4%2F0_189_5665_3399%2F5665.jpg>
 Noora Kela recreates one of Rodin’s sculptures from Rodin and Dance: The 
Essence of Movement. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
 Rodin used his (by then significant) influence to champion the careers of 
these dance pioneers and he was a key figure in supporting Nijinsky during the 
brouhaha that followed his 1911 ballet L’Apres Midi d’un Faune, when half of 
Paris claimed to be scandalised by its pagan images of sexuality and its 
adoption of archaic-looking dance forms. Rodin drew Nijinsky in poses from the 
ballet and sculpted him once; and the resulting bronze (which was only cast in 
1957) is one of the most expressive pieces that has survived of the dancer. In 
the bunched up force of the curving torso and lifted leg, in the torsion of the 
neck and in the feral, almost goatish cast to Nijinsky’s features, Rodin 
captured something of the explosive impact the dancer made when he first 
appeared on the ballet stages of Europe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fauguste-rodin-dance-sculptures-courtauld-institute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd48edfcc36fe17fa12340aa928304e2e82371f5d%2F0_99_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Rodin's%20radical%20dance%20sculptures%20captured%20the%20shock%20of%20modernity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fauguste-rodin-dance-sculptures-courtauld-institute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Rodin%27s%20radical%20dance%20sculptures%20captured%20the%20shock%20of%20modernity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fauguste-rodin-dance-sculptures-courtauld-institute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd48edfcc36fe17fa12340aa928304e2e82371f5d%2F0_99_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Russell Maliphant photographed at the Rodin Museum in Paris. Photograph: Ed 
Alcock 
For me it’s the most riveting piece on display at the Courtauld, but there’s 
one other important strand in this exhibition, which traces Rodin’s interest in 
a troupe of classical Cambodian dancers who visited France in 1906. While the 
artist professed to despise the codified language of ballet, he was entranced 
by these court dancers; by the intricacy and delicacy of their hand movements, 
and the serenity with which they moved. His beautiful, rapid sketches of these 
dancers have a distinctive softness and suspension of line in comparison with 
his images of western bodies; in details such as the inward curl of the hand, 
the hinge of the foot, the delicate tilt of the head, they also attempt to 
capture more accurate formal details of style.


 The power of Rodin’s response to bodies and movement can be measured by the 
fact choreographers today have mined his work for their own use.Shobana 
Jeyasingh <http://www.shobanajeyasingh.co.uk/>, who has created a solo work in 
response to the Courtauld exhibition, found inspiration in the slippage between 
the soft Cambodian studies and the harder lines of the western-oriented work.
Russell Maliphant <http://www.russellmaliphant.com/>, who created a full-length 
homage to Rodin in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/feb/06/the-rodin-project-review>, found 
inspiration not just in the dance pieces, but in all of the artist’s work.Back 
then he spoke about the choreographic riches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/feb/01/russell-maliphant-rodin-hip-hop> 
he’d encountered, claiming that the six gaunt figures inThe Burghers of Calais 
<http://www.ppu.org.uk/memorials/peace/london/burghers.html> had been a “lesson 
in dynamics and grouping”, and that the massive, surreal imagery ofThe Gates of 
Hell <http://www.musee-rodin.fr/en/collections/sculptures/gates-hell> had 
forced him to radically rethink his style. To find his own dance variant of 
“all these figures twisting and falling and pouring through this vertical 
surface” had, he said, “completely challenged my own vocabulary of movement”.

• Rodin and Dance: The Essence of Movement is at the Courtauld Gallery 
<http://courtauld.ac.uk/gallery/what-on/exhibitions-displays/rodin-and-dance-the-essence-of-movement>
, London, until 22 January. Information: 020-7848 2777.
 