
Howard Davies, who has died aged 71, was quite simply one of the great post 
war British theatre directors. He mined texts exhaustively, was deeply 
sensitive to actors and ensured theatre was a memorable visual experience. At a 
time when directing plays is often equated with exhibitionistic self-display or 
concept-mongering, Davies was a classic example of the director as interpreter 
of an author’s intentions.

Howard Davies, theatre director, dies aged 71
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/26/howard-davies-theatre-director-dies-71-tributes-nt-donmar-eyre-hytner-nunn>
What was startling was his own growth from radical young Turk into a director 
who effortlessly combined the personal and the political. Having been put in 
charge byTrevor Nunn <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/trevor-nunn> of the 
RSC’s Warehouse theatre (now the Donmar) in Covent Garden in 1977, Davies 
produced an astonishing 35 plays in five years. He directed many of them 
himself, including work by Bertolt Brecht, Edward Bond, Hanif Kureishi and CP 
Taylor, turning a former rehearsal room into a powerhouse of creative energy.

During that time he also staged in Stratford the premiere of Pam Gems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/16/pam-gems-obituary>’s Piaf in 
which Jane Lapotaire gave a mesmerising performance as the Parisian chanteuse. 
But undoubtedly the highlight of Davies’s RSC years washis 1985 production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/11/les-liaisons-dangereuses-alan-rickman-lindsay-duncan-rsc-1986>
 of Christopher Hampton’s adaptation of Les Liaisons Dangereuses. He once told 
me that he had difficulty getting through Laclos’s epistolary novel. You would 
never have guessed it from his superbly stylish production in which a pair of 
calculating predators use sex as a weapon of revenge. Davies not only got from 
Alan Rickman and Lindsay Duncan (a pair later to be reunited in his West End 
production ofPrivate Lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2001/oct/06/theatre.artsfeatures1>) 
performances that glistened like a stiletto blade, he also suggested that 
beneath the surface glitter we were watching the last gasp of a doomed class.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhoward-davies-theatre-director-obituary-dead-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb9e4cee78dcc1421274183ea89efcc33b1f7b8b%2F0_0_2464_1648%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Howard%20Davies%3A%20a%20lightning%20rod%20for%20theatrical%20genius&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhoward-davies-theatre-director-obituary-dead-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Howard%20Davies%3A%20a%20lightning%20rod%20for%20theatrical%20genius&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhoward-davies-theatre-director-obituary-dead-tribute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb9e4cee78dcc1421274183ea89efcc33b1f7b8b%2F0_0_2464_1648%2F2464.jpg>
 Helen Mirren in Mourning Becomes Electra in 2003. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 
It was that ability to unearth the social and political resonances of private 
behaviour that made Davies a supreme director. It also made him a natural 
interpreter, when he joined the National Theatre in 1988, of the classic plays 
of the American repertory. He showed that Eugene O’Neill’s inordinateMourning 
Becomes Electra <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/nov/29/theatre>, his 
version starring Helen Mirren, is a study of both a divided family and a riven 
nation.

His 2000 production of Arthur Miller’s All My Sons, revived in the West End 10 
years later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/may/28/all-my-sons-michael-billington>, 
rescued the play from melodrama and allowed it to become a portrait of a 
society swathed in protective illusions. Outside the National, he also directed 
a landmark production of Edward Albee’s Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? at the 
Almeidain 1996 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/28/david-suchet-edward-albee-playwright-whos-afraid-of-virginia-woolf>
, starring David Suchet and Diana Rigg, that reminded us we were watching a 
play about the decline of a civilisation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhoward-davies-theatre-director-obituary-dead-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78671bccab9f92c08619b08fa5b12c6d0c960390%2F0_0_2800_1863%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Howard%20Davies%3A%20a%20lightning%20rod%20for%20theatrical%20genius&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhoward-davies-theatre-director-obituary-dead-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Howard%20Davies%3A%20a%20lightning%20rod%20for%20theatrical%20genius&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhoward-davies-theatre-director-obituary-dead-tribute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78671bccab9f92c08619b08fa5b12c6d0c960390%2F0_0_2800_1863%2F2800.jpg>
 Chaos and tumult... Anthony Calf (The Hetman) and Conleth Hill (Leonid) in The 
White Guard at the National Theatre. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
But one of Davies’s virtues was that he gave actors and designers room to 
breathe. You saw that in his productions of two monumental Russian pieces,Burnt 
By the Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/mar/04/burnt-by-sun-national>
 andThe White Guard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/mar/24/the-white-guard-review> at the 
National Theatre. In the former, aided by Vicki Mortimer’s design, Davies 
caught the pathos of a beautiful summer’s day in the dacha of a Red Army 
officer. And I have never seen the chaos and tumult of civil war better 
demonstrated than in the latter where Bunny Christie’s design reinforced the 
visions of Mikhail Bulgakov as author and Davies as director.

Davies was always the loyal associate rather the symbolic figurehead of our 
two main national companies and never enjoyed a prominent public profile. But 
he was infinitely more than a reliable lieutenant. Whether directing classic 
plays or new work by writers as diverse as David Hare, Christopher Hampton, 
David Edgar or Tom Stoppard, he made the essence of the text manifest. If the 
hallmark of a great director is to realise a writer’s intentions to the 
maximum, Davies surely deserves the epithet.
 