
Howard Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/oct/18/howard-davies-director>, one of 
the greatest British theatre directors of his generation, has died aged 71 
after a short battle with cancer, his family have said.

Davies directed extensively in London and New York and had a 28-year 
relationship with theNational Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre>, directing a remarkable 36 
productions.


Rufus Norris, the National Theatre’s artistic director, paid tribute to a man 
he said had achieved “an almost legendary status within the industry”.

He added: “His work, particularly on the American, Russian and Irish canons, 
was unparalleled. His reputation among actors, writers, directors and designers 
alike was beyond question, and has been for so long that his name has become a 
byword for quality and depth. His gaze and focus were unswerving, but his 
twinkling humour sat on the shoulder of his fierce intellect. Either way, he 
always spoke his truth, and, for a junior director, that was both inspiring and 
frightening.”

Three of Norris’s predecessors added to the tributes. Sir Nicholas Hytner 
said: “Howard Davies was the director all actors wanted most to work with, and 
his productions were the ones I most wanted to see, always cracking with 
intellectual and emotional energy. He unlocked wild and contradictory passions 
in everything he did, and would describe a play not in terms of his concept but 
of its humanity. He was the first person I asked to work with me when I became 
the National’s director. I could not imagine being there without him, or doing 
the job without his friendship and support. He was the irreplaceable 
cornerstone.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fhoward-davies-theatre-director-dies-71-tributes-nt-donmar-eyre-hytner-nunn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fdae118005a7eae291070a0274e65ce236f406a%2F0_560_4633_2780%2F4633.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Howard%20Davies%2C%20theatre%20director%2C%20dies%20aged%2071&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fhoward-davies-theatre-director-dies-71-tributes-nt-donmar-eyre-hytner-nunn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Howard%20Davies%2C%20theatre%20director%2C%20dies%20aged%2071&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fhoward-davies-theatre-director-dies-71-tributes-nt-donmar-eyre-hytner-nunn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fdae118005a7eae291070a0274e65ce236f406a%2F0_560_4633_2780%2F4633.jpg>
 Howard Davies’s production of The Plough and the Stars. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
Sir Trevor Nunn said Davies’s flow of “legendary” productions at the National 
never ceased to amaze. “For me, his NT production of All My Sons remains the 
greatest production of a 20th-century classic I have ever seen. The news of his 
death is incomprehensible.”

Sir Richard Eyre said: “He was a wonderful director, a wholly admirable man 
and a good friend.”

Davies was as busy as ever before falling ill. His final production was the 
NT’s The Plough and the Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/28/the-plough-and-the-stars-review-lyttelton-london-national-theatre-sean-o-casey>
, which closed only last weekend. It was co-directed with Jeremy Herrin, who 
took over when Davies fell ill.

Many actors took to Twitter to pay tribute. Samuel West said: “Howard Davies 
built casts like making a cake – never afraid to change the recipe slightly as 
long as the thing rose. And it always did.” <https://twitter.com/exitthelemming>

Mark Gatiss tweeted <https://twitter.com/Markgatiss/status/791057812801646593>
: “Honoured to have worked with the great Howard Davies. Simply one of the very 
best. Funny, forensic, passionate. A huge loss to the theatre.”

Davies had been due to direct Michael Frayn’s Wild Honey at Hampstead theatre 
later this year and the venue said it would now present the show in his memory.

Edward Hall, its artistic director, and Greg Ripley-Duggan, its executive 
producer,said in a statement that Davies was “a man of huge skill, fierce 
determination and quiet modesty who changed the face of British theatre” 
<https://www.hampsteadtheatre.com/news/>.

Davies was nominated six times as best director in the Olivier awards, winning 
three times - for The White Guard, The Iceman Cometh, and All My Sons. He also 
established the Warehouse theatre in Covent Garden for the RSC, which later 
became the Donmar Warehouse.

In a statement Davies’s family said: “It is a devastating loss to his family, 
friends and the people who loved and worked with him. He was a wonderful, 
loving husband, father and grandfather, and a phenomenally talented director. 
He will be hugely missed.”
 