
In June 2007, the Guardian critic Michael Billington was asked to name the 
best theatre director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2007/jun/15/whoisbritainsbesttheatred>
 in the UK. In selecting Howard Davies, who has died aged 71, over some of his 
better-known colleagues, Billington was confirming the profession’s worst-kept 
secret. Not only was Howard the master of 20th-century repertory, the supreme 
interpreter of Gorky, O’Casey, O’Neill, Albee, Miller and Williams. He was also 
one of the first names most playwrights would think of when asked whom we would 
like to direct our next play.

It was Howard’s fate only once to run a theatre of his own. For most of his 
life, he acted as a vital lieutenant, first toVal May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/apr/16/val-may> at the Bristol Old Vic, 
then toTrevor Nunn <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/trevor-nunn> at the Royal 
Shakespeare Company, and finally to successive directors at the National 
Theatre:Peter Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/peter-hall>, Richard Eyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/richardeyre>, Nunn and Nick Hytner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/nicholas-hytner>. All four artistic 
directors relied on him equally and turned to him first, occasionally in panic, 
when needing a guaranteed return to quality. It was Hytner who best summed up 
the professionalism and consistency of his work by referring to him as the 
“irreplaceable cornerstone” of his years at the National Theatre. “If only I 
had three Howard Davieses, running this place would be simplicity itself.”

Howard Davies: a lightning rod for theatrical genius
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/27/howard-davies-theatre-director-obituary-dead-tribute>
Born in Reading, the son of Thomas, a miner turned glassblower who instilled 
in him a deep love of learning, and his wife, Hilda, Howard was propelled by 
scholarship to Christ’s Hospital, Horsham, where the teachers were bright 
enough to give a natural rebel a measure of authority which he immediately used 
to abolish fagging. The experience of being forced through the class and 
educational system bred in him a peppery radicalism which was evident both at 
Durham University and in Bristol, where he first worked at the Old Vic in the 
early 1970s, while living in a commune. It was there that he met his first 
wife, Sue Wall, with whom he had two adored daughters, Kate and Hannah.

From the start, the twin hallmarks of Howard’s work were evident. His early 
grounding in Brecht left him with a lifelong determination to dig out and make 
evident on stage the social and political context of the play he was directing. 
No Davies production was ever pitched in a void of pure style. But already at 
Bristol, he was developing – via a gifted group that includedKenneth Cranham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/12/orton-pinter-kenneth-cranham-the-father-tricycle-interview>
 andTony Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/14/tony-robinson-my-daughter-used-to-call-me-tony-now-she-calls-me-dad>
 – the astonishing affinity with actors that would enrich so many lives in the 
coming years. When he moved to the RSC, he decided, after a Troilus and 
Cressida updated to the Crimean war, that Shakespeare was not his playwright of 
choice. But he initiated relationships, in particular withJuliet Stevenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/juliet-stevenson> and Alan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-obituary>, that 
would bear glorious fruit in later years.

Howard Davies, theatre director, dies aged 71
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/26/howard-davies-theatre-director-dies-71-tributes-nt-donmar-eyre-hytner-nunn>
While at the RSC he came upon a disused banana warehouse turned rehearsal room 
in Covent Garden and persuaded Nunn to let him run it as a theatre for new 
plays. At the Warehouse, between 1977 and 1981, he presented 26 world 
premieres, which most famously includedEducating Rita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/17/julie-walters-willy-russell-how-we-made-educating-rita>
 by Willy Russell, Piaf byPam Gems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/16/pam-gems-obituary>, and Good by 
CP Taylor <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/nov/06/theatre.stage>, but 
which also took in work by Brecht,Barrie Keeffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/oct/07/barrie-keeffe-a-loss-to-journalism-but-what-a-gift-to-playwriting>
, Peter Prince,Howard Barker <http://www.howardbarker.co.uk/>, David Mercer, 
David Edgar <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/davidedgar> and Edward Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/edwardbond>. It was Howard’s sometimes 
embattled insistence that a Shakespeare company should also be working with 
living playwrights that led him to premiere Christopher Hampton’s Les Liaisons 
Dangereuses at the Other Place in 1985, with Stevenson, Rickman andLindsay 
Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/lindsay-duncan>. Anyone lucky enough 
to have seen that production at such close quarters inBob Crowley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/oct/02/theatre-bob-crowley-set-costume-designer>
’s designs will remember holding their breath at its perfection.

After taking the Laclos adaptation to Broadway, he joined the National Theatre 
in 1988 as an associate director, and began his run of 36 productions in 28 
years. His opening version of Tennessee Williams’s Cat On a Hot Tin Roof with 
Ian Charleson,Eric Porter 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituaryeric-porter-1619844.html> and 
Duncan seemed to mark that moment at which British actors began to annexe the 
postwar American repertory for the first time without a sense of strain. After 
he had directed a definitiveWho’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/28/david-suchet-edward-albee-playwright-whos-afraid-of-virginia-woolf>
 at the Almeida in 1996 withDiana Rigg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/diana-rigg> and David Suchet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-suchet> – “Amazing”, said 
Edward Albee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/18/edward-albee-obituary> on the 
first night, “how the old play buffs up in the right hands” – he asked Kevin 
Spacey to play Hickey in O’Neill’s The Iceman Cometh (1998) and found himself 
with a massive international success, which accidentally introduced Spacey to 
the Old Vic, where the play transferred.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhoward-davies-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c2a01de1e4df5637cadeec4ba04bd7f0680b798%2F455_102_3435_3434%2F3435.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Howard%20Davies%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhoward-davies-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Howard%20Davies%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhoward-davies-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c2a01de1e4df5637cadeec4ba04bd7f0680b798%2F455_102_3435_3434%2F3435.jpg>
 Alan Rickman and Juliet Stevenson in Les Liaisons Dangereuses, directed by 
Howard Davies and performed by the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1985. 
Photograph: Alastair Muir/Rex/Shutterstock 
Howard’s subsequent production of Miller’s All My Sons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2000/jul/09/features.review67> (2000) 
was just as strong. But a period of living in New York left him doubtful 
whether he wanted to work in the commercial theatre. His love was for ensemble, 
and for deeply wrought work. Any compromise with theatre-for-money enraged him. 
Stubborn and plain-spoken, he never envied the emollience necessary to shove 
half-baked stars into the starting gate.

Instead, at the National, with the help of the designers Crowley, Bunny 
Christie <http://www.bunnychristie.co.uk/> and Vicki Mortimer, he continued to 
develop a unique language, a supple kind of deep-breathing spacious naturalism, 
particularly in the Lyttelton, which was his and his alone, and in which every 
single role was given its democratic focus. This method filled out Russian 
plays such as Bulgakov’sThe White Guard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/mar/24/the-white-guard-review> and 
Gorky’sPhilistines <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/may/31/theatre5> as 
richly as it did Irish plays such as Boucicault’s The Shaughran. By the time he 
took on Sean O’Casey’s notoriously difficultThe Silver Tassie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/24/the-silver-tassie-review-national-theatre>
 in 2014, his control was so perfect that he could pull into one flow scenes 
that are usually too wildly disparate to hold together.

Zoë Wanamaker <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/zoe-wanamaker> once 
remarked that there are many directors who can tell actors whether what you are 
doing is good or bad. But she had known only three who could help you when you 
were in trouble. Top of her list was Howard. I saw for myself the beauty of his 
rapport with actors for the first time when he directed my play The Secret 
Rapture in 1988. “Oh by the way,” he announced one day, “I’ve given the play a 
new ending.” When I nervously asked what it was, he said “Wait and see.” I did, 
and it was better than the one I’d written. We were to work together six times 
on film and on stage –Maggie Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/maggie-smith> and Judi Dench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/judi-dench> played in The Breath of Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/oct/16/theatre.artsfeatures3> (2002) at 
the Haymarket,Tamsin Greig <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tamsin-greig> 
andNicola Walker <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/nicola-walker> played in 
Gethsemane <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/nov/12/theatre1> (2008) at 
the Cottesloe – and each time I wondered at the total contrast between the 
person outside the rehearsal room, who might well arrive combative, antsy or 
discontent, with the serenity and focus of the maestro who directed inside it. 
You could feel the change as he passed through the door.

He always had a passion for walking, and he deliberately spaced out his trips 
abroad to work off some of the excess energy created by the concentration of 
directing. When I joked that his autobiography should be entitled Doing a 
Runner, he grinned and said, “Too right.” Only by getting away frequently could 
he be so intensely present when he was needed. He also lavished love on his 
three grandchildren, Sam, Iris and Ida. When, some years after his first 
marriage had ended in divorce, he met Clare Holman, they took to travelling 
together all over the world, and were married in 2005 at Coombe Valley in Devon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhoward-davies-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53bb0a34702c13f36c586e78e2987fba87d8ff88%2F211_494_1408_844%2F1408.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Howard%20Davies%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhoward-davies-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Howard%20Davies%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fhoward-davies-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53bb0a34702c13f36c586e78e2987fba87d8ff88%2F211_494_1408_844%2F1408.jpg>
 Maggie Smith, foreground, and Judi Dench in The Breath of Life, directed by 
Howard Davies at the Theatre Royal Haymarket, London, in 2002. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
His later work became more various. He directed a new play by Rory Kinnear at 
the Bush <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/19/the-herd-review> and a 
striking suffragette play by Rebecca Lenkiewicz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/aug/02/theatre1>. He nursed an unlikely 
desireto prove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/04/hay-fever-duncan-noel-coward-review>
Noël Coward <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/noelcoward> a radical and even 
made Somerset Maugham seem modern with a Chichester revival ofFor Services 
Rendered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/07/for-services-rendered-five-star-review-theatre-excellent-work-from-a-flawless-cast>
 (2015) with Justine Mitchell and Stella Gonet in superb company. But a running 
thread throughout was his feel for the writing ofHoward Brenton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/howardbrenton>. He and Hytner persuaded 
Brenton back into the theatre after a stay in television with adrama about St 
Paul <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/nov/10/theatre>. The lucidity 
Howard then brought to55 Days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/oct/25/55-days-review> (2012) at 
Hampstead theatre, with Douglas Henshall’s Cromwell in fictional encounter with
Mark Gatiss <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/mark-gatiss>’s King Charles I, 
represented the art of stage direction at its most refined: complex information 
conveyed without effort, profound emotion conveyed without sentiment.

Howard was diagnosed with cancer this summer while directing Ibsen’s An Enemy 
of the People 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/08/enemy-of-the-people-bonneville-chichester-theatre-review>
 for Chichester festival theatre. The last time I went to see him, two weeks 
ago, he and Clare had laid out a feast of wine and food, which he could not 
manage, but which typically he said “I will hugely enjoy watching you eat”. 
That night, there was the usual generous love of good times and good talk, 
which rolled into his character as an artist. His stage had breadth, daring, 
light and, above all, movement. In a Howard Davies production you couldn’t 
disentangle interpretation from narrative or character. They were one. It’s 
rare that anyone’s whole. But Howard was.

He is survived by Clare, and by his daughters and grandchildren.

• Stephen Howard Davies, theatre director, born 26 April 1945; died 25 October 
2016
 