
David Wagner does not call it heavy metal football. The former Borussia 
Dortmund reserve team manager, who was convinced to become a coach by his 
former Mainz team‑mate and great friend Jürgen Klopp, prefers to use a 
different term for the style of play he has been cultivating atHuddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> Town since being hired in 
November with instructions to transform the club.

“We now call it the Terriers’ identity,” says Wagner with a broad smile. 
“Exactly the style of football I love is like a terrier. We are not the biggest 
dog, we are small, but we are aggressive, we are not afraid, we like to compete 
with the big dogs and we are quick and mobile and we have endurance. We never 
give up. This small dog has fighting spirit for sure.”

Five games into the season and this small dog is top of the Championship, 
having sunk its teeth into two of the favourites for promotion,winning at 
Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/newcastle-huddersfield-championship-match-report>
 anddrawing at Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/16/aston-villa-huddersfield-match-report>
. No one at Huddersfield is barking about promotion to the Premier League yet, 
nor even about ending the season higher than Saturday’s opponents, Leeds 
United, for the first time since 1962. Nor is anyone ruling it out. “I don’t 
set targets because sometimes targets are limits and we don’t like limits,” 
says Wagner. “But I’m not a dreamer, I’m a worker.”

Charlton aiming to rise again against backdrop of fury and boycotts | Nick 
Miller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/08/charlton-athletic-boycotts-roland-duchatelet-katrien-meire>
Wagner makes sure his players work, too, so that they can play at the 
ferocious intensity he demands. He introduced double training sessions as soon 
as he arrived, with start times switched to correspond to the kick-off of the 
next match, whether at 3pm or in the evening. Pundits warned of mutiny but 
Wagner has found harmony. “This was one of the biggest surprises and biggest 
helps for me,” he says. “There was no resistance, especially from the very 
experienced players like Dean Whitehead and Mark Hudson. If you deliver 
professionals something that makes them feel stronger, then they will follow. 
This was the case and this was the reason why they are very open for the 
future.”

Huddersfield’s performances improved rapidly under Wagner but they appeared to 
run out of steam towards the end of last season, which concluded with a 4-0 
loss at Bristol City and a 5-1 home defeat by Brentford. Wagner knew that his 
first pre-season with the club would be crucial, especially after he bought or 
brought in on loan 13 players, including four from Germany, where Wagner was 
born and bred before playing internationally for the United States, his 
father’s homeland. Wagner needed to fuse these players rapidly into a unit so 
on the first day of pre‑season training, before any fitness or tactical work, 
he took them to fend for themselves on a tiny uninhabited island off the coast 
of Sweden.

“We knew we had a lot of new signings and should never forget that this is a 
traditional English football club with more than 100 years of history and I am 
the first manager from outside the British Isles and maybe there are as many 
foreign players as there has ever been, so we thought: ‘How can we make the 
players bind together very quickly?’” he says.

“We went to Sweden for four days and three nights and we didn’t bring a ball. 
We were really in the wild, no electricity, no toilet, no bed, no mobile phone 
or internet. If you are hungry, take your rod and get a fish. If you are 
thirsty, go to the lake and put your bottle in. If you are cold, make a fire.

“We had three guides with us to help, but if you are always together, in a 
two-man tent or eight hours a day in a two-man canoe – and we always rotated 
the pairings – then you have to speak to each other. I am convinced that the 
better you know your mate off the pitch, the more you are able to work for him 
on it in uncomfortable situations.

“They changed their borderlines over those three days. I can say now, three 
months later, that it was 100% success, and that is the feedback from the 
players, too.”

Wagner is no hollow sergeant‑major. He laughs a lot for a start and his 
approach is rooted in more than an ability to foster a strong esprit de corps. 
He has overseen the appointment of a nutritionist and a head of performance 
services and has had it written into players’ contracts that they must live 
within 15 miles of the club’s training ground because long commutes hinder 
recovery. These are basic measures for a man who spent five years gaining a 
degree in biology and sports science from Darmstadt University after finishing 
his playing career in 2005.

“Maybe I can say I lost my hunger for the football business so I decided to 
study to understand more about the science side,” he says of that career move. 
“Those were probably the hardest five years of my life, but I did it. After 
about two years, my hunger for football came back.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fhuddersfield-david-wagner-no-electricity-no-beds-football-championship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8fe426deb17314d4d0fc7d57efee43a8fb32b02%2F0_0_4000_2667%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Huddersfield%E2%80%99s%20David%20Wagner%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20had%20no%20electricity%2C%20no%20toilet%2C%20no%20beds%20and%20no%20mobile%20phones%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fhuddersfield-david-wagner-no-electricity-no-beds-football-championship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Huddersfield%E2%80%99s%20David%20Wagner%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20had%20no%20electricity%2C%20no%20toilet%2C%20no%20beds%20and%20no%20mobile%20phones%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fhuddersfield-david-wagner-no-electricity-no-beds-football-championship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8fe426deb17314d4d0fc7d57efee43a8fb32b02%2F0_0_4000_2667%2F4000.jpg>
 David Wagner at Huddersfield’s training ground. Photograph: Matthew Lloyd for 
The Guardian 
Klopp, who is godfather to one of Wagner’s children, helped keep his hunger 
alive. “Jürgen said to me one day shortly before I did my last exam: ‘Listen, 
you were a professional footballer so when you get your exam, please do your 
Uefa pro licence, then you will have the three qualifications you need and all 
doors will be open for you to come back into football.’”

That is what Wagner did, but after completing his pro licence and running 
Hoffenheim’s under-19s for two years, he decided to go back to school. He was 
18 months into the two years of practical work experience required to qualify 
as a teacher in Germany when, in 2011, Klopp asked him to coach Dortmund’s 
second team. “I had a few discussions at home,” says Wagner. “Then I decided to 
take the job.”

He thrived at it for four years, taking Dortmund II to the third tier of 
German football while playing the exhilarating style that Huddersfield’s 
chairman, Dean Hoyle, would eventually ask him to transplant to Yorkshire.

“The main part of the style here is exactly what we had in Dortmund,” says 
Wagner. “We have had to adapt some things to the English environment. For 
example, referees here do not blow their whistles as much so there are fewer 
breaks in the game and players get more tired around 70 minutes. Maybe 
sometimes we have to keep the ball more rather than go for another goal even if 
you might then concede an equaliser.”

Mostly, however, Huddersfield play like a whirlwind. The exciting style was 
one of the reasons why the club sold a record number of season tickets this 
summer, more than 15,000 (the other reason was that Hoyle slashed prices). In 
August, the club enjoyed its highest attendance on an opening day for 46 years 
and 18,479 fans were thrilled to witness evidence that Wagner’s pre-season had 
paid off as Huddersfield avenged their heavy loss on the final day of last 
season by beating Brentford 2-1.

That fine start to the campaign has continued. Huddersfield even won 2-1 at 
Melwood last week when Klopp invited them to play a friendly behind closed 
doors against Liverpool players who were not on international duty.

The question now is whether Huddersfield can sustain their all-action style 
over a 46-match league campaign without a winter break. “There’s no reason why 
not,” says Wagner. “The important thing is to find the right balance between 
intensity and recovery and everybody knows I have no problem with rotation.” 
But Wagner reiterates: “There are a lot of different areas where we have to go 
forward to be a proper professional football club and we are only at the start 
of his journey.”

He adds: “But we can enjoy our start and be confident as we go into the 
biggest game of our season, against Leeds United. It’s not just a derby, for us 
it’sthe derby.” Wagner reckons March’s 4-1 win at Elland Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/19/leeds-huddersfield-championship-match-report>
 could be the highlight of his reign so far. “We will do our best to make our 
fans celebrate again,” says a man who is changing his club’s identity, but not 
too much.
 