
If swing state equivocators come across for Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, they will most likely 
not have been prodded the sparkly, slapdash, occasionally aggravating, often 
irresistible, and seriously solipsistic Stronger Together, a fundraiser for 
Clinton created by the Broadway community, live-streamed on several platforms. 
A haphazard mix of song, story and Hugh Jackman, the show again showed the 
support of workers in the arts for the Democratic party, a point recently made 
by the astonishing talent differential at the conventions. (Remember? Alicia 
Keys, Paul Simon, Meryl Streep, Angela Bassett, Lenny Kravitz, Carole King, 
Katy Perry v Scott Baio.)

Saturday Night Live: Baldwin is back as Trump for 'worst ever presidential 
debate'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/16/saturday-night-live-baldwin-is-back-as-trump-for-worst-ever-presidential-debate>
On Monday night, plenty of luminaries packed the St James Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, onstage and behind it. Jordan 
Roth, Richie Jackson, Stephen Schwartz and Harvey Weinstein produced the 
program. Billy Crystal hosted it. Michael Mayer directed with Diane Paulus as 
special consultant, perhaps because Paulus is a director if passion and verve, 
perhaps because it would have been a gaffe to exclude women from the creative 
team. The cavalcade of performers don’t seem to have spent much time 
rehearsing, so the evening’s tone was uneven as was its execution.

The program opened with Billy Crystal performing a Comedy Tonight parody and 
delivering a Borscht-Beltish monologue in which he compared Donald Trump to a 
7-11: “He’s open 24 hours selling us crap we don’t want.” He then introduced a 
disembodied Barbra Streisand as the “voice of God”, which is pretty much how the
Broadway <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> community regards her.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fhillary-clinton-broadway-fundraiser-hugh-jackman-julia-roberts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6991fbe60d350ae1158601b7d19e76e7b87c78c%2F0_144_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hugh%20Jackman%20and%20Julia%20Roberts%20among%20stars%20at%20Clinton%20Broadway%20fundraiser&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fhillary-clinton-broadway-fundraiser-hugh-jackman-julia-roberts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hugh%20Jackman%20and%20Julia%20Roberts%20among%20stars%20at%20Clinton%20Broadway%20fundraiser&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fhillary-clinton-broadway-fundraiser-hugh-jackman-julia-roberts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6991fbe60d350ae1158601b7d19e76e7b87c78c%2F0_144_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Uzo Aduba, Julia Roberts and Lena Dunham on stage. Photograph: Justin 
Sullivan/Getty Images 
Hugh Jackman sauntered onstage to deliver Oh What a Beautiful Morning, a sly 
reappropriation of the Morning in American slogan. He altered the lyrics to 
say, “Everything’s going her way,” and encouraged the audience in a singalong. 
But the next few songs seemed less germane, the fiddle-while-Weimar burns 
anthems Wilkommen and Cabaret (well at least Joel Grey and Sienna Miller they 
didn’t choose Tomorrow Belongs to Me) and Been a Long Day, performed bySarah 
Jessica Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sarah-jessica-parker> and 
Matthew Broderick, with an assist from Victoria Clark.

'That was so emotional!': Mary J Blige gets the 411 on Hillary Clinton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/30/mary-j-blige-411-hillary-clinton-apple-music>
More apropos were Anne Hathaway and Kelli O’Hara’s Get Happy/ Happy Days Are 
Here Again duet, Stephen Schwartz and O’Hara’s For Good, and Josh Groban’s 
Somewhere Over the Rainbow. Numbers like Emily Blunt’s No One Is Alone, Neil 
Patrick Harris’s The Origin of Love and Ayodele Casel’s tap routine 
acknowledged Clinton-Kaine campaign as the humane, all-embracing alternative to 
Trump-Pence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fhillary-clinton-broadway-fundraiser-hugh-jackman-julia-roberts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffda158c3c49900f17c1a958660b63f9286eb2e71%2F0_163_1979_1188%2F1979.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hugh%20Jackman%20and%20Julia%20Roberts%20among%20stars%20at%20Clinton%20Broadway%20fundraiser&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fhillary-clinton-broadway-fundraiser-hugh-jackman-julia-roberts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hugh%20Jackman%20and%20Julia%20Roberts%20among%20stars%20at%20Clinton%20Broadway%20fundraiser&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fhillary-clinton-broadway-fundraiser-hugh-jackman-julia-roberts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffda158c3c49900f17c1a958660b63f9286eb2e71%2F0_163_1979_1188%2F1979.jpg>
 Emily Blunt performing on stage. Photograph: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images 
 A high road smackdown was delivered to Trump via Bernadette Peters’s Children 
Will Listen and a lower one by Anna Wintour, who compared the “hideous ties” 
sold by Trump to the American-made shirts that fashion designers had created 
for the Clinton campaign. (Wintour actually wore a T-shirt herself, more or 
less, a sequin-encrusted version of a Marc Jacobs design.) Sarah Jones gave 
perhaps the cleverest denunciation of the evening, hailing Clinton as the 
candidate who “understands Great White Way is not a policy mandate”.

Clinton herself did not appear live, but she delivered a video message, 
saluting the arts for telling us “what we are, where we are going and where we 
will be”. Chelsea Clinton appeared, making a poised speech, while Bill Clinton 
delivered a far more rambling one that touched on Bob Dylan, independent 
bookstores, mental health advocacy, and Shimon Peres, rather than the Lerner 
and Loewe medley everyone had hoped for.

More focused spoken word was provided by Helen Mirren, who recited a speech of 
Eleanor Roosevelt’s and Angela Bassett, who offered an ardent Sojourner Truth. 
Jon Hamm andJake Gyllenhaal <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jake-gyllenhaal> 
provided an enthusiastic, though underprepared seen from It Can’t Happen Here 
while Julia Roberts went inadvisably off script in the casually profane intro 
that prefaced her Molly Ivins recitation. Roberts, along with Sarah Paulson, 
Lena Dunham, Uzo Aduba, Ansel Elgort and Harris returned in an endless sequence 
in which they traded quotations as in some superlatively dull parlor game.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fhillary-clinton-broadway-fundraiser-hugh-jackman-julia-roberts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7002381ff89c86076fe80e051ba6bfdc9f9fb163%2F0_269_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hugh%20Jackman%20and%20Julia%20Roberts%20among%20stars%20at%20Clinton%20Broadway%20fundraiser&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fhillary-clinton-broadway-fundraiser-hugh-jackman-julia-roberts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hugh%20Jackman%20and%20Julia%20Roberts%20among%20stars%20at%20Clinton%20Broadway%20fundraiser&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fhillary-clinton-broadway-fundraiser-hugh-jackman-julia-roberts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7002381ff89c86076fe80e051ba6bfdc9f9fb163%2F0_269_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Sienna Miller and Anne Hathaway performing on stage. Photograph: Justin 
Sullivan/Getty Images 
But the evening finished strongly with a riff on Ten Duel Commandments 
performed by Lin-Manuel Miranda and Renee Elise Goldsberry (“I have only one 
overwhelming feeling/ Anyone here want to shatter a glass ceiling?”) and a 
rendition of Battle Hymn of the Republic led by the Cynthia Erivo, which was 
fittingly and climactically glorious.

One might question the purposed of the exercise. Show tunes and spoken word 
presented by women, minorities, members of the LBGTQ community, and Elgort 
almost certainly won’t tip undecided voters toward Clinton. But something about 
that untidy, embraceable mix of performers also works to define the Democratic 
party as one of inclusivity and liberality, a big, tuneful and frequently 
spangled tent.
 