
Zenit St Petersburg <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zenitstpetersburg> 
stepped closer to reaching the knockout stages of the Champions League after 
making it three wins out of three in Group H following a 3-1 win against Lyon.

Zenit did not take long to take advantage of a lacklustre start by the 
visitors. A fine pass by Oleg Shatov in the third minute was played in to Artem 
Dzyuba, who had time to take a touch before stroking the ball past Lyon’s 
Portuguese goalkeeper Anthony Lopez to score his 11th goal in as many games for 
club and country.

Valencia rely on two own goals to see off unfortunate Gent in Group H
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/20/valencia-gent-champions-league-match-report>
André Villas-Boas’s side were dominant and should have extended their lead. 
Dzyuba had a great chance to score his second following good work by Shatov and 
Hulk, but he slipped at the vital moment and his shot ballooned over the bar.

Yet after the half-time break, the French side were rejuvenated and drew level 
four minutes after the break when Alexandre Lacazette brilliantly diverted 
Christophe Jallet’s cross past Mikhail Kerzhakov in the Zenit goal.

Lyon began to dominate but Hulk scored a stunning goal in the 56th minute to 
put the hosts back in front. The Brazilian picked the ball up on the halfway 
line and advanced towards the opposing goal before unleashing an outstanding 
left-footed shot which swerved past Lopez to give the forward his third goal in 
as manyChampions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> 
games this season.

Dzyuba then missed another glorious opportunity to put Zenit 3-1 ahead, 
shooting wide after being put through.Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> pushed forward in search of an 
equaliser and Lacazette almost provided it, but he was denied by an excellent 
last-ditch tackle by Aleksandr Anyukov.

Chasing the game with nine minutes to go, Lyon were caught on the break and 
the Zenit captain Danny sealed victory with a composed finish after being 
played in by Shatov.

Zenit stay top of Group H with nine points from three games, while Lyon have 
just one after a draw and two defeats. The two sides meet again on 4 November 
in a game Lyon must win to keep their qualification hopes alive.
 