
Only five players remain from the Hull City squad who won automatic promotion 
in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/04/hull-city-cardiff-city-championship>
 and it provides an insight into the strength of this season’s Championship 
that one of them, David Meyler, harbours no doubt the current crop are more 
talented.

Yet that apparent superior ability was only enough for Steve Bruce’s team to 
finish fourth, 10 points off Burnley and six adrift of Middlesbrough. Plagued 
by inconsistency, especially away from home, Hull’s season mixed 3-0 wins over 
both promoted teams with defeats by three of the bottom four.

So here they are, running the play-off gauntlet with Derby in their sights and 
the first leg at the iPro Stadium on Saturday. The clubs’ meetings this season 
do not make for pretty reading for Hull: two defeats, six goals conceded and 
none scored.

Derby were the only team to win in the league on Humberside – Hull’s other 10 
defeats came on the road – but Meyler believes confidence, belief and hunger 
remain high.

“We still have a great chance,” the midfielder says. “Derby will be tough but 
we believe in ourselves. At the start the target was automatic promotion. We 
felt with the squad we had we could win theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> but we hit bad form and 
sticky patches at the wrong times.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-meyler-hull-city-derby-county-championship-play-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3b7817ef4ef519d64699605db59d977bf00a141%2F0_211_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hull%20City%E2%80%99s%20David%20Meyler%3A%20%E2%80%98This%20team%20are%20100%25%20more%20talented%20than%20in%202013%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-meyler-hull-city-derby-county-championship-play-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hull%20City%E2%80%99s%20David%20Meyler%3A%20%E2%80%98This%20team%20are%20100%25%20more%20talented%20than%20in%202013%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-meyler-hull-city-derby-county-championship-play-offs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3b7817ef4ef519d64699605db59d977bf00a141%2F0_211_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Bradley Johnson scores the first of Derby County’s goals in a 4-0 win over 
Hull City at the iPro Stadium in April. Photograph: Matt 
Bunn/BPI/REX/Shutterstock 
“When it came to the end of November we had six or seven wins in a row but had 
a slump at Christmas. We came out of that and got back to winning ways but then 
had another sticky patch. It was unfortunate but that’s why the division is so 
difficult and tough for teams to go straight back up.”

The lure of winning promotion at Wembley remains great. For Meyler at least, 
the complicated route would be more satisfying. “We have two games that are 
huge and a chance to reach Wembley – if you guaranteed me which way to go up, I 
would say the play-offs. We’re doing it the hard way but I believe we can and 
nobody can tell us otherwise.”

Previewing the Football League play-offs: how the 12 clubs have fared in the 
past
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2016/may/11/football-league-play-offs-championship-league-one-two>
On a personal level, the 26-year-old’s season has mirrored the club’s. His 
highlight was a morning in January when his girlfriend gave birth to their 
daughter, Alanna, and hours later, having not slept all night, he wasat the 
training ground to sign a new two-year contract 
<http://www.hulldailymail.co.uk/Hull-City-s-David-Meyler-Fatherhood-changed/story-28632649-detail/story.html>
. “I have watched him grow from a boy to a father,” Bruce, who also worked with 
Meyler at Sunderland, has said. “We all know that he’s a manager’s dream.”

There have been noteworthy issues for the vice-captain, too. He was demoted to 
the bench for several weeks following a mistake inthe FA Cup replay against 
Arsenal in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/08/hull-city-arsenal-fa-cup-replay-match-report>
 and Bruce remarked last month that “when his partner had the baby I think he 
lost a stone in weight. He was up every other hour feeding the baby because 
that’s just him”.

Meyler worked his way back into the starting XI, only for a hamstring problem 
to keep him out of the final three league games. He says he is fit and ready 
for Derby after sitting out last weekend’s hammering of Rotherham “as a 
precaution” because there was nothing riding on the game.

Bruce’s team are almost unrecognisable from the team who went up in dramatic 
circumstances on the final day three years ago, when Ross McCormack scored a 
last-minute goal for Leeds to bump Watford out of second and into the 
play-offs, ensuring Hull went up in their stead.

Meyler thinks this side are stronger, making their fourth-place finish all the 
more frustrating. “In the team we had in 2013, we probably had a lot of players 
that were hungry to reach the Premier League,” he says. “But this team has 
players that have already been there. This team is 100% more talented, more 
gifted. It’s just consistency that we have lacked. We’re disappointed in 
ourselves for that.We’d beaten Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/26/hull-city-burnley-championship-match-report>
 andMiddlesbrough at home 3-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/07/hull-city-middlesbrough-championship-match-report>
, we’ve had fantastic wins but at times we left ourselves down with 
inconsistency.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-meyler-hull-city-derby-county-championship-play-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3de3db59d35b14dedeff72ec2d17f00e9faf7463%2F0_162_4004_2402%2F4004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hull%20City%E2%80%99s%20David%20Meyler%3A%20%E2%80%98This%20team%20are%20100%25%20more%20talented%20than%20in%202013%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-meyler-hull-city-derby-county-championship-play-offs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hull%20City%E2%80%99s%20David%20Meyler%3A%20%E2%80%98This%20team%20are%20100%25%20more%20talented%20than%20in%202013%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fdavid-meyler-hull-city-derby-county-championship-play-offs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3de3db59d35b14dedeff72ec2d17f00e9faf7463%2F0_162_4004_2402%2F4004.jpg>
 Hull City’s David Meyler reacts to Olivier Giroud’s opening goal for Arsenal 
in their FA Cup fifth round replay at the KC Stadium. Photograph: Andrew 
Yates/Reuters 
Without taking anything for granted, Meyler will likely be part of the 
Republic of Ireland’s European Championship squad. He would rather miss the 
friendly against Holland though, 24 hours before the play-off final on 28 May.

He was named in Martin O’Neill’s extended group for that fixture – along with 
six others involved in the play-offs – but hopes there will be double reason to 
celebrate on Saturday afternoon because O’Neill is expected to name his 23-man 
squad for the tournament.

The prospect of being involved in Euro 2016 has added to Meyler’s motivation 
but forgetting about France has been challenging. “You have to keep it to one 
side,” he says. “The lads who played in the Bosnia play-offs know they are in 
but for the rest it’s about playing at a consistently high level for our clubs 
and achieving something to make the manager take notice. The majority are 
playing all the time and it’s a case of if you’re doing well with your club you 
will reap the international awards.

“What you do at club level gets you that recognition. I’m obviously looking 
forward to it because it’s huge for the country. It also helps to focus on your 
club game because doing well there does not harm your chances.”
 