
So Premier League Hull advance at the expense of Championship Newcastle. But 
this was not a simple story, one that included 120 minutes, a red card, a 
penalty shootout and goalkeeper heroics before Hull sealed a first League Cup 
semi-final place in their history.

Newcastle outplayed them for great periods of this match on a pitch that by 
the end was covered in frost and had been the stage for 90 minutes of dull 
football followed by 30 compelling ones.

Ben Woodburn sets record as Liverpool break Leeds to reach EFL Cup last four
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/liverpool-leeds-united-efl-cup-quarter-final-match-report>
Neither side could find a breakthrough in normal time and, when Dieumerci 
Mbokani was sent off in the 89th minute, Hull looked down and out. Mohamed 
Diamé put Newcastle in front in extra time before Robert Snodgrass equalised 
one minute later and the game went to penalties. Newcastle missed three with 
Eldin Jakupovic saving two – Jonjo Shelvey, Dwight Gayle and Yoan Gouffran the 
culprits – while Hull finished theirs emphatically.

Mike Phelan, the Hull manager, said: “I thought Newcastle played decent 
football and moved the ball around well but I thought we were also good value 
for money tonight. For this football club it’s a tremendous achievement because 
it’s the furthest they’ve ever been [in the competition]. The players are 
really pleased with that.

“I was pleased for all of them. Eldin has been in the cup competitions all the 
way through and has performed well. Going into the penalty shootout he was 
probably the right goalkeeper to have there. He’s probably been the hero 
tonight and hopefully he’ll be the hero again.”

Diamé looked as if he had won this tie in the 98th minute and is a player who 
reflects these two teams’ unusual status. Promoted with Hull last season – 
scoring the winning goal inthe Championship play-off final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/hull-city-sheffield-wednesday-championship-play-off-final-match-report>
, indeed – he rejected a contract offer from City andopted to drop down a 
division with Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/newcastle-sign-mohame-diame-hull-city>
.

The Senegal international was a key figure in a first half that Newcastle 
dominated. Shelvey played an exquisite through-ball to Gayle in the 12th 
minute, which the striker controlled with ease before releasing a powerful 
left-footed shot that Jakupovic palmed away. Gayle, who has scored 13 league 
goals this season, returned to the Newcastle starting XI after being a late 
substitute in thehome defeat against Blackburn Rovers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/newcastle-united-blackburn-rovers-championship-match-report>
and was one of seven changes for the visitors. Hull made six.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhull-city-newcastle-united-efl-cup-quarter-final-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F250d812e3254a0a1ba523908abcb818b78539d94%2F0_0_4872_2925%2F4872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hull%20beat%20Newcastle%20on%20penalties%20in%20EFL%20Cup%20despite%20Mbokani%20red%20card&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhull-city-newcastle-united-efl-cup-quarter-final-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hull%20beat%20Newcastle%20on%20penalties%20in%20EFL%20Cup%20despite%20Mbokani%20red%20card&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fhull-city-newcastle-united-efl-cup-quarter-final-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F250d812e3254a0a1ba523908abcb818b78539d94%2F0_0_4872_2925%2F4872.jpg>
 Eldin Jakupovic takes the acclaim of the Hull City fans after his penalty 
shootout heroics. Photograph: Lee Smith/Reuters 
With the away end packed and the black and amber shirts providing little 
warmth early on for the Hull supporters on a bitterly cold evening, all the 
initial noise emanated from Newcastle’s contingent. Rafael Benítez had argued 
before this game that the club should have been given more tickets but those 
who got them certainly made their presence felt.

Newcastle controlled the tempo in the first half and Isaac Hayden, in 
particular, impressed in the centre of midfield. Hull attempted to change the 
momentum as the game wore on and, although there was little cohesion going 
forward, they did begin to edge back into things. Andy Robertson darted forward 
from left-back and cut inside, only for Hayden to barge him off the ball and 
concede a free-kick. Snodgrass curled an effort towards Matz Sels’ left-hand 
post but the goalkeeper calmly watched it go wide.

The drama was saved for the dying moments of normal time. Jamaal Lascelles 
challenged Mbokani from behind on the touchline in front of the Hull dug-out, 
the pair tangling legs and the striker visibly riled. They then went head to 
head and Mbokani moved his forward with more force, earning a red card from 
Neil Swarbrick. It was hardly a headbutt but there was movement towards 
Lascelles.

Crystal Palace to lose Connor Wickham for season with cruciate injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/crystal-palace-connor-wickham-cruciate-ligament-knee-injury>
That proved the final act of the 90 minutes and in extra time Newcastle began 
to make their numerical advantage count. Achraf Lazaar ventured forward from 
left-back and smashed a shot against the bar from inside the Hull penalty area 
before Diamé gave the visitors the lead. A corner was taken short to Vernon 
Anita on the right of the penalty area and his clipped cross was flicked on by 
Gayle to Diamé, who prodded into the bottom corner.

This sparked mass celebrations in the away end but the party did not last 
long. One minute later Hull were level. A long ball forward from defence was 
headed on by the substitute Markus Henriksen, who then unleashed a fierce 
effort at goal. It was straight at Sels but he could only palm the ball out to 
the onrushing Snodgrass who slotted it in underneath the goalkeeper.

Benítez said: “There are a lot of positives because the team was doing well. 
In the second half they [Hull] were pushing and we defended well. We allowed 
them to play the counterattack and we have to improve that. As a team we made 
mistakes.

“We allowed them to score. It’s not the keeper’s fault. We have to carry on 
working hard and doing things in the same way.”

Hull were emphatic with their penalties, Snodgrass, Michael Dawson and 
Huddlestone all scoring to send them into the last four.
 