
Hundreds of British properties suspected of belonging to corrupt politicians, 
tax evaders and criminals could be seized by enforcement agencies under tough 
new laws designed to tackle London’s reputation as a haven for dirty money.

Huge amounts of corrupt wealth is laundered through the capital’s banks. The 
NationalCrime <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ukcrime> Agency believes up to 
£100bn of tainted cash could be passing through the UK each year. Much of it 
ends up in real estate, and in other assets such as luxury cars, art and 
jewellery.

The criminal finances bill 
<http://www.gov.uk/government/collections/criminal-finances-bill>, published on 
Thursday, is designed to close a loophole which has left the authorities 
powerless to seize property from overseas criminals unless the individuals are 
first convicted in their country of origin.

It will introduce the concept of “unexplained wealth orders”. The Serious 
Fraud Office, HM Revenue and Customs and other agencies will be able to apply 
to the high court for an order forcing the owner of an asset to explain how 
they obtained the funds to purchase it.

'Tower for the toffs': UK's tallest skyscraper and playground of the rich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/24/st-george-wharf-tower-london-luxury-pads-emblematic-housing-crisis>
The orders will apply to property and other assets worth more than £100,000. 
If the owner fails to demonstrate that a home or piece of jewellery was 
acquired using legal sources of income, agencies will be able to seize it.

The law targets not just criminals, but politicians and public officials, 
known as “politically exposed persons”. Depending on how quickly it passes 
through parliament, the bill could come into force as early as spring 2017.

“There are some hundreds of properties in the UK strongly suspected to have 
been acquired with the proceeds of corruption,” said the campaign group 
Transparency International, which has been pressing for the new measures. “This 
will provide low-hanging fruit for immediate action by law enforcement 
agencies, if those agencies are properly resourced.”

The Guardian revealed through the Panama Papers how a powerful member of 
Muammar Gaddafi’s inner circle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/may/16/gaddafi-insider-accused-of-using-state-cash-to-buy-luxury-scottish-hotels>
 had built a multimillion-pound portfolio of boutique hotels in Scotland and 
luxury homes in Mayfair, Marylebone and Hampstead in London. Ali Dabaiba, who 
was head of Libya’s infrastructure fund for a decade, has been accused by 
government prosecutors in Tripoli of plundering money meant for hospitals, 
schools and archaeology. He rejects the allegations.

Scottish police have confirmed they are investigating, but Libya’s request for 
an asset freeze has not been implemented.

Bukola Saraki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/05/panama-papers-world-leaders-tycoons-secret-property-empires>
, the president of the Nigerian senate who faces allegations that he failed to 
declare his assets, owns a property in Belgravia in his own name.

The Panama Papers revealed that the £5.7m property next door belonged to 
Seychelles and BVI companies benefiting Saraki’s wife and former special 
assistant. Saraki said he had declared all his assets correctly and in 
accordance with Nigerian legislation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fproperties-seized-assets-corrupt-cash-crackdown-criminal-finances-bill-tax-haven%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53ee7be6ebf633158147e6d4045f76d98e0f2050%2F1587_5_2550_3188%2F2550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hundreds%20of%20properties%20could%20be%20seized%20in%20UK%20corruption%20crackdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fproperties-seized-assets-corrupt-cash-crackdown-criminal-finances-bill-tax-haven%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hundreds%20of%20properties%20could%20be%20seized%20in%20UK%20corruption%20crackdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fproperties-seized-assets-corrupt-cash-crackdown-criminal-finances-bill-tax-haven%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53ee7be6ebf633158147e6d4045f76d98e0f2050%2F1587_5_2550_3188%2F2550.jpg>
 Nigeria’s president Muhammadu Buhari, who criticised David Cameron at an 
anti-corruption summit in London this year. Photograph: Sunday Alamba/AP 
During the London anti-corruption summit in May, the Nigerian president, 
Muhammadu Buhari, 
<http://europe.newsweek.com/nigerias-buhari-cameron-dont-apologize-just-get-our-money-back-458487?rm=eu>
 was asked if he demanded an apology from David Cameron for a gaffe in which 
the prime minister was filmed describing the west African country as
“fantastically corrupt” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/may/10/cameron-caught-boasting-to-queen-about-fantastically-corrupt-countries-video>
. Buhari replied that he wanted action: “What I am demanding is the return of 
the assets”.

Unexplained wealth orders will also help expose the owners of properties. Land 
Registry figures show UK real estate worth more than £170bn is held by more 
than 30,000 tax haven companies.

Most owners of these companies hide behind anonymous trusts, or nominee 
directors and shareholders. In a single 50-storey apartment complex in London, 
the Tower at St George Wharf in Vauxhall, a quarter of the flats are held 
through offshore companies.

Those targeted will not need to be resident in the UK. So long as their assets 
are in the UK, an order can be enforced. The law will apply to property 
acquired before it is introduced.


The bill also contains stronger seizure and forfeiture powers designed to make 
it easier for police and investigators to freeze bank accounts and confiscate 
assets such as jewellery and art, which are harder to seize under current laws.

“We will not stand by and watch criminals use the UK to launder their dirty 
money or fund terrorism,” said the security minister, Ben Wallace. “This 
legislation will ensure the UK is taking a world-leading role in cracking down 
on corruption and send a clear message to criminals – we will take your liberty 
and your money.”

Campaigners say that for the new law to be effective, agencies must be given 
the financial and political support to take powerful and wealthy individuals to 
court.

“We simply cannot continue to roll out the red carpet to the world’s corrupt 
elite wanting to lodge their illicit wealth in the UK,” said the director of
Transparency International, Robert Barrington 
<http://www.transparency.org.uk/press-releases/transparency-international-response-to-criminal-finances-bill/>
. “The UK has a responsibility to ensure that any stolen wealth flowing into 
the country is stopped, frozen, and ultimately returned to the people from whom 
it was stolen.”
 