
Hundreds of people are expected to protest near a fracking site in Lancashire 
that was given the green light by the government this week.

The Lancashire Responds rally on Saturday 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/1402161039812947/?notif_t=plan_user_associated&notif_id=1474893129676053>
 is the first shot across the bows of Cuadrilla, in what anti-fracking groups 
and local residents say will be a sustained campaign of action tostop the 
company fracking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-fracking-given-go-ahead-as-lancashire-council-rejection-is-overturned>
 next year.


Environmentalists said they were considering a series of “rolling blockades” 
to dog and delay the shale company in setting up its rigs at the Preston New 
Road site on the Fylde.


“This is a test case for fracking in the UK and our intention is to send a 
clear message to investors: it’s not a safe investment putting your money in 
extracting more hydrocarbons,” said a spokesman for the Reclaim the Power 
group, which was involved inprotests against Cuadrilla drilling in Balcombe in 
2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/shortcuts/2013/jul/30/fracking-protest-battle-of-balcombe>
.

Fracking explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=4d42b98e-1b9d-4f95-b256-e12acfd39f21>
“The tactics will be at a logistical level to slow down and hamper the truck 
movements, and that will cost Cuadrilla money, in logistical headaches and 
security costs.”


The group said it was drawing inspiration for its plans from the successful 
1980s campaign against the Franklin river dam in Tasmania.


Tina Rothery, a local woman and prominent anti-fracking campaigner who is 
facinga £55,000 legal bill over her occupation in 2014 of a field leased to 
Cuadrilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/24/anti-fracking-activist-refuses-to-pay-legal-bill-cuadrilla>
, said she would fight Cuadrilla through non-violent protests.


“There will be direct action, of course there will. It will be peaceful, we’re 
not evil, nasty people,” she said. “There’s no way we’re backing down and 
stopping [after the government decision]. Our obligation is to our children to 
keep them safe. There’s nothing that makes me step off the path and let 
Cuadrilla through to my grandchildren.”


Other local people opposed to the plans said they would go down whatever 
avenues they could. But Claire Stephenson, who lives in nearby Wesham and whose 
children used to go to a primary school around a mile from the fracking site, 
scoffed at the idea of breaking the law to stop the fracking.


“Good lord, no. That’s not what we’re about at all,” said Stephenson, who is a 
spokesperson for local residents’ group Preston New Road Action group. “As a 
group we are still going to follow the legal, democratic route. We will be 
involved in peaceful protest, we have to make our voices heard.”


She said it was “disgraceful” that the communities secretary, Sajid Javid, had 
overturned the local county council’s rejection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-fracking-given-go-ahead-as-lancashire-council-rejection-is-overturned>
 of fracking at the site. “They’ve been given the keys to Lancashire,” she said.


While Stephenson said her group was now scouring Javid’s 600-odd page decision 
letter for further opportunities for legal challenges, in private, fracking 
opponents admit they have now largely run out of legal options over the Preston 
New Road site.

The Roseacre Wood site, which Javid said he was minded to approve but deferred 
a decision on to give Cuadrilla more time to see if it could mitigate traffic 
impacts, is a different matter.

Barbara Richardson, who lives around 550 metres from the site, moved to the 
area when she retired to enjoy walks and wildlife but said she had experienced 
two and a half years of “torment” fighting the fracking bid. A lifetime Tory 
voter, she said she would never vote for the party again.

“We are six miles from the main road, and a further five from the nearest 
motorway junction. It’s country lanes, single track in part. We have 9,000 
cyclists use these lanes a year, there are livery yards.

“It’s not the desolate north, it’s very much an affluent farming and tourism 
area. We don’t think it’s appropriate anywhere, but particularly here.” She 
said local residents were now gathering further evidence on the potential 
traffic problems as part of the inquiry the Department for Communities and 
Local Government was now opening following Thursday’s decision.

Sarah Walmesley, who lives in Blackpool North Shore said she felt betrayed by 
the government overriding local concerns and would be attending protests and 
rallies to stop Cuadrilla.


“We have been let down in Lancashire by the very people who claimed not 24 
hours earlier that this was a government that would listen to the people,” she 
said, referring toTheresa May’s Conservative conference speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-consigns-cameron-to-history-in-populist-speech>
.


Jennifer Mein, Leader of Lancashire county council, said that the government’s 
actions appeared to go against the grain of the localism agenda it had promoted 
in recent years.


“Residents and businesses in Lancashire mobilised themselves on this issue; 
their councillors listened carefully to what they and the applicant had to 
say,” she wrote inan article for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/07/tory-localism-fracking-lancashire-sajid-javid-drilling>
.


“The subsequent overturning of three of those councillors’ decisions not only 
underlines the theory that localism only applies when it suits the centre, it 
highlights the chasm that exists between people seeking answers and reassurance 
and a government that is either unwilling or unable to provide them.”

Cuadrilla has said it hopes to begin drilling in the sites during the second 
quarter of 2017, and looks forward to demonstrating that fracking can be done 
safely in the UK.
 