
If there is such a thing as a human right to hunt, contemporary 
hunter-gatherers must surely possess it. Although many hunter-gatherers now 
also cultivate crops or keep livestock, hunting remains a vital means of 
subsistence and is central to their identity. It is not they who have driven so 
many species to extinction; it is not they who pose a serious threat to 
wildlife numbers, but commercial poachers and the money-seekers behind them.


 So why should hunter-gatherers – the bushmen of the Central Kalahari, for 
example, or the Hadza of northern Tanzania – now require the permission of the 
rest of us to do what they have probably done for millennia?

If you want to tackle carbon emissions let indigenous people control their land
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/16/indigenous-communities-control-over-land-mitigate-climate-change>
 The answer, it turns out, is that we own the wildlife that they want to hunt. 
With a single stroke of the legislative pen, almost all countries with a 
significant wildlife population have vested title to all wild animals in the 
nation state. One curious result is that an antelope or wildebeest changes 
owners every time it crosses an international boundary; but the rule also means 
that the state on either side of the boundary is able to regulate who can hunt 
what, and where and when they can do it. Hunter-gatherers may know little or 
nothing about these arrangements until they are arrested for an offence under 
the local wildlife law.

 Given that for most of our time on earth, humans have hunted and gathered to 
survive, it is curious that those of us who have changed our ways are so 
intolerant of those who have not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Frespect-human-right-hunt-indigenous-tribes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34a90c1a0808f77521ff6982c1516832f63a64ea%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hunting%20must%20be%20regarded%20as%20a%20human%20right%20for%20indigenous%20and%20tribal%20peoples%20%7C%20%20Gordon%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Frespect-human-right-hunt-indigenous-tribes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hunting%20must%20be%20regarded%20as%20a%20human%20right%20for%20indigenous%20and%20tribal%20peoples%20%7C%20%20Gordon%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Frespect-human-right-hunt-indigenous-tribes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34a90c1a0808f77521ff6982c1516832f63a64ea%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 The indigenous Xikrin people who live on the Bacaja, a tributary of the Xingu 
River, on a hunt. Photograph: Taylor Weidman/LightRocket via Getty 
One reason is undoubtedly to do with the conservation lobby, which is largely 
responsible for the swath of game parks and reserves where hunting of any sort 
can attract a long prison sentence. InAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> especially, conservationists have 
pursued a vision of wilderness free of human contact, which never existed until 
they thought it up. To them, it has not mattered that tribal peoples were 
evicted from their homes to make way for protected areas. In south-east 
Cameroon, for instance, thousands of Baka “pygmies” are now consigned to the 
perimeter of the national parks which were once their homes. Those caught in 
their old hunting grounds risk a serious beating at the hands of park 
eco-guards.

An antelope or wildebeest changes owners every time it crosses an 
international boundary

Many conservationists now acknowledge that mistakes have been made 
<https://cmsdata.iucn.org/downloads/durbanaccorden.pdf>, but in their “war” 
against the illegal wildlife trade have rarely troubled to distinguish 
subsistence hunters from commercial poachers.

 Some fear that subsistence hunters, although they hunt only “for the pot”, 
pose an unacceptable risk to wildlife numbers even outside the parks. There is 
little scientific evidence of this, and the limited data available suggests that
natural growth rates usually exceed the take off 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/IPeoples/SRIndigenousPeoples/Pages/SRIPeoplesIndex.aspx>
.

 Perhaps the most crucial factor, however, might be the common misconception 
that hunter-gatherers are somehow “backward” and that for their own good they 
need to become like the rest of us.

The formal recognition of a right to hunt, it has been argued by the Botswana 
government among others, would only delay their transition to the “normality” 
of a more settled existence: a transition, as it happens, which will also make 
them easier to control and, eventually, to tax.

 These views are deeply embedded in the law of property. In Ethiopia, Kenya 
and many other parts of Africa, the law tends to recognise property rights 
based on the use or occupation of land only if this is continuous and 
exclusive. If it is neither, it will generally not matter that the community 
has made the same use of the same tracts of land for generations.

For the many hunter-gatherers who either share space with other groups or rely 
on resources scattered over a wide area – and who are therefore still highly 
mobile even if they also have permanent settlements – this approach is liable 
to undermine any legal claim to land rights.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Frespect-human-right-hunt-indigenous-tribes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F402499f981e017b32b38121c926d78331c9003d1%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hunting%20must%20be%20regarded%20as%20a%20human%20right%20for%20indigenous%20and%20tribal%20peoples%20%7C%20%20Gordon%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Frespect-human-right-hunt-indigenous-tribes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hunting%20must%20be%20regarded%20as%20a%20human%20right%20for%20indigenous%20and%20tribal%20peoples%20%7C%20%20Gordon%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Frespect-human-right-hunt-indigenous-tribes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F402499f981e017b32b38121c926d78331c9003d1%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 A bushman from the Khomani San community in the southern Kalahari desert, one 
of the last indigenous groups of people of South Africa. Photograph: Dan 
Kitwood/Getty 
 There have been occasional victories. I represented the Kalahari bushmen in a 
2006 case in the Botswana high court in which the court overturned a hunting 
ban in the Central Kalahari Game Reserve 
<http://www.chr.up.ac.za/index.php/browse-by-country/botswana/1118.html>, 
because it violated not only local wildlife legislation but the bushmen’s right 
to life under the Botswana constitution. In another case, Kenya’s land and 
environment court recently ruled that members of the Ogiek community have been 
“unfairly prevented from living in accordance with their culture as farmers, 
hunters and gatherers in the forests”, and that this amounted to discriminatory 
treatment in breach of the constitution of Kenya.

The tribes paying the brutal price of conservation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/28/exiles-human-cost-of-conservation-indigenous-peoples-eco-tourism>
 But the reversals have far outweighed the successes. Since all customary land 
rights were extinguished by law almost 25 years ago, the Hadza of northern 
Tanzaniacommit an offence <http://www.survivalinternational.org/galleries/hadza>
 every time they hunt. The Baka of south-east Cameroon 
<http://survivalinternational.org/about/southeast-cameroon> are in much the 
same position.

The Kalahari bushmen may have won their court case but are still refused 
licences to hunt – and if they hunt anyway, are liable to be fired at from 
helicopters. Botswana is only one of several countries to have adopted a 
shoot-to-kill policy, which apparently attaches greater importance towildlife 
than to human life <http://thevoicebw.com/minister-khama-warns-poachers/>. 
Almost everywhere, the odds are still stacked hugely against contemporary 
hunter-gatherers. National laws have yet to accept that not everyone wants to 
be a farmer or to live in a big city, and that the sedentarisation of 
hunter-gatherers can cause many more problems than it solves.

 International law is less constrained by the straightjacket of property 
rights, and has proved more supportive of subsistence hunting rights. For 
example, article 14 of theILO Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention 
<http://ilo.org/global/topics/indigenous-tribal/lang--en/index.htm> has 
explicitly recognised the need “to safeguard the right of the peoples concerned 
to use lands not exclusively occupied by them, but to which they have 
traditionally had access for their subsistence and traditional activities” 
which must include hunting. Article 26 
<http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf> of the UN 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples talks of “their right to the 
resources which they have traditionally used” – resources which, once again, 
must include animals hunted for subsistence.

Indeed, there are some developments but regional and international bodies are 
notoriously slow to process claims and are often unable to enforce their 
decisions once they are made. Those who support the rights of hunter-gatherers 
need to explore other avenues.

 A first port of call might be the international conservation NGOs, which have 
played such crucial a role in the creation of national parks in developing 
countries.

Gordon Bennett is a human rights lawyer and works closely with Survival 
International

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 