
It’s a confounding paradox: who’d have thought it possible that a man could 
achieve such a blazingly magnificent year while simultaneously adding up such 
an unprecedented run of bad hair days? With the latest incarnation of his 
perpetually perplexing tresses,Lin-Manuel Miranda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/lin-manuel-miranda> has proven himself yet 
again to be in a league all his own.

Earlier this summer, as the actor-writer-composer-singer-quality tweeter’s 
groundbreaking run in the title role ofHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> was winding down, speculation ran 
high as to what the star’s next moves would be – with his career, with his 
personal life, and with his ponytail.

The results are in, and let’s just say that if they gave out Grammys, 
Pulitzers, Tonys or MacArthur ‘genius’ fellowships for haircuts, there might 
actually be something the guy couldn’t win. Miranda stands as proof that 
less-than-great hair can happen even to more-than-great men.

From the early rehearsal days 
<http://www.broadwayworld.com/article/Photo-Flash-Go-Inside-Rehearsals-for-Public-Theaters-HAMILTON-with-Lin-Manuel-Miranda-More-Full-Cast-Announced-20141215>
 of what started as a passion project through his final bow on 9 July, Miranda 
dutifully rocked a ponytail, that hairdo beloved both by our nation’s founding 
fathers and by every woman who’s ever gone to work directly from the gym. Even 
as costars Leslie Odom Jr, Daveed Diggs and Christopher Jackson graced the 
stage with more modern locks, Miranda stuck to a low-in-style, high-in-product 
vibe, in what we were all led to believe was about inhabiting the role of the 
brilliant, complicated, sometimes questionable-choice-making character he 
portrayed.

Along the way, he made self-deprecating jokes 
<https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/461221362913513473> about sharing messy 
half ponytails with his female costars, and just a few weeks agoconfessed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/19/fashion/tonys-lin-manuel-miranda-family.html?_r=0>
 to the New York Times: “I have been having dreams of going to the barbershop.” 
Indeed, no sooner had he departed the stage for his last performance than he 
sent out apicture <https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel/status/752009275803836417> of 
his freshly snipped tresses with the message: “Teach ’em how to say goodbye.”

At his farewell party that evening, Miranda sported 
<http://www.people.com/article/lin-manuel-miranda-hamilton-haircut> a Muhammed 
Ali shirt and a haircut that cleared the collar by a margin wide enough to 
satisfy any Catholic boy’s school or military recruitment office. And with 
that, the torch of America’s Most Famous Ponytail officially passed to Ariana 
Grande.

While the loss of the ponytail was openly grieved 
<http://zap2it.com/2016/07/lin-manuel-miranda-cuts-off-ponytail-after-last-hamilton-performance/>
 in some circles, GQ gave Miranda’s new look anenthusiastic stamp of approval 
<http://www.gq.com/story/lin-manuel-miranda-ponytail-haircut>, declaring it 
“everything a first haircut in a long time should be. Stylish, page-turning, 
looks-enhancing, age-reversing.”

But the magic could not last. On Friday, Miranda’s father and sometime duet 
partner 
<http://www.broadwayworld.com/videoplay/STAGE-TUBE-All-in-the-Family-Lin-Manuel-Miranda-Performs-Duet-with-His-Father-for-Ham4Ham-20151227>
 proudlytweeted <https://twitter.com/Vegalteno/status/753973423399837696> out a 
photo of his high-achieving son captioned: “Next stop@Lin_Manuel 
<https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel> Big Ben.” 
Luis A. Miranda, Jr. (@Vegalteno) 
Next stop @Lin_Manuel <https://twitter.com/Lin_Manuel> Big Ben! 
pic.twitter.com/3EGYt4RKgE <https://t.co/3EGYt4RKgE>
 <https://twitter.com/Vegalteno/status/753973423399837696> July 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Vegalteno/status/753973423399837696> 
From the looks of things, it would appear the younger Miranda is preparing for 
his trip to the United Kingdom by emulating Hugh Grant at his Four Weddings and 
a Funeral hair-flopping peak. Inthe words of Thomas Jefferson 
<http://acewithreason.tumblr.com/post/140659892040/daveed-diggs-all-of-jeffersons-whaaaats-in>
: whaaaaaaat?

Perhaps we should have been prepared for this. We should have remembered that 
peculiarly groomed goatee <https://youtu.be/MTsI-JFraCA> from Miranda’s How I 
Met Your Mother episode, or thatunfortunate homage 
<https://youtu.be/WNFf7nMIGnE> to Ross Geller he sported when he first offered 
a taste of what was then known as The Hamilton Mixtape at the White House back 
in 2009.

Miranda’s a busy working dad of a young child, juggling a deluge of 
professional andcharitable 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/watch-lin-manuel-miranda-j-los-dazzling-orlando-tribute-on-fallon-20160713>
 projects while still making time to crack wise to his Twitter followers. He’s 
brilliant, funny and objectively super hot. If he wants to walk around in a 
football helmet or a clown wig, he will justifiably retain the unconditional 
love of a grateful legion of fans regardless.

But I live in the same Manhattan neighborhood as Miranda, and I know for a 
fact that there is a barber shop every 10 feet. This is an easily remedied 
situation. And I just don’t believe the most adored man in America right now 
threw away his ponytail just to throw away his shot at a better hairstyle.
 