
I’ve always privately thought that the two most liberating products to have 
been invented in the 20th century are dry shampoo and Febreze, but perhaps I’m 
just a slob. A society of people freed from the tyranny of washing their hair 
and clothes in an endless, predictable cycle until they expire is just the kind 
of utopia I can get on board with.

Clearly other women feel the same, because the UK market for shampoo and 
conditioner hasdropped by £23m over the past year 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4049976/Shampoo-sales-fall-23million-past-year.html>
. Some have blamed this on slovenly freelancers such as myself, and there may 
be something in that. Working from home is a peculiar endeavour that sees time 
mysteriously sucked into a vortex ofHomes Under the Hammer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/mar/26/homes-under-the-hammer-brilliant-daytime-tv-with-added-dion-dublin>
 and endless cups of tea. You had intended to spruce yourself up a bit but, 
before you know it, it’s 5pm and – although there’s a shirt on your top half to 
make you look presentable for that Skype meeting – your bottom half bears a 
pair of penguin pyjama bottoms (which is fine, as long as you don’t forget and 
stand up to fetch something mid conference call, as happened to a friend of 
mine). Somehow – and despite having contributed precisely nada to the country’s 
gross domestic product – the window you had designated for that quick shower 
was slammed shut many hours ago.

Now we're supposed to embrace clean sleeping. How tiresome | Hannah Jane 
Parkinson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/sleep-has-been-monetised-how-tiresome>
This is how I ended up being the kind of woman whose mother frequently asks if 
she is intending on brushing her hair today. Perhaps, privately, people think I 
have let myself go, not that I give a toss. You don’t have to buy into Naomi 
Wolf’s theory inThe Beauty Myth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/oct/18/classics.shopping> that the 
grooming industry ramped up a notch just as women were liberating themselves 
from the home, so that the patriarchy could keep us subjugated with the 
expensive, time-consuming and tedious whims of female grooming.

Around my mid-20s, I discovered feminism and, more importantly, came to the 
realisation that not only can you not polish a turd, but that rolling it in 
glitter takes ages and costs a bomb. Suddenly, the swizz was exposed: my hair 
looked the same – middling – whether I washed it with 99p own-brand apple 
shampoo or the really pricey stuff. There’s a cliche that women let themselves 
go as soon as they have a ring on their finger, but my descent into 
slovenliness long predates that happy occurrence.

I wasn’t always like this. Ten years ago, it was fake eyelashes, fake tan, 
fake cleavage. I wore heels all the time. Drag queens complimented me on my 
beehive. Then I moved south and began to dress – as one of my northern friends 
put it – as if I had crawled out of a bin. The watershed moment was when she 
came to visit and put her hair in rollers and dug out a cocktail dress in order 
to go to the pub. “Aren’t you going to get changed?” she asked, looking me up 
and down with disdain. I was not.

Thinner, smoother, better: in the era of retouching, that’s what girls have to 
be | Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/08/thinner-retouching-girls-image-manipulation-women>
So, I would hazard that the majority of us dirty-haired slatterns are based 
down south. Slowly letting yourself go isn’t really an acceptable project to 
take on up north. My mum has recently moved back after several years in London. 
“The girls all seem to have shaved their eyebrows off and painted them back 
on,” she reported, “I don’t understand it. Does it come from pornography?”

Leaving aside whatever niche eyebrow-based porn my mother might imagine 
pollutes the internet, phenomena such as the “scouse brow 
<http://fashion.telegraph.co.uk/news-features/TMG8997240/Scouse-Brow-a-beginners-guide.html>
” owe much to the fact that so many of us live our lives online these days. The 
Kardashian look of waist training and contouring is genuinely laborious, but 
can be deceptive in its transformative potential (if there isn’t a word for a 
person who only looks buff on social media, then there definitely should be). 
Refusing to participate can be a feminist statement against objectification, 
but it also puts you on more of the same level as men, for whom I’ve always 
felt sorry in the sense that, if you’re unattractive, you really have nowhere 
to hide. Unless you’re David Bowie reincarnated, the possibilities for 
transformation are limited to short back and sides.

Let’s not kid ourselves, then, that we are in the grips of an overwhelming 
beauty backlash. For every one of us who has realised that having a fringe 
means only needing to put foundation on half your face and never needing to do 
your eyebrows, there’s another woman trapped in the death grip of the YouTube 
beauty tutorial. And that is her choice. I don’t think caring about it is 
stupid or shallow.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> who 
love fashion and beauty always have this charge levied at them, while men who 
are obsessed with cars, sport or power tools are somehow lent a certain 
gravitas. It’s just not for me. And I’m amazed how much time I now have on my 
unmanicured hands.
 