
The Rabbits, written by Kate Miller-Heidke and adapted from a picture book by 
John Marsden and Shaun Tan, was one of the most popular shows to run at this 
year’s Sydney festival. The production, which debuted at Perth international 
arts festival in 2015, promised to bring the book to life with spectacular 
staging and costumes that would bring a third dimension to Tan’s illustrations 
and characters. Everybody raved about it. Guardian Australia gave ita five-star 
review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/18/the-rabbits-review-triumphant-adaptation-of-a-deeply-tragic-story>
.

There was only one snag: I would never be able to see it. 

Live theatre is an experience most enjoy, but for those who are blind or have 
low vision, the gap left by the visual information – taken for granted by 
sighted people – can be extremely frustrating.

The Rabbits review – triumphant adaptation of a deeply tragic story
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/18/the-rabbits-review-triumphant-adaptation-of-a-deeply-tragic-story>
I lost my sight at the age of five as the result of glaucoma. As a musician 
and writer, I have a particular interest in theatre and have welcomed the 
increase in audio-described theatre available in Australia. With descriptions, 
people like me can engage with and sometimes get lost in the work on stage. 
Sometimes we’re backstage before a show begins, touching the props and costumes.

I wouldn’t be able to see The Rabbits, but on 21 January – late in the season 
– I was able to enjoy it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fi-love-theatre-and-im-blind-heres-how-that-works%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d193c398d0211bf67ea7be2cf2d97ae5d977c95%2F0_0_4832_3216%2F4832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20love%20theatre%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20blind.%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20that%20works%20%7C%20Ria%20Andriani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fi-love-theatre-and-im-blind-heres-how-that-works%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20love%20theatre%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20blind.%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20that%20works%20%7C%20Ria%20Andriani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fi-love-theatre-and-im-blind-heres-how-that-works%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d193c398d0211bf67ea7be2cf2d97ae5d977c95%2F0_0_4832_3216%2F4832.jpg>
 ‘The marsupials’ costumes were softer ... zippered like a coat and trousers’: 
The Rabbits at the 2016 Sydney festival. Photograph: Jon Green 
The Rabbits is an allegorical tale of colonisation told from both sides as a 
group of marsupials (described as “numbat-like creatures”) have their world 
invaded by the arrival of the rabbits. The tactile tour organised bySydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> festival was led by the 
stage manager, Garry Alcorn, who guided a group of us as we touched and held 
some of what would be appearing on stage.

Garry showed us a long pole with a flag on one end and a gun on the other 
which the rabbits planted on the ground to mark their territories. We felt the 
rabbit captain’s costume too: a gargantuan top hat with brass studs, gold 
medallion and trim. Around the sides were plastic clockwork cogs; the 17th 
century navy coat was transformed to a stiff boat-shaped contraption around the 
torso, complete with trimmings and gold buttons. The preshow notes, which are 
given to vision-impaired people before the show, explained the black coat was 
full of white indecipherable calligraphy, just like the illustration in the 
book.

The marsupials’ costumes were softer, more comfortable two-pieces which could 
be zippered like a coat and trousers. Last, Garry passed around a baby – the 
show’s most important element. It felt like a soft toy animal and had a long 
tail that fitted snugly around the neck. The end of the tail had a small hook 
to attach it to kites as they flew out of the reach of the marsupial mothers.

During the performance I listened through an earpiece as an audio describer 
talked me through what was happening on stage – the movement of the actors, the 
changes of scene, any other visual cues that were important to the show. Audio 
describers are usually volunteers trained by Vision Australia, who I work with 
sometimes; they prepare the preshow notes, and with meticulous timing, feed in 
the information during gaps between dialogue.

Michael Ward is the national coordinator of audio description at Vision 
Australia. The service, he says, enables people who are blind or have low 
vision to access the rich elements on offer onstage, helping them be more in 
the moment than they are when they have to do the extra work of deciphering as 
well as listening. It also helps place scenes in context and “ensures you are 
not the only one in the room not laughing at the sight gag”, he says.

Belvoir St Theatre’s production of Stephen Sewell’s The Blind Giant is Dancing 
was audio-described on 12 March, but I attended an earlier performance too. I 
was struck by how different the play was the second time around.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fi-love-theatre-and-im-blind-heres-how-that-works%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37223d286fde4e6eb56caf20dd358044ce0cf5d0%2F0_0_6496_3840%2F6496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20love%20theatre%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20blind.%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20that%20works%20%7C%20Ria%20Andriani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fi-love-theatre-and-im-blind-heres-how-that-works%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20love%20theatre%20and%20I%E2%80%99m%20blind.%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20that%20works%20%7C%20Ria%20Andriani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fi-love-theatre-and-im-blind-heres-how-that-works%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37223d286fde4e6eb56caf20dd358044ce0cf5d0%2F0_0_6496_3840%2F6496.jpg>
 Yael Stone and Dan Spielman in a promo shot from Belvoir’s 2016 production of 
The Blind Giant Is Dancing. Photograph: Brett Boardman/Belvoir St Theatre 
Without audio description, the core interest was the dialogue between the main 
characters: an enraged progressive (Alan played by Dan Spielman), a stubborn 
feminist (his wife Louise played by his real-life partner Yael Stone), sinister 
journalist Rose and a controlling magnate. One of the first scenes features an 
argument between Alan and Louise, and at first, I sided with Alan, in the 
throes of a midlife crisis with Louise just not listening to him. But with 
audio description, I learned that Louise kept coming to Alan’s side during 
their fight, trying to hold him before being rebuffed. I sympathised more with 
her that time.

Orange Is The New Black's Yael Stone brings her marriage to Belvoir's stage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/16/tv-stars-yael-stone-and-dan-spielman-on-bringing-their-marriage-to-belvoirs-stage>
With audio description, movement on stage becomes part of the drama instead of 
just background noise. In Belvoir’s production of Blind Giant, the sets changed 
rapidly with little sound; the seeing audience was notified of the move by a 
flashing screen of text that dominated the stage. Alan could be at home, at his 
workplace or at a bar having a drink with Rose. Without description, all I got 
was a jumble of loosely connected chatter with few clues from the script or 
accompanying sounds. I had to guess where scenes were set – the local council? 
The Labour party campaign office? Alan’s office? And where did Alan work? The 
Institute of Applied Economics in Redfern was stated numerous times on the 
screen but no one on stage mentioned it.

With audio description, movement on stage becomes part of the drama instead of 
just background noise
Ria Andriani 
Knowing it was in Redfern upon second viewing, I could picture some of the 
local bars where Alan would meet with Rose. We were told the names of each 
character as they appeared on stage, too – helpful when actors are playing more 
than one character.

Jill Gavin, the audio describer for The Blind Giant is Dancing, explained her 
preparation: “I watch the play three times, once in the audience and twice more 
in a separate space. At Belvoir the audio describers sit in the green room and 
watch the show on a video feed.”

Gavin uses the scripted stage direction and director’s comments to write 
preshow notes and fills in the rest with extra information, such as what 
individual characters look like, what they wear and what they are doing in the 
spaces between the script. By summarising the scenes one or two pages in 
advance, Gavin can time her description on cue. This is important: a 
description must be to the point and not superfluous.

As a blind theatregoer, knowing the context and physical detail of the 
performance makes a great deal of difference to our experience. Tactile tour 
and audio description services add new layers of information and help us 
appreciate the complexity of live performance and the richness of our local 
creative culture. At present these services are mostly confined to major arts 
companies with well-established procedures in place. But for true 
accessibility, audio description should be part of every performance.
 