
The dilemma I am American; born, raised and still living in New York City and 
I am, without hyperbole, devastated. I feel my country, in electingDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, has just been led down the 
road to destruction and mayhem. My shame, confusion, fear, anger, and sadness 
are unrelenting. I witnessed 9/11 from my school window as a teenager, so I 
will never think of the US as a place of unending harmony or prosperity, but I 
cannot believe that so many people would allow this to happen.

I knocked on doors, encouraged people to vote and donated money, but had I 
known the reality, I would have done much more. I know people in other 
countries are equally shocked, but do you have any wisdom to share? I would 
also like to tell those abroad that many of us here find this tragic and deeply 
embarrassing (no one I know feels differently to me – although I realise that 
is part of the problem).

Mariella replies My heart goes out to you. Many of us remain mortified by our 
nation’s recent political choices. We both live in countries that have 
experienced political shocks of a seismic nature in the past year and you are 
certainly not alone in your despair and embarrassment. That said, you can’t 
take responsibility for the choices a nation makes any more than you can for a 
partner.

The best we can hope for is to try to understand why such choices were made 
and let that inform future dialogue. On the summer day wevoted to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, plenty of us in the UK 
were as devastated as you are now, but time has encouraged a degree of 
sagacity. Pulling up the drawbridge to the UK has provided a salutary lesson to 
those on both sides, and neither seemed to be in step with voters. Believing 
you’re the one in the right is no alternative to appreciating the concerns of 
others, no matter how alien their beliefs might feel.

It’s a lesson as true in politics as it is in our personal lives. Being so 
convinced of the righteousness of your beliefs that you block your ears to 
opposing ideas is certainly not constructive. Never has the liberal left looked 
more out of step with the populist tune and I speak as a paid-up member of that 
fraternity. My belief and hope is that the referendum and election outcomes in 
both the UK and US respectively will animate us all out of our apathetic 
stupor. We’ve been treading water for too long. Like partners in an unhappy 
marriage we needed things to hit rock bottom to force us out of our hapless 
ways.

Our daily diet of failure is delivered through every media outlet, our 
excesses and cruelties writ large

The world as we know it has to change. It feels as though the divide between 
rich and poor hasn’t been so pronounced since the Middle Ages. Along with our 
determination to claim whatever meagre bit of soil we consider our birthright, 
we’re becoming increasingly useless at the life skills essential to survival. 
My shameful TV secret is that I’m anI’m a Celebrity 
<http://www.itv.com/imacelebrity> viewer, a programme that often confirms my 
theory that evolution is in retreat. Your future president would have made a 
perfect contestant. I suspect you know how to light a fire, wash your socks and 
whip up a meal from basic ingredients, but that basic skill set is gradually 
making you part of a minority in the developed world.

It’s a dangerous state of affairs. No wonder the proponents of fear are taking 
over. As a species we are scared witless and feel increasingly helpless about 
where we are heading. But instead of fuelling us to care better for our planet 
and its inhabitants we’ve been wringing our hands and staring out the window.

Again, as in a relationship, it’s all too easy to identify where things are 
wrong and harder, but more constructive to identify where we’re getting it 
right. Our tally in making the world a better place is something we don’t often 
add up. Instead our daily diet of failure is delivered through every media 
outlet, our excesses and cruelties writ large to capture the popular 
imagination. So it’s hard not to despair.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftrump-blasts-dishonest-press-as-he-kicks-off-victory-tour-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20blasts%20'dishonest%20press'%20as%20he%20kicks%20off%20victory%20tour%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftrump-blasts-dishonest-press-as-he-kicks-off-victory-tour-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20blasts%20%27dishonest%20press%27%20as%20he%20kicks%20off%20victory%20tour%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftrump-blasts-dishonest-press-as-he-kicks-off-victory-tour-video&media=>
Trump blasts ‘dishonest press’ as he kicks off victory tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/02/trump-blasts-dishonest-press-as-he-kicks-off-victory-tour-video>
If you look at the history of mankind, this lurch to the right, making 
self-protection instead of magnanimity our mantra, is instinctive when the 
going gets tough. Yet across the globe there are millions of individuals like 
you – active, politically aware, socially conscious and prepared to take action 
to shape a brave new world around their hopes and dreams.

Donald Trump is an anomaly and will one day be a historical footnote. He’s a 
symptom, not a cause or a cure. In hindsight we may even be grateful to him. 
All relationships benefit from navigating a few crises along the way. Only when 
we are confronted by our worst behaviour do we pull ourselves back from the 
abyss. As the late, great Leonard Cohen growled: “There is a crack in 
everything. That’s how the light gets in.” During these dark days it’s more 
important than ever to focus on that sliver.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 