
When you meet the playwright and director Anthony Neilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/mar/03/anthony-neilson>, he tells you 
all the reasons you should not work with him. He is quite emphatic when he 
tells you that he inspires a searing loathing from actors who are subjected to 
his rehearsal process. Anthony takes a group of actors and an original premise 
and carves out a play over the course of six weeks. It is the very essence of 
live theatre – much is improvised and quite often actors are given rewrites 
just hours before coming on stage.


Having just been in his new play Unreachable 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/unreachable> at the Royal Court, I 
know Anthony’s warning is not wrong – it’s an extraordinarily frustrating and 
anxiety-fuelled vortex you are thrown into. You come out the other side a 
little uncertain of what’s just happened.

Matt Smith took a huge risk with Unreachable – the result is unmissable
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/jul/14/matt-smith-unreachable-royal-court>
On top of that, being an actor with a disability means industry folk can be a 
little cagey about subjecting you to anything that could be interpreted as 
cruel. Or difficult. Let alone inappropriate. We are in an age of political 
correctness – a blessing in parts, but also a curse. When I went to meet 
Anthony one sunny afternoon at the Royal Court, it could have gone either way.


Intriguingly, any reluctance he showed seemed to be more due to a concern that 
there would be a process of pussyfooting, whereby other actors would attempt to 
be extra nice to the poor little deaf girl. My deafness was potentially an 
unnecessary distraction from what we were there to do. It was refreshing to 
hear my disability being described as an inconvenience – but for all the right 
reasons.

The role I played in Unreachable was a deaf role, as it should be. Anthony 
develops his characters around the actors he works with and he wasn’t going to 
cover that up like a conspiracy. He could have – he had full artistic licence 
and Anthony is not one to bend to expectation, whether societal or theatrical. 
There are moments in Unreachable where the comedy lies in poking fun at 
everyday reactions to deafness. (There is also an audience’s wall of fear to 
smash through first, before they feel comfortable in laughing.) My role in the 
play was not centred on disability, as though it is the very essence of my 
being. Instead, other aspects of my personality were drawn out and exaggerated 
– my directness, unapologetic honesty and enjoyment of pointed sarcasm. (I 
think.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fdeaf-actor-theatre-roles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee222a012c450a88493a07ebe78d7b82e65e9a17%2F335_119_2581_3339%2F2581.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I'm%20a%20deaf%20actor.%20That%20shouldn't%20define%20me%20%E2%80%93%20or%20limit%20the%20roles%20I%20play&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fdeaf-actor-theatre-roles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%27m%20a%20deaf%20actor.%20That%20shouldn%27t%20define%20me%20%E2%80%93%20or%20limit%20the%20roles%20I%20play&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fdeaf-actor-theatre-roles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee222a012c450a88493a07ebe78d7b82e65e9a17%2F335_119_2581_3339%2F2581.jpg>
 Not one to bend to expectation … Anthony Neilson. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod 
for the Guardian 
Is this a sign that the industry is finally recognising people with 
disabilities for what they are? Not just a tick in the box on the diversity 
shopping list, or a subject matter but well-rounded human beings? Just … people?

One day, I heard something that bothered me. (Yes I can hear and still be deaf 
– strange I know.) An usher was explaining to some of the audience after the 
play that I was actually deaf in real life, not a hearing actor playing deaf. 
It turned out that this was one of the more regular questions of audiences 
after seeing the play.

Was that because of the tendency to cast able-bodied actors in disabled parts? 
(A recentstudy 
<http://www.rudermanfoundation.org/blog/article/the-ruderman-white-paper-employment-of-actors-with-disabilities-in-television>
 found that 95% of disabled parts go to able-bodied actors.) Was it that the 
character didn’t fit their perceptions of deaf people? (Silent? Sign-language 
user? Lost and confused?) Or was it because I’ve worked so hard to improve the 
clarity of my voice that I now sound more hearing than deaf?

This is where I am stuck between a rock and a hard place.

There is no escaping that I am deaf. I can lip-read and hear with the use of 
hearing aids. Not as clearly as you, mind, but unlike you, I can crank up the 
volume. If my back is turned and you’re talking to me, I am probably not 
deliberately ignoring you. If you call out “house lights going dark” and forget 
to tell me, I may fall off the stage. Working with me doesn’t sound so 
terrible, does it? I do sound a little funny though. You’re going to shake your 
ears for a while as if they’ve got water in them, and then get on with it. It’s 
not you, it’s me.

It’s a fact I’m comfortable with – I have a disability. There should be no 
shame in having a disability, only pride in the ownership of the fact. I am 
proud of who I am. I am proud of being deaf.

But in the same way that being deaf doesn’t define all that I am as a person, 
I don’t want it to define the roles I play. It’s an incredibly limiting way to 
live and to work. And because I have a disability that I cannot hide (or fully 
disguise), that means I stay firmly in the bracket of “deaf actor”, rather than 
“actor”. In the rigidity of the casting process, that can mean fewer than 10 
auditions per year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fdeaf-actor-theatre-roles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2935a6a97281d7c94836e098ce24e6ec856ead5%2F0_0_4748_3159%2F4748.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I'm%20a%20deaf%20actor.%20That%20shouldn't%20define%20me%20%E2%80%93%20or%20limit%20the%20roles%20I%20play&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fdeaf-actor-theatre-roles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%27m%20a%20deaf%20actor.%20That%20shouldn%27t%20define%20me%20%E2%80%93%20or%20limit%20the%20roles%20I%20play&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fdeaf-actor-theatre-roles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2935a6a97281d7c94836e098ce24e6ec856ead5%2F0_0_4748_3159%2F4748.jpg>
 Genevieve Barr with Arthur Hughes in The Solid Life of Sugar Water at the 
National Theatre in 2016. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
The most common argument for the lack of auditions is that disabled parts have 
to first be written if disabled actors are to play them. Which is a poor 
semblance of an excuse. Then we get to the argument about the quality of 
disabled actors not being high enough. How do you know that?

Did the producers of Me Before You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/me-before-you-film-love-disability-thea-sharrock-sam-claflin>
 orThe Theory of Everything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/07/theory-of-everything-review-hawking-eddie-redmayne>
 even audition actors who were wheelchair users or had motor neurone disease? 
The casting process needs to be equal.

Rufus Norris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/31/rufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview>
, the artistic director of the National Theatre, recently raised the premise 
that the reason deaf and disabled actors don’t get cast is because we are not 
part of directors’ “inner circles 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/rufus-norris-casting-from-inner-circle-has-been-barrier-to-disabled-actors/>
”. That might be right. At least it’s an acknowledgement that we aren’t even 
being considered. Kudos to him for saying it so candidly.

I could go on. But if I did, I couldn’t blame you if you stopped reading. It’s 
all a little dull and stale, a vicious merry-go-round. It doesn’t seem to be 
getting us anywhere.

Life isn’t fair. We know that. So why is it important that we see more 
disabled characters in the media? Is it to tackle the stigma around disability? 
Or because we are striving for a level playing field in gender, race, 
disability and in every which way? Is it because one sixth of the UK’s 
population have a disability and therefore we should see that accurately 
represented on our stages and screens?

Before Jack Thorne became a household name, the writer of Harry Potter and the 
Cursed Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/26/harry-potter-cursed-child-review-palace-theatre-london>
 – and Graeae’s The Solid Life of Sugar Water, in which I starred – wrote ablog 
<http://www.dontplaymepayme.com/jack_thorne_17.html> about “transgressing” 
disability. He said that “it’s about doing things differently because that’s 
the way change happens”.

Access all areas: the plays that took captioning and signing to their hearts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/25/access-all-areas-theatre-bsl-captioning-signing-deaf-disabled-audiences>
The acting industry loves change. It has an immense power in its hands. And it 
thrives on finding the new, the different, whether that’s in the writing, the 
cinematography, the direction, the acting or the people. Look at the definition 
of creativity – “the use of original ideas”. Look at the definition of 
originality – “the quality of being unusual”. Look at the definition of art – 
“the application of creative skill or imagination”. Working with disabled 
talent encapsulates all of what they’re looking to achieve.

It was liberating working with Anthony Neilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anthonyneilson> because he welcomes the new 
and the different. He doesn’t pursue change so much as disregard the norms. He 
takes actors from different walks of life and finds intrigue in how they 
interact and behave among one another. The unpredictability of the process went 
right down to the wire every day, right until the last performance. It felt 
like we were tap dancing on the needlepoint of change. It tested all of us and 
(I suspect) both debilitated and empowered us in different ways. Anthony makes 
people want to be brave and you can almost touch life’s ferocity and vitality 
when performing his work. It’s freeing and frighteningm and addictive for its 
joy. It can be an amazing feeling – the scope of possibility.

Likewise, being disabled has a power. It constantly tests us and tries us, 
forces us to innovate and to endeavour even when we don’t want to. It can bring 
us to the very base of despair but when something is achieved, we know we have 
got there through our own hard work. I feel very lucky that, with Unreachable 
and The Solid Life of Sugar Water, people are starting to see the “normality” 
in how people with disabilities live their lives. I hope for a day where I can 
be recognised as a deaf actor and no longer feel that it stands in the way of 
doing what I love.
 