
Sometimes the feeling prevails that Scottish football deserves all it gets. 
Certainly, when asking why the country’s national sport has been reduced to 
laughing‑stock status for so long, events of recent weeks would serve as a 
useful reference point. Where the attitude of the dark age is so prominent, 
where hypocrisy is rife, it really is no shock that Scotland continues to fail.

Heart of Midlothian’s courting of Ian Cathro as the head coach to replace 
Robbie Neilson triggered some quite astonishing coverage. Cathro, at 30,has now 
taken over at the Edinburgh club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/hearts-ian-cathro-newcastle-tynecastle>
. He has realised the extent to which pre‑conceived agenda hits home, not that, 
thankfully, anybody who knows Cathro thinks he will care one jot.

Amongst those to publicly express concern were Stephen Craigan, a youth 
development coach at Motherwell, Jamie Fullarton – recently manager of Notts 
County for 12 games, winning three – and Kris Boyd, a player as notable 
throughout his career for what he couldn’t do as what he could.

This has not been astute opinion forming. Rather, it represents crass 
demeaning of someone who deliberately ploughed his own furrow. Cathro has 
crammed more into the past eight years than the majority of Scottish coaches 
sample in a career.

During his journey, Cathro has dealt with professionals of a far higher level 
than he will ever encounter in Edinburgh. Whatever other issues may ensue, he 
is unlikely to quiver at the thought of giving dressing-room instruction to 
Conor Sammon and Robbie Muirhead.

Hearts appoint Ian Cathro as their new head coach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/hearts-ian-cathro-newcastle-tynecastle>
Boyd used his newspaper column 
<https://www.thescottishsun.co.uk/sport/football/259062/rookie-gaffer-ian-cathro-is-a-huge-gamble-for-hearts/>
 to insist Cathro will be “way, way out of his depth” after issuing needlessly 
personal jibes relating to the Hearts coach’s supposed immaturity. Man 
management, Boyd asserted, “is a part of the game he knows absolutely nothing 
about”. This appears to be based on Boyd encountering a “shy” Cathro at a Uefa 
Pro Licence course.

This willingness to lacerate a young, innovative coach before he has even been 
pictured with a scarf above his head is one thing. The same language was not 
used when it emerged Rangers held talks with Cathro in 2015, just as when the 
Ibrox club’s former managers and current chairman speak of a need for 
over-investment, thereby ignoring the sins of the past, this is merely accepted 
at face value.

More serious is the ignorance with which Cathro has been treated. It is 
endemic of the attitude which holds Scotland back. The country appears petty 
and parochial, as if it wants this outsider – Scottish himself, remember – to 
fail. Only on Saturday, further small‑mindedness was apparent as Mark McGhee, 
manager of Motherwell and assistant to the Scotland national team, claimed he 
did not know the name of Celtic’s assistant manager Chris Davies. McGhee 
welcomed Davies, by name, in his programme notes of the same day.

Nobody in Scotland can legitimately preach from a position of great power. If 
Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> want to be bold and 
different, where is the harm?

On one hand, people bemoan systematic failure. On the other? Let’s mock 
someone who thought outside the box. If Hearts lose at Ibrox on Saturday, as 
they may well do given a dismal away record, Cathro will be whacked by yet 
another wave of negativity.

Of course, Cathro represents a risk for Hearts; just as Neilson was when 
plucked from under-20 coaching in 2014. That did not play out too badly. The 
reality is any appointment at any level of the game, let alone one as low as 
Scotland, may not succeed.

Cathro may be the victim of inverted snobbery. His pathway to the top flight 
took him from his own football school to Dundee United, Rio Ave in Portugal, 
Valencia and Newcastle, where Rafael Benítez thought the young Scot worthy of 
retention despite the rest of Steve McClaren’s backroom staff being shown the 
door. As Cathro was embarking on an alternative and admirable career path, 
Scotland’s reputation was taking a hammering with every passing European 
competition or international fixture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fscottish-football-hearts-ian-cathro-sfa-malky-mackay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F022a0a423e7c7be11fabf2bc6d3c32ac48d9dc99%2F0_89_2630_1578%2F2630.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ian%20Cathro%20debate%20shows%20Scottish%20football%20is%20still%20in%20the%20dark%20age%20%7C%20Ewan%20Murray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fscottish-football-hearts-ian-cathro-sfa-malky-mackay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ian%20Cathro%20debate%20shows%20Scottish%20football%20is%20still%20in%20the%20dark%20age%20%7C%20Ewan%20Murray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fscottish-football-hearts-ian-cathro-sfa-malky-mackay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F022a0a423e7c7be11fabf2bc6d3c32ac48d9dc99%2F0_89_2630_1578%2F2630.jpg>
 Malky Mackay is on the SFA’s radar for the role of performance director 
despite the scandal that has seen him not work in football for nearly two 
years. Photograph: Phil Noble/Reuters 
Craig Levein, now Hearts’ director of football and the man who spotted 
Cathro’s promise when in charge of Dundee United, knows better than anyone 
about the latter’s talent. It should be remembered that, since exiting 
administration more than two years ago, Hearts have got precious few decisions 
wrong.

Cathro’s first was to turn to his long-time friend Austin MacPhee as his 
assistant. Their paths have been similar, with MacPhee progressing to the point 
of being a key influence on Michael O’Neill’s hugely acclaimed Northern Ireland 
squad. MacPhee not only takes football analytics to a new level, he retains the 
capacity to properly impart relevant information on players and teams. 
Together, Cathro and MacPhee are being painted in some quarters as the Nutty 
Professors of Scottish football.

MacPhee’s decision both endorses Cathro and rather leaves the Scottish FA in a 
pickle. The 37-year-old had been a strong candidate and perhaps the favourite 
to take on the governing body’s performance director role before opting for 
Tynecastle. MacPhee’s appeal to the SFA was obvious, from collection and use of 
data for clubs and national teams to implementation of a full coaching 
curriculum.

With MacPhee out of the equation, Malky Mackay is left as the supposed 
frontrunner for the performance director job and that is where the proper focus 
in Scotland should lie: the willingness of the governing body to seriously 
consider Mackay, to the point where he was present in the Hampden Park 
director’s box for the recent League Cup final.

Mackay is, of course, backed by old friends in high places. The respective 
managers of the Old Firm, Brendan Rodgers and Mark Warburton, have touted 
Mackay for what is a seriously important post. At no point have that pair, or 
anyone else, had the gumption to point out exactly why the 44-year-old is 
wholly unsuitable.

The first point is a basic football one. When Mackay was flying high at 
Watford or Cardiff City, he would have had no interest whatsoever in Scotland’s 
performance plan. He is a manager, not a youth football strategist; just as, 
should any decent English club show interest in Mackay’s services again, the 
notion would persist that he could not cross the border quickly enough.

More pertinent still is the means by which Mackay is now happy to make himself 
available and why he will not be touched by a club with self-regard. Nobody 
should needreminding of message exchanges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/21/malky-mackay-iain-moody-dossier-fa-cardiff-city>
 which referred to “Fkn chinkys” and “dogs”, “not many white faces” on a 
transfer list, “a bounce on her falsies” of a female agent plus other texts 
which verged from antisemitic or racist to simply offensive. Two elements of 
this affair were ludicrous: the sense that this was endemic of football 
culture, plus Mackay’s explanation of “friendly text message banter”.

Here is the appropriate context; a Scottish role which oversees schools, 
academies, male and female teams plus the coaches responsible for them. What 
possible message would it send out for someone with Mackay’s previous to be in 
charge? For all Mackay has a right to work and a second chance, being given 
this in such a job would be staggering, even by the SFA’s questionable 
standards of judgment. Equal opportunity? Two fingers to the suggestion, more 
like.

Cathro’s arrival plus MacPhee’s acceptance link these two affairs. One has 
sparked anger, the one which follows logic and reason. Only in Scotland.
 