
Ian Hendon has been sacked as head coach of Leyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient>.

The O’s have managed just one win in their last eight league matches and were 
beaten 3-1 at home by Exeter on Saturday.

Hendon was appointed during the close season as a replacement for Fabio 
Liverani and the club were tipped for promotion back to League One at the start 
of the campaign. They sit 11th inLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> but are only two 
points off the play-off places.

The club’s Italian president Francesco Becchetti was handed a six-match 
stadium ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/15/leyton-orient-francesco-becchetti-ban>
 and fined £40,000 by the Football Association last week after being found 
guilty of violent conduct.

The 49-year-old’s punishment was in relation to an incident which occurred 
immediately after Orient’s 3-2 home win against Portsmouth on Boxing Day when 
television pictures showed him taking a kick at the assistant manager Andy 
Hessenthaler on the pitch after the final whistle. Hessenthaler is now in 
temporary charge at Brisbane Road.

A statement on the Orient website said 
<http://www.leytonorient.com/news/article/leyton-orient-statement-on-ian-hendon-2907653.aspx>
: “The club can confirm Ian Hendon has been relieved of his role as head coach 
of Leyton Orient.

“The club would like to thank Ian for his commitment and passion during his 
time at Leyton Orient and would like to wish him the best in his future 
endeavours.

“Assistant manager Andy Hessenthaler will be assuming Ian’s duties on an 
interim basis as caretaker manager. Leyton Orient will make an announcement at 
such time as a new appointment is made.

“The coaching and management team will continue to focus on realising the full 
potential of the team and will be working intensively to enhance the club’s 
performance and position in the league.”
 