
The head of the New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> corruption 
watchdog, Megan Latham, has announced she will step down from the role next 
week.

The resignation comes after the Baird government pushed through controversial 
changes to the Independent Commission Against Corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/16/baird-governments-icac-reform-disgraceful-exercise-to-sack-commissioner>
, which effectively forced Latham out of the chief commissioner position.

Operation Spicer proves we need Icac. Any half decent government would restore 
its funding | Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/01/operation-spicer-proves-we-need-icac-any-half-decent-government-would-restore-its-funding>
As a result of the new laws, “it is not in the best interests of the 
commission that the commissioner continues to exercise the functions of the 
commission, particularly when decisions in relation to those functions are 
liable to be revisited by a reconstituted commission at a later time”, a 
statement from Icac said on Wednesday.

Latham would have been forced to reapply for a her role as part of a 
restructure that replaces a single commissioner with three – two of whom need 
to agree to investigations before they go ahead.

The opposition leader, Luke Foley, described the legislation as a blatant 
attempt to sack Latham for overseeing an investigation into theLiberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> donations scandal 
that resulted in 11 MPs being sidelined.

“This is the lowest point in several decades when it comes to the fight 
against corruption,” Foley said on Wednesday.

“It just makes it clear that no commissioner or commissioners will ever have 
the guts to inquire into any corruption inside the governing party of the 
state, whether it’s a Labor or Liberal government, because Commissioner Latham 
was terminated for doing so.”

The premier, Mike Baird <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mike-baird>
, has defended the reforms, arguing they will “deliver a stronger and fairer 
anti-corruption watchdog”.

“We are implementing the recommendations of a bipartisan committee that was 
unanimous in its recommendations that were supported by Labor,” Baird told ABC 
radio. “They have conveniently forgot that they were the ones that actually 
supported this.”

Yet the reforms have alarmed two former Icac chiefs, Anthony Whealy and David 
Ipp, who say the move will severely weaken the watchdog.
 