
In my native Colombia, the cloud forests of the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta 
have been described as holdingthe most important concentration of threatened 
wildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/14/colombia-misty-mountain-nature-reserve>
 on Earth. These forests are also the ancestral home of the Koguis, an 
indigenous group now numbering around 10,000 individuals.

In their cosmology, Koguis are the elders of humanity, living in the heart of 
the world, while outsiders are the “younger brothers” who were banished because 
of how they abused the land in the past – an accurate description of a planet 
where 160,000 acres of tropical rainforest are destroyed or damagedevery day 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/earth-talks-daily-destruction/>.

For centuries, the Koguis have strived to care for their land in a way that 
will preserve it for future generations. If we listen to them and other 
indigenous peoples, if we respect their rights and honour their traditions, I 
think we “younger brothers” still have a chance to get it right.

At the COP 22 <http://unfccc.int/meetings/marrakech_nov_2016/meeting/9567.php> 
climate conference in Marrakesh this week and last, governments are unveiling 
plans to meet their emission reduction goals – including switching to 
lower-carbon energy and transport. But it is imperative that these plans also 
include the vast, sparsely populated areas that are home to indigenous peoples.

In Latin America, for instance, there are around 40 million indigenous people. 
Altogether,indigenous and community-owned lands 
<http://www.rightsandresources.org/wp-content/uploads/GlobalBaseline_web.pdf> 
represent around 23% of the region’s total land mass. This is an immense 
territory, roughly equivalent to the combined surface of India, Pakistan, and 
Afghanistan.


Indigenous rights are key to preserving forests, climate change study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/indigenous-rights-forests-climate-change-study>
Much of this land is still covered by forests and grasslands whose 
preservation is a proven and cost-effective way of reducing emissions. In my 
experience, there is no better way to ensure the careful stewardship of these 
assets – whether in the Amazon basin, the Andean highlands or the jungles of 
Central America – than to give indigenous communities full control over the 
land.


Indigenous peoples have encyclopaedic knowledge about the landscapes they live 
in. They also have the strongest possible incentive to ensure the 
sustainability of those ecosystems. The World Resources Institute 
<https://www.wri.org/sites/default/files/securingrights-full-report-english.pdf>
 conducted a study of 80 forest areas in 10 countries in south Asia, east 
Africa, and Latin America which found that community-owned and managed forests 
delivered greater carbon storage, as when local communities have no legal 
rights, or very few, their forests are more vulnerable to deforestation. 
Indeed, evidence suggests thatstrengthening indigenous forest rights is 
associated with both better communities and healthier forests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/indigenous-rights-forests-climate-change-study>
.


When local communities have no legal rights, or very few, their forests are 
more vulnerable to deforestation
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Findigenous-communities-control-over-land-mitigate-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1931d3dd773fdd9c60908302034a1c885180ded8%2F0_0_5108_3501%2F5108.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20you%20want%20to%20tackle%20carbon%20emissions%20let%20indigenous%20people%20control%20their%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Findigenous-communities-control-over-land-mitigate-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20you%20want%20to%20tackle%20carbon%20emissions%20let%20indigenous%20people%20control%20their%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Findigenous-communities-control-over-land-mitigate-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1931d3dd773fdd9c60908302034a1c885180ded8%2F0_0_5108_3501%2F5108.jpg>
 Group of Kogi Mamas or Holy Men signatories. Kogi Colombia. Photograph: 
Religious Images/UIG/Getty Images/Universal Images Group 
In the past, governments and policymakers tended to undervalue the link 
between climate change mitigation and indigenous land rights. But the Paris 
Agreement explicitly recognised this, and some governments – including Bolivia 
and Guatemala – incorporated such considerations into theirIntended Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDCs) <http://www.wri.org/indc-definition>. 


Of course, land rights are no panacea. Even when they have control, 
communities need support when deciding how to most effectively use local 
resources, how to provide a decent livelihood for their people, andhow to deal 
with illegal activities such as clandestine mining and poaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/28/exiles-human-cost-of-conservation-indigenous-peoples-eco-tourism>
.

Donor nations and development banks must also help to strengthen the 
institutions responsible for land tenure and expand climate finance options for 
investments that promote sustainable landscapes.

An indigenous community's battle to save their home in the Amazon – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/sep/23/an-indigenous-communitys-battle-to-save-their-home-in-the-amazon-in-pictures>
At the Inter-American Development Bank we are seeing a surge in interest from 
countries to prioritise infrastructure and land use programmes that will 
contribute to their NDCs. So we are launching a new initiative,NDC Invest, 
<http://www.iadb.org/en/news/news-releases/2016-10-06/ndc-invest-platform-for-climate-finance,11586.html>
 to offer countries a range of support.



Today, I hope our deeper understanding of the potential impact of indigenous 
land stewardship will lead to an ambitious inclusion of these communities in 
the national and global discussions on climate mitigation and adaptation.

Luis Alberto Moreno is president of the Inter-American Development Bank in 
Washington


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.



 