
Jürgen Klinsmann may have lost this team

For much of his first World Cup cycle, Jürgen Klinsmann’s glass half-full 
approach seemed like a calming signal. But as his second cycle has stumbled 
from setback to mini-revival to bigger setback, his unwillingness to take 
responsibility looks to have made him an increasingly isolated figure.

After the farce of the opening half hour against Mexico, when the US team was 
overrun while trying to figure out an unfamiliar 3-5-2 formation, Michael 
Bradley spoke pointedly of a lack of clarity about the players’ roles. Bradley 
had been part of a two-man delegation that approached Klinsmann during a break 
in play before the US reverted to a marginally more successful, and much more 
familiar 4-4-2.

USA slump to 4-0 defeat in Costa Rica as pressure builds on Jürgen Klinsmann
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/usa-slump-defeat-costa-rica-jurgen-klinsmann>
Klinsmann did send his side out in a 4-4-2 in Costa Rica, but there was no 
fluidity or inspiration, and even with the team still in the game at half-time 
there was no noticeable bounce in their performance after the break. By the 
time the US shipped the three goals in 10 minutesthat would turn defeat into a 
rout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/usa-slump-defeat-costa-rica-jurgen-klinsmann>
, some fans may have been willing to absorb the worst qualifying defeat since 
1957 just to see whether Klinsmann was capable of accepting any sort of 
responsibility.

Well, informing the press that he’d told the players “this won’t be the last 
4-0 defeat of their careers” was certainly a novel mea culpa from Klinsmann. It 
was also in keeping with his pattern of deflecting blame from his own habit of 
tinkering with formations and positions to the detriment of team stability and 
morale. He did take “full responsibility” for the team’s inability to fight 
back at 2-0 down, but it was buried in the usual platitudes.

Simply put, the players looked like they don’t have any faith in what 
Klinsmann sets them up to do right now, and they were handily beaten by a team 
that know their strengths and play to them.

It’s going to be a long winter for Sunil Gulati

Klinsmann is Sunil Gulati’s man. When Gulati decided that the sprawling mass 
of the US Soccer development system could only be united by force of 
personality, he had a shortlist of one. The initial excitement around 
appointing the iconoclastic, perpetual enthusiast Klinsmann reflected well on 
Gulati, but in the second, more trying cycle, where the team has fallen short 
of virtually every benchmark except the Copa America semi-final place, Gulati 
has become increasingly guarded about the man he awarded a contract extension 
to before the last World Cup.

Before the Costa Rica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/costarica> game, 
Gulati was asked once again if Klinsmann’s job was at risk – and he answered 
emphatically that it was not. But the manner and margin of this defeat will 
mean he can expect to be asked that question even more pointedly in the coming 
days.

The USA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/usfootballteam> sit bottom of 
the Hex standings heading into winter. Their next competitive game is in March 
against Honduras, and it’s hard to see where inspiration is going to come from 
in the meantime. Klinsmann and his champion Gulati will be left emphasizing 
“stability” as one of the dwindling assets the coach brings to the team – 
assuming, that is, Gulati’s own patience is not exhausted.

What’s certainly true is that the last window the US could conceivably make a 
coaching change is opening now, at a moment when the national team momentum 
has, at best stalled, under the head coach. The degree of latitude allowed by 
the Hex means that the US should still qualify for the World Cup, but does 
Gulati have faith that Klinsmann can shape and inspire any team he gets there? 
And perhaps most pertinently, is Gulati prepared to continue to stake his own 
reputation on the performances of a damaged coach?

Costa Rica’s MLS contingent comes good
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fusa-costa-rica-analysis-jurgen-klinsmann-world-cup-qualifier-hex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4f87b277ecd0ba0a872dd3683963b70be4320d2%2F0_161_2832_1698%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ill-disciplined%20and%20ill-managed%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20USA's%20Costa%20Rica%20debacle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fusa-costa-rica-analysis-jurgen-klinsmann-world-cup-qualifier-hex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ill-disciplined%20and%20ill-managed%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20USA%27s%20Costa%20Rica%20debacle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fusa-costa-rica-analysis-jurgen-klinsmann-world-cup-qualifier-hex%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4f87b277ecd0ba0a872dd3683963b70be4320d2%2F0_161_2832_1698%2F2832.jpg>
 Johan Venegas celebrates his goal on Tuesday night. Photograph: John 
Dorton/John Dorton/ISI/REX/Shutterstock 
It’s been one of the subplots of the recent wave of MLS expansion that 
Concacaf players beyond the US have fleshed out the player pool, even as 
Klinsmann has insisted on the importance of a European finishing school for 
young American players.

Well, on Tuesday night, one of his young players playing in Germany was 
tormented by a player who can’t get off the bench for his MLS side. From the 
moment Montreal Impact’s Johan Venegas clattered into John Brooks in the 
opening minutes it set the tone for a long night for Brooks. He and fellow 
center back Omar Gonzalez were repeatedly pulled out of position by Costa Rica.

Still, the US looked to have survived until Vancouver’s Christian Bolaños 
scooped a perfect cross to the edge of the six yard box for Venegas to glance 
in the opening goal just before half-time. Bolaños would get a goal of his own 
in the second half, while his club team-mate Kendall Waston stood firm in 
blocking out Jozy Altidore at the other end, and by the end of the game NYC 
FC’s Ronald Matarrita was providing the assist on the fourth goal.

The US, of course, continue to draw on MLS players, and the midfield anchors 
of Michael Bradley and Jermaine Jones both play in the league, as does the main 
striker, Altidore. But where Klinsmann sees a structural problem with MLS as a 
drain on ambition, other Concacaf nations see a resource. And on Tuesday night 
Costa Rica’s MLS contingent played like a celebrated asset.

Indiscipline could cost the US down the line

From the moment a smirking Venegas backed away from an apoplectic Brooks after 
a flashpoint in the opening minutes, it was clear discipline was going to be an 
issue in the game. Certainly if Brooks had had any sense he’d have respected 
the sight of Jermaine “yellow card machine” Jones motioning at him to calm down.

Brooks would be booked early, though that in itself had little bearing on an 
indisciplined and ultimately costly performance he will want to forget. Jones 
on the other hand, seemed to forget his advice to Brooks and picked up a yellow 
that will keep him out of the next game against Honduras – a game that will 
also now be missed by Timmy Chandler.

The latter may be a small mercy – whatever position he plays in, Chandler 
looks out of place for the US, and Tuesday night was no exception, as he was 
frequently caught out of position or too late to the ball. His misplaced pass 
that led to the fourth goal was only the most costly mistake on a night full of 
them.

Chandler and Brooks weren’t alone in this, and Brooks in particular continues 
to learn apace as a defender, but it was more worrying to see Altidore barge 
his way into the book with a foul near the halfway line when the game was long 
gone, or to see Bradley too pick up a yellow. Bookings will happen in 
competitive games, but the US were drawn into too many flashpoints in both the 
Mexico and Costa Rica games. And having eroded their margin for error with two 
losses in those games, they can’t afford suspensions to further erode that 
margin as the group continues.

Pulisic was as good as it got for the US

If there’s a bright spot in all the mess, it’s that Christian Pulisic 
continues to look comfortable at this level, even if he’s not yet on the same 
page as his colleagues or coach.

Having claimed that Pulisic has a roving role in a 3-4-3 against Mexico, 
Klinsmann put the Dortmund player out wide against Costa Rica, then watched as 
the player responded with some amazingly calm touches for a player of his age 
and relative inexperience, trying to find space in the final third. And if 
Pulisic’s team-mates generally failed to anticipate his timings at least he was 
making the chances.

But against Costa Rica in particular Pulisic did not have a meaningful foil to 
play off. Had Sacha Kljestan come into the game earlier, perhaps he could have 
sparked some space for Pulisic to exploit or vice versa. But as it was, 
Klinsmann tried to augment his attack with the speed of Lynden Gooch rather 
than finesse. That might still have helped Pulisic were it not for the fact 
that he was the player Gooch replaced.
And if ultimately Pulisic was a credible rather than exhilarating threat for 
the US, that was as good as it got on one of the worst national team 
performances in memory.
 