
It is an odd, but intriguing, fact that Oh! What a Lovely War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/31/kenneth-tynan-on-oh-what-a-lovely-war>
 andHalf a Sixpence 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/features/2016/archive-flash-bang-wallop-half-sixpence-back/>
 opened within two days of each other in 1963. On the face of it, you could 
hardly have two musicals more radically different.

One is an ensemble piece attacking the horrendous sacrifice of life in the 
first world war; the other was clearly conceived as a vehicle for Tommy Steele 
as a cheery Kentish draper. But happening to reread Lovely War and see the West 
End transfer of Chichester’s refurbished Half a Sixpence on the same day 
recently, I was struck by how much the shows have in common. Both start with an 
evocation of Edwardian seaside England; both take a dim view of the starchy 
upper classes; and David Heneker, who wrote the original music and lyrics for 
Half a Sixpence, co-authored one of the best musicals to come out ofJoan 
Littlewood’s Theatre Workshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/11/joan-littlewood-biography-by-peter-rankin-extract>
, Make Me An Offer.

Both shows share another important feature: they are palpably British. In his 
excellent 1997 book,Broadway Babies Say Goodnight 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/first/s/steyn-broadway.html>, Mark Steyn sniffily 
writes: “British musicals? It STILL sounds like a contradiction in terms.” 
Steyn concedes the success of the Lloyd Webber canon including Cats, Evita and 
The Phantom of the Opera, but all of these transcend national barriers and are 
in no way peculiarly British. Indeed, what we seem to have witnessed in the 
last 40 years is the emergence of the global musical that has as much resonance 
in Brisbane or Birmingham as it does in Berlin or on Broadway.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fmusicals-half-a-sixpence-british%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65331599bf49a7f4e26d29d40ec2b944f1aa6878%2F0_120_3914_2623%2F3914.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20an%20era%20of%20global%20musicals%2C%20Half%20a%20Sixpence%20is%20distinctly%20British&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fmusicals-half-a-sixpence-british%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20an%20era%20of%20global%20musicals%2C%20Half%20a%20Sixpence%20is%20distinctly%20British&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fmusicals-half-a-sixpence-british%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65331599bf49a7f4e26d29d40ec2b944f1aa6878%2F0_120_3914_2623%2F3914.jpg>
 Tracie Bennett, centre, in Mrs Henderson Presents. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 
But is the British musical quite the glittering corpse Steyn suggests? One 
could point to a pre-Cats tradition that stretches from Gilbert and Sullivan to 
Lionel Bart. In recent years we have seen, although it’s hardly been noted, the 
re-emergence of the musical with firm roots in its native soil. The outstanding 
example isBilly Elliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/02/how-we-made-billy-elliot-the-musical>
, with a score by Elton John and book and lyrics by Lee Hall, that took the 
1984 miners’ strike as its setting. You might addMatilda the Musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/07/musicals-we-love-matilda>, 
although the score is the work of Australian Tim Minchin, but there has been a 
string of shows that, even if they have not been as popular, prove that the 
British are hardly musical duffers. My own list of favourites includes Howard 
Goodall’sThe Hired Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jun/14/the-hired-man-review>, George 
Stiles and Anthony Drewe’sBetty Blue Eyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/apr/13/betty-blue-eyes-review> and 
George Fenton and Simon Chamberlain’sMrs Henderson Presents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/26/mrs-henderson-presents-review-a-shot-in-the-arm-for-the-british-musical>
, which cheekily celebrated the wartime survival of the Windmill theatre.

Half a Sixpence has the key quality any musical needs: a moment of pure ecstasy

Stiles and Drewe, along with Julian Fellowes and Cameron Mackintosh, are also 
the team behind the reworked Half a Sixpence, which has many of the qualities 
that define the British musical. It is palpably about class. Far from being a 
snobbish put down of an uppity draper, however, it suggests there is more 
camaraderie, cheer and good nature to be found in the pub parlour than in the 
posh drawing room. It relies on the music-hall tradition, most obviously in the 
rumbustious Flash, Bang, Wallop. But it also has the key quality any musical 
needs: a moment of pure ecstasy. That comes in a new number, Pick Out a Simple 
Tune, when Charlie Stemp, a 22-year-old who has the engaging quality of a young 
Michael Crawford, whips out his banjo and gets a roomful of snooty toffs to 
rattle the spoons, whirl like dervishes and even swing from the chandeliers.

I am not arguing the show is likely to cause a social revolution. What it 
proves, though, is that the British musical, far from being a lost cause, 
perkily thrives even in an age of theatrical globalisation.
 