
A few summers ago, I took a friend to a Sydney Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Company season launch, though quite 
why she agreed to come would prove unfathomable. “Nobody cares about theatre,” 
she told me after the following year’s theatre productions had been announced.


Earlier that evening my friend had tried to inveigle a theatre company 
official to photograph her, requesting Cate Blanchett be captured as background 
scenery. He declined.

But who does care about what theatre has to present, beyond its occasional 
bankable star? Moreover, how many care compared with the global reach of 
Netflix or the sugar high of multiplex blockbusters?

In a world of Brexit, Trumpists and angry white conservatives fearful of the 
rights of others, who deride calls for empathy as weakness, I’d argue theatre 
can not only promote human diversity, it might also save lives at a low ebb.

When technology has atomised us and we retreat behind phone screens passing 
one another on the street, the dark theatre space hones our attention and 
shapes the empathy sorely needed in a collective experience.

Certainly, Darwin-raised and Brisbane-based playwright Stephen Carleton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/09/brisbanes-new-theatre-boom-and-the-turquoise-elephant-in-the-room>
 understood humour can plant an epiphany while we’re distracted with laughter, 
with his Griffin award-winning playThe Turqoise Elephant 
<https://dailyreview.com.au/turquoise-elephant-review-griffin-theatre-sydney/50930/>
, whose carnival of materially rich grotesques made us laugh at climate change 
denialists, and also question our own culpability.

Beyond Hamilton: five shows Pence and Trump should see together
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/nov/21/hamilton-broadway-shows-mike-pence-donald-trump>
Given just 110 bums on seats for each performance at Griffin’s Stables theatre 
in Sydney’s Kings Cross, however, you could argue about the reach of the work’s 
important questions.

There is a vastly bigger audience on Broadway, and the hottest ticket of the 
moment isHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/18/hamilton-review-founding-father-gets-a-hip-hop-makeover>
, a hip-hop musical about the crucial role of immigrants in building America 
that has won 11 Tony awards and is likely to gross $US100m a year in its New 
York incarnation alone.

When the US vice-president elect, Mike Pence, took his seat at the Richard 
Rodgers theatre on 18 November,he was booed by audience members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/21/hamilton-actor-defends-speech-mike-pence-donald-trump>
. At curtain call, actor Brandon Victor-Dixon, who plays Burr, respectfully 
directed a speech at Pence: “We, sir, are the diverse America who are alarmed 
and anxious that your new administration will not protect us. But we truly hope 
this show has inspired you to uphold our American values and to work on behalf 
of all of us.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mike%20Pence%20booed%20at%20Hamilton%20musical%3A%20'We%20are%20anxious%20you%20will%20not%20protect%20us'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mike%20Pence%20booed%20at%20Hamilton%20musical%3A%20%27We%20are%20anxious%20you%20will%20not%20protect%20us%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video&media=>
Mike Pence booed at Hamilton musical: ‘We are anxious you will not protect us’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video>
On a much smaller scale, there is a piece of theatre helping people discuss 
something as pertinent as respect for diversity: depression and suicide.Every 
Brilliant Thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/08/edinburgh-festival-2014-every-brilliant-thing-review-depression>
 is a one-man UK show coming back to Australia this February, after playing 
Perth, Melbourne and Geelong in 2016, and before that London and New York.

It is a different show every night, because audience members – generally equal 
numbers male and female – participate. Onefive-star review 
<http://www.limelightmagazine.com.au/review-every-brilliant-thing-duncan-macmillan-jonny-donahoe-piaf>
 out of Perth said its audience was released back into the world “enriched and 
enlightened by the experience”.

Every Brilliant Thing tells the story of a seven-year-old boy whose mother has 
tried to take her own life. The little boy starts making a list of things that 
make life worth living. Ice cream. Kung fu movies. Sunlight. Select audience 
members receive numbered pieces of paper corresponding to these brilliant 
things, and get their little moment in the spotlight, some even standing in for 
particular characters, either from their seats or briefly on stage.

Perhaps the humour is relatable because audience members probably think back 
to the optimism of their own childhoods. HBO has recently recorded performances 
of this theatre-standup hybrid for a screening later this year. Taking over the 
narrator’s role from Jonny Donahoe for this new season at the2017 Adelaide 
festival <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2017/EveryBrilliantThing> is 
another British actor,James Rowland <https://twitter.com/jdsrowland>.

The writer, director and performer are careful not to sell the work as 
autobiographical, to allow space for audience members’ personal response. 
Nonetheless, the material has a personal resonance amid its universal appeal.

“I get sad a lot,” the blond-bearded Rowland tells me in the London office of 
Paines Plough <http://www.painesplough.com/> touring theatre company, recalling 
the profound impact of first seeing Donohoe perform the role three years ago. 
“I’ve never myself had medical treatment for depression. But to be honest, I 
don’t think I have any friends who aren’t affected by severe mental health 
issues at some point in their lives.

“This show definitely makes people more aware of the way it’s affecting them, 
in a way [interacting] you often don’t.”

Director George Perrin, on the opposite couch, tells me mental health has 
become a completely new conversation, and the stage has played its role. He has 
spent time recently with comedianRuby Wax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ruby-wax>, who some years ago was 
commandeered as a poster-girl for depression, along with celebrity polymath 
Stephen Fry.

“Mental health is a sliding scale, like physical health,” says Perrin. 
“Sometimes I’m physically healthy, sometimes I’m not.”

Every Brilliant Thing is “just one group of people in a room telling a story 
to another group of people”, says Perrin. “So if you think theatre can’t affect 
people’s lives, then you don’t think people can affect people’s lives. There’s 
something about this show that wants to hold your hand and allow you to see 
through other people’s eyes. I see first-hand the impact it has on people.”

Duncan Macmillan: theatre at its best is an intervention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/23/duncan-macmillan-theatre-every-brilliant-thing-lungs-2071>
Writer Duncan Macmillan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/23/duncan-macmillan-theatre-every-brilliant-thing-lungs-2071>
 chips in: “It’s an imaginative, empathetic exercise, and we could probably all 
do with a little bit of that. Particularly in this time of social media and 
polarisation and fake news stories and who we choose to follow making us more 
extreme. We’re growing further apart. Here is one of the few places we actually 
have a communal, social experience.

“Now, more than ever, theatre has not just a possible role but an obligation 
to preserve these pockets of unmediated, unpoliticised, social, communal, 
empathetic works.”

Indeed, as Macmillan points out, accessibility may not be fashionable in terms 
of critical taste – “uncool”, even.

 But hopeful, realistic, unsentimental theatre that encourages people to 
express their feelings and listen to others is just what the world needs now.

• Every Brilliant Thing 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2017/EveryBrilliantThing> will be staged at 
Adelaide festival from14 to 18 March
 