
Transferring a five-star hit play from one theatre to another is always a 
tricky business. But it's fair to say that Lucy Kirkwood's Chimerica looks 
every bit as good at theWest End's Harold Pinter <http://www.chimerica.co.uk/> 
as it did at the Almeida. It's also worth recalling that the play ismuch more 
than an overnight sensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/may/29/chimerica-review>: it was 
commissioned and nurtured over a six-year period by Headlong and is in the epic 
style of its obvious predecessor, Lucy Prebble'sEnron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jul/23/enron-review-by-michael-billington>
.

Seeing it again earlier this week, what struck me was Kirkwood's success in 
balancing private and public worlds. Her play is partly about the personal 
quest by an American photojournalist, Joe Schofield, to discover the 
whereabouts of the lone protester who confronted a tank in Tiananmen Square in 
1989; but it is also about the similarities and differences betweenChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and America and their mutual 
misunderstanding of each other. Those are big issues for any one play.

As a study of a journalist, the play sees Joe's shortcomings without launching 
into an attack on his profession. I was reminded of another recent drama,
Vivienne Franzmann's The Witness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jun/11/witness-review>, which arraigned 
its photographer hero for achieving fame at the expense of other people's 
misery. But Kirkwood's Joe is a much more complex figure. He jeopardises the 
safety of his Chinese source, fails to look after the source's US-based nephew 
and sacrifices his own lovelife to his hunger for a story. At the same time, 
Joe is a genuine idealist, pursuing his quest in the teeth of opposition from 
an expenses-conscious editor. We are used in drama to the journalist as 
villain. Kirkwood instead shows the journalist as muddled antihero driven by an 
ungovernable obsession.

But this is also a political play about the dynamic tension between the two 
global superpowers. In Kirkwood's view, China is a country still suffering the 
social consequences of a speeded-up economic revolution: it is also a place 
that "values the supremacy of its culture above all else". America, meanwhile, 
is economically dependent on China while buying into the myth that it is simply 
a vast market awaiting exploitation. Neither country, Kirkwood suggests, 
understands the other, and never will until there is a real exchange of ideas 
and information.

This makes Chimerica sound dry. It is anything but, in Lyndsey Turner's 
exhilarating production and Es Devlin's design. A Guardian colleague I bumped 
into said he thought the play was a bit like television. I disagree profoundly: 
it is certainly filmic in its speed and multiplicity of short scenes, but it is 
also overwhelmingly theatrical in its ability to relate character to issues and 
to come up with astonishing images. When a body tumbles out of a refrigerator 
in the Beijing apartment of Benedict Wong's Zhang Lin we are in the realm of 
the ultra-theatrical, a million miles away from the bland realism of 
television. Go see.
 