
In Patrick Süskind’s 1985 novel, Perfume, an 18th-century French orphan is 
born with an extraordinary sense of smell and Süskind describes every scent and 
odor experienced by our protagonist. “Odors have a power of persuasion stronger 
than that of words, appearances, emotions, or will,” says the writer. “The 
persuasive power of an odor cannot be fended off, it enters into us like breath 
into our lungs, it fills us up, imbues us totally. There is no remedy for it.”

In the same way Perfume takes the reader on a journey of fragrances without 
actually smelling anything, Top Chef does the same with food. From the kitchen 
to the final dish, we experience every bite with the chef and the judges. From 
Bryan Voltaggio’s goat cheese ravioli with delicata squash puree and bronze 
fennel in season six to last year’s winner, Jeremy Ford, and his ricotta and 
mozzarella cheese cylinder with spiced fig jam, pumpernickel toast, and a honey 
ball, every dish is served up on TV.


The show succeeds because it celebrates the art of cooking without asking its 
audience to know anything about it

Created in 2006, Top Chef premieres its 14th season on Bravo on Thursday 
night, where professional chefs will compete against each other. Every 
contestant comes with an impressive résumé and the judges include Eric Ripert, 
Wolfgang Puck and Graham Elliot, the latter being the newest addition to the 
judges’ table. This is by far the most grueling of competitions and I am always 
amazed at the way these chefs handle themselves – personally I would have cried 
myself to sleep every night if Tom Colicchio ever criticized my scrambled eggs.

Every year, the show’s format slightly changes – whether that’s number of 
contestants, elimination rounds or guest judges – and for this season eight new 
contestants will face off against eight returning from previous seasons.


Some episodes never change because they are just too damn entertaining, 
Restaurant Wars being the perfect example – the contestants split in two teams 
and have to create, manage and serve in a pop-up restaurant. The contestants 
are always as eclectic as you can get and Top Chef is always at its best when 
the people are as interesting as their food. I’m ecstatic that Katsuji Tanabe,
the talented Mexican-Japanese chef from LA 
<http://www.bravotv.com/people/katsuji-tanabe> is back for this one – he is a 
charismatic train almost always veering off track.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ftop-chef-in-praise-of-season-14-bravo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d898288cd572126033b2867d12eac792a67d948%2F0_120_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20praise%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Top%20Chef%2C%20the%20Michelin-starred%20reality%20TV%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ftop-chef-in-praise-of-season-14-bravo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20praise%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Top%20Chef%2C%20the%20Michelin-starred%20reality%20TV%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ftop-chef-in-praise-of-season-14-bravo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d898288cd572126033b2867d12eac792a67d948%2F0_120_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Top Chef judge Tom Colicchio and presenter Padma Lakshmi. Photograph: 
Bravo/Bravo via Getty Images 
Another ingredient for Top Chef’s appeal comes down to the main judges. I love 
everything thatGail Simmons <http://gailsimmons.com/> says and I am always in 
agreement with her palate, she could judgeNathan’s Hot Dog Eating Contest 
<http://www.nathansfamous.com/hot-dog-eating-contest> and still make it sound 
classy. Season 8 winner Richard Blais is most definitely enjoying his role as 
the “been-there-done-that” judge and nothing escapes the wrath of Tom 
Colicchio, James Beard award-winner and founder of New York’s renowned Gramercy 
Tavern. The veteran chef and judge is Top Chef’s Captain Ahab, searching for 
the perfect dish and ready to destroy its creator with venomous criticism. He 
did, however, take it surprisinglyeasy on Marge Simpson 
<http://www.simpsonsworld.com/video/277262403731> when he guest-starred on The 
Simpsons. Meanwhile, Indian-American presenter Padma Lakshmi is a smart food 
critic and one of the most valuable and critical voices on the show.

Top Chef now has multiple local versions across the world, including Top Chef 
Middle East and Top Chef Panama – both of which premiered this year. It has 
been nominated for an Emmy every year since 2007 and won in 2010 for 
outstanding reality-competition. After all these years it’s clear to me that 
the show succeeds because it celebrates the art of cooking without asking its 
audience to know anything about it in the first place. The chefs, judges and 
challenges are all there to entice your appetite, without ever asking for your 
expertise. Top Chef wins our attention because ultimately, it’s a program about 
people and their undying love for their craft. Bravo to Bravo for that.
 