
Bruce Shearman has handed out how-to-vote cards for the National party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/national-party> for 50 years. It 
has been a big part of his life, a big part of his identity. He has a 
certificate proving his 40-year party membership. He was the president of the 
Lismore branch on New South Wales’s north coast, until he quit a few years ago, 
and a personal friend of local MP Thomas George. When he and his wife, Nola, 
built their dream home three years ago on their cattle property, George and his 
wife gave them a rose to plant in their new garden.

“I have known Thomas for 50 years,” Shearman says. “We used to play cards 
together and one thing and another, but good friendships sometimes disappear. 
It’s been a sad time for us.”


On Saturday, Shearman, still a farmer at 78, won’t be encouraging voters to 
stick with the Nationals. He is too old-fashioned to disclose how he will vote 
himself, but he believes the Greens will get most support in Lismore, held by 
the Nationals by a normally impenetrable margin of 24.3%. One issue has shaken 
Shearman’s entire political outlook and is defining this election in large 
swaths of country NSW: the fight to stop coal seam gas.

Before Shearman resigned as president at Lismore, he and Nola drove to 
Chinchilla in Queensland to look at its CSG operation. He decided that gas 
wells and water treatment ponds and endless trucks and dust didn’t suit the 
lush green hills of Lismore, with its small farms and bad roads. He came home 
and reported what he had seen to the Nationals, but says the party didn’t want 
to listen.


“I’m very much against CSG. I don’t want them invading our land and 
transforming our land whatsoever. I went to see the local member, spoke at 
meetings, but all he would do is change the subject.” Nola, also a Nationals 
member for more than 40 years, adds: “We’ve got to stop it from coming here, 
once it’s here it’s here.”


The Shearmans’ story can be interpreted in several ways. Maybe they’re 
“nimbys” – they have a CSG exploration licence over their 130-hectare property 
just outside Lismore. Maybe CSG is not right for the far north coast – the 
northern rivers, as it’s known, with its beauty, tourism, farms, and history of 
environmentalism – but might be better suited elsewhere. Maybe the Nationals 
got caught between backing miners and farmers and lost support of even diehard 
supporters because they didn’t pick up early enough how big this was getting.


The bigger picture

Maybe there’s something else going on. The prominent climate change activist 
Naomi Klein writes in her new book This Changes Everything that “resistance to 
high-risk extreme extraction (such as CSG) is building a global, grassroots, 
and broad-based network the likes of which the environmental movement has 
rarely seen … suddenly no major new project, no matter how seemingly routine, 
is a done deal”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b068bbbf9a88d51b8a426cd322381f5747d34df%2F0_100_3500_2101%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20vast%20swaths%20of%20rural%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20there's%20only%20one%20election%20issue%3A%20coal%20seam%20gas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20vast%20swaths%20of%20rural%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20there%27s%20only%20one%20election%20issue%3A%20coal%20seam%20gas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b068bbbf9a88d51b8a426cd322381f5747d34df%2F0_100_3500_2101%2F2000.jpg>
 A coal seam gas water pipeline passes under a road near Chinchilla during the 
construction phase in 2011. Photograph: Tim Wimborne/Reuters 
Klein argues the big picture – that sustained and successful local revolts are 
not really about the environment, but about democracy, where people of vastly 
different backgrounds insist on having a real say about the crucial resources 
of air, land and water where they live. She outlines examples all over the 
world, including protests against Whitehaven Coal’s mine at Maules Creek in 
northern NSW.


The state election has barely touched on Klein’s thesis, of course. Nor is it 
caught up with the now routine reports concluding that that 80% of the world’s 
fossil fuels will need to be left in the ground if the world is to avoid 
warming more than two degrees by mid-century (although gas gets off more 
lightly than coal, with half needing to stay in the ground, according to one 
report.)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/07/much-worlds-fossil-fuel-reserve-must-stay-buried-prevent-climate-change->

This is a parochial state election about the privatisation of poles and wires, 
health, education, jobs, the aftermath of corruption scandals and the 
unpopularity of the Abbott federal government.

Leave fossil fuels buried to prevent climate change, study urges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/07/much-worlds-fossil-fuel-reserve-must-stay-buried-prevent-climate-change-study-says>
But the regional uprising over CSG is more about an unconventional gas source 
where the gas is held tightly in coal seams saturated with water and where 
sophisticated technology is used to release it. Large numbers of wells are 
drilled, and water is pumped out to allow the gas to flow. The process was 
first used commercially in Queensland in 1996 and in the US since the 1970s – 
but it is still relatively immature in Australia.

There are all the implications of what that technology might mean practically 
for regional communities, but there are bigger issues here, too: the urgency of 
climate change compared with the short-term necessities of politics, and the 
growing demand of people to be listened to.

A watershed moment

The immediate goal for those against CSG is to stop it before it takes hold in 
NSW. “We are at a watershed with CSG,” say Paul Spooner, local councillor, 
general manager of the Byron Bay community centre, and Labor’s candidate for 
the far north coast seat of Ballina. This is a seat first contested in 1988 
that has been held by one man since for the past 27 years – the retiring member 
Don Page.


A recent poll says that, despite its 24.6% margin on paper, it could fall to 
Labor with Green preferences on this issue – even though there are no known CSG 
reserves in Ballina and only a small slice of the electorate is covered by an 
exploration licence. Nearby Lismore and Tweed, both held by the Nationals with 
margins of more than 20%, are also vulnerable to Labor and Green challenges and 
do have exploration licences over big chunks of them.


Spooner hands out his literature at a local farmers market at the town of 
Bangalow, beautifully green and hip. He compares the intensity of the mood to 
the battle to save Tasmania’s Franklin dam in the early 1980s. “This election 
is a referendum on CSG on the north coast.”


Now that the election is almost here, everyone seems to be willing to listen 
hard to what people think about CSG, which leaves those who have been fighting 
for years sceptical.

“The people of the Lismore electorate have continually made it clear to me 
that they do not want CSG here,” George said a few days ago. Nationals Ballina 
candidate Kris Beavis says he will fight the Coalition if it supports CSG in 
his electorate. “I’ve basically said from day one that I don’t think it’s 
appropriate for our area … if that makes me distinctive from the party, so be 
it.”

Tweed Nationals MP Geoff Provest told the ABC the Coalition had a “plan to 
make the north coast coal seam gas-free”, a statement that surprised many. 
These Nationals suddenly face serious resistance – with a concerted campaign, 
and lots of posters – urging people to “put the Nationals last”.

Across the state, there is barely any CSG production now, and nothing at all 
on the north coast. Only the Camden project in western Sydney is in full swing, 
accounting for 5% of the state’s gas needs. In Queensland, the industry is 
huge, with CSG providing 90% of domestic gas needs, with the NSW government 
warning of possible gas shortages in the state as Queensland gas is diverted to 
the Asian export market. There’s nothing happening in Victoria, with a 
moratorium in place since mid-2012 and the new Labor government pledging a 
parliamentary inquiry before any change.


Regulations changes and community resistance

On this issue, NSW is the national battleground to see whether this industry’s 
retreat will accelerate. The government has pegged back explorations that 
covered close to half the state when Labor was in power to about 11%, although 
critics say the buybacks have been mostly in non-active areas. Two big projects 
have been declared strategically important for energy needs, but have been 
plagued by delays, regulations changes and community resistance. AGL’s 
Gloucester gas project north of Newcastle has approval to begin, and Santos’s 
Narrabri gas project in the Pilliga forest in the north-west is at the 
appraisal stage, soon to submit its environmental impact statement.


Until very recently, these two projects appeared to have broad bipartisan 
political support, although both are controversial. The state government in 
January suspended AGL’s operations near Gloucester after the company detected 
banned chemicals in two wells and a water storage tank. Its operations are 
under review.


NSW election diary: parties face hostile environment in fight for green vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-news-blog/2015/mar/19/nsw-election-diary-parties-face-hostile-environment-in-fight-for-green-vote>
The spiritual heart of opposition to CSG in NSW is in the northern rivers 
region, centred in Lismore. Up here, people are obsessed, with daily coverage 
in newspapers, and street stalls, fund-raisers and ubiquitous anti-CSG posters. 
The biggest of all is against Metgasco’s licence 15km from Lismore. In May last 
year, this was the site of the anti-CSG movement’s most significant stand, and 
most significant victory, and a dawning sense that an unlikely group of 
farmers, locals, Aboriginal elders and activists could win against a mining 
company with political support.


Hundreds of protesters who had camped out to block Metgasco’s drilling 
operation were due to be confronted and removed by about 800 police. Instead, 
there were hugs and cheers when the confrontation was avoided – the minister 
for energy and resources, Anthony Roberts, suspended Metgasco’s drilling 
licence for lack of community consultation, a decision that infuriated the 
company, which is now challenging it in court.


Among the crowd that day was Adam Guise, who grew up on a farm, has worked as 
an adviser for the Greens MP Jeremy Buckingham, and was then a spokesman for 
Gasfield Free Northern Rivers. Guise was heckled a little at a candidates’ 
forum last week – one questioner demanded why the Greens wanted non-human 
animals designated as “beings” and declared that farmers who voted Green would 
be “putting a noose around your neck’’ – but nobody takes his candidacy lightly.


Only the Greens would ban CSG entirely in the state, and have always objected 
to it on the north coast, even when the issue was dismissed as a fringe 
concern. “The Greens are the only ones that have stood up for our farmland,” 
Guise said. “The others are playing catch-up now a week from the election.”


And so they are. “Sink the Nats and that’s the end of coal seam gas forever,” 
NSW Labor’s leader,Luke Foley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/luke-foley>, told a crowd at the 
site of the blockade this week. “It won’t take riot police, it will take the 
power of the ballot box.”


Gasfield free

Aidan Ricketts is a law lecturer at Southern Cross University, an 
environmental activist and strategist for the Gasfield Free Northern Rivers 
group. It got going just three years ago, and pioneered surveying communities 
to see what they think about CSG.

Tiny towns and communities have declared themselves “gasfield free”, attaching 
now-familiar yellow triangles to their gates. It’s a little disingenuous – the 
one question asked is: “Do you want your road and property to remain gasfield 
free?” Few people would say no to that – 95% of communities in the area have 
agreed – but it has proved a potent tactic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb44642a0c6fb5dabab763996a643736a797b9711%2F218_731_2862_1717%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20vast%20swaths%20of%20rural%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20there's%20only%20one%20election%20issue%3A%20coal%20seam%20gas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20vast%20swaths%20of%20rural%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20there%27s%20only%20one%20election%20issue%3A%20coal%20seam%20gas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb44642a0c6fb5dabab763996a643736a797b9711%2F218_731_2862_1717%2F2000.jpg>
 Protesters at Gunnedah declare the area gasfield-free at a protest on 15 
March. Photograph: Gay Alcorn for the Guardian 
The whole strategy is based on devolving everything to locals to run their own 
campaigns and to conduct their own surveys. Gasfield Free Northern Rivers helps 
with strategy and support, and is in turn backed by umbrella group Lock the 
Gate, which began in Queensland, where CSG is well established.


Ricketts believes the campaign has rattled and confused political parties and 
left established environmental groups behind. “One thing Lock the Gate did, it 
didn’t worry about parliamentary lobbying,” Ricketts says. “It just said we’re 
going to build a giant social movement and when we have, you’ll come to us, and 
if you look at this election that’s what you’re seeing. The politicians are now 
falling over themselves to make concessions, and if you look at the NSW 
election, it’s absurd: ‘I’m more against coal seam gas than you are’.”


Ricketts is right. The political shifts have been dramatic. Labor was the 
party in government that issued CSG exploitation licences “like confetti” as 
the premier,Mike Baird <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mike-baird>, 
likes to put it. All but one licence in the northern rivers were issued by 
Labor, for as little as $1,000 each, some to small companies with little 
experience or resources. According to Lock the Gate, there remain 28 licences 
that Labor approved while in office.

NSW election: National party faces losing heartland seats in the bush
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/24/nsw-election-national-party-faces-losing-heartland-seats-in-the-bush>
Now, Labor says it has changed. It supports a moratorium on the industry 
across the state until the recommendations of NSW’s chief scientist, Mary 
O’Kane, are fully implemented and the industry is “proven to be safe”. It will 
declare “no-go” zones, including all of the northern rivers, which cover the 
three seats it is targeting. It says it will cancel the licences of companies 
such as Metgasco, insisting that no compensation is needed. Unsurprisingly,
Metgasco is furious 
<http://www.metgasco.com.au/asx-announcements/labor-policy-risks-nsw-becoming-state-sovereign-risk>
, saying it has spent $120m on the project so far under licences approved and 
renewed by both sides of politics, and that it would demand compensation.

The state government is furious, too, because it has it has done far more to 
rein in the industry than Labor. The Nationals leader, Troy Grant, has 
acknowledged that “people are yelling at each other” over this issue, “probably 
one of the most difficult things we’ve had to grapple with in government”. It 
has tightened regulations, bought back more than a dozen licences, and on 
Friday said it would insist on buying back the Dart licence covering most of 
the seat of Lismore. But it won’t cancel licences – which opponents want – 
saying that to do so would end up in costly legal battles. That means, say 
opponents, that companies won’t hand over lucrative licences, just ones in 
areas where there is little gas.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44e1b40ea6402625ecdbe629df5152b21ec06150%2F0_360_3264_1958%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20vast%20swaths%20of%20rural%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20there's%20only%20one%20election%20issue%3A%20coal%20seam%20gas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20vast%20swaths%20of%20rural%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20there%27s%20only%20one%20election%20issue%3A%20coal%20seam%20gas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44e1b40ea6402625ecdbe629df5152b21ec06150%2F0_360_3264_1958%2F2000.jpg>
 Nationals state MPs Thomas George, Troy Grant and Duncan Gay announce a coal 
seam gas licence buyback
in Lismore on 20 March. Photograph: Gay Alcorn for the Guardian 
The moratorium on issuing new coal seam gas licences remains, but at some 
point after the election the Coalition says it will identify ­strategic areas 
for CSG development. There’s no doubt the government believes CSG is necessary. 
“It will remain a big part of the economy, yes, and it is part of our overall 
solution,” Baird told the Australian Financial Review recently.


Dean Draper, the co-ordinator of Gasfield Free Northern Rivers, says the 
government’s policy is all “smoke and mirrors” and it couldn’t just keep 
blaming Labor for the old cowboy days. “The government renewed these CSG 
licences – they didn’t have to renew them – and they’re saying once they’re in 
you can’t get rid of them. Labor and Greens talk about cancelling licences 
whereas the Nationals don’t have that policy.”

Great Artesian Basin feeds argument

In the northern rivers, it can seem as though CSG has no friends, but that’s 
not true across all NSW. Drive 600km from Byron Bay and you get to the 
north-western town of Narrabri, population 7,500, surrounded by cotton, wheat 
and cattle farms. This is also coal country – Whitehaven Coal’s contentious 
Maules Creek mine is in this shire.


Santos’s $2bn CSG project is proposed in the Pilliga state forest 25km from 
town. It has government support, including that of the local Nationals MP and 
water minister, Kevin Humphries, who told a candidates’ forum that “if someone 
comes into your community and wants to spend $2bn … give them a go and see what 
they have to offer”. It has the backing of the local council and many 
businesses. Santos is confident most residents support it, too, although that’s 
not a universal view.


The Narrabri gas project would be the largest CSG operation in the state, with 
850 gas wells drilled over 20 years. The company estimates it could provide 
half of NSW’s gas needs when fully operational, at a time when the government 
is warning of looming shortages.

Until a few days ago, Santos believed it had Labor’s support, too, at least 
tentatively, and was confident that it would meet Labor’s condition that the 
chief scientist’s recommendations be implemented. It might have been sitting 
out the election, but that idea was upended when Foley announcedLabor would ban 
CSG in the Pilliga <http://www.lukefoley.com.au/labor_s_csg> and would refuse 
to allow Santos to proceed with production should Labor win the election. No 
compensation was mentioned for a project that has already cost Santos more than 
$1bn.


Foley said: “The risks CSG poses to the natural assets of the Pilliga, 
particularly the underground water storages, are unacceptable.”


Labor cited CSIRO modelling indicating the forest was an “important recharge 
area from the Great Artesian basin” and quoted the federal government’s 
environmental assessments team which acknowledged “the Pilliga region (in 
general) is recognised as an important recharge area for the Great Artesian 
Basin, [and] the potential for high-level impacts to a water resource presents 
a real possibility”.

Foley said: “There’s some parts of the state that must be off limits to coal 
seam gas permanently, and the recharge zone for the Great Artesian basin has to 
be one of them.”


Battle for Liverpool Plains: Chinese coal project tears at fabric of rural NSW
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/26/battle-for-liverpool-plains-chinese-coal-project-tears-at-fabric-of-rural-nsw>
The announcement flabbergasted Santos’s NSW general manager, Peter Mitchley, 
who was “at a loss” to understand it “given we have not yet released our 
environmental impact statement which will explain in detail how we will manage 
any impact from our work”. It stresses that Santos’s coal seams are hundreds of 
metres below the Great Artesian basin.

“We don’t affect the recharge of the Great Artesian basin,” Mitchley told the 
ABC. “It’s an entirely safe and sustainable project.” Foley’s announcement also 
stunned the government, and alarmed business groups in NSW.


Mitchley is frustrated with the whole debate, although he acknowledges the 
industry is partly to blame, with loose practices on some projects and a lack 
of real community consultation on others. Santos’s project has had its 
troubles, too, with the company in 2013 detecting elevated levels of uranium 
and other heavy metals in an aquifer below one of its wastewater ponds that was 
leaking. It was fined $1,500.


Its share price has dropped and in February it slashed $808m off the value of 
its holding, now standing at $543m, citing a reduction in reserves and delays.

Mitchley insists “we’re nowhere near that point” of giving up because it’s all 
too hard in NSW. If the project gets approval, he is confident of finding 
investors, and gas could be flowing in a little over two years.


The project has some advantages. Unlike those in the northern rivers, it is 
mostly on state-owned land designated for these sorts of industries. Santos is 
bending over backwards to support the town financially and will take anyone who 
asks out to the Pilliga to have a look at its trial wells and water storage 
ponds.


Its policy is not to search for gas on private land without permission – there 
are a number of private landholders who have given access to Santos, although 
it will not reveal how many. He says there are no plans to frack – the 
controversial process involving pumping fluids and chemicals into a well to 
fracture the coal seam to allow it to flow more easily. Earlier work had showed 
the coal had already fractured naturally through earth movements and the idea 
was “redundant”.


The environmental impact statement is not yet complete, but Mitchley says all 
the evidence to date is that the project would not affect groundwater, the big 
fear of locals and farmers and the stated reason for Labor’s new policy. For 
that he cites the chief scientist’s report, which said the risks of CSG were 
manageable and that the industry was no more or less risky than other 
extractive industries.


As for water, Mitchley says Santos won’t be taking it from the same source 
that townspeople and farmers use. It will remove water – a relatively small 
amount, he says – from “much deeper down, a completely unconnected source”.


Mitchley believes in climate change, and the company has made much of its 
green credentials: that the greenhouse emissions from burning gas are half that 
of burning coal. That, like much in this debate, is ferociously contested. The 
argument is about how much gas – basically methane – is unintentionally leaked 
during the CSG process. Methane has 20 times the global warming potential of 
carbon dioxide, and if too much is leaked, gas’s advantage over coal is reduced.

Mitchley says the argument is “unbelievable” and shakes his head. “It’s one of 
the ironies of this current debate. Imagine for a minute a scenario where the 
development of gas is prohibited by green activism. There is a thirst for 
energy and that energy deficit is met by increased coal. What an ironic 
outcome. What an absolutely bizarre, twisted outcome.”

Mitcheley says what is missing in the debate in NSW is a discussion about how 
we balance the environmental cost of providing much-needed energy with the 
lifestyles most of us want to live. “We don’t have technology today at a cost 
we can afford where we can go magically we’re all green and renewables.”

‘We cannot afford to lose any industry’

Russell Stewart , 58, boasts that he was “born in Narrabri and I will die in 
Narrabri”. He’s a local businessman and the president of the Narrabri chamber 
of commerce. He is “$100% comfortable” with the Santos CSG project and says 
most locals agree with him. He does volunteer that he worked for Santos as a 
community consultant for a time, and that the company leases some commercial 
properties he owns. “I’m bloody pleased they do otherwise they would have been 
empty otherwise.”

“If it wasn’t for Santos and CSG at the moment, that street would be dead, I’m 
telling you. Look around you, we haven’t had rain in three years. [Opponents] 
say: ‘You’re only in it for the money’ and I say shit yeah, I want people to 
stay in the bush.”


This is the other side of many country towns. Their populations are declining 
and ageing. They want jobs, and local businesses need contracts. Already, 
Santos spends $350,000 a year on supporting local groups, everything from the 
Rotary club to the men’s shed.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe27c2287b07927d1b3ce980d82147c20d0fcab76%2F1_108_1232_740%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20vast%20swaths%20of%20rural%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20there's%20only%20one%20election%20issue%3A%20coal%20seam%20gas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20vast%20swaths%20of%20rural%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20there%27s%20only%20one%20election%20issue%3A%20coal%20seam%20gas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe27c2287b07927d1b3ce980d82147c20d0fcab76%2F1_108_1232_740%2F1000.jpg>
 Ron Campey is opposed to CSG mining in Narrabri. Photograph: Gay Alcorn for 
the Guardian 
Stewart talks of outsiders, particularly the Wilderness Society, coming to 
town and assuming people are opposed. There is a local group supporting the gas 
project and another one opposing.


“The public feeling is that they’re sick and bloody tired of people speaking 
for them. The feeling is that we cannot afford to lose any industry.


“Have a look at country towns falling apart, why aren’t we?”

 It is hard to tell the public mood in Narrabri. It is in the huge 
National-held electorate of Barwon, which makes up nearly half the state. An 
independent candidate, Rohan Boehm, is running largely in opposition to CSG, 
arguing it is just too risky “until we can be absolutely certain that there 
won’t be a depletion of our natural resource, our air and water quality.”

A ReachTel poll conducted by Boehm found 87% of the electorate – broader than 
Narrabri, but still significant – were either very concerned or concerned about 
their risks to water supplies and food-growing areas from CSG mining. More then 
half of Nationals voters said they were very concerned.


Just outside Narrabri lives grain and cattle farmer Ron Campey, aged 70. The 
Santos project won’t come near his farm, but he’s fighting hard against it 
anyway. “It’s for the next generation, it’s basically the water quality, or the 
damage to our water aquifers, and the escaped gases as far as health is 
concerned,” he says.


As for those supporting the industry: “The town’s been bought by Santos. It’s 
as much money as you want to everyone in town.”


Far away in Byron Bay in the northern rivers, the mood is much more united. 
CSG is not wanted here. A group of 100 or so people gather at dawn on the main 
beach, to mark one year since the Bentley blockade victory, which people still 
talk about as though it were yesterday. There are children and adults, some 
wrapped in blankets against the chill.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8a04b75a2102a9a33e341f6173990d93af7a3b6%2F0_103_1280_768%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20vast%20swaths%20of%20rural%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20there's%20only%20one%20election%20issue%3A%20coal%20seam%20gas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20vast%20swaths%20of%20rural%20New%20South%20Wales%2C%20there%27s%20only%20one%20election%20issue%3A%20coal%20seam%20gas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Fin-vast-swaths-of-rural-new-south-wales-theres-only-one-election-issue-coal-seam-gas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8a04b75a2102a9a33e341f6173990d93af7a3b6%2F0_103_1280_768%2F1000.jpg>
 Farmers Peter and Meg Nielsen at their property outside Lismore, oppose CSG in 
the NSW northern rivers. Photograph: Gay Alcorn for the Guardian 
Meg Nielsen, a farmer from Bentley who protested a year ago, grabs me for 
their signature song. The crowd sways as one with the music. “Let’s walk gently 
/ on the hallowed ground of Bentley / let’s stand arm in arm / for our 
neighbour’s farm.”


Frackman's accidental activist: 'There's blood in the water and I'm the shark'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/23/frackmans-accidental-activist-theres-blood-in-the-water-and-im-the-shark>
Nielsen says the whole thing has brought the community together. “Hippies, 
Nimbin people, professional people, tradies, farmers, right across the 
community. We’ve never had so many friends in our lives,” she laughs.


Nielsen, 66, is a National party member. A year ago, she quit her full-time 
job with an accountancy firm to work on this protest. On her T-shirt is 
printed: “Vote for a gas free Northern Rivers. Put the Nationals last.”

 