
Outside the Westchester Diner in Peekskill, New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, about 40 miles from New York’s 
Central Park, a reactor dome crests the trees behind an overpass like a giant’s 
bald head.

It’s one of two at Indian Point Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Center, at the bank of the 
Hudson river in neighboring Buchanan, among the oldest nuclear power plants 
still in operation, and a monument to the energy industry’s resistance to years 
of work by concerned scientists, locals and state officials to close down a 
facility that only last month dumped a plume of radioactive waste into their 
groundwater.

Indian Point’s two working reactors opened in the early 1970s and have had a 
lot of people worried for a long time. Five years ago the New York Times 
wondered if it was “America’s Fukushima” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/17/opinion/is-indian-point-the-next-fukushima.html?_r=0>
 – the Japanese site of theworld’s worst radiation crisis  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/12/fukushima-nuclear-blast-japan-alert>
since Chernobyl. In February the New York governor, Andrew Cuomo, called its 
operation“unacceptable” 
<https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/statement-governor-andrew-m-cuomo-regarding-indian-point-nuclear-facility>
 – he wants the plant closed.

It’s easy to see the source of his concern. The population density around 
Indian Point is of more than 2,100 people per square mile, by far the greatest 
for any of the US’s 61 nuclear power plants. Many of those people live and work 
in the plant’s shadow with growing unease.

In May 2015, an electrical transformer in the reactor called Unit 3 exploded, 
causing water to flood a room near the explosion where electrical distribution 
panels are housed and pouring3,000 gallons of oil 
<http://preview.lohud.com/story/news/2015/08/04/indian-point-shutdowns/30841551/>
 into the Hudson. The Union of Concerned Scientists classified the incident as a
“near miss” in its annual review. 
<http://www.ucsusa.org/news/press_release/annual-nuclear-safety-review-0680#.VvRH6WSrRz8>
 Last year near misses occurred at eight nuclear facilities in the US.


“Had the flooding not been discovered and stopped in time, the panels could 
have been submerged, plunging Unit 3 into a dangerous station blackout, in 
which all alternating current (AC) electricity is lost,” the report’s authors 
wrote. “A station blackout led to the meltdown of three nuclear reactor cores 
at Fukushima Dai-ichi in 2011.”
groundwater leaks 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/03/2016-03-nuclear-map/> 
In February, radiation levels at three monitoring wells around the plant 
spiked, in one spot by 65,000%. Patricia Kakridas, a spokeswoman for Entergy, 
said the source was likely “water which exited a temporary filtration system 
that was set up and dismantled in late January 2016” in preparation for 
refueling; the company said radioactive material won’t leach into drinking 
water.

And in March, when the plant was being refueled, a breaker tripped and cut 
power in one of the reactors; when the diesel generators kicked in, they died 
while trying to restart the first electrical system. Fortunately a second 
backup worked.

Because the plant is cooled in large part by water from the Hudson – up to 
2.5bn gallons a day – it kills about 1 billion fish and other aquatic organisms 
a year.

Incidents such as these are among the reasons Cuomo wants it closed, and 
Indian Point is now in a vulnerable position. The operating license for Indian 
Point 3 expired in December. The license for Indian Point 2 expired in 2013 
(Indian Point 1 was decommissioned in 1974). Yet both remain active as the 
company pursues a license renewal and in the meantime Spectra, a pipeline 
company, is planning to add a gas pipeline that runs underneath the property to 
the two that have been there since the plant was built.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Findian-point-nuclear-plant-new-york-troubled-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fd3c7c0c4e7cb73b015d83e04a4c45228f4a8ee%2F55_37_4684_2810%2F4684.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indian%20Point%20nuclear%20plant%20reeks%20of%20troubled%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Findian-point-nuclear-plant-new-york-troubled-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indian%20Point%20nuclear%20plant%20reeks%20of%20troubled%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Findian-point-nuclear-plant-new-york-troubled-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fd3c7c0c4e7cb73b015d83e04a4c45228f4a8ee%2F55_37_4684_2810%2F4684.jpg>
 Governor Andrew Cuomo of New York has called the operation of Indian Point 
‘unacceptable’. Photograph: Mike Groll/AP 
Not everyone wants the plant to close; it’s one of Buchanan’s few employers. 
About 1,000 people work at the plant, without counting the related businesses 
nearby. The town’s population is 2,060 as of the 2013 census.


Dennis Drogan, who worked at the plant from 2002 to 2003 and now owns the 
Bella Roma deli in the nearby village of Tarrytown, said Buchanan relies 
heavily on the plant and locals are stunned some of their neighbors want to 
shut down the place that supports their livelihood. He also said it’s safer 
than people say.

“Getting into the property is very, very difficult,” he said. Drogan was an 
electrician at the facility in the time when post-9/11 counter-terrorism 
restrictions were being put into effect in the plant due to its proximity to 
New York City. “If you want to tighten a screw, you have to say why,” he said.

Courtney Williams, a cancer researcher who lives in the area with her husband 
and little girl, puts it this way: “If you are looking at it really just with 
fresh eyes, you’re just like, ‘This is fucking insane, there’s a pipeline going 
through it and gas pipelines underneath it and it’s 40 years old and it’s right 
outside of New York and it’s leaking tritium [the radioactive hydrogen from 
February’s leak], this is insane! What are you doing!’ But if you’ve been 
working at the plant for 40 years, and you work there and your mom worked 
there, you’re just like, ‘Everyone’s comfortable with it here. Their families 
live nearby. They wouldn’t be doing anything that’s dangerous.’”


In fact, Williams’s mother used to work at the plant as a nurse. But Williams 
says that having handled radioactive material in her scientific training – Yale 
and then a PhD in biochemistry Princeton – that feeling of safety is illusory. 
“It’s your sense of what is dangerous. There are snake-charmers and lion-tamers 
whose blood pressure doesn’t go up … Doesn’t mean it’s safe! It just means 
they’re acclimated to that level of risk.”

Westchester, wooded, close-knit and old, is one of the original 12 counties of 
the province of New York, the British colony that became the Empire State. Its 
primary means of travel are the twisting, interlocking highways and the Metro 
North railway system that ends at Grand Central terminal in Manhattan. 
Evacuation plans for the numerous villages and towns in the 50-mile “peak 
injury” evacuation zone, to say nothing of most of the five boroughs, have been 
derided as “fantasy documents 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/21/nyregion/21towns.html>” by Northeastern 
University public police professor Daniel P Aldrich.
 Indian Point Energy Center is about 40 miles from Central Park in 
mid-Manhattan 
Cuomo has waged an ongoing campaign against the plant’s continued operation, 
citing“unacceptable” failures 
<https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/statement-governor-andrew-m-cuomo-regarding-indian-point-nuclear-facility>
, especially the leak of radioactive water in February, but to no avail.

Reactors 2 and 3 remain open in part because of a regulatory quirk: There are 
so many complaints, called “contentions”, filed with its primary regulator, the 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), that Entergy is allowed to keep Indian 
Point running until it can respond to all the grievances as part of its 
relicensing process.

Less than three weeks after the water leak, the NRC decided to honor Entergy’s 
request, made several years prior, that it be allowed to perform a 
comprehensive leak test every 15 years, rather than every 10.

How long that will take is anyone’s guess. Neil Sheehan, a spokesman for the 
NRC, said he could not say when (and if) a decision on the plant’s renewal 
would come. “I can’t give you a specific date,” he said. “Nobody would have 
anticipated it taking this long.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Findian-point-nuclear-plant-new-york-troubled-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa62e6e16d223132ebcc998933c5eaa55a8746cd0%2F0_171_3316_1989%2F3316.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indian%20Point%20nuclear%20plant%20reeks%20of%20troubled%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Findian-point-nuclear-plant-new-york-troubled-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indian%20Point%20nuclear%20plant%20reeks%20of%20troubled%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Findian-point-nuclear-plant-new-york-troubled-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa62e6e16d223132ebcc998933c5eaa55a8746cd0%2F0_171_3316_1989%2F3316.jpg>
 A control room agent at the Indian Point nuclear power plant. Photograph: 
Julie Jacobson/AP 
The NRC has never declined to renew an operating license.

Sheehan said complaints about Indian Point were frequent, but they were also 
largely about undramatic issues. “Indian Point has had a number of issues, but 
they haven’t risen to the level of high safety significance,” Sheehan said. “I 
mean, fossil fuel plants have transformer fires.”

Paul Gallay of Riverkeeper, an activist organization close to Buchanan in 
Ossining that is seeking to shut down the plant, blames much of the trouble on 
simply age. “Indian Point is just too old, there’s too much that cannot be 
replaced, there are too many components that have seen too much use.”


But it continues to be used. Edwin Lyman, senior scientist with the Union of 
Concerned Scientists’ global security program in Washington DC, blames the 
license-renewal process itself. “The process was designed to limit the scope 
that could be considered, specifically the ability of the public to intervene,” 
Lyman said. The process was changed in 1995, Lyman explained, so that all a 
nuclear plant must do to address a “contention”, or objection to a way the 
plant has been run, is demonstrate a plan to correct a specific problem.


And some of the problems are longstanding and increasingly worrisome, notably 
the spent fuel pools – storage for the waste material, still radioactive, from 
the rods used to power the plant.

“We have great concerns about onsite storage of spent fuel in the pools,” 
Lyman said. “There’s a real risk that if that water is let out fairly rapidly 
either through a seismic event or a terrorist attack, that the spent fuel could 
actually catch fire.”

The fuel remains onsite at Indian Point, as it does at most nuclear power 
plants, and must be carefully maintained, for example it must be cooled for at 
least a decade before it can be sealed in concrete “dry casks”. Sheehan (and 
others) point out that moving it out of the state along Interstate 95 is 
impractical given the population density along the busy transport corridor. The 
plant has produced about 1,500 tons of waste and continues to produce more.

At this point, the license renewal process for Indian Point is scheduled 
through at least September of 2016 but the legacy of Indian Point, whether it 
closes or no, has a half-life of far, far longer.
 