
1) Southgate should have stripped England captaincy of bogus value

Captaincy is among the biggest red herrings in football: all players are 
supposed to set examples with their performances and leaders lead with or 
without an armband. And yet the England captaincy matters simply because a lot 
of people think it matters.Steven Gerrard was upset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/feb/29/scott-parker-england-captain-gerrard>
 when it was taken off him by a caretaker manager, Stuart Pearce, andDavid 
Beckham was uplifted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2002/may/19/worldcupfootball2002.sport10> 
when it was given to him by a caretaker manager, Peter Taylor. The country’s 
latest caretaker manager, Gareth Southgate, should have de-fetishised the 
armband by announcing England do not need a captain other than for 
administrative purposes – to do the coin toss, basically – and, therefore, that 
the identity of the skipper for the matches against Malta, Slovenia and all 
opponents during his reign would be decided two seconds before each match by a 
dressing-room raffle.Paul Doyle

2) Scotland must make no mistake against Lithuania


Scotland’s match against Lithuania on Saturday is surely a must-win game, even 
if Gordon Strachan was at pains to deny it last week. The reality is that, if 
Scotland fail to win their home game against what is probably the second 
weakest team in Group F behind Malta, then they face an uphill task to reach 
Russia, even at this early stage in qualification.Scotland’s 5-1 win in Malta  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/04/malta-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier>
flattered Strachan’s side – but for a miscued Robert Snodgrass cross that 
luckily found the net they would have gone in at half-time 1-0 down, and it was 
only a contentious penalty that reduced Malta to 10 men and gave Strachan’s 
side the space to dominate. Lithuania will be a tougher task but, with 
Slovakia, England and Slovenia to come, Scotland need as many points on the 
board as possible, something that Strachan should know from the failed Euro 
2016 qualification campaign.Michael Butler

Next Generation 2016: 60 of the best young talents in world football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/oct/05/next-generation-2016-60-of-the-best-young-talents-in-world-football>
3) Horgan must be given chance to be a hero

Dundalk’s success in the Europa League has led to an understandable heave for 
their star player Daryl Horgan to be included in theRepublic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> squad. There was a 
minor backlash when the winger was omitted from Martin O’Neill’s initial 33-man 
squad for the qualifiers against Georgia and Moldova and that has been 
exacerbated by a bleak injury list. Daryl Murphy, Aiden McGeady, Kevin Doyle, 
Stephen Quinn, Keiren Westwood and Anthony Pilkington were ruled out at the 
start of the week, while Harry Arter cried off too. O’Neill has said the reason 
for Horgan’s omission, and perhaps another one or two of his club-mates, is due 
to scheduling – League of Ireland players have only 40-week contracts so the 
season must finish at the end of this month and Dundalk will have played 10 
games in four weeks – but it is a shame one of the country’s most exciting 
prospects will play no part this week. In November, though, there will be no 
excuse.Alan Smith
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Finternational-football-10-things-to-look-out-for-world-cup-2018-qualifying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc84a15f137d0130206cb50827a0862bae986d7c9%2F0_200_2322_1393%2F2322.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=International%20football%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20World%20Cup%202018%20qualifying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Finternational-football-10-things-to-look-out-for-world-cup-2018-qualifying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=International%20football%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20World%20Cup%202018%20qualifying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Finternational-football-10-things-to-look-out-for-world-cup-2018-qualifying%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc84a15f137d0130206cb50827a0862bae986d7c9%2F0_200_2322_1393%2F2322.jpg>
 Dundalk’s Daryl Horgan, centre, would be a popular choice for the Republic of 
Ireland squad. Photograph: Niall Carson/PA 
4) Time for Robson-Kanu to start again?

Hal Robson-Kanu has not started a league match this season and was benched for 
Wales’s opening qualifier,the 4-0 home win over Moldova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/05/wales-moldova-world-cup-2018-qualifier-match-report>
, which Sam Vokes started instead. Vokes scored and performed well, making a 
strong case to retain the position for Thursday’s trip to Austria. But that 
will be a very different match, one in which Wales are going to have to 
demonstrate their defensive excellence and counter-attacking sharpness. Chris 
Coleman may decide Robson-Kanu’s greater mobility, and his capacity to create 
space for team-mates such as Gareth Bale and the in-form Joe Allen, mean it is 
time to give the West Bromwich Albion player his first start of the season. 
Aaron Ramsey’s absence is a blow, of course, but Andy King is a decent deputy 
and Wales have the ability to get a key win in what is likely to be a tight 
group.PD

5) Deschamps may turn to Benzema sooner rather than later

For how long can Didier Deschamps afford to leave Karim Benzema out? France’s 
array of forwards is frightening, yet last month’s 0-0 draw against Belarus was 
a poor start to their first qualifying campaign in three years. With Mathieu 
Valbuena out of the squad, Deschamps has admitted the door is not closed on 
Real Madrid’s No9 but that he is “making sporting choices”. Benzema’s two goals 
this season may not warrant a recall on their own but his quality or experience 
– he has more than twice as many caps as any other forward in the squad – is 
not in doubt, while others, such as Kingsley Coman, Anthony Martial and Kévin 
Gameiro, have not exactly been in sparkling form for their club. Benzema has 
said he is ready to return and, shouldFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> draw another blank against 
Bulgaria on Friday or Holland on Monday, he may well find himself back in the 
fold for the game against Sweden next month.MB

6) Kosovo face two true tests of their calibre

Kosovo, after a 1-1 draw in their competitive debut  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/05/valon-berisha-earns-draw-with-finland-in-kosovos-first-competitive-match>
against Finland, face more testing opponents on Thursday night by welcoming 
Croatia to their home ground – in Shkodra, Albania, because they do not yet 
have a stadium that is up to scratch – before playing Ukraine away on Sunday in 
a fixture with obvious political undertones. Albert Bunjaki, the Kosovo head 
coach, has admitted they are underdogs but believes his fearless team can cause 
a surprise in one of the most testing groups in the Uefa section. This time 
they at least have a squad cleared to play following the farcical delay in 
Finland but their performances in the next two games will give a better idea of 
what they are capable of. On paper they look a level above some of the recently 
admitted fodder (sorry, Gibraltar) but, as Bunjaki has publicly targeted, are 
they really capable of qualifying for the 2020 European Championship?AS
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Finternational-football-10-things-to-look-out-for-world-cup-2018-qualifying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F310749aaa8fcc8a4e8ac2c643ccd77fce3f724b2%2F110_0_3940_2589%2F3940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=International%20football%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20World%20Cup%202018%20qualifying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Finternational-football-10-things-to-look-out-for-world-cup-2018-qualifying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=International%20football%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20World%20Cup%202018%20qualifying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Finternational-football-10-things-to-look-out-for-world-cup-2018-qualifying%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F310749aaa8fcc8a4e8ac2c643ccd77fce3f724b2%2F110_0_3940_2589%2F3940.jpg>
 The Kosovo national team after their competitive debut against Finland. 
Photograph: Markku Ojala/EPA 
7) Africa’s fearsome group stages kick-off

The group stages of the African qualifying process for the World Cup begin 
this week and include the most high-calibre small pool in the world, as Group B 
is made up of Algeria, Cameroon, Nigeria and Zambia, countries who between them 
have been continental champions nine times. Only the group winners will go to 
theWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> so there 
is no room for error. Algeria start as favourites because they are technically 
excellent and brim with speed and creativity but they carry some doubts into 
the campaign. Two key players, Yacine Brahimi and Sofiane Feghouli, are in poor 
form with their clubs, and the national manager, Milovan Rajevac, is in the 
early days of his reign, having been appointed only in June after Christian 
Gourcuff’s resignation. The visitors on Sunday, Cameroon, are also beset by 
uncertainty (as ever these days), with the captain, Stéphane Mbia, remaining 
out in the cold after a dressing-room schism. But even with Clinton Njie out 
injured, the Indomitable Lions have the attacking potency to punish any 
Algerian slip-ups. Nigeria will attempt to start atoning for their failure to 
qualify for next year’s Africa Cup of Nations by beating Zambia on Friday, a 
match in which they hope Mikel Jon Obi will make light of his lack of action 
for Chelsea. PD

8) Switzerland aim to keep pressure on European champions


Portugal are certain of victory on Friday, when they host Andorra, but will be 
concerned about the strong possibility of Switzerland following uplast month’s 
victory over them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/06/world-cup-qualifying-roundup-portugal-lose-in-switzerland-as-france-are-held>
 by winning away in Hungary. The Hungarians’ pre-Euro 2016 buoyancy was pricked 
byemphatic elimination from the tournament by Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/hungary-belgium-euro-2016-match-report>
 and an embarrassing 0-0 with Faroe Islands at the start of their latest 
campaign. Switzerland’s assignment is complicated by the suspension of Granit 
Xhaka, whose passing tends to knit the team together but whose tendency to 
unravel mentally resurfaced as he was sent off in the win over the European 
champions. Johan Djourou delivered what was perhaps his best international 
performance in that game but is injured for the trip to Budapest. Despite those 
absences Switzerland should win and Admir Mehmedi could confirm he has become a 
striker on whom his country can count for regular goals.PD
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Finternational-football-10-things-to-look-out-for-world-cup-2018-qualifying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffad7d78b206e2a24001cf551f9ba6298d9bbab59%2F917_108_4555_2733%2F4555.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=International%20football%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20World%20Cup%202018%20qualifying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Finternational-football-10-things-to-look-out-for-world-cup-2018-qualifying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=International%20football%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20World%20Cup%202018%20qualifying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Finternational-football-10-things-to-look-out-for-world-cup-2018-qualifying%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffad7d78b206e2a24001cf551f9ba6298d9bbab59%2F917_108_4555_2733%2F4555.jpg>
 Johan Djourou will miss Switzerland’s trip to Hungary. Photograph: Kenzo 
Tribouillard/AFP/Getty Images 
9 ) Cagey fighting expected between Italy and Spain


There can be little doubt over the game of the week – but it could end up 
being quite cagey. Only 103 days have passed since one of the most memorable 
moments of Euro 2016, whenItaly truly ended Spain’s golden era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/italy-spain-euro-2016-match-report>
 in the last 16 even if the signs were there long before. Julen Lopetegui may 
have replaced Vicente del Bosque but the word revenge must be playing on the 
minds of some Spanish players as they head to Turin on Thursday night. The
Azzurri have changed managers, too, with Giampiero Ventura replacing Antonio 
Conte. Both should be given time before being fully judged but a knee-jerk 
reaction would be sadly inevitable with a defeat, pointing to a tight game with 
an emphasis on playing it safe.AS

10) Chile in a pickle

Things are hotting up for Chile. The Copa America holders are in a pickle 
after two surprisingly bad results last month, as a defeat in Paraguay and a 
0-0 home draw with Bolivia left them eighthin the South American qualifying 
league 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/06/south-american-world-cup-qualifiers-lionel-messi-neymar>
. Their task on Thursday is to thrive at high altitude and beat Ecuador, who 
are two points and two places above them. Ecuador are also on a mission of 
atonement, having endured an even worse September than Chile, a 3-0 home 
spanking by Brazil being followed by defeat in Peru. Chile tend not to enjoy 
their trips to the high altitude of Quito, where their last four visits have 
ended in defeat. A similar result on Thursday would leave them with a mountain 
to climb to reach the World Cup.PD
 