
Internazionale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale> appointed 
Stefano Pioli on Tuesday as their ninth coach in the past six years, his first 
managerial role with one of Italy’s top three clubs.

The 51-year-old, who has coached 10 clubs in Italy’s top two divisions without 
winning a major trophy, replaced the DutchmanFrank de Boer who was dismissed 
last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/inter-sack-head-coach-frank-de-boer-europa-league>
 after 85 days and 14 games in charge.

Internazionale sack head coach Frank de Boer after two months in charge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/inter-sack-head-coach-frank-de-boer-europa-league>
Inter, enduring their fifth consecutive season without Champions League 
football, confirmed the appointment in a statement. “Internazionale is 
delighted to confirm that terms have been agreed with Stefano Pioli to become 
Inter’s new head coach until June 30, 2018,” the club said.

Pioli led Lazio to third place in Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> in 2014-15 but was less 
successful last season and was sacked in April after an embarrassing 4-1 defeat 
by neighbours Roma.

Inter, Milan and Juventus are considered to be Italy’s biggest three clubs, 
although neither of the Milan sides has won a Serie A title since 2011.

A central defender in his playing days, Pioli’s first job as a coach was with 
the Serie B side Salernitana in 2003. He moved to Modena, another second-tier 
side the following year, and got his first chance in the top flight with Parma 
in 2006. He was dismissed after six months with the team one place off the 
bottom and went back to Serie B where he coached Grosseto, Piacenza and 
Sassuolo.

Chievo brought him back to Serie A in 2010 and he moved to Palermo the 
following year but lasted only 90 days at the notoriously volatile club. Next 
stop was Bologna and he kept them in Serie A during two difficult seasons 
before moving to Lazio.

Inter won the Champions League, Serie A and Coppa Italia treble under José 
Mourinho in 2010 but have not been able to recapture that sort of form, often 
languishing in mid-table.

The Chinese electronics retailer Suning Commerce Group bought nearly 70% of 
Inter for €270m (£225m at the time) in June, less than three years after the 
club had been sold to a consortium led by the Indonesian businessman Erick 
Thohir.

The club were once owned by Massimo Moratti, whose family control the Italian 
oil refiner Saras, from 1995 to 2013.
 