
Internazionale could not take full advantage of Fiorentina’s slip-up at Napoli 
when they were held to a 0-0 draw at home by theSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> champions, Juventus.

In a hard-fought encounter at the Giuseppe Meazza stadium Inter almost broke 
the deadlock in the 27th minute but the Juve goalkeeper, Gianluigi Buffon, 
tipped Marcelo Brozovic’s curled effort on to the bar.

Juve, too, were denied by the woodwork when, in the 69th minute, Sami 
Khedira’s right-footed shot beat Samir Handanovic but rattled away off the left 
post.

The outcome in Milan left Inter in third place, level on 17 points 
<http://www.fifa.com/world-match-centre/nationalleagues/nationalleague=italy-serie-a-2000000026/standings/>
 with Roma in second.

Fiorentina remain top by one point despite their five-match winning streak in 
all competitions ending with a 2-1 defeat atNapoli. Gonzalo Higuaín scored the 
winner with a quarter of an hour remaining, only a couple of minutes after 
Nikola Kalinic had cancelled out Lorenzo Insigne’s goal forNapoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> at the beginning of the second 
half.

Napoli’s third successive win lifted them to fourth, with Sassuolo a place 
below them on goal difference after beatingLazio 2-1.

Domenico Berardi’s seventh-minute penalty for Sassuolo and Simone Missiroli’s 
goal on the hour proved enough to beat the Rome club, who pulled one back 
through Felipe Anderson but then had Danilo Cataldi sent off in injury time.

Palermo ended a four-game losing run by edging to a 1-0 victory at rock-bottom 
Bologna, the bottom club who slumped to their seventh defeat in eight games.

Franco Vázquez scored the only goal of the game in the 23rd minute to leave 
the hosts with just three points to their name.

Panagiotis Tachtsidis’ last-gasp winner sealed a dramatic 3-2 victory for 
10-manGenoa over Chievo, who took the lead in the first minute through Alberto 
Paloschi.

Goals from Leonardo Pavoletti and Serge Gakpe put Genoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa> ahead but the game looked to have 
turned in Chievo’s favour when Blerim Dzemaili was dismissed and Sergio 
Pellisier levelled, only for Tachtsidis to win it for the hosts.

Luca Paganini’s header and Federico Dionisi’s shot from just outside the area 
gaveFrosinone a 2-0 victory over Sampdoria.

Internazionale 0-0 Juventus: Serie A – as it happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/oct/18/internazionale-v-juventus-serie-a-live> 