
Internazionale lead Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> heading into the 
Christmas break but a 2-1 defeat byLazio means their advantage is only one 
point.

Antonio Candreva opened the scoring and Mauro Icardi’s second-half leveller 
was rendered redundant when Candreva stuck away his own saved penalty with 
three minutes remaining to condemn Roberto Mancini’s team to defeat.

Juventus extend winning streak after Mandzukic and Paul Pogba sink Carpi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/20/carpi-juventus-serie-a-report-mandzukic-pogba>
Felipe Melo conceded that spot-kick and was later shown red for a dangerous 
challenge on Lucas Biglia. TheLazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio>
 midfielder Sergej Milinkovic-Savic followed him down the tunnel for dissent in 
stoppage time.

Fiorentina and Napoli are still in the hunt for the title after claiming wins 
overAtalanta and Chievo respectively.

Gonzalo Higuaín’s brace helped Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> to a 3-1 victory in Bergamo. 
Marek Hamsik also scored a penalty and Alejandro Gomez replied for the hosts. 
Both sides lost a player after Jorginho and Gabriel Paletta were dismissed.

Fiorentina beat Chievo 2-0 through goals from Nikola Kalinic and Josip Ilicic, 
dislodgingJuventus from the Champions League places after the reigning 
champions’3-2 triumph at Carpi earlier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/20/carpi-juventus-serie-a-report-mandzukic-pogba>
.

Rudi García’s Roma returned to winning ways after they snapped a four-game 
winless run by downingGenoa 2-0 at the Stadio Olimpico.

The capital club lost Edin Dzeko to a red card but won the match with goals 
from Alessandro Florenzi and Sadiq Umar.

Milan ended the year on a high by edging out Frosinone 4-2 at the Stadio 
Matusa thanks to goals from Ignazio Abate, Carlos Bacca, Alex and Giacomo 
Bonaventura. Daniel Ciofani had put the hosts ahead and Federico Dionisi scored 
in the final stages.

Sampdoria claimed a first win under Vincenzo Montella as Palermo were beaten 
2-0 by goals from Roberto Soriano and David Ivan; and the bottom side,Hellas 
Verona, were held to a 1-1 draw at home to Sassuolo as Luca Toni’s goal 
cancelled out Sergio Floccari’s opener.

The next round of games takes place on 6 January.
 