
Internazionale went on a rare scoring spree to thrash the Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> newcomers Frosinone 4-0 
and go clear at the top, the first time Roberto Mancini’s team have won a 
league match by more than one goal this season.

Fiorentina, previously level with Inter, needed two goals from the substitute 
Nikola Kalinic to rescue a 2-2 draw at home to lowlyEmpoli after they had 
trailed 2-0. Their coach, Paulo Sousa, admitted later he had made mistakes with 
his team selection.

Vincenzo Montella made a losing start as coach of Sampdoria, who went own 1-0 
atUdinese, and Davide Ballardini, starting a second stint in charge of Palermo, 
saw the Sicilians held 1-1 atLazio.

There was an amazing finish at Genoa where Francesco Acerbi scored in the 94th 
minute for the visitorsSassuolo to make it 1-1, only for Leonardo Pavoletti to 
restore the lead and win it for the hosts almost immediately. Both teams had a 
player sent off in the first half.

Inter have 30 points from 13 games, two ahead of Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> and Napoli, who ground out a 
2-0 win atVerona with second-half goals from Lorenzo Insigne and Gonzalo 
Higuaín.

AS Roma, held 2-2 at Bologna on Saturday, are a further point behind in fourth.

Jonathan Biabiany pounced on a rebound to put Inter ahead in the 29th minute 
and Mauro Icardi doubled their lead early in the second half from Adem Ljajic’s 
pass.

Inter, who had scored only 12 goals in their first 12 games and won eight 
times by single-goal margins, added late goals through the defender Jeison 
Murillo and substitute Marcelo Brozovic.

Fiorentina’s Sousa conceded he picked the wrong team after watching Marko 
Livaja and Marcel Buechel giveEmpoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/empoli> a 2-0 half-time lead.

“Before the game I was convinced that this was the best line-up. But, 
reviewing the first half, I would not field it again, of course not,” said the 
Portuguese coach.

The visitors could easily have gone three ahead as Riccardo Saponara fired 
over and then had a strong penalty appeal waved away.

The game changed dramatically in the second half after Fiorentina brought on 
the Croatia forward Kalinic who reduced the arrears with a header in the 56th 
minute and turned in Khouma Babacar’s pass to level just after the hour.

In a dramatic finale Kalinic hit the bar and saw another effort blocked by 
Lukasz Skorupski, who also made a superb save in stoppage time to turn away 
Matias Vecino’s long-range shot.

Emmanuel Badu’s first-half goal for Udinese ensured a losing start for 
Montella, whose predecessor atSampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria>, Walter Zenga, was fired after 
only 14 matches. The visitors also had Ervin Zukanovic given a straight red 
card.

Ballardini made his Palermo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> 
debut against Lazio, where he spent an unhappy six months in 2009-10, and saw 
the defender Edoardo Goldaniga give the Sicilians a first-half lead before 
Antonio Candreva levelled with a second-half penalty for Lazio.

Tempers flared just before half-time in Genoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa> when Sassuolo’s temperamental 
striker Domenico Berardi was sent off for a wild kick at Cristian Anseldi and 
Diego Perotti was dismissed for the hosts after he also got involved.

The Venezuela midfielder Tomas Rincon put Genoa ahead with a curling effort 
early in the second half before the astonishing finale.
 