
Ben Sahar’s stoppage-time winner completed a stunning triumph for Hapoel Be’er 
Sheva, who came from behind to beat Internazionale 3-2 and dump the Italian 
side out of theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league>, a result that left 
the rest of Group K wide open.

First-half goals from Mauro Icardi and Marcelo Brozovic put Inter in control 
in Israel, but Lúcio Maranhão gave Hapoel a second-half lifeline before Anthony 
Nwakaeme converted from the penalty spot after the Inter goalkeeper Samir 
Handanovic was sent off.

Wayne Rooney ignites Manchester United in rout of Feyenoord
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/manchester-united-feyenoord-europa-league-match-report>
The result sends Inter out, while Hapoel will head to St Mary’s for a 
winner-takes-all match against Southampton,who lost 1-0 at Sparta Prague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/sparta-prague-southampton-europa-league-match-report>
.

The League of Ireland side Dundalk still retain a chance of progress despite 
being beaten 1-0 at home by AZ Alkmaar. A goal from Wout Weghorst after nine 
minutes proved enough to win it, butDundalk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundalk> remain in with a chance of 
qualification. If they beatMaccabi Tel Aviv in their final group game and AZ do 
not beatZenit St Petersburg, who have won the group already and who beat 
Maccabi 2-0 on Thursday, they will go through.

Anderlecht, St Etienne, Roma, Genk, Athletic Bilbao, Olympiacos, and Krasnodar 
all got the results they needed to go through on Thursday night.

Anderlecht beat the Group C whipping boys Gabala 3-1 in Baku, with Rashad 
Eyubov sent off late on for the hosts. Later,St Etienne’s goalless draw with 
Mainz was enough to send the Ligue 1 side through.

Athletic Bilbao and Genk both advanced from Group F with wins over Sassuolo and
Rapid Vienna respectively. Raúl García and Aritz Aduriz helped Athletic come 
from behind to beat Sassuolo 3-2, while Nikos Karelis struck in a 1-0 Genk win.

Roma needed only to avoid defeat against Viktoria Plzen but Edin Dzeko scored 
a hat-trick in a 4-1 win.

Austria Vienna missed the chance to follow them through in Group E as they 
lost 2-1 at home toAstra Giurgiu, with Constantin Budescu scoring an 
88th-minute winner from the penalty spot.

A 1-1 draw with Young Boys was enough for Olympiakos, but Apoel Nicosia could 
not follow them out of Group B as they lost 2-1 toAstana, having played almost 
an hour with 10 men following Inaki Astiz’s dismissal. Astana got an 
84th-minute winner from Djorde Despotovic.

A 1-1 draw with Salzburg was enough for Krasnodar thanks to Nice’s 2-0 loss to 
the Group I leadersSchalke. However, Krasnodar left it late, with Fedor Smolov 
cancelling out Munas Dabbur’s first-half strike with only five minutes 
remaining.

Southampton on the edge after Costa Nhamoinesu hits Sparta Prague winner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/sparta-prague-southampton-europa-league-match-report>
Several others passed up their opportunities.

A win for either Celta Vigo or Standard Liege in their head-to-head meeting 
would have sent the victors through from Group G, but it finished 1-1 after 
Kostas Laifis levelled for Standard with nine minutes left. Iago Aspas had 
struck for Celta eight minutes in, but he was sent off in stoppage time.

Ajax made sure of topping the group with a 2-0 victory over winless 
Panathinaikos, having handed European debuts to four teenagers and seen Kenny 
Tete score his first senior goal.

Braga also knew a win would suffice, but they were held to a 2-2 draw by Gent, 
with all four goals coming in the first half.

The Group H winners Shakhtar Donetsk enjoyed a 4-0 rout of Konyaspor.

Group L is still open too with only one point separating the leaders 
Osmanlispor from the other three in the group following Thursday’s results.

Steaua Bucharest beat the group leaders 2-1, while Villarreal were held to a 
1-1 draw atFC Zurich, who levelled from the penalty spot in the 87th minute 
through Roberto Rodríguez.

PAOK’s stoppage-time goal muddied the picture in Group J. Fiorentina would 
have advanced with a draw but Garry Rodrigues struck in the third minute of 
time added on to deny them.

Liberec needed to win to stay in the competition and duly beat Qarabag 3-0, so 
all four teams have options going into the final match.

Fenerbahce’s comfortable 2-0 win over the 10 men of Zorya Lugansk kept the 
pressure on Manchester United, who responded with a4-0 win over Feyenoord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/manchester-united-feyenoord-europa-league-match-report>
 and moved into second place behind the Turkish club.
 