
The last time Falkirk won the Scottish Cup, in 1957, Inverness Caledonian 
Thistle <https://www.theguardian.com/football/invernesscaledonianthistle> were 
still 37 years from formation. The historical significance of this pair meeting 
at Hampden Park on Saturday afternoon in pursuit of the famous old trophy, 
then, should not be understated.

Cup competitions were never quite the guaranteed domain of the Old Firm but 
the demise of Rangers has offered a recent freshness to knockout events. They 
are to be cherished by clubs not afforded routine limelight.

Dundee 0-1 Inverness | Scottish Premiership match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/09/dundee-inverness-scottish-premiership-match-report>
In the case of Inverness, in the year of their 21st birthday, this flagship 
occasion and opportunity to claim what would be a first piece of major 
silverware could hardly be more timely. The abandoning of more than 100 years 
of history when closing down two Highland League clubs, Caledonian and 
Inverness Thistle, in order to guarantee the town could finally join the senior 
set-up is nowadays often forgotten but remains a significant point in Scottish 
football history. At the time, it was national news.

In 2015, Caley Thistle are European qualifiers and comfortably the third 
ranked team in Scotland’s top flight. They are the justified favourites to see 
offFalkirk <https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk>.

Glancing back a little over two decades, the Inverness football scene was 
overshadowed by civil war. Caledonian’s “rebel” supporters staged a string of 
vehement protests, including a pitch invasion, against what they viewed as a 
needless merger with Thistle.

Caley had always been the bigger – more successful, more widely unpopular – 
club but not routinely the better team. Thistle were at a particularly low ebb 
on and off the field by the time amalgamation talk turned serious. And yet, in 
the 1970s, Thistle were only narrowly defeated on a vote for Scottish League 
membership in their own right by Ferranti, later Meadowbank, Thistle.

The 1994 concern among the Thistle contingent was that their club would be 
airbrushed from history, a matter seemingly endorsed by the choice of Caley’s 
home ground for the new club’s matches and the inflammatory painting of urinal 
walls in their old foes’ colours.

Such bad feeling is pertinent because it has never fully been removed. A large 
chunk of the supports of both clubs, needless to say, vowed never to follow the 
new club. And never have. A generation was, in part, thereby skipped.

Caley Thistle’s subsequent charge through the senior leagues has not been 
replicated by a swell of support in their home city, a factor not lost on those 
inside the club. Home fixtures against Celtic and their Highland rivals, Ross 
County, do not sell out.

There are wider reasons for this, some of them not unique at all to Inverness, 
but the wish for a cup win to remove some antipathy from the past is openly 
acknowledged. There have been high points already,none more so than the famous 
Scottish Cup win at Celtic Park 15 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2000/feb/09/match.sport>, but tangible 
reward would surely create a firmer legacy for a club borne out of controversy.

Nobody represents the football dynamic of the Highland capital better than 
Charlie Christie. He grew up a Thistle supporter and served both Highland 
League sides with distinction – with a spell at Celtic in between – before 
taking the natural step to Caley Thistle. He starred once more for them in 
progression to the Premier League, later managing the club and now heading its 
youth set-up. Christie’s son, Ryan, is a terrific prospect in the Inverness 
midfield and the Scottish Football Writers’ young player of the year.

“As players at the time, we were all 100% for it [the merger],” Christie 
recalls. “Maybe the Caley ones in a selfish sense, because we realised we would 
be involved. The players got involved in publicly backing it and in retrospect 
that was a bad decision but we were looking at it solely as football players 
and we saw it as a way forward.

“I believe now – especially now, with Europe and a Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> final – we have proved to be 
100% correct. Caley couldn’t have done that on their own.

“I was a Thistle guy and my father was a Thistle guy. I was brought up with 
him talking a lot about the lost vote in 1974. By the time of my Caley days, if 
we drew a team from Scotland’s bottom two leagues in the cup at home, we 
expected to win. That was a fact.”

Part of the motivation back then was to prove a point against supposedly 
superior, battle-hardened opponents from the south. That attitude has never 
really changed at a club which punches well above its weight financially and 
still has no training facility of its own.

Players who have left Inverness, almost to a man, speak in glowing terms about 
the atmosphere at the club. Successful managers – Steve Paterson, Craig 
Brewster, John Robertson, Terry Butcher – have never succeeded when departing 
for bigger clubs.

“That cannot be coincidence,” Christie insists. “We must have something as a 
club. It maybe stems from the Highland League days – we don’t have spoilt 
players here.

“I remember Terry going to Hibs and doing an interview where he said he was 
looking forward to an office with a window and a training ground. Well, he had 
both of those …”Butcher was to preside over an embarrassing Hibs relegation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/25/hibernian-hamilton-scottish-premiership-play-off>
, of course.

Under John Hughes, despite losing their main striker Billy Mckay to Wigan in 
January and while playing considerably more expansive football than before, 
Inverness have blossomed. Silver tTrophies don’t justify a club’s existence 
but, where Inverness are concerned, one would offer an endorsement of positive 
transition.


Probable teams



Inverness Caledonian Thistle Esson; Raven, Warren, Meekings, Shinnie; Tansey, 
Draper; Watkins, Christie, Williams; Ofere.

Falkirk MacDonald; Duffie, McCracken, Dick, Grant; Taiwo, Kerr, Vaulks, 
Sibbald, Smith; Loy.
 