
The turnout was huge and for those who still hope that Iran’s hardline 
theocratic regime can be reformed, it was full of pathos. AsAli Akbar Hashemi 
Rafsanjani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/08/akbar-hashemi-rafsanjani-obituary>
, the Islamic republic’s former president, was laid to rest on Tuesday in south 
Tehran, hundreds of thousands of Iranians gathered in and around Tehran 
University.

For many of those present, the scene was reminiscent of the heady days of 
protest during the stillborn “green revolution” of 2009. Mourners turned the 
funeral into a rare display of public dissent, in the biggest gathering of its 
kind for seven years. The volume of state loudspeakers was turned up to drown 
out the chants in support of the two main opposition leaders under house 
arrest, Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi, as well as former reformist 
president Mohammad Khatami, who has also faced growing harassment.

Rafsanjani’s sudden death has deprived moderates of a key powerbroker who 
retained significant influence in the regime despite his views becoming 
steadily less hardline in recent years.

Iran’s current president, Hassan Rouhani, a close ally of Rafsanjani, urged 
unity after the ceremony, tweeting “let’s make bridges, not walls”. A deputy 
speaker of the parliament, Ali Motahari, a rare outspoken MP, said the passion 
on display showed the establishment had to end the house arrests.

Though many mourners took part simply to show respect for Rafsanjani, others 
took the size of the crowd as grounds for hope that a campaign for greater 
democracy, women’s rights and personal freedoms could be revived. Leading 
student activist Bahareh Hedayat, who was released in September after nearly 
seven years in prison, was among the crowd. “Rafsanjani’s popularity was a sign 
that people still want change and that they’re pursuing this through legal and 
peaceful means,” she told theObserver from Tehran.
 Mourners attend the funeral of Rafsanjani. Photograph: Majid Saeedi/Getty 
Images 
“They accept someone who was a senior cleric within the system but who shifted 
towards the people. Iranians welcome even the smallest of changes and reforms. 
This is an opportunity for the establishment to listen to people’s demands 
instead of pursuing violence and repression.”

In the 2005 elections, Rafsanjani was such a hated symbol of clerical 
aristocracy that the Iranian electorate chose hardliner Mahmoud Ahmadinejad as 
president over him. But after 2009 he underwent an apparent conversion to 
democratic reform, siding with the opposition and calling for the release of 
political prisoners at Friday prayers.

Hedayat said: “Rafsanjani was the last influential figure reformists had 
within the power system, a person who could keep the hope for reform alive. The 
system has to realise that the majority of Iranians want change and that desire 
for change won’t disappear.”

Mohammad Taghi Karoubi, the son of the arrested opposition leader, had a 
message for Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the country’s current supreme leader. “He 
was so resented once, but because he changed, we acknowledged that. This is a 
message to which Mr Khamenei should listen.”

Khamenei put differences aside on Tuesday and led funeral prayers, as the 
authorities did their best to portray Rafsanjani as a faithful revolutionary.

Gholamhossein Karbaschi, the former mayor of Tehran, said: “He could resolve a 
lot of issues, but even his death was influential. There is a psychological 
shock over his death and the reformists can use this to strengthen their 
position.”

But Sadeq Kharrazi, Iran’s former ambassador to the UN, noted that reformists 
had lost two highly influential figures in recent months – Rafsanjani and 
Ayatollah Abdul-Karim Mousavi Ardebili. However, he added: “I think 
Rafsanjani’s death will have a positive impact on the reformists.

“We have a nostalgic society,” he said.
 