
Dadcore is inspired by the wardrobe of the man who gave up on fashion when he 
became a father. Ostensibly its a wardrobe full of practical, comfortable, yet 
sadly dated clothes, but the concepts behind it and how it has arisen are 
interesting. Unlike most fashion trends – which are inspired by film, musicians 
or workwear – the idea of dadcore came from comedy one-liners and sketches that 
developed into internet jokes and memes before being seen on the catwalks.

It began at the turn of the noughties with a reference in the 2000 film 
adaptation ofNick Hornby’s High Fidelity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/jul/21/nickhornby>. Jack Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jack-black>’s character Barry calls out 
John Cusack <https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-cusack>’s Rob for wearing 
“the worst fucking sweater I’ve ever seen. That’s a Cosby sweater. A COSBY 
SWEATER.” The line screeches out of Black’s mouth with exaggerated disgust over 
a maroon, beige and brown striped jumper.

Of course, 16 years later, with sexual assault charges against him, that’s a 
whole different sort of insult, but back thenBill Cosby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bill-cosby>’s name was synonymous with 
America’s favourite dad. If there is a text that sets up the caricature behind 
dadcore more perfectly, it’s hard to think of one. Hornby’s novel-turned-film 
was a beardedBon Iver <https://www.theguardian.com/music/boniver>-esque hymn to 
lost youth and a calcifying life crisis. Wearing a jazzy sweater at that point 
– thanks toNoel Edmonds <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/noel-edmonds>, 
Carlton <http://freshprince.wikia.com/wiki/Carlton_Banks> from The Fresh Prince 
Of Bel-Air 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/17/the-fresh-prince-of-bel-air-when-the-mainstream-met-afrocentric-style>
 andGyles Brandreth <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gyles-brandreth> – 
marks you out as a man who doesn’t care if he looks like a fuddy-duddy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdad-dressing-fashion-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a9d29b15633d2e9bc58908941a2aca3c5aa1c6%2F0_0_4320_6480%2F4320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20dadcore%20a%20fashion%20trend%20to%20outlast%20them%20all%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdad-dressing-fashion-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20dadcore%20a%20fashion%20trend%20to%20outlast%20them%20all%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdad-dressing-fashion-trend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a9d29b15633d2e9bc58908941a2aca3c5aa1c6%2F0_0_4320_6480%2F4320.jpg>
 Tomorrowland A/W 16. Photograph: PR company handout 
Another trend now associated with dadcore style is wide-legged, front-pleated 
trousers. These fell out of favour in the noughties, when Dior Homme and Raf 
Simons brought back skinny jeans and the flat-fronted trouser was considered a 
more modern silhouette, a look that would rule for almost a decade. But now 
designers such asJ.W.Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/03/jw-anderson-loewe-interview> 
have resurrected the voluminous trouser look.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdad-dressing-fashion-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5289d239a5cadac8b8b6b06795f3f35af7303332%2F0_101_3208_4109%2F3208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20dadcore%20a%20fashion%20trend%20to%20outlast%20them%20all%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdad-dressing-fashion-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20dadcore%20a%20fashion%20trend%20to%20outlast%20them%20all%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdad-dressing-fashion-trend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5289d239a5cadac8b8b6b06795f3f35af7303332%2F0_101_3208_4109%2F3208.jpg>
E Tautz <https://etautz.com/> A/W 16. Photograph: James Gourley/Rex/Shutterstock
It’s dad jeans – typically stonewashed with a tapered leg and a nice high 
waistband you can tuck your T-shirt into – that are dadcore’s crowning glory. 
The concept of the terrible jeans that parents wore was first mocked on a
Saturday Night Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/saturday-night-live> sketch from 2003 
featuringTina Fey <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tina-fey> and Amy Poehler
 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-poehler> advertising something called 
Mom Jeans <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2aVxNH6iN9I>. Unflatteringly cut, 
with “nine-inch zipper, casual front pleats”, these jeans were the antithesis 
of the bodycon, figure-hugging jean that had become a mainstream fashion hit 
for both men and women. “Give her something that says, ‘I’m not a woman any 
more, I’m a mom!’” went the all-too-true tagline. A couple of years later, an 
article on style.com rejigged the concept into “dad jeans” – specifically about 
the one pair of jeans some men grow old with, irrespective of how bad they look 
and how poor the fit. “The wash? Wal-Mart blue. The crotch? The length of a 
baby’s arm.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdad-dressing-fashion-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70c967748f5d0954a6f9a0f8280a17924b7c39b8%2F56_294_2162_2816%2F2162.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20dadcore%20a%20fashion%20trend%20to%20outlast%20them%20all%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdad-dressing-fashion-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20dadcore%20a%20fashion%20trend%20to%20outlast%20them%20all%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fdad-dressing-fashion-trend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70c967748f5d0954a6f9a0f8280a17924b7c39b8%2F56_294_2162_2816%2F2162.jpg>
 President Barack Obama - the commander-in-chief of dadcore. Photograph: Alex 
Brandon/AP 
President Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> was 
constantly mocked for his “dorky dad” style throughout his presidency. “I think 
it’s funny that he’s involved in this fashion icon stuff because these pants 
he’s probably had for 10 years,”Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> told TV show Access 
Hollywood <https://www.accesshollywood.com/> in 2008. Republican political 
commentatorSarah Palin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/sarahpalin> put it 
more snappily: “People are looking at Putin as one who wrestles bears and 
drills for oil. They look at our president as one who wears mom jeans.”

Obama defended his look to Ryan Seacrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/hadley-freeman-blog/2011/dec/08/ryan-seacrest-today-hadley-freeman>
 during a radio interview: “I’ve been unfairly maligned about my jeans. The 
truth is, generally, I look very sharp in jeans.”

As his presidential term comes to an end, he might be proved right: Levi’s 
have just reissued their iconic 505 jean 
<http://www.levi.co.uk/US/en_US/category/men/jeans/fitnumber/505-straight>. 
This style has been out of favour since the 1970s (when it was shot in crotch 
close-up on the cover ofthe Rolling Stones’ Sticky Fingers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/16/from-observer-archive-16-may-1971-rolling-stones-safe-sound-marks-death-60s>
 andon the Ramones for their debut album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/12/ramones-first-album-goes-gold-after-38-years>
) but many fashion insiders recognise it as pure dadcore. Even Jonathan Cheung, 
Levi’s head of design, admittedin a recent interview 
<http://www.gq.com/story/levis-505c-new-style-archives-denim-jeans>: “It’s a 
little bit dad jeans.”

At this rate, the dadcore look will probably end up being one of the defining 
styles of our times.
 