
What is football without hope? It’s what drives all of us, however big or 
small the club we support. There’s always next week – another game, another 
chance. It’s why so many of us spend much of deadline day glued to the TV and 
refreshing rolling news feeds. That one extra player might just be the one we 
need, the one that makes all the difference, even if we hadn’t thought of him 
or even heard of him at this time yesterday.

Meet FC Santa Claus, the Lapland club aiming for promotion this Christmas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa90/2015/dec/09/fc-santa-claus-lapland-christmas>
We came perilously close to finding out the answer to that initial question 
when we were filming in Greece. At a packed Leoforos – the locals’ name for the 
Apostolos Nikolaidis Stadium, the home of Panathinaikos – an announcement came 
over the tannoy that the Athens derby betweenPanathinaikos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/panathinaikos> and Olympiakos would not 
now take place, after visiting player Alfred Finnbogason was hit by a flare in 
the pre-match pitch walk. It was over half an hour after the scheduled kick-off 
time.

The tension around the fixture, which had been palpable in the hours and days 
leading up to it, spilled over. Fans from the Gate 13 section behind the goal 
chucked flares at the riot police. The police advanced. Some fans broke through 
the barriers, moving towards the police and wielding projectiles, including 
more flares, broken-off seats and any other debris available. The police 
charged with batons, and tear gas was released. It took some 40 minutes for 
some semblance of order to be restored.

There’s no excuse for the violence – the moment when a father who was sitting 
in front of me led his 12-year-old son out of the stand after a flare shot 
narrowly past the boy’s head remains etched on my brain – but there was a 
feeling that so many fans just couldn’t take any more. Wherever we went at the 
weekend, and whoever we spoke to, people were just unable to stop themselves 
blurting out the hopelessness of it all.Olympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos>, they said, were protected 
from on high.

The champions’ owner, Evangelos Marinakis, is currently being investigated 
(again) in a fixing scandal, having already been cleared once this year in a 
case which had its roots as far back as 2011. Yet what was almost as bad was 
that even those who didn’t reference the criminal element of this feel that the 
cards are stacked.

Safe standing is popular in Germany and should be welcomed by British leagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa90/2015/oct/09/safe-standing-bundesliga-fans-premier-league>
Olympiacos have won 17 of the last 19 Super League titles. It is difficult to 
see anything changing in a hurry, with their position gaining strength every 
year as they bank another season’s worth of Champions League money. Whether 
Panathinaikos’ fan-funded model can bridge that gap is open to question, 
particularly in a country where people have problems of daily subsistence far 
more important than funding football. In the north, Aris have begun to move 
away from that.

There are glimmers of improvement. PSAP (players union) representative 
Stamatis Syrigos explained to us how players are more protected than before, 
which is a big step, with unpaid wages having been a huge problem. What needs 
to happen next is for some of that hope to filter down to the fans – because 
hope is important.

Follow Copa90 on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/user/Copa90football>, 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/copa90> and Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Copa90>
 