
I am sitting in a circle in a grey, corporate room with 10 housing association 
employees – administrators, security guards, cleaners – eyes darting about 
nervously. We are asked to eat a sandwich in silence. To think about every 
taste and texture, every chewing motion and bite. Far from being relaxed, I 
feel excruciatingly uncomfortable and begin to wonder if my jaw is 
malfunctioning. I’m here to write about a new mindfulness initiative, and since 
I’ve never to my knowledge had any mental health issues and usually thrive 
under stress, I anticipate a straightforward, if awkward, experience.

Then comes the meditation. We’re told to close our eyes and think about our 
bodies in relation to the chair, the floor, the room: how each limb touches the 
arms, the back, the legs of the seat, while breathing slowly. But there’s one 
small catch: I can’t breathe. No matter how fast, slow, deep or shallow my 
breaths are, it feels as though my lungs are sealed. My instincts tell me to 
run, but I can’t move my arms or legs. I feel a rising panic and worry that I 
might pass out, my mind racing. Then we’re told to open our eyes and the 
feeling dissipates. I look around. No one else appears to have felt they were 
facing imminent death. What just happened?

For days afterwards, I feel on edge. I have a permanent tension headache and I 
jump at the slightest unexpected noise. The fact that something seemingly 
benign, positive and hugely popular had such a profound effect has taken me by 
surprise.

Mindfulness, the practice of sitting still and focusing on your breath and 
thoughts, has surged in popularity over the last few years, with a boom in 
apps, online courses, books and articles extolling its virtues. It can be done 
alone or with a guide (digital or human), and with so much hand-wringing about 
our frenetic, time-poor lifestyles and information overload, it seems to offer 
a wholesome solution: a quiet port in the storm and an opportunity for 
self-examination.The Headspace app 
<https://www.headspace.com/signup?origintoken=google-b&gclid=CMH5x92gqcoCFYOfGwodLTINyQ>
, which offers 10-minute guided meditations on your smartphone, has more than 
three million users worldwide and is worth over £25m. Meanwhile, publishers 
have rushed to put out workbooks and guides to line the wellness shelves in 
bookshops.

After meditation I would do things that were out of character, acting 
erratically. I had panic attacks

Large organisations such as Google, Apple, Sony, Ikea, the Department of Health
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Transport for London have 
adopted mindfulness or meditation as part of their employee packages, claiming 
it leads to a happier workforce, increased productivity and fewer sick days. 
But could such a one-size-fits-all solution backfire in unexpected ways?

Even a year later, recalling the sensations and feelings I experienced in that 
room summons a resurgent wave of panic and tightness in my chest. Out of 
curiosity, I try the Headspace app, but the breathing exercises leave me with 
pins and needles in my face and a burgeoning terror. “Let your thoughts move 
wherever they please,” the app urges. I just want it to stop. And, as I 
discovered, I’m not the only person who doesn’t find mindfulness comforting.

Claire, a 37-year-old in a highly competitive industry, was sent on a 
three-day mindfulness course with colleagues as part of a training programme. 
“Initially, I found it relaxing,” she says, “but then I found I felt completely 
zoned out while doing it. Within two or three hours of later sessions, I was 
starting to really, really panic.” The sessions resurfaced memories of her 
traumatic childhood, and she experienced a series of panic attacks. “Somehow, 
the course triggered things I had previously got over,” Claire says. “I had a 
breakdown and spent three months in a psychiatric unit. It was a depressive 
breakdown with psychotic elements related to the trauma, and several 
dissociative episodes.”

Four and a half years later, Claire is still working part-time and is in and 
out of hospital. She became addicted to alcohol, when previously she was driven 
and high-performing, and believes mindfulness was the catalyst for her 
breakdown. Her doctors have advised her to avoid relaxation methods, and she 
spent months in one-to-one therapy. “Recovery involves being completely 
grounded,” she says, “so yoga is out.”

Research suggests her experience might not be unique. Internet forums abound 
with people seeking advice after experiencing panic attacks, hearing voices or 
finding that meditation has deepened their depression after some initial 
respite. In their recent book,The Buddha Pill 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/283080/>, 
psychologists Miguel Farias and Catherine Wikholm voice concern about the lack 
of research into the adverse effects of meditation and the “dark side” of 
mindfulness. “Since the book’s been published, we’ve had a number of emails 
from people wanting to tell us about adverse effects they have experienced,” 
Wikholm says. “Often, people have thought they were alone with this, or they 
blamed themselves, thinking they somehow did it wrong, when actually it doesn’t 
seem it’s all that uncommon.”

People don't talk about the risk of injury. You need a good trainer

One story in particular prompted Farias to look further into adverse effects. 
Louise, a woman in her 50s who had been practising yoga for 20 years, went away 
to a meditation retreat. While meditating, she felt dissociated from herself 
and became worried. Dismissing it as a routine side-effect of meditation, 
Louise continued with the exercises. The following day, after returning home, 
her body felt completely numb and she didn’t want to get out of bed. Her 
husband took her to the doctor, who referred her to a psychiatrist. For the 
next 15 years she was treated for psychotic depression.

Farias looked at the research into unexpected side-effects. A 1992 study by 
David Shapiro, a professor atthe University of California, Irvine, 
<https://uci.edu> found that 63% of the group studied, who had varying degrees 
of experience in meditation and had each tried mindfulness, had suffered at 
least one negative effect from meditation retreats, while 7% reported 
profoundly adverse effects including panic, depression, pain and anxiety. 
Shapiro’s study was small-scale; several research papers, including a 2011 
study by Duke University in North Carolina, have raised concerns at the lack of 
quality research on the impact of mindfulness, specifically the lack of 
controlled studies.

Farias feels that media coverage inflates the moderate positive effects of 
mindfulness, and either doesn’t report or underplays the downsides. 
“Mindfulness can have negative effects for some people, even if you’re doing it 
for only 20 minutes a day,” Farias says. “It’s difficult to tell how common 
[negative] experiences are, because mindfulness researchers have failed to 
measure them, and may even have discouraged participants from reporting them by 
attributing the blame to them.”

Kate Williams <http://www.psypag.co.uk/kate-williams/>, a PhD researcher in 
psychiatry at the University of Manchester and a mindfulness teacher, says 
negative experiences generally fall into one of two categories. The first is 
seen as a natural emotional reaction to self-exploration. “What we learn 
through meditation is to explore our experiences with an open and nonjudgmental 
attitude, whether the experience that arises is pleasant, unpleasant or 
neutral,” she says.

The second, Williams says, is more severe and disconcerting: “Experiences can 
be quite extreme, to the extent of inducing paranoia, delusions, confusion, 
mania or depression.” After years of training, research and practice, her own 
personal meditation has included some of these negative experiences. “Longer 
periods of meditation have at times led me to feel a loss of identity and left 
me feeling extremely vulnerable, almost like an open wound,” Williams says. As 
an experienced mindfulness teacher, however, she says she is able to deal with 
these negative experiences without lasting effect.

Rachel, a 34-year-old film-maker from London, experimented with mindfulness 
several years ago. An old school friend who had tried it attempted to warn her 
off. “He said, ‘It’s hardcore – you’ll go through things you don’t want to go 
through and it might not always be positive.’ I suppose sitting with yourself 
is hard, especially when you’re in a place where you don’t really like yourself.
Meditation <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/meditation> can’t ‘fix’ 
anyone. That’s not what it’s for.”

After a few months of following guided meditations, and feeling increasingly 
anxious, Rachel had what she describes as a “meltdown” immediately after 
practising some of the techniques she’d learned; the relationship she was in 
broke down. “That’s the horrible hangover I have from this: instead of having a 
sense of calm, I overanalyse and scrutinise everything. Things would run round 
in my mind, and suddenly I’d be doing things that were totally out of 
character, acting very, very erratically. Having panic attacks that would 
restrict my breathing and, once, sent me into a blackout seizure on the studio 
floor that involved an ambulance trip to accident and emergency.” Rachel has 
recovered to some extent; she experiences similar feelings on a lower level 
even today, but has learned to recognise the symptoms and take steps to combat 
them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fis-mindfulness-making-us-ill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3602abada4143bffd6fc9ddc2dd52b13a4582ea%2F0_223_1887_2411%2F1887.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20mindfulness%20making%20us%20ill%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fis-mindfulness-making-us-ill%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20mindfulness%20making%20us%20ill%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fis-mindfulness-making-us-ill%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3602abada4143bffd6fc9ddc2dd52b13a4582ea%2F0_223_1887_2411%2F1887.jpg>
 Illustration: Nick Lowndes for the Guardian 
So are employers and experts right to extol the virtues of mindfulness? 
According toWill Davies <http://www.gold.ac.uk/politics/staff/davies/>, senior 
lecturer at Goldsmiths and author ofThe Happiness Industry 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/283946/s/happiness-industry/>
, our mental health has become a money-making opportunity. “The measurement of 
our mental and emotional states at work is advancing rapidly at the moment,” he 
says, “and businesses are increasingly aware of the financial costs that 
stress, depression and anxiety saddle them with.”

Rather than removing the source of stress, whether that’s unfeasible 
workloads, poor management or low morale, some employers encourage their staff 
to meditate: a quick fix that’s much cheaper, at least in the short term. After 
all, it’s harder to complain that you’re under too much stress at work if your 
employer points out that they’ve offered you relaxation classes: the blame then 
falls on the individual. “Mindfulness has been grabbed in recent years as a way 
to help people cope with their own powerlessness in the workplace,” Davies 
says. “We’re now reaching the stage where mandatory meditation is being 
discussed as a route to heightened productivity, in tandem with various apps, 
wearable devices and forms of low-level employee surveillance.”

One former Labour backbencher, Chris Ruane, recently proposed meditation for 
civil servants, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/14/meditation-help-stressed-public-servants-mps-inquiry>
 on the basis that it would cut Whitehall costs by lowering sick leave through 
stress, rather than making the workplace and jobs less stressful in the first 
place. “The whole agenda is so fraught with contradictions, between its 
economic goals and its supposedly spiritual methods,” Davies argues. “It’s a 
wonder anyone takes it seriously at all.”

Mindfulness <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/mindfulness> has also 
been adopted by the NHS, with many primary care trusts offering and 
recommending the practice in lieu of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). “It 
fits nicely with the Nutribullet-chugging, clean-eating crowd, because it 
doesn’t involve any tablets,” says Bethan, a mental health nurse working in 
east London. “My main problem with it is that it’s just another word for 
awareness.”

My main problem with mindfulness is that it’s just another word for awareness

Over the past few years, Bethan has noticed mindfulness mentioned or 
recommended increasingly at work, and says many colleagues have been offered 
sessions and training as part of their professional development. But the move 
towards mindfulness delivered through online or self-help programmes isn’t for 
everyone. “It’s fine, but realising you have depression isn’t the same as 
tackling it,” she says. “I don’t see it as any different fromthe five-a-day 
campaign <http://www.nhs.uk/livewell/5aday/Pages/5ADAYhome.aspx>: we know what 
we should be eating, but so many of us don’t do it. We know that isolating 
ourselves isn’t helpful when we feel blue, but we still do that.”

Part of the drive is simple cost-cutting. With NHS budgets squeezed, 
resource-intensive and diverse therapies that involve one-on-one consultations 
are far more expensive to dispense than online or group therapies such as 
mindfulness. A CBT course costs the NHS £950 per participant on average, while 
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy, because it’s delivered in a group, comes 
in at around £300 a person. “It’s cheap, and it does make people think twice 
about their choices, so in some respects it’s helpful,” Bethan says.

But in more serious cases, could it be doing more harm than good? Florian Ruths
 <http://www.national.slam.nhs.uk/about-us/our-experts/florianruths/> has 
researched this area for 10 years, as clinical lead for mindfulness-based 
therapy in the South London and Maudsley NHS foundation trust. He believes it 
is possible to teach yourself mindfulness through apps, books or online guides. 
“For most people, I think if you’re not suffering from any clinical issues, or 
illness, or from stress to a degree that you’re somewhat disabled, it’s fine,” 
he says. “We talk about illness as disability, and disability may arise through 
sadness, it may arise through emotional disturbance, like anxiety. Then, 
obviously, it becomes a different ballgame, and it would be good to have a 
guided practice to take you through it.” This runs counter to the drive towards 
online mindfulness apps, delivered without supervision, and with little to no 
adaptation to individual needs or problems.

But for Ruths, the benefits outweigh the risk of unusual effects. “If we 
exercise, we live longer, we’re slimmer, we’ve got less risk of dementia, we’re 
happier and less anxious,” he says. “People don’t talk about the fact that when 
you exercise, you are at a natural risk of injuring yourself. When people say 
in the new year, ‘I’m going to go to the gym’ – out of 100 people who do that, 
about 20 will injure themselves, because they haven’t been taught how to do it 
properly, or they’ve not listened to their bodies. So when you’re a responsible 
clinician or GP, you tell someone to get a good trainer.”

People may not know they have a bipolar vulnerability until they try 
mindfulness

Certain mental health problems increase the risk of adverse effects from 
mindfulness. “If you have post-traumatic stress disorder, there is a certain 
chance that you may find meditation too difficult to do, as you may be 
re-experiencing traumatic memories,” Ruths says. “Once again, it’s about having 
experienced trainers to facilitate that. We’ve seen some evidence that people 
who’ve got bipolar vulnerability may struggle, but we need to keep in mind that 
it may be accidental, or it may be something we don’t know about yet.”

Of course, people may not know they have a bipolar vulnerability until they 
try mindfulness. Or they might have repressed the symptoms of post-traumatic 
stress disorder, only for these to emerge after trying the practice.

How can an individual gauge whether they’re likely to have negative 
side-effects? Both Farias and Ruths agree there isn’t a substantial body of 
evidence yet on how mindfulness works, or what causes negative reactions. One 
of the reasons is obvious: people who react badly tend to drop out of classes, 
or stop using the app or workbook; rather than make a fuss, they quietly walk 
away. Part of this is down to the current faddishness of mindfulness and the 
way it’s marketed: unlike prescribed psychotherapy or CBT, it’s viewed as an 
alternative lifestyle choice, rather than a powerful form of therapy.

Claire is clear about how she feels mindfulness should be discussed and 
delivered: “A lot of the people who are trained in mindfulness are not trained 
in the dangers as well as the potential benefits,” she says. “My experience of 
people who teach it is that they don’t know how to help people if it goes too 
far.”

There is currently no professionally accredited training for mindfulness 
teachers, and nothing to stop anyone calling themselves a mindfulness coach, 
though advocates are calling for that to change. Finding an experienced teacher 
who comes recommended, and not being afraid to discuss negative side-effects 
with your teacher or GP, means you’re far more likely to enjoy and benefit from 
the experience.

As both Claire and I have found, there are alternative relaxation methods that 
can keep you grounded: reading, carving out more time to spend with friends, 
and simply knowing when to take a break from the frenetic pace of life. 
Meanwhile, Claire’s experience has encouraged her to push for a better 
understanding of alternative therapies. “No one would suggest CBT was done by 
someone who wasn’t trained,” she says. “I’d like to see a wider discussion 
about what mindfulness is – and on what the side-effects can be.”

Some names have been changed.

• Dawn Foster’s new book, Lean Out 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/364931/>, is 
published by Watkins.
 