
The departure of Tim Sherwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/26/aston-villa-tim-sherwood-disappointed-sacking>
 from his post as Aston Villa boss was inevitable, no matter how many former 
pros leapt to the defence of a man who had picked up just one point from a 
possible 27. The blame cannot be placed solely at the feet of the manager, who, 
it has been revealed, had little say in a number of the players bought in the 
summer to replace Christian Benteke and Fabian Delph.

Director of recruitment Paddy Reilly and sporting director Hendrik Almstadt 
reportedly didn’t see eye to eye with Sherwood, and their decision to opt for 
the risky policy of signing a large number of players withoutPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> experience has rightly 
come under the microscope. Sherwood may have had his hands tied, but that was 
the path the club chose and he proved incapable of getting results from his 
players.

The club are, as Sherwood said after the late defeat to Swansea City on 
Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/24/aston-villa-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
, in a hole. The former Spurs boss wasn’t helping to fill it, having failed to 
settle on his favoured personnel, let alone system. His decision to chop and 
change until something worked was far from convincing. Villa have used five 
different formations already this season, with 17 different players starting at 
least three times in the league.

The Villa board came to the conclusion that Sherwood didn’t know what he was 
doing after a slump that culminated in six consecutive Premier League defeats. 
He was no longer the right man for the job, having had the short-term impact 
the club so desperately needed, so who is right for Villa now?

The board appear to have made their mind up already, with Rémi Garde the clear 
favourite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/25/aston-villa-target-remi-garde-tim-sherwood>
 to take over at the Premier League’s bottom club. Reports suggest that Garde 
is very tempted by Aston Villa’s offer. Newcastle and Sunderland – the other 
two clubs in the relegation zone – have approached the Frenchman in the past 
but it seems his job will be to keep Villa in the Premier League. The quick 
conclusion both parties would have wanted is being held up by Lyon, who are 
reluctant to let his former assistants follow him to England.

The decision to pursue Garde as first choice has received a mixed reaction. 
Those familiar with the manager’s work think he has what it takes to succeed in 
the Midlands. Those that haven’t followed the 49-year-old’s career are 
understandably worried by Villa’s choice of a manager with no experience of 
managing in England – the policy of buying players with no history in the 
Premier League has proved dubious and they fear that the manager could also 
struggle.

Garde is known to have a fondness for English football. During an understated 
time at Arsenal he became a loyal and trusted figure under Arsène Wenger, who 
retains great faith in the former France international’s coaching credentials. 
Hiring Garde represents an opportunity to build bridges between the players at 
the club. He excelled in helping young French players at Arsenal. Used 
sparingly on the pitch, Garde was credited with helping new recruits settle 
quickly at the club. In that sense, Villa’s interest is understandable.

As manager of Lyon, during a time when the club was stripped of their best 
players and all but forced to put their faith in young talent due to a lack of 
transfer funds, Garde’s achievements were admirable. In his first season Lyon 
finished fourth and reached the finals of both domestic cup competitions, 
winning the Coupe de France. They would go on to win the subsequent Supercup 
and finish the 2012-13 campaign third. They dropped to fifth in his final 
campaign, but Lyon’s team rating actually rose year-on-year – from 6.94 to 7.04 
– as Garde nurtured an impressive young squad.Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> did not want their manager to leave 
but Garde came to the decision that the 2013-14 season would be his last before 
a sabbatical. It was understood that he wanted to move to recharge his 
batteries and then relocate to England.

In terms of playing style, Garde favoured a 4-2-3-1 formation in his first two 
seasons at Lyon, with the team spearheaded by Bafétimbi Gomis. He often 
switched to a 4-4-2 diamond once Alexandre Lacazette proved capable of forming 
an effective partnership with Gomis, who is now at Swansea City. Sherwood has 
utilised both systems this season. Settling on a structured way of playing 
should be the first task for the next Villa boss.

Developing young players will also be key. It was a vital determinant in 
Sherwood’s appeal back in February and one that remains important to the Villa 
board. Lacazette, Maxime Gonalons, Jordan Ferri and Nabil Fekir were given a 
chance to prove their worth at Lyon under Garde and the have gone on to 
flourish at the club. Lacazette and Fekir scored 40 league goals between them 
last season and Gonalons became an ever present in the side, gaining the 
captaincy and taking on the mantle of the experienced head in a midfield packed 
with potential.

Villa are obviously a different prospect altogether, but they aren’t a lost 
cause. While the teams around them have slumped to resounding defeats, Villa 
have only lost one match by more than a single goal this season – when Alan 
Hutton scored a freak own goal in a 2-0 defeat at Stamford Bridge earlier this 
month. Garde would face an uphill task, but not an impossible one.

He remains a risk but no more so than sticking with something so clearly 
broken. With the Premier League’s repairmen, Tony Pulis and Sam Allardyce, 
otherwise engaged, there aren’t a great deal of safe-bet managers available to 
Villa. David Moyes has been heavily linked to the job and would be considered 
among the best options given his vast experience of the league, but he seems 
keen to stay in Spain for the time being. Nigel Pearson may also tick a number 
of boxes.

Villa don’t seem equipped to adapt to the “Brendan Rodgers way”, and the 
evidently eagerDwight Yorke’s credentials boil down to the fact that he used to 
play for the club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/26/dwight-yorke-aston-villa-tim-sherwood>
. So too did Bosko Balaban. If Villa are to be resuscitated from their current 
state, they need a long-term vision Putting anyone in charge of such of a task 
with so few realistic candidates available will always be a risk. Garde may 
well be one worth taking, with bigger and better offers unlikely to be too far 
off for the Frenchman.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
Bundesliga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Ligue 1 Infographic: WhoScored 
All statistics courtesy of WhoScored.com <http://www.whoscored.com/>, where 
you can find live in-game data as well as player and team ratings. You can 
follow all the scores, statistics, live player and team ratings withtheir free 
app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/whoscored-football-app/id940048063?mt=8&ign-mpt=uo%3D4>
.


Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
 