
People are generally fascinated by stand-up. There’s a belief that comics must 
have experienced some bad childhood incident to make them want to do it, but I 
don’t think we’re these screwed up hermits some newspaper articles would have 
you believe. However a comic has to have an absolute need to go back on stage 
the night after a bad gig. For years, when you start off, you’re doing most or 
all of your gigs for no money, and have a day job too. I, along with a load of 
other “struggling artistes”, was working for an ailing meal delivery company in 
Battersea. And every late afternoon I’d clamber into yet another 
Ginsters-spattered Honda and shake the hand of a fellow newbie comedian, and 
the Excel spreadsheet and the angry food customers would fade away. As we drove 
closer to the venue my stomach started to somersault.

We’d ask ourselves what the layout of the room would be like. It’s lethal if 
the audience is sitting at round tables, as half of them are facing away from 
you. It’s not good if there’s no mic stand when you play the guitar, because 
you can’t hold a mic too unless you’ve got a phantom limb which also works. Yet 
with these gigs you never ask yourself why you’re doing it, why you’re 
continuing to see the positives. You just do it. And then, having previously 
wondered how you’ll ever do more than seven minutes, you do Edinburgh Festival.

Edinburgh Festival is a slog. For anyone who wants to perform there, it’s a 
month-long jamboree of pleasure, heartbreak and madness. There are thousands of 
shows on in venues such as church halls, hotels and even swimming pools, 
ranging from one-person plays about Bad Stuff That Can Happen to 50-person 
dance pieces about engineering. There are billions of flyers lining the streets 
from early in the morning and the bars are open all night, so as you stumble 
home over the cobbled streets and as dawn breaks, some 18-year-old dressed as 
an emu will leap into your field of vision, screeching: “Awight, guv’nor! Fancy 
seein’ a cockerney version ofAs Yer Like It?”

Every comedian’s got a Worst Gig Ever, and mine occurred at Edinburgh, in a 
show calledThe Comedy Zone, when I hadn’t been doing stand-up for long. The 
Comedy <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> Zone is a show on every 
night of the festival in a large room and consists of four new acts doing 20 
minutes each. So at the top of my set list, to make it up to 20 minutes, I 
started writing the word “banter”. “Banter” should never be written in a set 
list. It is like writing “greet cashier” or “steal one grape” on a shopping 
list. It either happens naturally or it doesn’t. You can’t plan it and you 
certainly shouldn’t be listing it as material.

The three other acts and I dwelt in a cramped dressing room adorned with 
posters of previous performers in the venue, some of them very famous, 
invariably with “twat” or “dick” written in biro across their foreheads. Carved 
into the wall where you stood as you were about to go onstage were phrases of 
encouragement like: “You won’t always be shit!” and “Don’t trip over before you 
reach the mic!” and “Bill Hicks started somewhere!” I used to walk on tothe Eels
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/eels> and I could always tell that I was 
going to have a good gig if people were bopping or singing along as I walked on.

The night of my Worst Gig Ever was a Saturday night, it was packed, and the 
room had a really ripe feeling, like the swelling just before a storm. Some 
gigs pootle along, with no big laughs but no real dips. Tonight wasn’t like 
that. Tonight was going to go one way or another. The compère, Mark, introduced 
me. I was up first. I could see as I walked the short distance to the mic that 
the audience didn’t know the words to my Eels song.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fisy-suttie-my-worst-gig-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F124491083fdd22a46e5befad07ddc9514eb1c06a%2F0_80_3820_2293%2F3820.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Isy%20Suttie%3A%20my%20worst%20gig%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fisy-suttie-my-worst-gig-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Isy%20Suttie%3A%20my%20worst%20gig%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fisy-suttie-my-worst-gig-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F124491083fdd22a46e5befad07ddc9514eb1c06a%2F0_80_3820_2293%2F3820.jpg>
 On song: Suttie on stage. Photograph: Matt Crossick/Empics Entertainment 
Me: Hey guys! Give me a cheer on three if you’re Scottish! One two three! Give 
me a cheer if you’re English! One two three! Ooh, it’s likeWest Side Story 
here! Though I’m not sure anyone’s ever been knocked out by a haggis!

[Silence and general confusion.]

Me: Give me a cheer if you’re Spanish! Uno dos tres!

[Silence.]

Me: Right! No Spanish! OK. Does everyone know what a squirrel is?

Scottish guy near back: You’re shit. I hate you. This is shit.

Now. People think heckling’s a lot more common than it is. Sometimes, in less 
combative circumstances, people heckle to “help” you or because they think it’s 
a conversation. So for example you’ll be onstage about to do your cat material 
and you’ll say: “I bought a cat last week” and they’ll blurt out: “Me too!” as 
if you’re on a date with them and they can’t believe this godsend, this 
coincidence. These people must be treated gently and are not malicious. They 
are, at best, stupid and, at worst, actors. Yet the average person wouldn’t 
heckle. When things go wrong and an act is dying, most people sit cringing into 
their lager and crisps, simultaneously bewitched and repelled by what’s 
happening, the comedian becoming more and more determined to win back the 
crowd, or perhaps insulting the crowd, saying they don’t get the jokes.

It’s fascinating. It’s fascinating for comics, too, really, once we can put 
our egos aside. How can material which normally works in a variety of rooms 
suddenly fail us? However, tonight I was not using material which normally 
worked in a variety of rooms. I was using material which would be clinging on 
by the skin of its teeth even at a gig where people wore homemade clothes and 
played Scrabble in the interval.

The fact that the heckler was giving me money to stop talking was a small 
detail

[I try to carry on with my set.]

Me: If you don’t know what a squirrel is, I can explain…

Scottish guy near back: You’re shit.

Me: I’m half-Scottish!

Second Scottish guy: You’re half-shite!

Scottish guy near back: You’re totally shite!

[The first laugh of my set.]

Me: Right, I’ve only done three minutes, and I’m supposed to do 20. If the 
show overruns, we get fined, so the most I can do is 22. I could come off at 18 
minutes, but just to piss you off, I’m going to do 23. Now – do you want a song 
about Jamie Oliver or a song about a paedophile visiting Tunbridge Wells?

[Silence.]

Sound guy: Um. Paedo!

Me: Thank you, Simon. I’ve given away the punchline, but I’m doing it anyway. 
[Sings.] I live in a village, a very small village…

Before this onstage death, there were other occasions when I thought I’d died. 
Many times I’d been on in the basement of a dingy Soho pub in front of a few 
other acts, a Bulgarian family and the mother of the guy who runs the gig, and 
people try so hard to laugh, which is as hard as pretending to sneeze 
convincingly – you can do it for a bit then your face goes, ‘“Come on mate’ ” – 
and I’d thought then that I’d died. I thought – on those occasions when I’d 
tried a new bit and people had just stared at me with searching, pitying eyes – 
that I’d died. But none of that is dying. That’s just absence of laughter. 
Dying is when the air actually seems to thin, where you have an out-of-body 
experience and look down on yourself at the mic and can only hear your own 
tinny voice, which sounds so unfamiliar. This was the first time I’d died in a 
big room.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fisy-suttie-my-worst-gig-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff45e24b7c6c09874508ea1497ac81da553dc958e%2F0_95_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Isy%20Suttie%3A%20my%20worst%20gig%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fisy-suttie-my-worst-gig-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Isy%20Suttie%3A%20my%20worst%20gig%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fisy-suttie-my-worst-gig-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff45e24b7c6c09874508ea1497ac81da553dc958e%2F0_95_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Getting the joke: Suttie with David Mitchell in Peep Show. Photograph: Angus 
Young/Channel 4 Picture Publicity 
Scottish guy near back: I hate you so much. I’ll pay you to get off.

His wife: Erm – we paid a tenner to get in…

Scottish guy near back: No, Ruth, this is so bad, I’ve got to do something. 
For the sake of all of us.

People around him: Yeah!

Scottish guy near back: I’ll pay you 20 quid to get off! [I pause, strum the 
trusty D chord again, then look at him.]

I hadn’t gone “full-time” with stand-up at this point. I was working in a call 
centre, and £20 was a hell of a lot of money to me. In a way this would be 
“earning money from stand-up”, wouldn’t it? I was standing on a stage, talking, 
and someone was going to give me money. In fact they were giving me a pound a 
minute! The fact that he was giving me money to stop talking was a small detail.

Me: OK.

It took ages for “my fee” to snake its way through the crowd, during which I 
genially fingerpicked A minor on the guitar. Some people started to sway from 
side to side. Now it had been decided I was shit and they had been saved, they 
were prepared to listen a bit. When I finally got the money, I didn’t know how 
to get off. The fact that it was a tenner and two fivers made it somehow worse. 
Me [reverentially]: Fuck you, Edinburgh! Goodnight!

I strode offstage and into the tiny dressing room, where the ashen faces of 
the other acts awaited me. “Tough crowd!” I mumbled, glimpsing the “Bill Hicks 
started somewhere!” carved into the wall. I wondered if Bill Hicks had ever 
been paid to get off. I immediately burst into tears, which has only happened 
once since – after a horrendous solo show in Whitehaven when a group of blokes 
wouldn’t stop making snoring noises for the whole hour – and then I went and 
spent the whole £20 on whisky. I’m sure that’s what Bill Hicks would have 
wanted.

The Actual One: How I Tried, and Failed, To Remain Twenty-Something For Ever 
by Isy Suttie is published by Weidenfeld & Nicholson on 28 January for £14.99. 
To order a copy for £11.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/362277/>. It’s also 
available as an ebook and audiobook. To see Isy perform readings and songs from 
the book, visitisysuttie.com <http://isysuttie.com/>
 