
It was the biggest party Madrid had seen in a decade but it might not even 
have been the biggest party Madrid saw that week.Atlético Madrid celebrated 
their first league title in 18 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/19/atletico-madrid-la-liga-title-impossible>
 one Sunday evening in May, their 10th in total; less than seven days later and 
barely 400m up the road,Real Madrid celebrated their first European Cup in 12 
years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/24/real-madrid-atletico-madrid-champions-league>
, their 10th in total. From one God to the next, from Neptune to Cibeles, it 
had been a long wait. For Real, it felt like an eternity,becoming an obsession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/17/real-madrid-decima-florentino-perez-galactico-bale-ronaldo>
. For Atlético, it was not so much the impossible dream as too impossible to be 
a dream at all. But, somehow, they had made it. Both of them had.

At the end of the European Cup final, a handful of Real Madrid’s players ran 
into the press room and leapt on Carlo Ancelotti, chucking water around, 
bouncing up and down and singing: “How could I not love you?” Ancelotti had 
succeeded where a dozen coaches had failed and among his team only Iker 
Casillas had won the European Cup for the club before; when Casillas had come 
down the steps of the plane with the trophy 12 years ago, fans were already 
chanting for the ‘10th’ but they had not even reached a final since Glasgow.
Gareth Bale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-bale> watched it on 
the television, just a kid. This was a liberation.

Soon after Ancelotti had left, Diego Simeone appeared. He was asked what he 
was going to do next. He said he would watch the World Cup, although the next 
game he watched was actually Atlético’s youth team, and then he said he would 
prepare his team to “defend the league title we have just won”. The remark was 
a pointed one. The European Cup inevitably eclipses all else and as Jorge 
Valdano puts it: “ForReal Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> the only summit is the 
European Cup.” And yet six days before, Simeone’s team had achieved something 
astonishing, arguably greater, that should not be forgotten and probably 
defined this season even more than what happened in Lisbon.

Fate had been cruel to Atlético. They had played two European Cup finals 40 
years apart and a combined total of under two minutes had cost them both. Both 
times, a defender, the No4, had defeated them. But the fact that Simeone was 
sitting there at all was an achievement; that his team had come so close was 
even more of one and that they had won the league was bigger than both. This 
was a glorious year for them too. It may just be the most impressive, most 
difficult league title-winning achievement in Spanish history and it felt like
La Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> needed it. Spain 
was all the better for this, even if it would be wise not to suddenly think 
everything’s fine.

It is a decade since anyone else had won the league and in the last five years 
the nearest a team outside of the big two has got to the title was 17 points. 
Every team in Spain’s top half was weakened in the summer, their best players 
departing, while Barcelona and Real signed the two most expensive footballers 
in the market. This is what this column wrote in the season preview: “Madrid and
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> … long since 
disappeared into the distance. And no one is even trying to chase them any 
more.” Oh.

Atlético chased and somehow they chased them down. Many were swift to note 
that they had been unfairly written off right to the last. They forgot that 
Simeone himself had described the league as “impossible” and “boring”. Instead, 
it was fascinating and unexpected; tense all the way to the finish, the country 
suffering a collective coronary.

That usual head-to-head battle, boring with their brilliance, fighting among 
themselves and obliterating all others became a three-way thing. A Saturday in 
week 14 expressed it best: at 4pm Barcelona beat Granada 4-0, at 8pm Real 
Madrid beat Almería 5-0 and at 10pm,Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> beat Getafe 7-0. But 
mostly the results were not so huge, the victories far from easy, and the final 
weeks showed that the smaller teams could compete too. With a week to go, the 
top three did not manage a win between them in seven matches. The champions had 
10 points fewer than last year or the year before.

Simeone later admitted that the first time he thought Atlético might actually 
win the title was when they won in Bilbao but the song remained the same. 
Atlético went “game by game” untilthe game: away at Barcelona on the final day. 
By then Madrid had slipped out of the race. Xabi Alonso’s reaction following 
defeat in Vigo suggested that it might have been a mistake for them to have 
effectively given up, as unexpected results elsewhere showed that they had had 
a chance after all; Alonso’s reaction to Gareth Bale’s goal in Lisbon suggested 
that it no longer mattered much.

Meanwhile Barcelona stumbled through crises, losing their religion. “You lot 
only ever talk about results,” Tata Martino complained one day, but that was 
pretty much the last thing they talked about. There was so much else to focus 
on, so much else happening: from judges to taxmen, and thenthe tragic death of 
Tito Vilanova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/25/tito-vilanova-dies-aged-45-barcelona>
. And the style, of course. For the first time since May 2008, they had less 
than 50% of the possession when they played Rayo Vallecano and although they 
won 4-0, something was not quite right and they said so. Results? No, this was 
deeper: Barcelona no longer looked much like Barcelona.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F05%2Fbarcelona-tribute-tito-vilanova-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F5%2F5%2F1399286606919%2FA-giant-banner-in-memory--010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barcelona%20pay%20tribute%20to%20Tito%20Vilanova%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F05%2Fbarcelona-tribute-tito-vilanova-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barcelona%20pay%20tribute%20to%20Tito%20Vilanova%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F05%2Fbarcelona-tribute-tito-vilanova-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F5%2F5%2F1399286606919%2FA-giant-banner-in-memory--010.jpg>
 Barcelona pay tribute to Tito Vilanova after their former manager died of 
cancer. 
“We’ve left the dentists’, now it’s someone else’s turn,” Levante’s coach 
Joaquín Caparrós had said after his side were hammered at the Camp Nou on the 
opening day. It turned out that going there was not as painful for opponents as 
he expected.

It had all started with the signing of Neymar, a signing that cost Sandro 
Rosell more than he could have ever imagined and more than he would ever say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/26/neymar-barcelona-president-rosell-brazilian-transfer>
. With so much going on, a “strange” season in Andrés Iniesta’s words, perhaps 
the surprise was that Barcelona got so close. Certainly no one expected them to 
be playing for the league on the final day. A fortnight after publicly 
conceding the title,having already lost the Copa del Rey final to Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/16/barcelona-real-madrid-copa-del-rey-match-report-gareth-bale>
, they found themselves back in it through no merit of their own. Win at home 
and they would be champions.

Atlético had been a fingertip away from winning the league on the penultimate 
weekend, their players departing the field with a haunted look in their eyes. 
So theydid have to get a point in Barcelona and Barcelona did have something to 
play for and no Real Madrid-related doubts to diminish their commitment. Alexis 
Sánchez put them 1-0 up, on course, but they did not win. It looked like 
Atlético would be cruelly denied. Instead, that particular pain would wait a 
week after the domestic season closed. This time, in the league, Atlético hung 
on. In fact, they fought back. Atlético went a goal down and two men down, 
Diego Costa and Arda Turan forced off injured and in tears, but still they did 
it. “Pure history,” Simeone called it.

Barcelona ended with nothing for the first time in six years. The Spanish Cup 
and the European Cup were Madrid’s. The league was Atlético’s.Athletic Bilbao 
returned to the Champions League and brilliantly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/apr/28/ernesto-valverde-athletic-bilbao>
; Villarreal returned to the top flight and to Europe. At the other end,Real 
Betis, Valladolid and Osasuna went down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/18/fans-injured-osasuna-celta-vigo-la-liga>
. The latter had been in the first division for 14 years, a painful way for 
Patxi Puñal to end his career.As for the Europa League, that was Sevilla’s in 
Turin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/14/sevilla-benfica-europa-league-final-match-report>
; in a season marked by drama, with all four of the trophies won by Spanish 
clubs going to the last game and in the balance until the last minute, they had
defeated Valencia with a late, late goal 
<http://www.espnfc.com/blog/_/name/laliga/id/1843?cc=5739>, then beaten Benfica 
on penalties.

So, Spanish teams now hold the European Cup, the Europa League, the World Cup 
and the European Championships. But who cares about that? The medals that 
really matter are these. If anyone can be bothered to turn up and present them, 
that is …

Best signing

Atlético Madrid picked up Martín Demichelis for free, sold him for €5m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/01/manchester-city-atletico-madrid-martin-demichelis>
 without him ever having played a match for the club and still won the league. 
But the winner has to be Neymar’s dad: a bargain at just €40m.

Best new contract

On the eve of the final match of the season, Barcelona proudly announced that 
Leo Messi had signed a new deal at the Camp Nou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/16/lionel-messi-barcelona>. A 
new deal in which he became the world’s best paid player in return for agreeing 
to stay at the club for another five years, to increase his buy-out clause to 
€1,000m, and hand over his image rights. Oh, wait, no sorry, that should read: 
“In which the length of the contract and the size of his buy-out clause did not 
change, in which no commitment was given, and in which he gave Barcelona 
exactly 0% of his image rights, and after which, just two days later, he said 
he would walk away if they wanted him to.” Still, at least it was the 
motivation he needed to win the league for them, eh?

Best headline

“Neymar, superstar. Bale, disaster,” “Neymar, a leader whose value is rising 
all the time; Bale, an injured man who doesn’t justify his price.”Good work, 
Sport <http://www.sport.es/es/edicion_impresa/edicion_impresa-2013-10-3.shtml>.

Most painful headline

After Barcelona had stuck it up Madrid in the first clásico of the season, 
Sport shouted: “Take that!”, while the Catalan daily El9 decided to take a step 
further. Their front page read: “With Vaseline.”

Most extended metaphor

AS. A photo of Celta Vigo’s manager Luis Enrique in cycling gear was all it 
took for them to pedal a line, saddling the reader with a load of wheelie bad 
bespoke cycling puns. “Levante is the first summit in Luis Enrique’s mountain 
stage,” the headline ran. “Right now the Celta manager is at the back of the 
peloton and there are tough climbs on the horizon … he needs to move up the 
pack.”

Best exposé

No, not the report from Valencia newspaper Provincias, who got hold of a full 
list of the first-team salaries and published them for the world to see 
(Ricardo Costa was the top earner on €3.7m a year, in case you’re wondering), 
but the Getafe fan who provoked Diego Costa into missing a penalty …by flashing 
his arse at him <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qr75vtTcLzw>.

Best advert

Barcelona presented an agreement with Black and Decker in which the blurb 
really did describe them as “more than tools”. But the best was probably the 
full-page advert for Barcelona-branded Japanese knives – “the best team on the 
pitch, the best team in the kitchen” – in which Cristian Tello cuts mushrooms, 
Pedro Rodríguez slices tomatoes and Víctor Valdés is busy taking a meat cleaver 
to a courgettein a picture that makes you wince in anticipation and screams 
“opening scene of Casualty” at you 
<http://videos.mundodeportivo.com/20120404/servicios/promociones/los-cuchillos-japoneses-del-barca_54281255748.html>
.

Best video

Here’s Víctor Valdés reacting to Barcelona’s defeat at Valladolid. If you 
listen carefully,you can actually hear their season being flushed down the 
toilet <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ymtmnf-PDgM>.

Best pundit

“At no stage has it looked like we won’t go through. I knew we would score, 
but the impressive thing has been not conceding and it has never looked likely 
to happen. I don’t want to jinx it, but … Oh, you’re fucking joking. Fuck. 
Don’t fucking do this. How unfair, man. Mother of God.” The former Valencia 
captain and now radio pundit David Albelda starts talking with less than a 
minute to go and his former club heading to the final of the Europa League …and 
finishes talking with his former club heading out, their season in tatters 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D_p8lysdcbY>.

Best entertainer

Ancelotti’s eyebrow.

Most optimistic club

Athletic Bilbao <https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao>, who 
decided to test the PA system at their new San Mamés Stadium … by playing the 
Champions League anthem. Very soon, they’ll be playing it for real.

Most pessimistic club

Rayo Vallecano <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rayo-vallecano>, whose 
manager Paco Jemez announced: “No one hurts us as much as we hurt ourselves. 
We’re the ones slitting our wrists every day. It’s enough for our opponents 
just to wait for us [to kill ourselves].” It turned out they needn’t have 
worried. Mind you, they needed a dose of realism first. “We’re the smallest, 
shittiest team in the league and unless we get that into out heads, we will not 
compete,” Jemez said.

Best organisation

Ctrl C, Ctrl V from last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/jun/12/sids-2013-la-liga-season-review>
:the LFP of course … and someone really needs to invent an irony font for that 
‘P’. Hang on a minute … Actually, this year it’s not the league (LFP) who wins 
the award. Not because they’re not rubbish: in fact, they were their normal mix 
of crushing cynicism and characteristic incompetence. They gave four different 
official kick-off times for the game that decided the league and did not 
finally stick to one until six days before. They enraged three sets of fans to 
pay homage to one set of fans who, frankly, had done nothing special. And their 
president, the man who told Uefa that they would enjoy football in Gibraltar 
more “when it’s given back to us”, published a novel of murder and match-fixing 
called “Football is NOT like this.” Of course not.

But, you see, this year there was someone even worse. So, this time it’s not 
the LFP, it’s the Federation (RFEF) who get this award after they let a load of 
suspended players off for a week because it was a bank holiday and their 
competition committee couldn’t be bothered to meet, and left Atlético Madrid 
trophyless as they won the title against Barcelona because their president had 
a prior engagement and couldn’t make it to the final game. Mind you, how was he 
supposed to know when it was going to be played?

Best tweet

It was just after midnight soon after Real Madrid had beaten Elche thanks to a 
ludicrous late penalty and Spain’s national police force were overrun with 
people reporting a robbery, so they responded with a tweet: “We’ve had over 120 
mentions about football in the last 10 minutes. Remember, we’re here to help 
you on questions of SAFETY :-).” But the best has to be this one after Athletic 
Bilbao beat Barcelona: “List of teams who have won at the new San Mamés: ”

Best goal celebration

Cristiano Ronaldo responded to Sepp Blatter’s infamous drunk granddad at a 
wedding turned robotic dinosaur whose batteries are dying routine at Oxford 
University <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5sRa9tmU9Yk> by celebrating a goal 
against Sevillawith a commander’s salute 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3gwVPK0xZFQ>.

Best celebration

With one week still to go, Almería had secured survival and so they went to 
celebrate with their fans by throwing their shirts, shorts and boots into the 
crowd. There was just one small problem: they were not safe at all. And the 
following day they had to appeal to supporters to give their boots back for the 
final week. Where, this time, they did secure survival and they could do it all 
over again.

Worst week

Real Betis <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realbetis> in late October, 
early November. On the Sunday, an 18-year-old kid who’d never started a game 
scored against them after 13 seconds, setting up a 5-0 defeat; on the Monday 
their manager felt the need to hold a press conference to insist he wasn’t 
going to abandon ship, while up in the boardroom someone muttered: “more’s the 
pity”; on Tuesday, the ultras turned up at the training ground to abuse them, 
soon heading off to the coach’s office for an impromptu private meeting; on 
Wednesday, the team slipped into the relegation zone; on Thursday, they missed 
a penalty, twice; on Friday, the club published an official communiqué blaming 
the training ground incident on the coach; on Saturday, their most expensive 
summer signing went into hospital with appendicitis; and on Sunday, their 
centre-back broke his jaw. Still, things could only get better, right?

Worst year

Wrong. It’s another award for Betis. This season really couldn’t have gone 
worse. They had three managers, one of whom was Juan Carlos Garrido,who was 
sacked after 47 days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/20/la-liga-roundup-real-betis-sid-lowe>
. He was still in the job when he called his time at the club “pointless” and 
he was almost right: Betis had collected just one point under him. He’d had 
just one point, but three bosses: first there was Vlada Stosic, the sporting 
director, but then he was sacked; then there was José Antonio Bosch, the 
court-appointed administrator, but then he was sacked; and then there was the 
president Miguel Guillén, who has now gone as well. Asked if he feared the sack 
following a 5-0 defeat, Garrido said: “They’ve already tried that.” So they 
tried it again. Betis finished the season relegated, their centre-back a broken 
man pleading to be taken off. Oh, and Sevilla won the Europa League.

Speaking of which, best banner

“My peace, your grief.” Sevilla <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> 
fans slip the knife in during the derby.

Coolest footballer

“Now what?” journalists asked Ivan Rakitic after Sevilla had beaten Real 
Madrid at the Sánchez Pizjuán. “Now?” he said. “Now for a beer”. But Carlos 
Vela is even cooler. He scored a hat-trick in a 4-3 victory, was given the 
match ball signed by his team-mates and promptly announced: “I’ll give it to 
the dog so he can play with it.”

Biggest hero

Ronaldo apologised for hitting a Rayo-supporting 12-year-old girl with a shot 
by giving her his shirt, only for some of those around her to chant for her to 
burn it and eventually force her to give it up, handing it over to a security 
guard. And when you’re holding out for a hero it’s hard to look beyondthis 
photo of Alfred N’Diaye after a barrier collapsed in Pamplona on the final day 
<https://twitter.com/HuffPostUK/status/468297656230768640/photo/1>. But the 
winner is none of them. Instead, it’s Almería’s 38-year-old goalkeeper Esteban, 
who reckons he has missed just two training sessions in a 20-year career. He is 
not retiring but he is leaving, despite being ever-present this season and 
being the goalkeeper with the second most saves in the division and being more 
than good enough to continue. He is dropping down to the Second Division B to 
play for the team where he started his professional career and the club he 
supported as a kid: Real Oviedo. “I have a friend who I thought I could help,” 
he said.

Best protest

While Dani Alves was preparing to take a corner against Villarreal, someone 
threw a banana at him. He picked it up and ate a bit andso a campaign began 
which, at long last, has had an impact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/29/dani-alves-critical-backward-spain-banana-throwing-racism>
. Barcelona were losing 2-0 and won 3-2. After the game, Alves insisted: “I 
don’t know who threw it down but I’d like to thank them: that bit of potassium 
was what I needed to deliver the crosses for the goals.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR6b7bU3DMiA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR6b7bU3DMiA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR6b7bU3DMiA&media=>
 Dani Alves eats a banana thrown at him from the crowd. 
Best-dressed manager

Tata Martino admitted that his wife bought his lucky pistachio polo shirts 
from the local El Corte Inglés on the day they arrived in Barcelona.“Maybe 
it’ll start a fashion,” he said 
<http://www.sport.es/es/noticias/barca/martino-polo-verde-pistacho-compro-mujer-cuando-llegamos-barcelona-2727026>
. Or maybe it won’t. Meanwhile, the Valencia manager, Juan Antonio Pizzi, 
turned up at his presentation wearing a suit that belonged to someone else –
someone quite a lot bigger than he is 
<http://www.marca.com/2013/12/30/futbol/equipos/valencia/1388434177.html?a=8f6ba115af92f40ff84ee4550122734f&t=1389000618>
. But there can be only one winner. Sevilla’s appearance in the Europa League 
final meant that the whole continent got to enjoy Unai Emery’s blazerin all its 
red elbow-patched glory 
<http://www.whoateallthepies.tv/kits/184626/lets-hear-it-for-sevilla-coach-unai-emerys-colour-coordinated-jacket-elbow-patches.html>
.

Best excuse

Javier Aguirre. Not so much I shot the sheriff but I did not shoot the deputy 
asI shot the sheriff, the deputy and the deputy’s dog. Espanyol’s manager was 
sent off for calling the referee anhijo de puta, a son of a bitch, prompting a 
fabulously foul-mouthed post match press conference in which he bemoaned that 
the referee had gone for the obvious target. Or,ante la duda, la más tetuda, as 
he put it. “If in doubt, the one with the biggest tits.” “I saidhijo de puta 
but I say that 10 or 12 times a game: that’s the way I talk,” Aguirre admitted, 
going on to sayhijo de puta rather a lot to reinforce the fact that he does 
indeed sayhijo de puta rather a lot. Out came a magnificent stream of Mexican 
mouthing off, his accent getting stronger with every smirk and every swear 
word. “Chingada madre, hijo de puta, puta madre,” he went on, “I say things 
like that all the time. If you look, there’s even a banner withhijo de puta 
written on at the stadium. Some referees are a bit more of a laugh, some are 
more serious. So, yes, I was rightly sent off but …well, I could have been sent 
off 162 times 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x658DolRrYY&list=PL94pQbqkdgkG9SI9raih19H-SI2OFU6hL>
.”

Best referee

Texeira I.

Runner up

Texeira II.

Best linesman

During one Second Division B game this season, an announcement went out on the 
PA system. “Is there a referee in the house?” As it turned out there was too. 
And so it was that a punter ran the line for Racing Santander.

Best goal

“You talk about Pedro León as if he was Zidane.” So snapped José Mourinho. But 
has Zidane ever donethis <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B8aZFiYb1A0>? 
Bartlomiej Pawlowski controlled, turned andvolleyed in against Valladolid 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CqU-CRAcDdM>. Diego Costa’s overhead kick 
against Getafe waspretty tasty <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=35oTWd1tFO0>. 
And Ibai Gómez had only been on the pitch for 30 seconds when he thumped inthis 
one <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R_G78SNzing>against Real Madrid. The 
season’s best solo effort wasdown a division or three 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/blog/a-brilliant-solo-golazo-you-wont-have-seen-quique-cubas-arosa-v-cultural-areas>
, although if it’s three nutmegs you want, how aboutIago Falqué 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PSJfYoBDz18>? Carlos Bacca’s goal against 
Madrid is worth watching if only for theastonishing assist from Ivan Rakitic 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/blog/ivan-rakitics-backheel-chapeu-slide-pass-assist-v-real-madrid-for-sevillas-winner-was-outstanding-gif/>
, who flicked it over Pepe. With his heel. On the volley. And speaking of 
backheel volleys, the best of Ronaldo’s large collection of lovely goals was 
probably the92nd-minute backheel against Valencia 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cGNnF3py8dk>. But ultimately, the goal of the 
season probably belongs to Gareth Bale. Notthis shot 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vnvZO1h5mVg> that travelled at over 100kph 
against Elche, orthis one <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DYen3233f7Q> against 
Real Sociedad first time round, butthe winner 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yWVrolNQ4RU> in the Copa del Rey final. Of 
course.

Best match

Ramos versus the Ref. Sergio Ramos was on four yellow cards and he had decided 
that he quite fancied being on five yellow cards; that way he would get a game 
suspension, sit out against Elche and come back against Atlético with the slate 
wiped clean. So he went looking for the fifth in the final 15 minutes against 
Getafe. There was just one problem with the plan: the referee Pérez Montero was 
wise to it. Ramos committed five fouls and those were the ones that were given; 
there were as many again that weren’t. However hard Ramos tried – and he tried 
pretty hard, handballing and kicking and pushing and protesting and flying in, 
getting wilder with every one, a mental soundtrack of cymbal crashes 
accompanying each tackle – Montero stubbornly, and comically, refused to pull 
out the card. When the whistle went, the best man had won and covering his 
mouth to avoid the lip-readers, close to breaking into a giggle, Ramos could 
only offer his hand and his congratulations.Well played 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=avFGuAiaWC4>.

Best actual match

Getafe v Real Sociedad was cold, wet and great fun; it finished with a 2-2 
draw. After Atlético and Real Madrid drew 2-2, AS’s match report noted: “This 
was football, the way the British invented it in the middle ages … get the ball 
from one town to the other: whoever falls, the ball rolls and so do heads.” It 
was the way we invented and it was the way we like it too: a largely lawless 
match that Ancelotti called violent but was utterly compelling and furiously 
fast. Almería beat Real Sociedad 4-3 in a crazy match that was the start of 
their bid for survival: the victory pulled them out of the relegation zone and 
was decided with a 91st-minute goal by an 18-year-old kid called Hicham 
Khaloua, who was making his debut and had only been on the pitch for four 
minutes. The second clásico of the seasonfinished 4-3 to Barcelona at the 
Santiago Bernabéu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/23/real-madrid-barcelona-la-liga-clasico>
 and might just have been the best so far this century.

Better still was Sevilla’s trip to the same stadium. Afterwards Carlo 
Ancelotti noted: “It lacked balance”. Sod balance. It had everything else: more 
than 30 shots, one red card, three penalties, none of which were, three very 
particular celebrations, points proven, and 10 goals.10. The highest total at 
the Bernabéu in almost 50 years, even though both goalkeepers had been superb. 
Sevilla scored three and, for the first time in history, two penalties were 
given against Madrid at home, but still the visitors lost by four.It finished 
7-3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/oct/31/gareth-bale-real-madrid-sevilla-cristiano-ronaldo>
, but it was not finished until the very end and it was much more even than 
that makes it sound. When the final whistle went, they almost collapsed with 
exhaustion. And that was just the fans.

Team of the year

Atlético Madrid.

OK, OK, team of the year

GK: Thibaut Courtois (Atlético), RB: Juanfran. (Atlético), LB: Filipe Luís 
(Atlético), CB: Diego Godín (Atlético), CB: João Miranda (Atlético), M: Ivan 
Rakitic (Sevilla), M: Gabi (Atlético), M: Luka Modric (Real Madrid), M: Ángel 
Di María (Real Madrid), F:Cristiano Ronaldo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> (Real Madrid), F: Diego Costa 
(Atlético). Subs: Koke, Raúl García and Turan (Atlético), Bale, Alonso, Benzema 
and Ramos (Real Madrid), Iniesta and Messi (Barcelona), Rico, Gurpegui, 
Laporte, Aduriz (Athletic Bilbao), Trashorras and Larrivey (Rayo Vallecano), 
Navas (Levante), Bacca (Sevilla), Bruno, Gio and Musacchio (Villarreal), Vela 
(Real Sociedad).

Manager of the year

Diego Simeone. The only doubt is whether the word is ‘year’.

Player of the year

Third: Diego Costa

Second: Cristiano Ronaldo.

First: Gabi.

Cristiano Ronaldo was consistently brilliant, finishing as top scorer in La 
Liga and top scorer in the Champions League, with a record 17 goals in that 
competition, including one in the final. Diego Costa was the most outstanding 
performer as judged against expectations and arguably the most decisive player 
in the league – although he, like Ronaldo, missed much of the final weeks, 
including the draw at the Camp Nou that clinched the title. A case could be 
made too for Thibaut Courtois. But after a historic season in Spain marked, 
perhaps more than any other in the last decade or more, by ateam it feels more 
appropriate to chose a man who symbolises that team, even if he personally was 
talked about all too infrequently. And no one symbolises that team more than 
Atlético Madrid’s captain Gabi. Absolutely impeccable.

And finally, some of the season’s choicest quotes

• “If you haven’t got balls you can’t play for Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> at Mestalla … if you haven’t 
got balls, you can’t be their manager either” – Miroslav Djukic talks balls.

• “All you need to play football is one ball and two bollocks” – so does Rayo 
coach Paco Jémez.

• “I would like to congratulate the players’ mothers, they gave them huge 
balls” – and so does Diego Simeone.

• “If we took 50 million off Madrid and Barcelona would they be able to keep 
Ronaldo, Messi orNeymar <https://www.theguardian.com/football/neymar>? Would 
the stars stay?” – Javier Tebas forgets about Juan Mata and David Silva, 
Fernando Torres and Álvaro Negredo, Radamel Falcao and Santi Cazorla and many, 
many more.

• “I agree with the labour reform of this government. We’re more competitive 
with lower salaries” – wonder if Florentino Pérez has told his players that?

• “Ramos kicks me and I kick him, but that’s part of the game” – Diego Costa.

• “I’m just like everyone else: if it’s in my area I don’t think it’s a 
penalty; if it’s in theirs, I do” – Athletic Bilbao manager Ernesto Valverde 
nails it.

• “Some people are being ridiculous when it comes to referees” – and again.

• “We live in a country where after a spectacle like [the 4-3 clásico] people 
try to explain it through the referees” – so does Gerard Piqué.

• “Football. You know, it’s a game where you have to get a ball between the 
posts and when you go you get a point, or a ‘goal’, and then you start again 
and you try to get some more ‘points’ and so it goes …” – Pepe Mel explains the 
basics.

• “No matter what, Djukic will end the season” – Valencia president Amadeo 
Salvo didn’t say when. Djukic was sacked on 16 December.

• “I voted for the Spanish players [Xavi and Iniesta] … because I don’t want 
to get into any Madrid-Barcelona war” – Vicente del Bosque rather tragically 
says it all. All kinds of wrong.
 