
One thing I’ve learned from seven years of watching Bake Off is to keep a 
close eye on The Quiet One. I dismissed Andrew as an also-ran in week one when 
he didn’t know which way up a Jaffa Cake goes; and when his week two 
gingerbread structure was themed around punting at Cambridge, I rolled my eyes 
so hard they were practically filo pastry. In week three he served up a woven 
basket made of bread that was also FULL OF BREAD, but I was too caught up in 
the fascinating backstory of the animals in Val’s Ark to fully appreciate it.


Andrew plodded along for a few more weeks, turning out perfectly presentable 
bakes that earned an appreciative nod from Paul and Mary, but never quite 
managed Star Baker. The pressure continued to rise like an over-proved 
dampfnudel, but while everyone else was blowing their cream horns and flailing 
around like cats in a bathtub, Andrew was biding his time.

Then, in week seven, his ice cream mousse cakes were served up on a miniature 
ferris wheel and I realised that Andrew Smyth, 25-year-old aerospace engineer 
from Northern Ireland via Derby, was a TOTAL BAKING ASSASSIN. Tom’s hipster 
picnic didn’t stand a chance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-andrew-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc153a3a60666b002c2dc40b4d58dffd1bb2ea2c7%2F0_79_4289_2573%2F4289.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It's%20always%20the%20quiet%20one%3A%20why%20Andrew%20should%20win%20the%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-andrew-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%27s%20always%20the%20quiet%20one%3A%20why%20Andrew%20should%20win%20the%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-andrew-should-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc153a3a60666b002c2dc40b4d58dffd1bb2ea2c7%2F0_79_4289_2573%2F4289.jpg>
 Andrew’s ice cream mousse cakes were served up on a miniature ferris wheel … 
Tom’s hipster picnic didn’t stand a chance. Photograph: Love Productions/Tom 
Graham/BBC 
After that, Andrew was on a (Swiss) roll. In Tudor week, his ingenious 
Leonardo da Vinci-inspired geared pies turned like steampunk pastry cogs, and 
the fondant horses on his showstopper were created with a mould he made from a 
toy horse. After that mechanical marvel, it was easy to overlook his rotund 
knight (Henry VIII in his later years, perhaps?) packing a massive phallic 
caramel lance.

Engineers are my favourite kind of Bake Off contestant: nothing is ever 
half-baked, and it’s all about practice, planning and precision. Even his 
disasters were timed to perfection; if you’re going to forget to turn your oven 
on for 15 minutes, make sure it’s the week Val’s Bakewell has a soggy bottom, 
and her showstopper entirely failed to amuse Paul’s bouche. Likewise, if your 
semi-final puff pastry is a crumbly mess, take a deep breath and make it again, 
and pray that Selasi’s will be worse than yours (it was, poor Selasi).

It’s not just me who thinks Andrew deserves to win this year’s Bake Off – 2014 
finalist Richard Burr agrees. “Andrew’s attitude in the tent has been 
wonderful. He’s faced victory and defeat with such good humour. Plus he wore a 
pencil behind his ear, so he’s got to be a dude!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-andrew-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3619569aa0d96c725d48e6244f9e8f46201871dc%2F0_0_4290_2575%2F4290.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It's%20always%20the%20quiet%20one%3A%20why%20Andrew%20should%20win%20the%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-andrew-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%27s%20always%20the%20quiet%20one%3A%20why%20Andrew%20should%20win%20the%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-andrew-should-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3619569aa0d96c725d48e6244f9e8f46201871dc%2F0_0_4290_2575%2F4290.jpg>
 Engineers are my favourite kind of Bake Off contestant … Andrew gets dressed 
up by Mel. Photograph: BBC/Love Productions/Tom Graham 
Last year’s finalist Ian Cumming is also waving the flag for Andrew. “An 
engineer/baker is just my sort. Plus he’s a fellow challenger for ‘Never trust 
a skinny chef.’”

In a show that has no shortage of charm, kindness and joy, Andrew manages to 
bring a bonus ray of sunshine to the Bake Off tent. He’s clearly so delighted 
to be there, how can you not want to nudge him over the finish line?

Andrew has had a couple of close calls, but he’s stayed focussed, kept himself 
in the game – and will pull it out the bag when it truly matters. If he can 
avoid a total meltdown in the Grand Final, and draw on his engineering skills 
for the queen of all showstoppers, he might just walk away with the Bake Off 
crown. Just don’t forget to turn the oven on.
 