
If I am being honest, the realisation of the fairytale that was Leicester 
City’s Premier League title win annoyed me a little, as much as I was cheered 
by the achievement itself. What anguished me was the timing. Chelsea’s late 
equaliser against Spurs, confirmed Leicester’s success, came just a few minutes 
after 18 year-old Craig Wighton scored what was in my eyes a rather more 
significant winning goal for Dundee againstDundee United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited>.

And what a story: a teenager, one who grew up supporting Dundee, scoring the 
last-minute winner to sendDundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> 
United down under the noses of their own supporters. (Disappointingly, 
trepidation served to keep the number of visiting fans down when, ideally, they 
would all have been there to take their medicine.)

That, surely, would merit the full Sky ticker-tape treatment. Breaking: Dundee 
relegate rivals Dundee United – boyhood fan side-foots home last-minute winner. 
But when I eventually got back to the Phoenix bar in Dundee’s west end – after 
a quick tour of pubs nearer Dens Park – to toast a memorable evening, ears 
still ringing after the full South Enclosure experience, it was like this 
historic event had never happened.

Instead, it was wall-to-wall coverage of bloody Leicester City’s first-ever 
English bloody title win. Big bloody deal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffootball-rivals-relegation-celebrate-dundee-united-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19e475be61c90da6b6421249d87503e3dd8e6663%2F0_141_4793_2876%2F4793.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%20sounds%20vindictive%20but%20relegating%20your%20rivals%20can%20be%20as%20good%20as%20winning%20a%20trophy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffootball-rivals-relegation-celebrate-dundee-united-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%20sounds%20vindictive%20but%20relegating%20your%20rivals%20can%20be%20as%20good%20as%20winning%20a%20trophy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffootball-rivals-relegation-celebrate-dundee-united-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19e475be61c90da6b6421249d87503e3dd8e6663%2F0_141_4793_2876%2F4793.jpg>
 Dundee United players react to relegation. Photograph: Andrew Milligan/PA 
For me, and a few thousand others, the big deal was Dundee putting Dundee 
United down. That is what 2 May 2016 will forever mean to those of the dark 
blue persuasion.

Indeed, it might well remain all that ever matters, for I am not hopeful of 
seeing Dundee lift a major trophy in my lifetime. Those wishing to know my age 
can calculate it by simply noting the last time Dundee won a major cup, now 43 
years ago and counting. Which is one of the reasons why Dundee supporters, 
particularly ones of my 1973 vintage, got so worked up about the prospect of 
getting something fairly significant over on United.

I have heard it uttered that putting United down could be as good as winning a 
major trophy; perhaps better. I think I understand this. Yes, I know it wasn’t 
a Dundee success as such. I know it seems vindictive to get such satisfaction 
from the misfortune of someone else. Even my dad, my gracious, sensitive and 
sports-mad dad, was surprised by my insistence that Dundee being the ones to 
administer the final blow to United’s survival hopes meant everything. He noted 
I wasn’t the vindictive type. And I like to think I am not.

But this is football. And where would the game be without petty rivalries. As 
W. Somerset Maugham – or was it Ally MacLeod? – said: it is not enough to 
achieve personal success, one’s best friend must also have failed. Well, I’m 
the first to admit Dundee have not enjoyed anything like Dundee United’s 
success in the last 40 years.

So hoping a nearby ‘friend’ fails is about as good as it gets, hence the 
scenes (including a tangerine-coloured coffin being carried through the streets 
<https://twitter.com/Tele_Scott/status/727201762042597377?lang=en-gb>) on that 
Monday night in May. Not that I’d wish anything terminal on United. The 
two-teams-on-a-street scenario is something I cherish; without the rivalry I 
wonder if I’d feel the same about Dundee FC. Not enough is made by the city of 
the clubs’ closest-football-grounds-in-Europe status. There should be a visitor 
centre somewhere on Sandeman Street/Tannadice Street celebrating this shared 
history, one which would, I concede, have to chronicle the team down the road’s 
remarkable emergence from the shadows as well as Dundee’s own storied past.

Remembering Dundee United in the 1986-87 season: 70 matches, two finals, no 
silverware
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2015/mar/18/dundee-united-1986-1987-barcelona-uefa-cup-scottish-premiership>
So yes, there’s a basis for the bitterness. Not all Dundee fans are psychotic 
enough to wish relegation pain on United for its own sake. It is revenge. It is 
payback for the city upstarts becoming top dogs, often at Dundee’s own expense. 
But it also – and this is the rationale which predominantly accounts for how I 
feel – offers Dundee the longed-for chance to re-establish themselves as the 
premier team in town.

Not since the 1959-60 season have Dundee been able to say they are in a higher 
league than their rivals. The club has not been slow in seizing the opportunity 
to do so in their close season commercial activities. Season tickets are not 
just for Dens Park. They are for Dens Park – “home of the city’s Premier team”. 
And quite right too.

An exorcism had taken place there a few weeks earlier. Every Dundee fan will 
have their own personal film reel of flashbacks, some more gruesome than 
others. I was fortunate to avoid witnessing Dundee United winning their second 
major trophy, which happened to be against Dundee. At Dens Park. Where they had 
also won their first major honour a year earlier.

I was also fortunate to miss their first and so far last Scottish Premier 
League title win, which happened to be secured against Dundee. At Dens Park. 
There is, you might notice, a theme developing. But I did witness countless 
derbies in the 1980s and early 1990s when a talented United side invariably 
swept Dundee aside. Not always, granted. In fact, Dundee often fared better 
against United than they had any right to.

But I can still remember when Dave Smith applauded United off the park after 
an embarrassingly one-sided 3-0 win over Dundee, again at Dens. That’s right, 
Dave Smith. The Dundee manager. He didn’t last much longer.

I was there for the ridiculous cycle of torment that was being knocked out of 
the Scottish Cup five years in a row by Dundee United, between 1987 and 1991. 
It was unusual enough to be drawn against the same team for five straight 
seasons. But to lose, eventually (there were at least some replays involved), 
every single darned time?

The first exit, at the semi-final stage, was particularly harrowing. Up 2-1 at 
half-time against a United side that reached the final of the Uefa Cup a couple 
of weeks later, I can remember plotting with my sister our travel arrangements 
to get to Hampden for the final. Cue a second-half turnaround that I am now old 
enough and damaged enough to realise was always likely to occur. But back then 
it led to a sustained period of teenage gloom. Head bowed against the window of 
a Stagecoach bus, the trip back to Dundee from Edinburgh – the SFA, in their 
wisdom, had decided to play the game at Tynecastle, despite both clubs’ 
agreement to toss a coin to decide on a venue in Dundee – seemed to drag on 
even longer due to the number of Dundee United supporters’ buses whizzing by 
with their cargo of joyous fans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffootball-rivals-relegation-celebrate-dundee-united-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc581a5aae2bea5f75a0def86f6934d9ffa10691%2F0_87_3878_2327%2F3878.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%20sounds%20vindictive%20but%20relegating%20your%20rivals%20can%20be%20as%20good%20as%20winning%20a%20trophy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffootball-rivals-relegation-celebrate-dundee-united-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%20sounds%20vindictive%20but%20relegating%20your%20rivals%20can%20be%20as%20good%20as%20winning%20a%20trophy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffootball-rivals-relegation-celebrate-dundee-united-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc581a5aae2bea5f75a0def86f6934d9ffa10691%2F0_87_3878_2327%2F3878.jpg>
 A dejected Dundee United fan. Photograph: Andrew Milligan/PA 
We haven’t even done the 1990s yet. Fortunately, Jim McLean’s powers had begun 
to ebb. United were as poor as they had been in a generation but still managed 
to lift their first Scottish Cup, the one significant claim to superiority, 
other than seniority, my beloved Dundee had left by then. I remember studying 
for my finals at university in Dundee in a flat along the Perth Road. My pen 
scraped involuntarily down the page as the cheers of the fans gathered in the 
city square for the trophy parade drifted west along the Tay, sending jolts of 
pain shuddering through my body.

Even when United were relegated the following season it was hard to derive too 
much pleasure: Dundee were already down. On the day United’s demotion was 
confirmed we were in Stranraer trying hard to look on the bright side after 
missing out on promotion by a couple of goals.

But I tend to defer to author Jim Wilkie, an eminently sensible Dundee FC fan, 
when it comes to footballing matters in Dundee. After all, he wrote the book on 
the subject – the brilliantAcross The Great Divide 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Across-Great-Divide-Professional-Football/dp/1840184124>
. He confirmed my suspicion; it might well be an age thing. In the run-up to 
what Dundee fans dubbed the “Get Doon” derby, I gave him a call.

“So Jim, what about this Dundee/Dundee United dynamic – are you hoping Dundee 
pull the trigger? Is it churlish of Dundee fans to dearly wish for this to 
happen?” A pause down the phone line, perhaps even a little sigh. “Times have 
changed,” the sage began. “You are considerably younger than me. But we once 
watched the teams week about. When Dundee play United, there is a slight 
ambivalence for me. Even today I do not want United to go down – and I think 
there will be an unpleasant experience if it is the deciding game. Of course, I 
wanted United to win when they won the league [at Dens]. I am a Dundee fan. But 
I watched the United team that was promoted from the second division, with 
players like Ronnie Yeats and Dennis Gillespie, I do not follow their fortunes 
but I found it quite easy to go to European games for example and support them. 
When it comes to the crunch, I want to see them do well rather than badly. I am 
slightly distressed by the thought of Dundee fans singing ‘the Dees are having 
a party’, or whatever the song is, if their demise is confirmed by Dundee. How 
stupid! I am uneasy with it.”

So some Dundee fans, it’s clear, are still influenced by burnished memories of 
skipping from one side of the street to the other to watch games. Back in the 
1950s and 1960s, United were not perceived to be a threat to Dundee’s status as 
top team in the city. But the majority of Dundee supporters now are of an age 
to have only lived through the anguish of Dundee’s decline, which was bad 
enough without United’s simultaneous emergence as a European force. Like 
woodworm in the old Dens Park main stand, bitterness began to bury deep into 
pores. It’s only natural. Which is why I was surprised by the high number of 
people, many of them football literates, including Tam Cowan on Off the Ball, 
who seemed genuinely surprised to hear a Dundee supporter might welcome the 
prospect of United’s Waterloo coming at Dens.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffootball-rivals-relegation-celebrate-dundee-united-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc4cf5286da64fee6edeed5c2afccaaf7f7fdd94%2F0_0_2011_2844%2F2011.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%20sounds%20vindictive%20but%20relegating%20your%20rivals%20can%20be%20as%20good%20as%20winning%20a%20trophy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffootball-rivals-relegation-celebrate-dundee-united-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%20sounds%20vindictive%20but%20relegating%20your%20rivals%20can%20be%20as%20good%20as%20winning%20a%20trophy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ffootball-rivals-relegation-celebrate-dundee-united-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc4cf5286da64fee6edeed5c2afccaaf7f7fdd94%2F0_0_2011_2844%2F2011.jpg>
 This article is from the first edition ofNutmeg magazine 
<https://www.nutmegmagazine.co.uk/>. 
My United supporting friends, by contrast, expected nothing other than to be 
placed under siege on social media by a gloating Dee. They knew they’d given it 
out – and more – to me over the years. Although I have to confess something 
else: as I scanned the upcoming season’s fixture list to locate the derby dates 
there was a brief, if acute, sense of loss upon remembering there will be no 
league derbies for at least 12 months. But hey, we’ll live.

• This article is from the first edition of Nutmeg magazine 
<https://www.nutmegmagazine.co.uk>
• Follow Nutmeg on Twitter <https://twitter.com/nutmegmagazine> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/NutmegMagazine>
• Follow Alan Pattullo <https://twitter.com/alan_pattullo> on Twitter
 