
1) Red Bull and Renault to divorce?

Red Bull have finally had enough of Renault. The partners have been spitting 
at each other all season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/25/renault-accuse-red-bull-adrian-newey-lying-formula-one>
, like a Hollywood couple heading for the divorce courts. Now it looks most 
unlikely they will be together next season, even though a contract remains in 
place for 2016.

Red Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> are short of options. 
Mercedes don’t want to give them one of their power units and that leaves 
Ferrari as the only alternative.

It was good while it lasted between Red Bull and Renault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/08/red-bull-sebastian-vettel-formula-one>
, with four double world championships between 2010 and 2014, but getting your 
head around these new hybrid engines is no easy matter, as Honda would ruefully 
confirm.

Lewis Hamilton wins Italian GP as Nico Rosberg suffers major title blow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/06/lewis-hamilton-wins-italian-gp-monza>
2) McLaren-Honda marriage hits the rocks

McLaren have finally had enough of Honda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/24/mclaren-honda-f1-fernando-alonso-jenson-button>
. We learned on Saturday night they had asked for Honda’s engine chief, 
Yasuhisa Arai, to be replaced. Arai’s position at Honda is very strong so that 
will not be all that easy, despite his inept performances this year.

Another predictably poor result at Monza – they were always going to struggle 
at this power circuit – underlined just how far awayMcLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> are from where they should be.

This is all very damaging for McLaren. It’s damaging for Honda, too. Would a 
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> fan seriously 
contemplate buying a Honda road car from a company that has succeeded in making 
two world champions, Fernando Alonso and Jenson Button, look so slow?

3) Keep an eye on Daniel Ricciardo

Daniel Ricciardo is still a world champion in waiting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/11/f1-world-title-mine-daniel-ricciardo-red-bull-no-1>
. Like everyone at Red Bull, Ricciardo has suffered because of the weakness of 
Renault.

At Monza he started the race 19th after being given a 50-place grid penalty 
after two engine changes. It was rough all weekend for the Australian, with a 
hydraulics issue on Friday and then engine failure on qualifying day.

Given all of that, his drive through the field to finish eighth was superb, 
with a number of overtaking moves that reminded everyone of how terrific he was 
when he first stepped into the big time with Red Bull.

4) Pirelli poised to sign new deal

Pirelli will continue to be Formula One’s rubber men after their contract 
expires at the end of the 2016 season. Bernie Ecclestone, the sport’s chief 
executive, as goo
d as rubber-stamped the deal in Monza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/03/bernie-ecclestone-stands-with-pirelli-in-f1-row-with-ferrari>
, even though talks are still going on with Pirelli and their rivals Michelin. 
It’s been a tough few weeks for the Italian tyre makers but they are poised to 
sign a contract that would take them up to the end of the 2019 season.

5) Romain Grosjean catches the eye

Romain Grosjean has caught the attention of Haas, who are entering F1 next year
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/15/gene-haas-bid-marussia-assets-new-f1-team>
. Grosjean’s Italian Grand Prix lasted only a few minutes, as he attempted to 
follow up on his surprise podium place in the previous race in Belgium. He 
retired after damaging his suspension in a clash with Marcus Ericsson’s Sauber.

The speed of Grosjean interests Haas, who have already been linked with, among 
others, Jean-Eric Vergne and Kevin Magnussen.

The money problems at Lotus are frustrating Grosjean and reports that Renault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/renault> are about to buy them out have 
still come to nothing.
 