
Jürgen Klopp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> said 
Liverpool’s young talents “have a lot to learn” and need time to fulfil their 
potential after Exeter City were soundly beaten in the FA Cup third-round 
replay at Anfield.

The 18-year-old Sheyi Ojo became the youngest goalscorer in Liverpool’s FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> history and João Carlos Teixeira 
was also on the scoresheet in the 3-0 victory as Klopp’s makeshift side secured 
a fourth-round tie at home to West Ham United. Joe Allen opened the scoring and 
Jon Flanagan ended his 20-month injury nightmare with a second-half 
substitute’s appearance.

Liverpool’s second string proves uncomfortable for Christian Benteke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/20/christian-benteke-liverpool-exeter-fa-cup-replay-anfield>
The Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> manager was 
fulsome in his praise of the club’s young players, with the midfielders Kevin 
Stewart and Cameron Brannagan also impressing, but insisted patience was 
required before they could be considered for the Premier League.

“Ojo is very young, everyone can see he has big skills but there are also a 
lot of things he has to work on,” Klopp said. “He made a goal that wasn’t too 
bad. Hecame on in the last game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/exeter-liverpool-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
 and was important in the draw. He’s on a good way but it is a long way to go 
for all the boys. They showed what they are able to do and showed what they 
still have to learn. Now it is about giving the lads time to develop, not 
protecting them.

“It was a really enjoyable night for football and the lads enjoyed it, you 
could see that. They worked hard, created chances, scored wonderful goals and 
made mistakes but worked hard to correct those mistakes. There are a lot of 
things to learn. The target at the end of the road is Liverpool FC in the 
Premier League and for this you have to be ready in all parts of development.”

Jürgen Klopp’s Liverpool kids kill off Exeter City’s FA Cup dream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/20/liverpool-exeter-city-fa-cup-replay-match-report>
Paul Tisdale, the Exeter manager, said he was both proud of the League Two 
side’s run in the FA Cup – worth £500,000 to the club from the third round 
alone – but frustrated that his team “took too long to get going. But I 
shouldn’t be too downbeat tonight.”

Flanagan’s first appearance since May 2014 prompted a tweet from Brazil’s 
World Cup winning captain Cafu, to whom the Liverpool right back was compared 
prior to his knee problems. “I have a thousand tweets! I guess it’s the return 
of a friend to the field!!! @LFC” wrote the Brazilian on Twitter.

Klopp said: “That was an emotional moment. Nobody deserved it more than 
Flanno. He has been injured a long time and injured since I came here but he 
has never been in a bad mood. He’s a really strong lad. We have to take it 
day-by-day with him.”
 