
Jürgen Klopp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> has warned 
Liverpool’s young talent to put their development before financial reward as he 
confirmed they will be handed another chance against Exeter City in the FA Cup 
on Wednesday.

The Liverpool manager has vowed to deploy “a similar team to last time” in the 
third-round replay despite his injury problems easing somewhat sincethe match 
at St James Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/exeter-liverpool-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
. Jon Flanagan could feature, albeit only as a substitute, for the first time 
since May 2014.

Klopp’s show of faith carried a warning to several young Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> players in dispute with the 
club over new contracts.

Jürgen Klopp: I have final say on transfers at Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/jurgen-klopp-i-have-final-say-liverpool-transfers>
Jerome Sinclair appears destined for an Anfield exit this summer having 
rejected terms on an extension, while Jordan Rossiter and João Carlos Teixeira 
are also in contract stand-offs. Flanagan is out of contract at the end of this 
season although his situation has been complicated by serious injury.

The Liverpool manager said: “As a club you cannot make young players happy. 
That is not possible. It is not the club’s first job. Like in normal life, if 
it is not easy for you to be happy then no one can help you. But what we try is 
to create a situation where younger players know it is not important to get the 
highest wages in your life in the first year of your career. It is more 
important to get the real education and that is what we want to try. For this 
you always need a lot of things.

“I like Jerome, he is a real talent and if he wants to stay with us – no 
problem, absolutely no problem. If not, we cannot force it. I am fine with the 
situation but first of all you need young players who want to learn and if we 
can create a situation where they feel it is the right place to learn then 
everything is good. That is what we try for next season, we cannot do it now.

“As long as he is here he is a Liverpool player but I cannot make decisions 
for them. We can only offer things and first we need to offer education and 
training and the possibility to work together with the best coaches and the 
best players we have. Then it is up to the players.”

Sinclair, a 19-year-old forward, has been linked with a move to Watford. But 
Klopp added: “I’ve nothing to say about this. Jerome is a very young player, he 
has skills, he is a very good shooter but physically it is not easy for him to 
survive in the central position in a Premier League game against 6ft 4in 
defenders.”

Klopp may have more senior players available for the replay but said the 
prospect of injury recurrences after intensive Premier League games against
Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/17/liverpool-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 andArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/13/liverpool-arsenal-premier-league-match-report-firmino-giroud>
 inside five days will influence his selection against the League Two side.

He explained: “We had a few players who started against Man United and Arsenal 
who were injured a few weeks ago so we also have to think about whether it 
makes sense and whether it is too dangerous to start them again. We will put 
together a squad that can win the game but we must also think about re-injuries 
– that is the first thing we must think about.”

Klopp also reiterated his faith in Simon Mignolet after the goalkeeper signed 
a new five-year contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/18/liverpool-simon-mignolet-signs-new-contract>
 on Monday. “A lot of people have spoken about this situation, always talking 
about new goalkeepers from different countries,” Klopp said. “But since I came 
here I heard nothing negative about Simon from all the people I spoke to.

“Of course there is criticism, there are a lot of games and, as is normal, 
Simon was involved in some of the goals he conceded, but the package signed by 
Simon is perfect because he’s a young guy, smart enough to develop and to help 
the whole team. He gives a good feeling to the team when he’s in the starting 
line-up so that’s important. He makes us feel for sure that we want to work 
together for the next years. That’s why we gave him a new deal.”

Klopp, when asked if he has the final say on all transfer deals, said: “Yes. 
But does anybody have the final say? For example, say I wanted to take Zlatan 
Ibrahimovic and we have to pay £100m plus a big contract at 35 I think I would 
have to ask first.

“Sometimes my staff and I have an idea about a player, then we collect 
information and then we have players our scouts bring in and we speak about it.
If I don’t want a player to come here then he will not come 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/jurgen-klopp-i-have-final-say-liverpool-transfers>
. If a player I want doesn’t fit our budget then he will not come. It’s a 
normal situation.”
 