
Jurgen Klopp expressed his disbelief that Liverpool have another game to play 
after his callow side were held to a 2-2 draw againstExeter City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/exetercityfc> in the FA Cup third round 
and the German vowed to pick another inexperienced team for the replay at 
Anfield on Wednesday week.

Brad Smith’s goal 17 minutes from time denied Exeter a place in the fourth 
round on a night when Klopp was missing 12 players through injury and gave five 
youngsters their debut. Tom Nichols put Exeter ahead early on and when Lee 
Holmes restored their advantage direct from a corner, after Jerome Sinclair had 
equalised forLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>, the 
League Two club were on course for a famous upset.

Liverpool’s Brad Smith strikes to deny Exeter a memorable FA Cup scalp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/exeter-liverpool-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
Smith’s late strike, however, earned Liverpool a draw and Exeter a significant 
six-figure windfall, leaving Klopp to reflect on how he will deal with an 
already congested fixture schedule. “I can’t believe we have to play another 
game now,” the Liverpool manager said.

“Of course it’s difficult. We have two other games [in the Premier League] and 
then the replay is after Manchester United. If the situation doesn’t change we 
will play the same team or a little bit different with other young players. I 
can’t change it. So we have to try now to give the intensity to different 
players. We have to try it in theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> and accept what happens.”

Klopp felt that Liverpool deserved a draw on what was a poor playing surface. 
“The pitch was difficult for both teams, the first goal of Exeter was their 
first attack. Until then it was OK but that was ‘Oh my God’, not good for the 
young boys,” he said.

“Their second goal was something like a miracle that the ball was in and then 
in an atmosphere like this and with legs getting tired … we had a few more 
moments but not enough. So in the end we have to respect our own situation.

“We were here to go through to the next round, it wasn’t 100% – but 50% – so 
now we have another game at Anfield. It is what it is. It’s obvious what we 
have to learn in the future. We have to be more robust. It was an advantage for 
Exeter that they knew the pitch better than we do. But they were strong on the 
wing, they were quick in transition and they made a spectacular goal from the 
corner.”

Nichols admitted he was disappointed not to have won but is now looking 
forward to the replay. “I thought the boys were brilliant,” he said. “I thought 
we thoroughly deserved a draw. We didn’t park the bus, we gave it a right go 
and we’ve got a trip to Anfield.”
 