
Jürgen Klopp vowed to protect Ben Woodburn and allow him to fulfil his 
potential at Liverpool after the 17-year-old became the youngest goalscorer in 
the club’s history in the EFL Cup quarter-final defeat ofLeeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited>.

Next Generation 2016: 20 of the best talents at Premier League clubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/oct/04/next-generation-2016-20-of-the-best-talents-at-premier-league-clubs>
Woodburn, a Wales Under-19 international who was born in England, scored in 
the 81st minute at Anfield to seal a 2-0 win against Garry Monk’s impressive 
Championship side. At 17 years and 45 days old he beat Michael Owen’s record by 
98 days in only his second substitute appearance for the club asLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> secured a semi-final spot for 
the fourth time in six seasons.

“It’s all good,” Klopp said. “We know what Ben is capable of and what he is 
already able to do. My first job is to help these boys to be the best, in this 
case Ben Woodburn. There is a lot to do, especially to keep the public away for 
as long as possible. That is quite a difficult thing to do but on the other 
side we only brought him on because we want to use him so that means when he is 
on the pitch he is absolutely allowed to score goals, to prepare situations and 
to make crosses like Trent [Alexander-Arnold] did, for example. It is all good.

“I am really happy for him. The only problem is that I am a little bit afraid 
of you all [in the media]. That is the thing why I am so quiet. Maybe you can 
just write ‘goalscorer: Ben Woodburn’, and nothing else. That is quite a 
challenge. I heard he made history, Milly [James Milner] was the youngest 
goalscorer for Leeds, so he can still have a decent career.”

Klopp again demonstrated his confidence in Liverpool’s academy prospects by 
starting Alexander-Arnold and Ovie Ejaria against Leeds, though he admitted 
Woodburn’s goal enriched the quarter‑final win. “I don’t think it makes sense 
that I say the obvious [about Woodburn’s potential],” the manager said. “First 
of all I said to him: ‘Well done, but it was not too difficult – I would have 
scored too.’ That is maybe the truth. Nothing we say here is important enough 
that it would help Ben Woodburn or myself.

Ben Woodburn sets record as Liverpool break Leeds to reach EFL Cup last four
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/liverpool-leeds-united-efl-cup-quarter-final-match-report>
“We know how to handle the situation. I know I can say to you whatever I want 
but, if he scores goals, it’s very difficult to stay cool from your side. 
Tonight it was very important that we could have him on the bench and bring him 
into the game because of our situation in the offensive department, so he was a 
very important player for us and he scored a goal which makes it much more 
enjoyable.”

Lucas Leiva, Liverpool’s captain for the night, said a place in the record 
books would give Woodburn the confidence to maintain his rapid development. “He 
is a brilliant young player,” Lucas said. “He did very well. He just needs to 
keep learning, keep improving. A goal will give him confidence to keep 
learning, to keep going.”

The Brazilian was visibly moved during a period of silence held before 
kick-off for the Chapecoense players and others who died in a plane crash in 
Colombia.

Lucas said: “It was a terrible accident. I have a few people that I played 
with, some young players. It’s very hard for me to play tonight because I know 
a lot of people there but we just hope the families have the support they need 
and the victims rest in peace.”
 