
The USA coach, Jürgen Klinsmann remains, “1,000% sure” his side will qualify 
for the 2018 World Cup despitea 4-0 rout in Costa Rica last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/16/usa-costa-rica-analysis-jurgen-klinsmann-world-cup-qualifier-hex>
.

He even has the support of President Barack Obama, the coach told a gala 
dinner in Berlin. In an interview with Reuters, Klinsmann said he was 
disappointed “and even angry” that his team had lost two World Cup qualifiers 
in the space of five days, having let in a late goal against the run of playto 
lose 2-1 at home to Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/mexico-stun-united-states-on-late-rafael-marquez-winner>
. But he added that the team had played well at times during 2016 and would 
bounce back and win at least 15 points from the 24 available in the next eight 
qualifying games, which should enable the US to qualify from the Concacaf 
region.

The top three of the six teams go through 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/concacaf-hex-fix-solution-uefa-usa>
, with the fourth-placed country going into a play-off against a team from 
Asia. The US and Trinidad & Tobago are both pointless after two games.

“It’s important to put this in the right perspective,” he said. “We lost the 
two opening games and played the two best teams right away. We have eight more 
games to get the points needed to qualify. We’ve always reacted strongly when 
things were nerve-wracking.

From top to bottom, US men's soccer is dripping in mediocrity | Matthew Hall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/17/us-mens-soccer-mediocrity-jurgen-klinsmann-sunil-gulati>
“This team is always capable of reacting. We’ll correct this with the two 
games in March [against Honduras and Panama] and we’ll take one game at a time 
from there to get our points. I’m 1,000% sure we’ll qualify.”

Klinsmann said he was aware of the criticism in the media and calls for his 
dismissal after five years in the job, but he will not jettison his plan to 
patiently develop a team that would peak at the right time at Russia 2018.


“When things go slightly wrong, there are some people who come out and are 
ready to chop your head off,” he said. “In the long run, that’s going to make 
the development of the team difficult. It’s important to stay calm and be 
patient.


“There are definitely issues to be addressed but there is no reason to 
exaggerate them or panic,” he added. “I’ve been doing this for 35 years and 
there are always many reasons why certain things happen, both positively and 
negatively.


“It’s important to have the end result in mind. And the big picture is the 
overall development of the team in the four-year cycle between two World Cups. 
You have to be ready to take some setbacks during that phase.”


Klinsmann said the players were also confident that they had learned important 
lessons from the two losses, including failing to capitalise on their scoring 
chances against Mexico and then conceding a late goal at a corner due to poor 
marking.


“Sometimes you learn more from defeat than wins,” he said. “Not everything 
will go perfectly in 2017 on the path to the World Cup. The team is still in 
the process of finding itself. We’ve seen strong improvements of some young 
players this year but we’re still hoping one or two younger players will 
emerge.”

Concacaf World Cup qualifying is broken. But what should replace the Hex?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/concacaf-hex-fix-solution-uefa-usa>
With 12 wins, six losses and one draw, he felt 2016 had been a solid year - 
“except for the finish” - and called the US team’s wins against Costa Rica, 
Paraguay, Ecuador at the Copa America to reach the last four a seminal moment 
for US soccer.

“We had a maturing process at the Copa America that was outstanding,” he said. 
“We wanted to have younger players becoming more powerful and confident and got 
that. There is a real dynamic going on with players like Bobby Wood, John 
Brooks, Jordan Morris and Christian Pulisic.”

Klinsmann quoted President Obama telling him at a three-hour brainstorming 
meeting that also included a Nobel Prize winner, leading scientists and 
astronauts, that there was still a long way to go on the road to Russia.

“He said, ‘Coach, it didn’t go well in Costa Rica, but it’s only the start of 
the World Cup qualifying and you’ll get back on the right track.’ He 
understands that it’s a long qualifying process. He also understands dynamics 
of soccer as a global sport and how it builds bridges.”
 