
The extent of the injury crisis afflicting Liverpool has been laid bare with 
Jürgen Klopp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> considering a 
central defence of José Enrique and Tiago Ilori for the FA Cup tie at Exeter 
City.

Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> will take a 
threadbare, inexperienced squad to St James Park for Friday’s third-round 
match, with eight of the likely starting XI having played four matches or fewer 
for the club. Three are in line for their debuts.

With 12 players sidelined through injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/liverpool-coutinho-lovren-injuries-klopp>
 and Klopp refusing to risk those involved in four games in 11 days over the 
festive period, Nathaniel Clyne, Alberto Moreno and Emre Can will not start 
against the League Two side. Philippe Coutinho and Dejan Lovren, who sustained 
hamstring injuries inTuesday’s Capital One Cup semi-final win at Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/stoke-city-liverpool-capital-one-cup-semi-final-match-report>
, have been ruled out for at least the rest of January and 10 days respectively 
and Kolo Touré misses the tie having suffered cramp at the Britannia Stadium.

Jordon Ibe gives Liverpool advantage against Stoke in Capital One Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/stoke-city-liverpool-capital-one-cup-semi-final-match-report>
Touré’s absence deprives Liverpool of all their experienced central defenders 
and such is the paucity of options that Enrique,who has not played in 12 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/12/jose-enrique-liverpool-alienated-balotelli-borini>
, and Ilori, who has never featured for the club since arriving in 2013, could 
start. The Spanish left-back last appeared for Liverpool in theFA Cup draw 
against Bolton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/24/liverpool-bolton-wanderers-fa-cup-fourth-round-match-report>
 on 24 January last year and has played 84 minutes since December 2014. He was 
frozen out by the former Liverpool manager Brendan Rodgers having rejected 
opportunities to leave Anfield and was training apart from the senior squad 
when Klopp arrived in October.

Asked whether Enrique was in his plans for Exeter, Klopp replied: “Who?” Once 
clarified, he continued: “Hopefully. We don’t have too many centre-backs so it 
is an idea. But we have to see. He played the day before yesterday as a 
full-back for 90 minutes. We all need training but in this game we could need 
his experience.”

Ilori must prove his fitness before his inclusion against Paul Tisdale’s team 
is decided. The Portugal Under-21 international had his season-long loan at 
Aston Villa terminated on Thursday having not played a game for the Premier 
League’s bottom club. Klopp said of the £7m signing from Sporting Lisbon: “I 
don’t know how he is. He was injured a few weeks ago and now he is in training. 
I think he played for Aston Villa’s second team a few times and he should be 
available.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fliverpool-jurgen-klopp-exeter-city-fa-cup-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liverpool%E2%80%99s%20J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%20forced%20to%20field%20makeshift%20side%20against%20Exeter%20City%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fliverpool-jurgen-klopp-exeter-city-fa-cup-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liverpool%E2%80%99s%20J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%20forced%20to%20field%20makeshift%20side%20against%20Exeter%20City%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fliverpool-jurgen-klopp-exeter-city-fa-cup-video&media=>
Liverpool’s Jürgen Klopp forced to field makeshift side against Exeter City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jan/07/liverpool-jurgen-klopp-exeter-city-fa-cup-video>
. 
Klopp’s only selection guarantee was that the Liverpool team would be “very 
young, that’s for sure” and not include his regular starters across the festive 
programme. The Liverpool manager, whose side host Arsenal and Manchester United 
in the Premier League next week, said: “There are the injuries but you can also 
be influenced by an intensive period of football [when selecting a side] and so 
none of the players who played the last five or six games in a row will play at 
Exeter. That is not possible. Then we can try and make a team. It is not easy, 
but we will try and find one.”

Ilori and the forwards Ryan Kent and Sheyi Ojo may make their first Liverpool 
appearances. The full-backs Connor Randall and Brad Smith, the midfielders João 
Carlos Teixeira and Cameron Brannagan and the goalkeeper Adam Bogdan could 
start. Between them they have played 15 times for the club.

Klopp accepts his team are exposed to an FA Cup upset against a side 16th in 
League Two. “It is a chance for Exeter and they have to take it,” he said. But 
the man who led Borussia Dortmund to three German Cup finals in his last four 
seasons at the club insists his selection will not be a sign of disrespecting 
theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>.

Klopp said: “We have the situation that we have. We cannot play with Phil 
Coutinho – he cannot play for three and a half weeks at least. That is the 
situation. If someone wants to write headlines it is not the truth because we 
respect the FA Cup. There is one reason for the team we will play tomorrow.”

Liverpool are scouring the transfer market for defensive reinforcement before 
Arsenal’s visit to Anfield next Wednesday, withBorussia Dortmund’s Neven Subotic
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/football-transfer-rumours-liverpool-subotic>
 and Internazionale’s Andrea Ranocchia among several under consideration. Klopp 
denied claims, aired this week by the former Liverpool manager Graeme Souness 
and Sunderland’s Sam Allardyce, that histraining regime and high-intensity 
pressing game are to blame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/06/liverpool-injuries-jurgen-klopp-pressing-game-sam-allardyce>
 for the injury problems. “Our play is not that intensive,” he said. “Maybe the 
first game at Tottenham was more intensive than other games. We made a few more 
sprints, but not 500 more. It’s normal, average running. Football is not all 
about more running, it’s about more in the right moment. It’s about thinking 
quicker.”

Allardyce on Thursday apologised for his comments, saying: “I didn’t mean to 
upset you or criticise your club in any way.”

The Liverpool manager revealed he had to start Coutinho against Stoke as 
Jordon Ibe was struggling with illness and Christian Benteke had an achilles 
problem. “Phil had played a lot of games and so we planned to change at 
half-time but then, 18 minutes, bang. That is the situation. If we could have 
changed players more often then no one would have had this intensity [of games] 
but you cannot have 40 or 50 players.”
 