
For four years in the 1950s, Jackie Sewell, who has died aged 89, was the most 
expensive footballer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/aug/09/top-10-most-expensive-players-in-the-world-paul-pogba>
 in Britain, having moved from his first league club,Notts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty>, to Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> for a record £34,500 
midway through the 1950-51 season.

A quick, clever and incisive inside-forward, Sewell scored half a dozen First 
Division goals in 10 games, which almost saved Wednesday from relegation; they 
eventually went down by the narrowest of margins, on goal average. The 
following season he scored 22 goals in 35 Second Division matches to bring them 
back up to the top flight, and his feats with Wednesday earned him his first 
England call-up, against Ireland in November 1951. The next summer he scored 
England’s first goal in a famous 3-2 friendly victory over Austria. Yet he 
would win only six international caps in all, and his misfortune was that two 
of them came against the brilliant Hungarians, who thrashed England 6-3 at 
Wembley in November 1953 and 7-1 in Budapest the following May. He was the last 
surviving member of the England team from the 1953 Hungary game.

At Wembley, where he played inside-left, he dashed through the Hungarian 
defence to score a fine first-half goal that brought the score to 1-1 and gave 
England brief, illusory hope. “We were going to win,” he later told me. “There 
was no doubt about that, because we hadn’t been beat at home. But the only 
chance I think I had all afternoon was when I scored.”

His final England goal tally was three, but he continued to produce goals 
frequently for Wednesday, although in 1954-55 his 14 in 35 games could not save 
them from another relegation. With 13 goals in 16 games the following season he 
materially helped them to regain their First Division place, but midway through 
the campaign he was sold toAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>. He stayed with them until 
early in the season 1959-60, figuring in the Villa team that won the FA Cup 2-1 
againstManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> in 1957.

Born in Whitehaven, Cumbria, Sewell left school to become a milkman, but soon 
switched to working down the mines so that he could be free at weekends to play 
football for his local club, Kells Centre, following in the footsteps of his 
father and half a dozen uncles.

Gifted but sometimes unpredictable on the field, he was only 15 when Frank 
Buckley, the celebrated manager ofWolves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolves> in prewar years, brought him to 
Notts County. He won a regular place in County’s Third Division (South) side in 
the 1946-47 season, making an immediate impact with 21 goals in 37 games. The 
following season the veteran former England centre-forwardTommy Lawton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/sep/15/tommy-lawton-andy-carroll-england>
 arrived at the club from Chelsea, and the two of them formed an outstanding 
partnership. In 1949-50, playing alongside Lawton, Sewell’s 19 goals in 32 
games helped the team to promotion to the Second Division, where in the 
following campaign, clearly untroubled by better opposition, he added another 
14 goals in 26 games, before Sheffield Wednesday came calling. He was, he said, 
perfectly happy at Meadow Lane, and had no great desire to join a bigger, 
richer club. But the transfer went ahead nonetheless. The £34,500 transfer fee 
was, briefly, a world record: no bigger sum was paid for a player in Britain 
until Eddie Firmani was sold byCharlton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/charltonathletic> to Sampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> for £35,000 in 1955. Not until 
Alan Shearer <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer> went from 
Blackburn Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackburn> to Newcastle 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> for £15m in 1996 
did a British player command a world-record transfer fee again.

Nat Lofthouse <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nat-lofthouse> of Bolton 
Wanderers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/boltonwanderers>, the England 
centre-forward, was among Sewell’s admirers and friends, striking up a fine 
understanding with him when they both played for England. “His real value was 
never appreciated,” said Lofthouse. “We hit it off because we were totally 
different. I couldn’t play, but I could shoot and head. Jackie could play. He 
had great skill, positional sense and an ability to spot an opening.”

When Sewell went to Villa for £20,000, he renewed his acquaintance with their 
manager, Eric Houghton, once a teammate at Notts County. He had a successful, 
if fairly short, spell at Villa Park, making 123 league appearances and taking 
possession of his only winner’s medal, for the FA Cup, before transferring to
Hull City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hullcity> for a mere £2,000 in 
1959. When he finished at Hull two years later, with 509 English league 
appearances and 228 league goals from his 15-year career, he went off to what 
was then Northern Rhodesia as a coach and player for the Lusaka club. Northern 
Rhodesia became Zambia in 1964, and in his late 30s Sewell was chosen to play 
10 times for the newly independent nation during 1964-65, captaining the side 
and becoming one of the few footballers to have played for two different 
countries.

He later coached teams in Zimbabwe and Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of 
Congo) before retiring to Nottingham, where he was a regular attender atNotts 
County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty> matches into old age.

His wife, Barbara, died in 2010; he is survived by their son, Paul.

• John (Jackie) Sewell, footballer, born 24 January 1927; died 26 September 
2016
 