
Towards the end of Jamali Maddix’s first – and, as it turns out, last – year 
at university, he got a tattoo. In the surprisingly straight-bat boardroom at
Vice Media <http://www.vice.com/en_uk>’s UK headquarters in Shoreditch, east 
London, he rolls up his left sleeve: the blue-purple ink runs from his wrist to 
his elbow and depicts a man wearing a suit looking into an abyss. It’s quite 
something. “It’s that idea of me actually doing what I want to do and fuck the 
corporate shit,” Maddix explains (reader beware: Maddix does like an 
expletive). “That’s why I put it on my forearm, so I can’t work in a bank. I 
don’t want to be a bank teller – I want to be a comedian.”

The tattoo did the job, but not in the way Maddix was expecting. He picked up 
a blood infection from the needlework and had to drop out of university to 
recuperate. He’d been doing standup on and off for years, but for six months he 
decided to commit to it fully. “Everyday I’d write, write, write, all day,” he 
says. “I’d perform at night, I’d do three, four shows a night, come back and 
write. And I didn’t feel sorry for myself. You know, I don’t blame a lot of 
people for giving up, because it’s a hard game, man. You go on stage and no one 
laughs, it’s shit. It’s disappointment, disappointment and it’s hard to carry 
on. But you have to make the decision yourself and go, ‘I’m going to have to 
keep on trucking.’ And I did; I kept on trucking and I done all right.”

Maddix, who is 25 now, certainly has done “all right”. At the end of those six 
months, he had honed his act enough to win the2014 Chortle student comedy award 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6YomWwPvH0E>. He is now a poster boy for 
Viceland <https://www.viceland.com/en_uk/>, a new TV network from “the world’s 
pre-eminent youth media company and content creation studio”. Maddix has made a 
six-part documentary series calledHate thy Neighbour, in which he travels 
around the world trying to make sense of the growing resurgence of rightwing 
beliefs. He starts in Sweden, with the Aryan leaders of Nordic Youth, and ends 
after the Brexit referendum with the English Defence League, with trips to meet 
radicals in Israel, Ukraine and the US in between. Location footage is 
interspersed with standup sets recorded in a small club back in London – think 
Louis Theroux mixed withStewart Lee’s Comedy Vehicle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/04/stewart-lees-comedy-vehicle-bbc-bafta-james-corden>
, without the polish of those seasoned pros.

I know what this country's like. There's this fear and we hit bad times and 
it's easier to blame someone with brown skin

Maddix’s background certainly gives him an intriguing standpoint from which to 
discuss the rise of the far-right. His mother is British-Italian and his father 
is Jamaican; they haven’t been together for a while: “I’m from a broken home, 
man!” Promotional material forHate thy Neighbour notes that Maddix, who has a 
long, straggly beard, is “often mistaken for being a Muslim – but he is 
actually a committed drinker, smoker and fornicator”. In his early standup 
routines, he would tell audiences that he grew up in “Dagenham in the 90s”. 
This isn’t exactly true: he was raised – and continues to live with his mum – 
in Ilford, five miles away. Either way, he was in an excellent position to 
observe the British National party winning 12 council seats in Barking and 
Dagenham in 2006, and the “white flight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/01/white-flight-diversity-cities>
” that saw the white British population in the area drop from 80% in 2001 to 
less than 50% in 2011.

“I’ll put it into context for you,” says Maddix. “Ilford is on the border of 
east London and Essex, so we never got the gentrification of east London and we 
never had the money of Essex to begin with. So it’s just a stalemate. A 
stagnant area. Everything is shutting down. I love the place, I grew up there, 
but it’s a shithole. No one has invested anything into the area. So what you 
have is abject poverty and then you have affluence. Both in the mix.”

Does his background explain why he wanted to make Hate Thy Neighbour? “Maybe 
that was a subconscious foundation for it,” Maddix says, “but I wouldn’t say 
that was the reason why. There were various reasons I wanted to make this show.”

Maddix expected Remain to triumph in the EU referendum, but he wasn’t entirely 
shocked by the result. “I wish I found that surprising, I wish I did, but I 
don’t,” he says. “Because I’ve travelled up and down this country, man, I’ve 
met people, I know what this country’s like. There’s this fear and we hit bad 
times and it’s just easier to blame someone with brown skin. It’s easy to blame 
someone else. It’s not the banks, it’s not the politicians, it’s that guy who’s 
trying to make a living.”

Dyslexic, dyspraxic and a comic-book obsessive, Maddix struggled at school and 
had little direction until one night at home he was flicking through the TV 
channels. “What really made me want to do comedy was watching100 Greatest 
Standups and I was young, 14,” he recalls. “Probably high as well, smoking some 
weed, watching the show. Well, 15 then, for the record. Or 16. OK, it was 
yesterday.”

Maddix snickers: “So I was 16 or however old I was, and I was watching this 
show and everyone was all right and then I saw Bill Hicks and I was like, ‘What 
the fuck is this, man?’ Like, ‘This shit is mental.’ I love the people I grew 
up with, I do, but every conversation was about money or clothes or just 
nothing. I always felt that there was more to this, but I didn’t know what it 
was. And I watchedBill Hicks <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/bill-hicks> and 
I thought, ‘There’s someone who has the same ideas as me.’”

Another defining moment came when Maddix was studying theatre and performance 
practice at the University of Salford. He was hardly an exemplary student: “I 
was flunking out; I think I went to four lectures in the year.” One of the 
four, however, was part of a module where the comedian Jason Manford came in to 
give advice on how to do standup. At the end of the session, Manford asked if 
any of the class wanted to try out some material. Maddix, who had started 
performing aged 16, but had stopped a couple of times, disgruntled, did a few 
bits. “He looked at me and went, ‘The only advice I can give you is just to 
leave uni, mate, you don’t need to be here,’” says Maddix. “He went, ‘Be a 
comic, that’s what you are.’”

Viceland might well be the future of television, but it’s too early to tell at 
the moment. It launched in the UK in September, having previously started 
broadcasting in North America in February. In June, Shane Smith, the CEO of 
Vice Media, announced that the company had signed deals to broadcast in 44 
countries and there is certainly some muscle behind it. Vice Media has been 
valued at more than $4bn and the new channel’s co-president (and Vice creative 
director) is Spike Jonze, the director ofBeing John Malkovich and Her. Two of 
the first commissions –Gaycation <https://www.viceland.com/en_us/show/gaycation>
, a travel show from an LGBT perspective, fronted by the actor Ellen Page, and
Woman, hosted by Gloria Steinem – were nominated for Emmy awards.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6YomWwPvH0E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6YomWwPvH0E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6YomWwPvH0E&media=>
Watch Jamali Maddix’s winning set at the Chortle student comedy awards 2014. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6YomWwPvH0E> 
The channel is still finding its feet in the UK. On opening night, Viceland 
(which is on Sky channel 153 or a Now TV box) had a peak of about 17,200 
viewers. Whether it can convince millennials to tune in remains to be seen and 
much will depend on the pull of young talents such as Maddix and Grace Neutral, 
an extreme tattooist, whom Viceland believes will not be found anywhere else.

Maddix, who is tall and hefty, but has gentle eyes behind milk-bottle 
spectacles, thinks that in his case that’s probably true. He had the idea for
Hate thy Neighbour a few years ago and it had even been “sort of optioned” 
once. But the channels he spoke to all wanted to change the idea too much for 
his liking. He says: “Then I got a meeting for the new Viceland channel and I 
told them the idea and they said, ‘Yep, good, bang.’ And we made it. So Vice 
have been a lot more free and giving and it suits being there; it’s not that 
weird show on Channel 4.”

Though he is fascinated by race, Maddix dislikes being described as a “race 
comic”. “I get it, I understand why, but talking about race – what does that 
really mean?” he says. “Listen, when a white comedian goes up, even though he 
doesn’t mention he’s white, he’s talking about the white experience. He’s 
talking about race.”

Writing the standup material for Hate thy Neighbour to go alongside his 
experiences on the road has been easy, Maddix found. What has taken him aback, 
though, is that some of the extremists he met, including a man with dogs called 
Adolf and Eva, and General Yahanna from Pennsylvania, an African American 
“Hebrew Israelite” who believes white people are possessed by Satan, have 
actually been pleasant company. “I don’t know if we could be friends, but the 
weird thing about some of these people is that they have nice qualities. 
There’s one guy who had probably the most horrific views that I heard, but he 
had likable qualities about him, where you go, ‘If that was taken away, he’d be 
a great guy.’”

Although many of the groups he met held intolerant views, there was only a 
single point during filming that Maddix feared for his own safety. “They might 
say shit behind my back but not to my face,” he says. “There was only one 
episode where I felt like ‘Fuck!’ I was surprised it happened so late. There’s 
this mixed-race dude running around the world talking to people who are a bit 
racist and then, out of nowhere, I forgot that they really do live this life! 
This was reality.”

Maddix seems a natural fit for the Vice model – that of a regular person, 
rather than a journalist or a reporter, landing in an extraordinary situation 
and sending back a dispatch. (For an excoriating and extremely funny primer on 
the pros and cons of this approach, search “David Carr confronts Vice 
<http://www.nytimes.com/video/business/100000003509105/page-one-david-carr-confronts-vice.html>
” from the 2011 documentaryPage One: Inside the New York Times.) At one point, 
in the first episode ofHate thy Neighbour, when Maddix is hanging out with the 
young, immigrant-vilifying leader of the Nordic Youth, he chuckles and says: 
“I’m a journalist… apparently.”

Depressed about Brexit? Outsiders is the comedy that makes you want to stay in 
| Anne Henry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/10/brexit-outsiders-comedy-tv-sitcom>
So is he or isn’t he? “Well, I’m not a journalist,” says Maddix. “I’m not. And 
I don’t want to go there as one. I’m going there representing Jamali; I’m not 
going there representing journalism, integrity, shit like that. A good 
journalist, they go there and do the things that a good journalist would do, 
but in terms of preparing and shit, I didn’t want to make a film where I go 
there and go, ‘I’ve researched everything and you’re wrong!’ Run around the 
world going, ‘You’re wrong! And you’re wrong! And you’re wrong!’”

This is perhaps the main difference to Louis Theroux. While one always 
suspects that Theroux knows more than he’s letting on, Maddix tends to 
genuinely be reacting on the fly. This can certainly lead to some choice 
moments. In the first episode ofHate thy Neighbour, he asks a member of Nordic 
Youth whether he is ever attracted to black women. The young man says no. 
Maddix pushes: not Beyoncé? Halle Berry? The young man replies that he’s not 
even sure who they are. “You liar!” laughs Maddix and the two men exchange 
rueful, revealing smiles.

“Listen, Louis Theroux is the best that’s ever done that style of journalism,” 
says Maddix. “I ain’t trying to copy his style because there’s no point. 
Whatever he’s doing, he don’t need to change the recipe. But he’s him, he’s 
living his reality, I’m living mine. So I’m just trying to do what I can do. I 
put my little two pence in.”

Maddix has to go to finish the edit on the last films. There’s much more he’d 
like to achieve – standup tours, more documentaries, move out of his mum’s 
house – but for now he’s feeling pretty content. “Comedy saved my life,” he 
says. “I wasn’t going to do anything else in my life. I’ve already done things 
in standup and things in my life that I never thought I’d achieve. Even sitting 
here, right now, in the Vice office and talking to theObserver… I’m a boy from 
Ilford, that shit doesn’t happen to me. Just from telling jokes and that.”

Hate thy Neighbour is on Viceland <https://www.viceland.com/en_uk/> on 
Wednesdays at 10pm
 