
James Maddison’s stoppage-time winner ensured Rangers suffered a miserable 
return to Pittodrie as Aberdeen claimed a dramatic 2-1Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> win.

Rangers had not visited Aberdeen in four-and-a-half years but the time had 
done little to quell the animosity between the sides. TheAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> support mercilessly lapped it 
up as winger Johnny Hayes stroked the home side ahead 22 seconds into the 
second half.

But the Irishman’s foul on Lee Wallace teed up Andy Halliday to level from the 
penalty spot with 13 minutes left.

Just as Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> thought they 
had claimed a point the substitute Maddison curled home an unstoppable 
free-kick to send Mark Waburton’s team into the bottom half of the table.

Joey Barton under investigation for allegedly breaking betting rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/20/joey-barton-investigation-breaking-betting-rules-rangers>
Having registered back-to-back clean sheets for the first time this season, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/scottish-roundup-premiership-championship-rangers-st-johnstone-hibs>
 Warburton decided to stick with Danny Wilson and Clint Hill at the centre of 
his defence. Aberdeen needed to go for the jugular but the Dons looked 
restrained.

They did have Rangers sprinting back into covering positions as early as the 
third minute when Graeme Shinnie slipped the ball in for Adam Rooney but 
Wilson’s clearing tackle was well-timed.

The visitors, meanwhile, looked assured in possession. Mark Reynolds did well 
to get a touch on Joe Garner’s header as James Tavernier crossed from wide, 
while the Rangers right-back sent a free-kick into the Dons wall.

Garner came close again when a deflected strike off Shay Logan almost caught 
out Reds keeper Joe Lewis. The former Cardiff man pulled off a vital save 
though as he scrambled to his left.

Aberdeen’s first moment of sustained pressure ended with Kenny McLean being 
given space to shoot but Wes Foderingham did well to push it over his bar. 
Rangers continued to push in the moments leading up to the break with Barry 
McKay whipping the ball just over the top.

Rangers striker Kenny Miller arrested in connection with alleged brawl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/rangers-striker-kenny-miller-arrested-in-connection-with-alleged-brawl>
Derek McInnes knew his side needed a spark as Aberdeen re-emerged for the 
second period and threw on Maddison.

But even the Reds manager could not have expected the breakthrough to come as 
swiftly – or as simply – as they netted almost straight from kick-off.

The restart was knocked back to keeper Lewis and from his long punt Rooney 
flicked on for Hayes, who raced away from the static Tavernier before coolly 
slotting past Foderingham.

It was a shocking defensive lapse but Gers came close to a quick reply as 
Martyn Waghorn nodded just wide from Halliday’s free-kick, while the striker’s 
next intervention was to blaze over from close range.

It was not going to plan for Warburton, so he sent for Niko Kranjcar and Kenny 
Miller, with the latter instrumental in the equaliser.

Hayes ended up on the wrong side of Wallace inside the box as he ran onto 
Miller’s through ball and bundled the Ibrox captain to the ground, with 
Halliday doing the necessary from the spot.

But just as the game looked to be heading for a stalemate Maddison came up 
with his moment of magic.

Tavernier was harshly judged to have tripped Hayes and Maddison ensured 
referee John Beaton’s error proved pivotal as he swept his stunning set-piece 
past Foderingham with the help of the upright.
 