
James Thierrée’s new show, The Toad Knew 
<http://www.compagnieduhanneton.com/EN/show/the-toad-knew/10>, opens and closes 
in characteristically topsy-turvy fashion. At the start, the heavy red curtain 
hanging before us is pulled not up but entirely down, the cloth yanked across 
the stage like a great wave. It’s impressively hitched back in place at the 
end, leaving Thierrée and his company peeking their heads out mischievously 
from under the velvet drapes. Thierrée beams behind his fringe of silvery curls 
at the applause on this latest stop of their European tour.


James Thiérrée on Charlie Chaplin and his new show, Tabac Rouge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/24/james-thierree-chaplin-tabac-rouge-clown-sadlers-wells>
But the following morning, when we meet at his hotel in Montpellier, it’s a 
different story. Thierrée pads down to reception in his bare feet, wearing a 
T-shirt and shorts, and has a sombre, lopsided look about him. He says with a 
wince that he’s hurt his back and needs to find a doctor before that night’s 
performance. He’s full of apologies but the show must come first and we agree 
to speak on the phone later.

By the time we catch up with each other, the tour has reached Italy. How is he 
feeling? “My back is getting better. It’s all right. My body is an old 
companion,” he says with a robust laugh. “Sometimes he makes me pay the bills.”

Certainly, Thierrée has racked up quite an account: The Toad Knew is the sixth 
touring show he has dreamed up for hisCompagnie du Hanneton 
<http://www.compagnieduhanneton.com/EN/>. Physically demanding yet always done 
with a light touch, his exhilarating creations juggle elements of circus, mime, 
theatre and dance. They fit into family traditions that date back to his 
great-grandfatherEugene O’Neill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/30/eugene-o-neill-master-american-theatre>
, his grandfatherCharlie Chaplin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jan/27/charlie-chaplin-tramp-birth-hero>
, and his parents,Jean-Baptiste Thierrée and Victoria Chaplin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aWorgMToYzk>, with whose circus James and his 
sister,Aurélia <http://aureliathierree.com/>, performed from a young age. He 
takes a moment to ponder the toll of all these “twisting knees and bending 
backs and throwing myself on the ground” and concludes: “Maybe I should be out 
of the game already. But a little pain is part of the dancer and acrobat’s 
life. I was talking withBaryshnikov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/10/mikhail-baryshnikov-why-i-finally-agreed-play-nijinsky>
. I crossed paths with him at a show in Paris. We were exchanging stories about 
our different body pains. He just told me: ‘Get used to it. It’s not going to 
get any better!’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjames-thierree-the-toad-knew-edinburgh-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd846d7a90bcdd4e68bfaed5cd03f397f88f6e83%2F0_275_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Thierr%C3%A9e%3A%20'Baryshnikov%20told%20me%20to%20get%20used%20to%20pain.%20It's%20part%20of%20a%20dancer's%20life'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjames-thierree-the-toad-knew-edinburgh-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Thierr%C3%A9e%3A%20%27Baryshnikov%20told%20me%20to%20get%20used%20to%20pain.%20It%27s%20part%20of%20a%20dancer%27s%20life%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjames-thierree-the-toad-knew-edinburgh-international-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd846d7a90bcdd4e68bfaed5cd03f397f88f6e83%2F0_275_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 James Thierrée and Valérie Doucet in The Toad Knew, his sixth show with 
Compagnie du Hanneton. Photograph: Hugues Anhès 
Did he hurt himself during the Montpellier show? “No, I was in pain before,” 
he explains. “It’s usually in between towns that pains come out. In between 
Bordeaux and Montpellier we had two or three days off and it started coming. 
It’s when I’m inactive that the problems come out. My back got blocked and then 
I performed on a bad back and it made things worse. That’s why I woke up like a 
wreck.”

Waking up the morning after one of Thierrée's shows can feel like piecing 
together a spectacular dream

For audiences, waking up the morning after one of Thierrée’s shows can feel 
like you’re piecing together a spectacular dream. In the case of The Toad Knew, 
there’s the elaborate gothic-horror set, with its self-erecting spiral 
staircase and the fish tank used for a dance solo. There’s Thierrée’s squabble 
with a misbehaving piano, his fight with a violin, his thwarted efforts to keep 
his fringe from flopping over his face – which even a staple-gun doesn’t solve. 
There’s the riot of crockery-juggling that ends with an armadillo scuttling 
across the stage. And then there’s the eponymous amphibian, which is best kept 
secret – except to say that its entrance is a coup de théâtre that I can’t wait 
to see again.


So what’s with the title? “I always have a bit of a weird title,” Thierrée 
says with a laugh. “And it has a funny relationship to the show. It’s not 
always very meaningful or directly connected. Sometimes I’ve worked on a show 
for a while and the title comes and brings an entirely new direction. I like 
that. When I was a child, I was convinced that a frog had talked to me and told 
me many different secrets. I wasreally convinced because I had spent, like, 
half an hour with that frog on the side of the road. Sometimes, my father would 
make a joke of this and say, ‘Was the frog right?’ As I got older, he continued 
to make the joke. I thought it would be funny if it was the title of the show.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjames-thierree-the-toad-knew-edinburgh-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c8007286608685c3a98377c4ba4be6fb821050c%2F0_304_3850_2311%2F3850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Thierr%C3%A9e%3A%20'Baryshnikov%20told%20me%20to%20get%20used%20to%20pain.%20It's%20part%20of%20a%20dancer's%20life'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjames-thierree-the-toad-knew-edinburgh-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Thierr%C3%A9e%3A%20%27Baryshnikov%20told%20me%20to%20get%20used%20to%20pain.%20It%27s%20part%20of%20a%20dancer%27s%20life%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjames-thierree-the-toad-knew-edinburgh-international-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c8007286608685c3a98377c4ba4be6fb821050c%2F0_304_3850_2311%2F3850.jpg>
 James Thierrée in Tabac Rouge at Sadler’s Wells in London in 2014. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
In its English version, the frog of the French title (La Grenouille Avait 
Raison) has become a toad. Either way, the title will remind Thierrée’s 
devotees of the fish, cockroaches and other little critters that skitter into 
his tales. Those stage creatures are usually created by his mother, Victoria 
(the third of Charlie Chaplin’s eight children with Oona O’Neill, who was the 
daughter of Eugene).

Watching the show, you might be hard pressed to figure out just what the toad 
knew. When I spoke to Thierrée a couple of years ago about his previous work,
Tabac Rouge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/26/tabac-rouge-review-sadlers-wells-jamie-thierree>
, he said he wanted to layer his shows to make a “mille-feuille that would give 
possibilities of different readings”. The Toad Knew presents the tale of 
siblings kept in captivity in a cellar by a mysterious creature – but I know 
this purely from Thierrée’s description, rather than my own interpretation. The 
show left me dazzled, but more than a little baffled. Although it features more 
text than some of Thierrée’s other creations, those words won’t help you 
decipher a meaning – it’s a nonsense language spoken, or rather incanted, by 
the singerMariama 
<http://www.radio.net/magazine/article/mariama-take-me-to-paris-2/>. “We 
started touring it in Switzerland and she was speaking in French and was giving 
leads as to what the whole thing was about,” he explains. “I took that away 
because it was too precise … Switching to the imaginary language, I thought we 
could still work on the meaning as we toured it.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjames-thierree-the-toad-knew-edinburgh-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca324e921d88ff3fda0e1f080ee05faf465be429%2F0_154_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Thierr%C3%A9e%3A%20'Baryshnikov%20told%20me%20to%20get%20used%20to%20pain.%20It's%20part%20of%20a%20dancer's%20life'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjames-thierree-the-toad-knew-edinburgh-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Thierr%C3%A9e%3A%20%27Baryshnikov%20told%20me%20to%20get%20used%20to%20pain.%20It%27s%20part%20of%20a%20dancer%27s%20life%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjames-thierree-the-toad-knew-edinburgh-international-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca324e921d88ff3fda0e1f080ee05faf465be429%2F0_154_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Fishtank solo … Valérie Doucet in The Toad Knew. Photograph: Hugues Anhès 
Thierrée says he doesn’t set out to create a piece around a specific theme or 
character. “I pull strings and they’re connected to other strings and I’m 
pretty trustful that something is going to come out of all these links.” It 
usually all begins with one strong image. “For The Toad Knew I had this idea of 
going down the stairs into this world, bringing the audience with me under the 
surface.” Before long, a key part of Thierrée’s set began to take on a life of 
its own. “It’s such a strange object we had to have a name for it,” he says.

“It has different lights, different colours and different geometric shapes, so 
we called it the kaleidoscope. We had a wonderful journey building it. We 
started without knowing what the final object would be. At first it was 
supposed to be a ceiling, interwoven with different metal bars, kind of 
hovering above the heads of the characters. That was too heavy so we started 
deconstructing the ceiling … Then I thought it would be good to manipulate each 
part individually. Then we put some lights inside it … We advanced blindly to 
finish with the object you see in the show.”

The kaleidoscope – at times hovering like a fleet of space ships, at others 
pulsating like a jellyfish – emerges as a character in its own right, and is as 
central to the work as the ensemble of five performers accompanying Thierrée. 
Two of the company, the dancer Thi Mai Nguyen and the contortionist Valérie 
Doucet, are returning from Tabac Rouge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjames-thierree-the-toad-knew-edinburgh-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21261328cffafc8eaf9f98fa5bc1f6daa5bda6cb%2F1261_0_3071_3839%2F3071.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Thierr%C3%A9e%3A%20'Baryshnikov%20told%20me%20to%20get%20used%20to%20pain.%20It's%20part%20of%20a%20dancer's%20life'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjames-thierree-the-toad-knew-edinburgh-international-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Thierr%C3%A9e%3A%20%27Baryshnikov%20told%20me%20to%20get%20used%20to%20pain.%20It%27s%20part%20of%20a%20dancer%27s%20life%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fjames-thierree-the-toad-knew-edinburgh-international-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21261328cffafc8eaf9f98fa5bc1f6daa5bda6cb%2F1261_0_3071_3839%2F3071.jpg>
 ‘The theatre is where I grew up. It’s the magic box’ … James Thierrée with 
Yann Nédélec in The Toad Knew. Photograph: Hugues Anhès 
In between creating those two shows, Thierrée enjoyed his most prominent film 
role to date withChocolat <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tmGgjspbFAs>, 
directed by Roschdy Zem and released earlier this year in France. He portrays 
the real-life English clown Foottit who, with a former slave, Raphael 
“Chocolat” Padilla (played by Omar Sy), werea celebrated comedy duo 
<http://www.circopedia.org/Chocolat> in belle époque Paris. It’s 25 years since 
Thierrée started out in movies, cast as one of three Ariels in Peter Greenaway’s
Prospero’s Books <http://petergreenaway.org.uk/prospero.htm>. He counted John 
Gielgud, Ute Lemper and Bergman regular Erland Josephson among his co-stars in 
the film. “Mark Rylance was Ferdinand and I rememberMichael Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/aug/09/interview-michael-clark-ballet-dancer>
 [as Caliban], my god! We were in a huge factory in Amsterdam, with hundreds of 
naked extras because Peter Greenaway was fascinated by Renaissance imagery.”

In Prospero’s Books, the teenage Thierrée performed a trapeze act he had been 
doing in his parents’ show, Le Cirque Imaginaire. When he was offered the part 
in Chocolat, he says he was cautious because it’s hard to capture the essence 
of circus on screen. “You could think it’s the best subject imaginable for a 
movie – it’s very visual, full of emotions, travelling. But very rarely have 
people found a way to film it in an interesting manner.” One exception is 
Thierrée’s spellbinding trapeze performance in Robinson Savary’s 2005 film Bye 
Bye Blackbird, a lugubrious-looking, slow-moving drama otherwise distinguished 
by its Mercury Rev soundtrack and the casting of Derek Jacobi as a particularly 
hammy ringmaster.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhzid0JN7dzM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhzid0JN7dzM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhzid0JN7dzM&media=>
 Watch James Thierrée and Izabella Miko in a scene from Bye Bye Blackbird 
In the end, he decided that the tale of Foottit and Chocolat, once painted by 
Toulouse-Lautrec, was too tempting to resist. “The film digs at the origins of 
what I do today – the clowning and the musical world and the circus world all 
mixed up … Obviously, it’s all circulating around the family history and my 
grandfather.” Thierrée was three when Chaplin died and has no memories of 
meeting him. When we last spoke, he told me that he felt Chaplin’s presence was 
like “a lovely sky above. It’s beautiful to think that the tradition goes that 
far back – but I see it as one big tradition in the arts and that’s all.”

Thierrée’s creations sit knowingly within this history and he delights in 
exposing their mechanics – ropes and pulleys are as much a part of the 
aesthetic as the antique furniture and bric-a-brac. There’s nothing glossy 
about the worlds he creates – they’re hand-crafted, with a residue of grime and 
grease. And they’re built to last in the imagination. Thanks partly to that mop 
of salt and pepper hair, Thierrée can seem as if he is covered in dust on the 
stage and in The Toad Knew he has the air of a crackpot Victorian inventor. The 
stage becomes a workshop. “My first source of inspiration is the theatre 
itself,” he explains. “That’s where I grew up. It’s the magic box.”

 * The Toad Knew is at the King’s theatre, Edinburgh 
<http://www.eif.co.uk/2016/toadknew#.V4On3DYrKUk>, 24-28 August, as part of the 
Edinburgh international festival. Box office: 0131-473 2000  