
Crown Resorts chairman Robert Rankin has stepped down from the board as part 
of a reshuffle of the company’s senior leadership, with James Packer returning 
as a director afterquitting in December 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/21/australian-billionaire-james-packer-steps-down-from-crown-resorts-board>
.

The current deputy chairman, John Alexander, will replace Rankin from 1 
February.

Rankin, who will remain a director, said he had “relished the opportunity to 
guide [Crown] during a rapidly changing period”.

“The next stage of development of Crown Resorts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/crown-resorts> will be rightfully 
more focused on its outstanding Australian assets and, led by John Alexander, 
Crown Resorts has a very strong team in place to do that,” Rankin said.

Alexander said he would continue to focus on the company’s online gambling 
businesses, and on Packer’s high rollers casino and six-star hotel in 
Barangaroo.


After China's crackdown, can Packer’s Barangaroo casino survive without 
pokies? | Francis Markham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/after-chinas-crackdown-can-packers-barangaroo-casino-survive-without-pokies>
“Crown Resorts is one of Australia’s leading entertainment companies and we 
will work hard to ensure it continues to deliver world-class facilities and 
services to all its customers and guests,” Alexander said. “I thank theCrown 
Resorts <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/crown-resorts> board for 
its support and look forward to representing all shareholders to ensure the 
business continues to grow and create value.”

The company has been plagued by controversy in the past year. Eighteen staff 
were arrested in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/23/three-crown-casino-employees-formally-arrested-in-china-for-alleged-gambling-crimes>
 after a police operation across several cities in October. It isillegal to 
organise trips involving more than 10 people 
<http://www.afr.com/brand/special_reports/asia_trade/the-vast-scale-of-chinas-gambling-market-is-an-irresistible-lure-20161027-gsc96b>
 to foreign casinos or explicitly promote gambling activities in mainland China.

Crown has also scaled back its international ambitions. 

The company has halved its stake in the Macau-based Melco Crown, a move that 
signalled a retreat from China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/james-packer-retreats-from-china-with-sell-off-of-crowns-overseas-casinos>
 and a refocusing on its Australian operations. It also decided not to proceed 
with a $2b casino development project in Las Vegas.

When Packer stepped down as chairman in August 2015, he said of Rankin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/13/james-packer-steps-down-as-chairman-of-crown-resorts-casino-group>
: “Rob Rankin has my complete trust and respect as an executive and he will do 
an outstanding job as chairman. Given our global growth and aspirations, this 
is the right time for the company to make this change. I look forward to 
working closely with him.”
 