
The success or failure of the 2016 Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> season as a sporting spectacle 
is in the hands of a quietly spoken Cambridge graduate with a private passion 
for flying an 80-year-old Auster aircraft over the English countryside.

James Allison is Ferrari’s technical director and as such he has had overall 
responsibility for piecing together the only car capable of mounting a serious 
challenge to the intimidating hegemony of Mercedes when the new season begins 
in Australia on Sunday.

F1 testing tells us little but Mercedes still look best in a tighter field
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/25/f1-testing-mercedes> 
When Allison invited me to his Oxfordshire home last year it was to talk about 
Ferrari’s sensational win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/10/james-allison-ferrari-f1> in the 
Malaysian Grand Prix, their first victory since May 2013. I had scheduled half 
an hour for the interview but Allison’s gentle enthusiasm, his contagious 
ardency, meant that we spoke for two hours. It was easy to understand his 
talent for leading a team.

Ferrari were to win two more races last year with Sebastian Vettel and Kimi 
Raikkonen finishing third and fourth respectively in the drivers’ championship, 
behind the Mercedes duo. This time, however, there are fervent hopes that the 
prancing horse has upped its gallop andnarrowed the yawning gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/19/sebastian-vettel-ferrari-mercedes-f1>
 that existed between Mercedes and everyone else involved in 2015.

This is the first car that Allison has had total responsibility for creating; 
the 2015 model bore his fingerprints but the SF16-H carries his full DNA.

“All our hopes are in this car,” he said as he prepared for the opening race 
here on Sunday. “It’s certainly a very bold car – but it needs to be. If we 
look at last year’s model we were working to improve a baseline that was really 
quite poor.

“So we were able to make big steps last year. But to improve on last year’s 
car, which was quite reasonable, and make something which is another step 
forward, we needed to take bolder steps.

“We needed to be braver and work across the entire car in an aggressive way. 
And that’s something we have done, on the chassis side and also on the power 
unit. Horsepower, downforce, handling, everywhere – we’re very proud of what 
we’ve done everywhere. And we can’t wait to see it run.”

Allison, 48, is in his second spell with Ferrari. His first, five-year stint, 
at the start of the century, coincided with Michael Schumacher winning five 
world championships. He rejoined the Scuderiain September 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/21/ferrari-felipe-massa-belgian-grand-prix>
 and last year signed a new contract that will take him to the end of 2018.

He is respected as one of the leading engineers in Formula One. Eric Boullier, 
his old employer at Lotus who is now racing director at McLaren, says: “He has 
a management style that maybe some other teams would like to copy. He’s a good 
communicator, a good co-ordinator, has very good technical skills and a good 
vision. People trust him.”

Allison clearly possesses organisational ability as well as a technical 
vision. His most significant early contribution after rejoiningFerrari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> was to change the team’s vicious 
circle in which they would persevere for too long with a failing car and 
commence work on the following year’s challenger too late.

“We were robbing the future Peter to pay the present Paul,” he told me. “You 
pay enormously if you ignore the future.” Having said that, Ferrari still 
started work on their 2016 chassis a little later than some teams.

The SF16-H dominated the timesheets during testing in Barcelona recently. But 
it was often shod with faster, softer rubber. Mercedes, who opted to pound in 
the laps using harder compounds,emerged the more impressive overall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/25/lewis-hamilton-mercedes-incredible-week-testing>
.

The new Ferrari has the now fashionable short-nose look and has changed to a 
pushrod front suspension, giving up on the pullrod system. It also has a 
reworked rear end. Its performance this weekend will either enhance or detract 
from Allison’s strong reputation. But even he is unsure about how it will go.

“Every year we break new ground because we think we can make a car faster and 
better than the old one. But this year we have a very high proportion of bold 
new approaches and that’s necessary for us to make the step forward we want.

“If we do everything we intend we have a realistic chance. Saying it is easy, 
and doing it is a lot, lot harder. Only time will tell. But the entire project 
team has given its absolute best to make sure we can put a competitive car on 
the ground for the first race.”

At the very least Ferrari should improve on their effort here last year; 
Vettel finished third but was35 seconds behind the winner, Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/15/f1-australian-grand-prix-race-report>
.
 