
This chaotic match will have repercussions, possibly on the football front, 
definitely in disciplinary terms.Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> recovered from anger and 
disarray to salvage a draw that they celebrated like a victory. Two-goals down 
and destabilised by a sense of persecution following the first-half dismissal 
of Jamie Vardy and the award of a penalty against Danny Simpson, the champions 
stormed back and equalised with two minutes to go in normal time.

The thrilling 4-2 victory over Manchester City last Saturday did not prove to 
be a turning point in theirPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> campaign, but maybe this 
will.

What is certain is that Leicester will face disciplinary proceedings after 
they were shown six yellow cards in addition to Vardy’s red and the most 
extraordinary sight on a wild afternoon was of Kasper Schmeichel ushering the 
normally placid Claudio Ranieri away from the referee, Craig Pawson, at 
half-time.

The Italian said that his representations to Pawson – and his subsequent 
gestures to the Leicester fans – were intended to defuse tension or at least 
turn it into positive energy. The authorities will probably invite him to 
elaborate on that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fstoke-city-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05aa9c558ce073dc944c1c8bf82b8654bfbc1219%2F0_35_3194_1917%2F3194.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jamie%20Vardy%20in%20red%20card%20controversy%20as%2010-man%20Leicester%20battle%20back%20to%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fstoke-city-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jamie%20Vardy%20in%20red%20card%20controversy%20as%2010-man%20Leicester%20battle%20back%20to%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fstoke-city-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05aa9c558ce073dc944c1c8bf82b8654bfbc1219%2F0_35_3194_1917%2F3194.jpg>
 Jamie Vardy is shown the red card by Craig Pawson in the first half for a 
tackle on Mame Biram Diouf. Photograph: Anthony Devlin/Reuters 
Whatever appears on their rap sheet, Leicester’s away record remains awful. 
This was their second point on their travels this season, but the context in 
which it was gained could make it worth more. For a while they had seemed on 
course for a heavy beating and a full-blown meltdown.

Leicester’s woe began in the 28th minute when Vardy was sent off for a tackle 
on Mame Biram Diouf that Pawson deemed to be dangerous. The striker lifted both 
feet off the ground as he dived for the ball in his own half but he had landed 
by the time he connected with it. Pawson, who had been criticised in midweek 
for failing to punish Manchester United’s Marcos Rojo for a two-footed lunge at 
Crystal Palace’s Wilfried Zaha, ruled it to have been reckless.

There were suggestions that Vardy had been unbalanced by Glen Johnson as he 
went into the challenge, something the Stoke manager, Mark Hughes, referred to. 
“People are trying to say he was pushed and that’s the reason he jumped in with 
two feet off the ground,” he said. “It looked to me like he had two straight 
legs and out of control.

“There have been a couple of incidents like that where players have done 
similar and got away with yellows but those were deemed to be wrong, so the 
referee got it right.”

Leicester’s rage intensified 11 minutes later when Stoke were given a penalty 
after a cross by Bojan Krkic hit the outstretched arm of Simpson as the 
defender, two yards away from the crosser, tried to make a block. Deliberate? 
No. Careless? Debatable. Krkic capitalised from the spot.

Leicester lost their cool after that and it looked like they would be lucky to 
end the match with 10 players on the pitch. Three of their players were booked 
for dissent.

Middlesbrough add to Swansea City’s woes as Álvaro Negredo hits double
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/middlesbrough-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
To compound Leicester’s grievance, fortune turned against them. Stoke doubled 
their lead just before half-time when Johnson rolled a free-kick to Giannelli 
Imbula, whose shot struck the inside of the post, bounced off Schmeichel’s back 
and to the feet of Joe Allen, who stroked the ball into the empty net.

Schmeichel’s return to action after a six-week lay-off was supposed to herald 
an upturn in Leicester’s fortunes. The Dane had reinforced that theory by 
making a superb save from a shot by Jonathan Walters in the fifth minute. That 
was the trigger for tit-for-tat attacking in which Leicester gave as good as 
they got– until the loss of Vardy.

The England striker would have at least departed as a goalscorer if he had 
taken the chance given to him in the seventh minute by Marc Albrighton. But the 
striker hooked his lob wide. Lee Grant then had to make a save from a shot by 
Slimani, who forced him into another stop in the 23rd minute after nicking the 
ball off Ryan Shawcross. Two minutes later Grant intervened again, this time 
foiling Vardy after a cute set-up by Riyad Mahrez. Moments later Vardy jumped 
into the tackle on Diouf and was ordered off by Pawson. Then Leicester started 
to unravel.

Claudio Ranieri denies stoking Leicester fans’ anger towards referee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/claudio-ranieri-leicester-city-fans-referee>
It seemed that the visitors composed themselves at half-time because they 
emerged with fresh focus. But balancing the scores would be tougher. Schmeichel 
had to make a fine save to prevent Stoke from going three up, tipping over a 
header by Jonathan Walters.

Ranieri’s next significant intervention was to make a double substitution in 
the 72nd minute and the new arrivals combined to revive hope for the champions. 
Demarai Gray delivered a cross from the right and Leonardo Ulloa sent a 
powerful header past Lee Grant. Ryan Shawcross thought he had cleared it off 
the line, but technology determined otherwise. Pawson, no doubt grateful for 
the help, awarded the goal.

Two minutes from time, Leicester’s turnaround was complete as Christian Fuchs 
swung a ball into the box and Daniel Amartey powered a header into the net from 
eight yards. It felt like justice to Leicester.
 