
Jarrett Rivers struck a last-minute winner to send the Northern Premier League 
side Blyth Spartans into the third round of theFA Cup  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>with a memorable 2-1 win away to 
Hartlepool United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> on Friday 
night.

Spartans trailed at half-time to a Jonathan Franks goal but Stephen Turnbull’s 
superb free-kick got them back on level terms before Rivers burst into the area 
and shot into the far corner to seal a famous upset.

The game had been billed as a potential shock in the pre-match build-up but 
Hartlepool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> dominated the 
first half at Victoria Park and took a deserved lead in the 31st minute when 
the striker Franks headed home at the far post.

The League Two strugglers spurned several clear-cut chances to double their 
lead before the interval and were made to pay for it when the Spartans’ 
midfielder Turnbull curled home a delightful free-kick 11 minutes after the 
break to level the scores.

Marlon Harewood thought he had bundled home Hartlepool’s second in the 66th 
minute as the Blyth goalkeeper, Peter Jeffries fumbled his shot on the turn 
but, while replays suggested the ball had crossed the line, the referee Andrew 
Madley was unmoved.

Blyth, who reached the fifth round in 1977-78 and third round in 2008-09, grew 
in confidence as the second half wore on and in the final minute they were 
rewarded for their spirited endeavour.

The striker Rivers skipped past a challenge from the home left-back Dan Jones, 
ran into the Hartlepool area and fired a low shot across the goalkeeper, Scott 
Flinders, and into the net.

Hartlepool had six minutes of added time in which to find an equaliser and 
they nearly did when the centre-back Matthew Bates took aim from the edge of 
the area but his shot struck the crossbar before being hacked to safety.
 