
Javier Manquillo has become Sunderland’s sixth summer signing after completing 
a season-long loan move fromAtlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid>.

The Black Cats have also negotiated an option to seal a permanent four-year 
deal for the 22-year-old formerLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> full-back next summer.

Premier League: transfer window summer 2016 – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/aug/23/premier-league-transfer-window-summer-2016-interactive>
Manquillo, who spent last season on loan at Marseille, follows Papy 
Djilobodji, Adnan Januzaj, Donald Love, Paddy McNair and Steven Pienaar to the 
Stadium of Light as managerDavid Moyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-moyes> rebuilds his squad.

Manquillo spent the 2014-15 season at Liverpool after agreeing a two-year loan 
deal at Anfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/06/liverpool-sign-javier-manquillo-loan-atletico-madrid>
. He started in Brendan Rodgers’ side but dropped out of the first team andwas 
sent back to Madrid a year early 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/08/javier-manquillo-liverpool-atletico-madrid-loan-ended>
 at the end of his first season in the Premier League.

The Spain Under-21 international, who has played both Champions League and 
Europa League football for Atlético, arrived on Wearside on Wednesday evening 
for a medical and the formalities were completed on Thursday morning.

Moyes asked his No2, Paul Bracewell, to carry out his media duties following 
the1-0 EFL Cup victory over League One Shrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/24/sunderland-shrewsbury-efl-cup-match-report>
 – the first competitive win of his reign at the Stadium of Light – as he 
attempted to push home his interest in Manquillo.

Transfer window: exposing the widely held myths about how clubs sign players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-set-pieces-blog/2016/aug/24/transfer-window-market-myths>
The newcomer could go straight into the squad for Saturday’s Premier League 
trip to Southampton, where the Black Cats will attempt to register their first 
point of the campaign after back-to-back defeats by Manchester City and 
Middlesbrough.

By then, Moyes will hope to have added further to his squad with the club 
working feverishly behind the scenes to get him the players he wants beforethe 
transfer window closes next Wednesday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/24/transfer-window-one-week-to-go-what-do-every-premier-league-club-still-need>
.
 