
Javier Muñoz 
<https://twitter.com/JMunozActor?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 had been waiting in the wings. As the “Sunday Hamilton”, Muñoz wasLin-Manuel 
Miranda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/16/why-love-lin-manuel-miranda-crush-bim-adewunmi>
’s alternate in theeponymous Broadway colossus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/18/hamilton-review-founding-father-gets-a-hip-hop-makeover>
, playing the role when Barack Obama came to see it. Since 9 July, when Miranda 
left the cast, Muñoz has been performing the role of Alexander Hamilton full 
time, seven days a week.

There’s no sugar-coating it; this was not good news to the ticket holders, 
ticket buyers and other hopefuls who thought they would be seeing Miranda, the 
show’s Tony, Grammy, Pulitzer and MacArthur Genius awards-winning creator. For 
Miranda’s final performance, ticket prices for prime seats reached $20,000.

Anyone would be daunted, if not downright terrified, to fill the shoes of the 
man credited with reinventing musical theater, especially in front of an 
audience who thought they had paid to see the more celebrated star. Yet Muñoz 
approached this as he has other challenges in his life.

“It’s a total opportunity to have a really vibrant conversation [with the 
audience],” Munoz says. “I’ve been asking the audience: ‘Please consider this 
other option ofHamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> and stay 
with me in the story.’ And audiences do.”

When Muñoz was the understudy in Miranda’s previous Broadway musical In the 
Heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/14/in-the-heights-review-utterly-huggable-musical-lights-up-london>
, he experienced no such generosity from the audience – in fact, the actor felt 
overwhelmed by their disappointment that they were not seeing the composer 
performing his music. “I could feel their arms crossing,” says Muñoz. But he 
didn’t take it personally. “What it became for me was the opportunity to craft 
my skill as an actor, to bring the audience in and say, ‘Please trust me. I’m 
going to take you on this journey and it’s going to be great.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhamilton-lin-manuel-miranda-understudy-broadway-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4924a6d17753fcd644c2640f5bbf62b556d302d6%2F0_164_3753_2251%2F3753.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Javier%20Mu%C3%B1oz%3A%20adding%20sex%20and%20steel%20to%20Hamilton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhamilton-lin-manuel-miranda-understudy-broadway-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Javier%20Mu%C3%B1oz%3A%20adding%20sex%20and%20steel%20to%20Hamilton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhamilton-lin-manuel-miranda-understudy-broadway-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4924a6d17753fcd644c2640f5bbf62b556d302d6%2F0_164_3753_2251%2F3753.jpg>
 Hamiltons past and present: Muñoz and Lin-Manuel Miranda. Photograph: Walter 
McBride/Getty Images 
Muñoz is made of stern stuff. Last year, he was diagnosed with cancer; two 
months after surgery and radiation he was back in Hamilton and is now 
cancer-free. In 2002 he found out he was HIV-positive. “Feeling like it was the 
end of the world,” Muñoz says that for six years the diagnosis pervaded every 
aspect of his life and battered his sense of self-worth. Now, however, it’s a 
source of strength. “What it’s ultimately given me is the strongest fight that 
I didn’t even know I had. I wouldn’t give that up for anything.”

Muñoz knows that endings can lead to fateful beginnings, which is how he met 
Miranda. In 2005 Muñoz quit acting. Both his parents had been diagnosed with 
cancer within six months of each other and Muñoz moved home to help them. He 
took a job as a manager at a restaurant because he needed to earn a regular 
paycheck. “I loathed every minute of it,” he says.

When a college friend begged him to be in his play, he agreed. “I felt like 
that could be my swan song to the business.” At the first rehearsal, an actor 
approached him, insisting he would be perfect for a role in a show she was 
working on. “I’m someone who does not say no when the universe is knocking on 
your door,” he says. So he took the CD she gave him to listen to. “It was Lin 
rapping the opening number of In the Heights. I was blown away that someone 
wanted to put hip-hop on a commercial stage in the musical theater. This is 
like the marriage of all of my favorite things.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhamilton-lin-manuel-miranda-understudy-broadway-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ad020a938441483cc842319449dfde5014f16af%2F0_27_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Javier%20Mu%C3%B1oz%3A%20adding%20sex%20and%20steel%20to%20Hamilton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhamilton-lin-manuel-miranda-understudy-broadway-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Javier%20Mu%C3%B1oz%3A%20adding%20sex%20and%20steel%20to%20Hamilton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhamilton-lin-manuel-miranda-understudy-broadway-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ad020a938441483cc842319449dfde5014f16af%2F0_27_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Javier Muñoz as Hamilton: ‘Strike with all you’ve got.’ Photograph: Josh Lehrer
He sang a George Michael song for the audition that Miranda happened to love, 
and got the part. “That was the beginning of our creative relationship and we 
just became fast friends immediately.” Muñoz and Miranda had much in common, 
from growing up Latino in New York, to loving the same cartoons, science 
fiction “and, you know, those really geeky things”.

Muñoz says their relationship includes a level of “trust and humility that I 
have with no one else, and that I cherish. I can walk into the room with Lin 
and I don’t really need to have a lot of conversation with him to understand 
what he is trying to craft in a scene or with a lyric in any given moment.”

This connection was integral to creating the role of Alexander Hamilton. When 
he played Usnavi in In the Heights, Muñoz felt that he was essentially playing 
Miranda playing Usnavi. Not so with Hamilton, which has seen close 
collaboration between the two inhabitants of the role. “My version is a married 
version of what he’s created and then my spin and a few of my creative choices 
on top of that,” says Muñoz. “Then we just keep swapping of switching back and 
forth and building the thing and. It’s really remarkable, really takes a great 
amount of trust and I believe it’s our friendship that makes that possible.”

Journalists don’t agree on how Muñoz’s interpretation differs from Miranda’s. 
The New York Times’ theatre criticBen Brantley dubbed Muñoz “the sexy Hamilton” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/01/theater/in-hamilton-javier-munoz-puts-a-different-spin-on-the-title-role.html?_r=0>
. Brantley assessed that Muñoz had a more aggressive and angular Hamilton, but 
Rolling Stone wrote that he was more centered and mellow. Muñoz says that there 
are so many variables and so many details from any given day can affect and 
alter a performance. “I can never repeat the conversation that I have with an 
audience tonight. It’s always going to be unique and that’s why I’m so in love 
with live theater.”

Whether his Hamilton is biting or laid-back, Muñoz says he is more like 
another character in the musical, Aaron Burr. He relates to Burr’s stillness 
and identifies with the way Burr methodically thinks through every choice and 
every option. “That’s how I’ve tackled all the big challenges in my life – be 
it putting myself through college, be it health challenges. Sit and be patient 
– but be ready to go when the opportunity arises. Wait until you can strike and 
then strike with all you’ve got.”
 