
Time is a boomerang, not an arrow. I was adopted by Pentecostals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/oct/30/religion.uk3> and stamped 
“Missionary”. Christmas was important in the missionary calendar. From the 
beginning of November, either we were preparing packages to send to the Foreign 
Field or we were preparing packages to deliver to those in Hot Places returning 
to the Home Front.

It might have been because my parents had been in the second world war. It 
might have been because we lived in End Time, waiting for Armageddon. Whatever 
the reason, there was a drill to Christmas, from making the mincemeat for the 
mince pies to singing carols to, or rather at, the unsaved of Accrington. 
Still, Mrs Winterson lovedChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. It was the one time of 
the year when she went out into the world looking as though the world was more 
than a vale of tears.

She was an unhappy woman, and so this happy time in our house was precious. I 
am sure I love Christmas because she did.

Jeanette Winterson: my family Christmas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/20/jeanette-winterson-family-christmas-sherry-trifle-recipes>
On 21 December every year, my mother went out in her hat and coat while my 
father and I strung up the paper chains, made by me, from the corners of the 
parlour cornice to the centre light fitting.

Eventually my mother returned, in what seemed to be a hailstorm, though maybe 
that was her personal weather. She carried a goose, half-in, half-out of her 
shopping bag, its slack head hung sideways like a dream nobody can remember. 
She passed it to me – goose and dream – and I plucked the feathers into a 
bucket. We kept the feathers to restuff whatever needed restuffing, and we 
saved the thick goose fat drained from the bird for roasting potatoes through 
the winter. Apart from Mrs W, who had a thyroid problem, everyone we knew was 
as thin as a ferret. We needed goose fat.

After I had left home, and later gone to university at Oxford, I went back to 
the old house, that first Christmas-time. My mother had given me the ultimatum 
to leave home long since, when I fell in love with a girl, and in a religious 
house like ours I might as well have married a goat. We hadn’t spoken since. I 
had lived in a Mini for a bit, lodged with a teacher and eventually left town. 
During my first term at Oxford I received a postcard – one of those postcards 
that says post card in blue letters at the top. Underneath, in her immaculate 
copperplate handwriting was the message: “Are you coming home this Christmas? 
Love Mother”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fi-love-christmas-because-of-mother-jeannette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febfa754b972c598e5b3661a8ad0b079e2f62d461%2F0_177_1380_828%2F1380.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeanette%20Winterson%3A%20the%20last%20Christmas%20I%20spent%20with%20my%20mother&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fi-love-christmas-because-of-mother-jeannette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeanette%20Winterson%3A%20the%20last%20Christmas%20I%20spent%20with%20my%20mother&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fi-love-christmas-because-of-mother-jeannette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febfa754b972c598e5b3661a8ad0b079e2f62d461%2F0_177_1380_828%2F1380.jpg>
 Jeanette Winterson by fireside at home. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the 
Guardian 
❦

As I reached our little terrace house at the top of the street, I could hear 
the mostly musical sounds of what is best described as a bossa nova version of 
“In the Bleak Midwinter”. My mother had thrown out the old upright piano and 
got herself an electronic organ with double keyboard, orchestra stops, drum and 
bass.

She hadn’t seen me for two years. Nothing was said. We spent the next hour 
admiring the effects of snare drum and trumpet solo on “Hark! The Herald Angels 
Sing”.

My Oxford friend from St Lucia was due to visit me at home, which was brave of 
her, but when I had tried to explain about my family she thought I was 
exaggerating. At first the visit was a great success. Mrs W considered a black 
friend as a missionary endeavour all of its own. She went round to the retired 
missionaries from the church and asked: “What do they eat?” Pineapples, came 
the answer.

When Vicky arrived my mother gave her a wool blanket she had knitted so that 
Vicky would not be cold. “They feel the cold,” she told me.

Mrs Winterson was an obsessive and she had been knitting for Jesus all year. 
The Christmas tree had knitted decorations on it, and the dog was imprisoned 
inside a Christmas coat of red wool with white snowflakes. There was a knitted 
nativity scene, and the shepherds were wearing little scarves because this was 
Bethlehem on the bus route to Accrington.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fi-love-christmas-because-of-mother-jeannette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5a8719a47a6a34f928a5d23bb5fc7f176c27654%2F0_892_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeanette%20Winterson%3A%20the%20last%20Christmas%20I%20spent%20with%20my%20mother&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fi-love-christmas-because-of-mother-jeannette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeanette%20Winterson%3A%20the%20last%20Christmas%20I%20spent%20with%20my%20mother&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fi-love-christmas-because-of-mother-jeannette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5a8719a47a6a34f928a5d23bb5fc7f176c27654%2F0_892_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Mrs W had been knitting for Jesus all year. Photograph: Alamy 
My dad opened the door dressed in a knitted waistcoat and matching knitted 
tie. The whole house had been re-knitted.

Mrs W was in a merry mood. “Would you like some gammon and pineapple, Vicky? 
Cheese on toast with pineapple? Pineapples and cream? Pineapple upside-down 
cake? Pineapple fritters?” Eventually, after a few days of this fare, Vicky 
said: “I don’t like pineapple.”

Mrs W’s mood changed at once. She didn’t speak to us for the rest of the day 
and she crushed up a papier-mache robin. The next morning, at breakfast, the 
table was set with a pyramid of unopened tins of pineapple chunks and a 
Victorian postcard of two cats on their hind legs dressed up like Mr and Mrs. 
The caption said “Nobody loves us”.

That night, when Vicky went to bed, she found that her pillow had been removed 
and the pillowcase stuffed with warning leaflets about the Apocalypse. She 
wondered whether to go home, but I’d seen worse and I thought things might 
improve.

We wrapped half-cabbages in foil and speared them with cocktail sticks of 
cheddar cheese, topped with pineapple chunks

On Christmas Eve we had a group of carol singers round from the church. Mrs W 
did seem happier. She had forced me and Vicky to wrap several half-cabbages in 
tinfoil and spear them with cocktail sticks of cheddar cheese, topped with the 
rejected pineapple chunks.

She called these things sputniks. It was something to do with the cold war. 
Tinfoil? Antennae? The scaremongering that the KGB had listening devices hidden 
in cheese?

Never mind. The offending pineapples had found a purpose and we were all 
singing carols quite happily when there was a knock at the door. It turned out 
to be the Salvation Army, singing carols too.

This was reasonable. It was Christmas. But Mrs Winterson was having none of 
it. She opened the front door and shouted: “Jesus is here. Go away.”

Slam.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fi-love-christmas-because-of-mother-jeannette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6143c400a76a5e7ea52d0cc8ffe91ace26d6c3a9%2F0_144_4370_2622%2F4370.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeanette%20Winterson%3A%20the%20last%20Christmas%20I%20spent%20with%20my%20mother&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fi-love-christmas-because-of-mother-jeannette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeanette%20Winterson%3A%20the%20last%20Christmas%20I%20spent%20with%20my%20mother&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fi-love-christmas-because-of-mother-jeannette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6143c400a76a5e7ea52d0cc8ffe91ace26d6c3a9%2F0_144_4370_2622%2F4370.jpg>
 A Salvation Army band plays Christmas carols. Photograph: Matthew 
Chattle/REX/Shutterstock/Rex/Shutterstock 
When I went away after that Christmas I never went back. I never saw Mrs W 
again – she was soon too furious about my debut novel,Oranges Are Not the Only 
Fruit  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/oct/20/jeanettewinterson>(1985). 
Quote: “It’s the first time I’ve had to order a book in a false name.”

She died in 1990.

❦

As you get older you remember the dead at Christmas. The Celts, during their 
festival ofSamhain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/28/halloween-more-than-trick-or-treat-origins>
, expected the dead to join the living. Many cultures would understand that; 
not ours.

That is a pity. And a loss. If time is a boomerang and not an arrow, then the 
past is always returning and repeating. Memory, as a creative act, allows us to 
reawaken the dead, or sometimes to lay them to rest, as at last we understand 
our past.

Last Christmas I was alone in my kitchen, the fire lit – I love having a fire 
in the kitchen. I was pouring myself a drink when Judy Garland came on the 
radio singing “Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas”. I remembered how Mrs W 
had played that song on the piano. It was one of those moments we all know, of 
sadness and sweetness mixed together. Regret? Yes, I think so, for everything 
we got wrong. But recognition too, because she was a remarkable woman. She 
deserved a miracle to get her out of her trapped life of no hope, no money, no 
possibility of change.

Fortunately, she got the miracle. Unfortunately, the miracle was me. I was the 
golden ticket. I could have taken her anywhere. She could have been free ...

The Christmas story of the Christ Child is complex. Here’s what it tell us 
about miracles.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMKG5X0QMSWA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMKG5X0QMSWA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMKG5X0QMSWA&media=>
Miracles are never convenient (the baby’s going to be born whether or not 
there’s a hotel room – and there isn’t).

Miracles are not what we expect (an obscure man and woman find themselves 
parenting the Saviour of the World).

Miracles detonate the existing situation – and the blow-up and the back-blast 
mean some people get hurt.

What is a miracle? A miracle is an intervention – it breaks through the 
space-time continuum. A miracle is an intervention that cannot be accounted for 
purely rationally. Chance and fate are in the mix. A miracle is a benign 
intervention, yes, but miracles are like the genie in the bottle – let them out 
and there’s a riot. You’ll get your three wishes, but a whole lot else besides.

Mrs W wanted a baby. She couldn’t have one. Along comes me – but as she often 
said, “The Devil led us to the wrong crib.” Satan as a faulty star.

That’s the fairytale element of the story.

Sometimes the thing we long for, the thing we need, the miracle we want, is 
right there in front of us, and we can’t see it, or we run the other way; or, 
saddest of all, we just don’t know what to do with it. Think how many people 
get the success they want, the partner they want, the money they want, and turn 
it into dust and ashes – like the fairy gold no one can spend.

So at this time of year I think about the Christmas story, and all the 
Christmas stories since. As a writer I know that we get along badly without 
space in our lives for imagination and reflection. Religious festivals were 
designed to be time outside of time. Time where ordinary time was subject to 
significant time. What we remember. What we invent.

• Christmas Days: 12 Stories and 12 Feasts for 12 Days by Jeanette Winterson 
is published by Jonathan Cape. To order a copy for £11.25 (RRP £14.99) go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/christmas-days.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 