
McLaren’s Formula One team were humiliated at the Japanese Grand Prix on 
Sunday as they claimed their two world champions, Jenson Button andFernando 
Alonso <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso>, would be with them 
next year – only to have this immediately questioned by the bemused drivers.

Lewis Hamilton eases to Japanese GP victory ahead of Nico Rosberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/lewis-hamilton-eases-to-japanese-gp-victory-ahead-of-nico-rosberg>
Britain’s leading F1 team endured an embarrassing afternoon on and off the 
track, which is owned by their engine supplier, Honda, asLewis Hamilton cruised 
to his eighth win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/lewis-hamilton-eases-to-japanese-gp-victory-ahead-of-nico-rosberg>
 of the season for Mercedes to equal his idol Ayrton Senna’s total of 41 
victories.

Alonso and Button again failed to score a point between them, finishing 11th 
and 16th, with the former criticising the Honda power unit on the team radio. 
But an hour before the race started Ron Dennis, theMcLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> Group’s chairman and chief 
executive, confirmed that both Button, who has another year left on his 
contract, and Alonso, who has two, would be staying with the struggling team 
who are bracketed with Manor at the bottom of the constructors’ championship.

Dennis, who arrived late in Suzuka after being confined to his Tokyo hotel 
room with a virus, said: “Jenson has a two-year contract [including this year] 
and we are not changing. He will be in a McLaren next year, as far as I am 
concerned, and as far as he is concerned at this moment in time.” He then 
confirmed that Alonso, too, would remain at the team.

After the race and when pressed by Sky Sports on whether Button and Alonso 
would be staying, he said: “Yes, yes, yes. What is simpler than they’ve all got 
contracts, everyone has to live by their contracts, why don’t you just leave it 
at that?”

However,, also speaking after the race, Button denied that his mind was made 
up. “You’ll have to wait and see,” he said. “I’m not going to comment on 
something that I don’t know the future on.” And he suggested Dennis had made a 
pre-emptive judgment after talks that took place on Thursday and again at the 
track before the race.

“It’s not the right time to say anything yet because nothing is done,” said 
Button. “I speak to Ron a lot. There have been private meetings. I’ve never 
talked about our private matters. That’s all I’m going to say.”

Jenson Button talked out of Formula One retirement by McLaren chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/jenson-button-talked-out-of-formula-one-retirement-by-mclaren-chief>
But Button did not come out of Sunday looking much better than Dennis. The 
driver, who allowed himself to be strung along by the team a year ago and who 
said categorically a week ago that his mind was made up – with the likelihood 
that he would leave – was then asked if he wanted to carry on racing. He 
replied: “I want to race, in a competitive car. If we have a competitive car in
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>, I want to race. 
That’s what every driver dreams of. We’re out there to compete at the front.”

When asked what would be the situation if the McLaren car, as expected, is not 
competitive, he replied, confusedly: “Who knows?”

Meanwhile, when Alonso was asked if he would be in Formula One next year he 
replied: “I don’t know.” He had already upset McLaren and Honda by being 
critical during the race. He described the power unit as “a GP2” engine and 
said it was “embarrassing” when passed by the Sauber of Marcus Ericsson.

After he was told about that incident, an angry Dennis said: “I am not going 
to condone those sorts of things, because it doesn’t show the professionalism 
that I would like all our drivers to show. Maybe it was not a particularly 
constructive way to communicate with everyone at Honda.”

McLaren, without a title sponsor since 2013, after losing Vodafone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/mar/14/vodafone-f1-exit-mclaren-pressure>
, and who will be another £20m worse off next year after Johnnie Walker and 
Santander withdrew their backing, are hoping to announce a new sponsor in the 
next few weeks. But fresh deals will be difficult to strike with their team a 
shambles, and their drivers uncertain whether they are staying.
 