
Jenson Button believes Formula One’s controversial halo device would have 
helped Fernando Alonso in hisspectacular crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/mar/21/fernando-alonso-survives-horrific-f1-crash-in-pictures>
.

The halo, which made its debut in pre-season testing, has attracted some 
criticism –not least from Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/04/lewis-hamilton-formula-one>, who 
labelled it as the worst modification in the sport’s history – but is set to be 
introduced next season.

Lewis Hamilton agrees Formula One is ‘fundamentally broken’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/04/lewis-hamilton-formula-one> 
It is a concept which has been designed to shield a driver’s head from flying 
debris – in the wake of a number of high-profile incidents – but among its 
drawbacks is whether it would hinder a driver getting out of the cockpit.

Alonso, after hitting the wall and being catapulted airborne, landed upside 
down in hisMcLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> before crawling 
out of his car.

“He was upside down when he landed and if he had the halo it would have helped 
him,” Button, Alonso’s McLaren team-mate, said. “There was no need for him to 
get out in that situation. There’s more safety risk of things hitting our head 
than anything happening when the car’s upside down.

“With the halo he would have had less impact on his helmet. It’s very unusual 
that there would be an issue with fuel spillage or anything like that. The halo 
is the right direction and we need it.”

While Nico Rosberg beat Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/nico-rosberg-edges-out-teammate-lewis-hamilton-to-take-melbourne-grand-prix>
 to win the curtain raiser in Melbourne, Alonso’s incredible crash, which the 
Spaniard unsurprisingly said was the biggest of his career, has dominated the 
post-race agenda.

Fernando Alonso survives horrific F1 crash – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/mar/21/fernando-alonso-survives-horrific-f1-crash-in-pictures>
After he careered into the back of Esteban Gutiérrez at close to 200mph, 
Alonso was merely a passenger as he slammed into the wall before barrel-rolling 
through the air twice.

Coincidentally, two of Formula One’s other big crashes in recent times – 
involving Martin Brundle in 1996 and Jacques Villeneuve five years later – also 
occurred on the same bit of tarmac. The latter saw a track marshal killed after 
he was hit by a flying wheel. It is testament to the sport’s remarkable safety 
record that there were no fatalities on Sunday.

“Everything hurts a bit because everything inside your body moves when you are 
going so fast,” said Alonso. “The knees hurt a bit, because you are crashing 
against the cockpit and the steering column. I’ll need some ice but other than 
that, all fine.”

The Spaniard, who was given the all-clear by doctors at the track, also 
tweeted: “I am aware that today I spent some of the luck remaining in life, I 
want to thank McLaren, the FIA for the safety on this car. Also my colleagues 
and fans for the concern and unconditional support.”
 