
Jenson Button has revealed the full depth of McLaren’s frustrations by 
stating: “We won’t be on the podium this year.” Buttonhas been an unflagging 
cheerleader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/11/mclaren-jenson-button-f1-championship-chances>
as his team have turned in some dire performances this season but as he 
prepares for next Sunday’s British Grand Prix at Silverstone the former world 
champion admitted that neither he nor his team-mate Fernando Alonso – still 
regarded by many as the best all-round driver in the world – had any chance of 
a top-three finish.

Button, who gave McLaren their only points finish this season when he came 
eighth in Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/24/nico-rosberg-monaco-f1-gp-win-mercedes-pit-lewis-hamilton>
 in May, said: “We won’t be on the podium this year. I don’t go into 
Silverstone thinking I might not ever finish on the podium. I still hold out 
hope. I want to be on the podium and win in front of my home crowd. When 
they’ve been so supportive you want to repay them. But you’ve got to be 
realistic and realise that is not possible right now.”

Button has never finished on the podium at Silverstone, although he has been 
fourth three times since his first appearance in 2000.

McLaren were always expected to have problems this season after leaving 
Mercedes and turning to Honda to supply their new power unit, but no one 
expected the team with 12 drivers’ championships and eight constructors’ titles 
would be ninth out of 10 as the season approaches the halfway point,scrapping 
it out with Manor to avoid the wooden spoon 
<https://www.formula1.com/content/fom-website/en/championship/results/2015-constructor-standings.html>
.

The last two races, in Canada and Austria, were particularly painful, with 
Button and Alonso failing to finish both times. In Spielberg last weekend their 
race was over by lap nine, with Honda’s new president and CEO, Takahiro 
Hachigo, looking on with deeply etched frown.

After that result racing director Eric Boullier admitted that McLaren’s lack 
of track time would soon start to effect their hopes for next season.

Button said: “It hurts everyone. It doesn’t hurt me any more than everyone 
else. I’m a spokesperson for the team. I have to come across positive and 
confident because I’ve got 700 people at the factory that don’t come to a grand 
prix. We’re giving everything. We’re not just driving around waiting for it to 
get good.

“No one likes the situation we’re in. It’s our home grand prix and we want to 
have a good result. I think the parts we get for Silverstone will end up 
balancing everything out, so I’m looking forward to it. I think our car will be 
better there. The straights will be better – you carry speed on. Aero is very 
important.

“It won’t be an easy weekend but as always it will be very emotional with the 
British public. I’m really excited about it. It’s grassroots racing. That’s 
what it feels like. It’s like going karting again, or Formula Ford, and that’s 
what I love.”

He added: “Honda are massively committed. The new CEO is a true racer, which 
is great. He seems very passionate about his motor racing which is exactly what 
we want. They’re definitely in for the long haul. They are working nonstop in 
Japan. A lot of the people sleep at the factory in Sakura to put the hours in. 
It’s phenomenal.”

As if to cheer himself up Button recalled some of his best memories at his 
home race. “I was inthird coming out of the pits in 2011 and the wheel fell off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jul/10/lewis-hamilton-british-grand-prix>
. Last yearI was so close to a podium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/06/lewis-hamilton-british-grand-prix>
. Someone sent me a picture the other day – I went into turn one in P2. I was 
like: ‘Wow!’ Such a special feeling.

“My first grand prix at Silverstone was great. I overtook Michael Schumacher 
into turn one. I finished fifth with nine cylinders. I’ve had lots of very 
special memories there. We’re going through difficult times as a team but I 
think the crowd will still support us.”
 