
Jenson Button will sit down with McLaren’s chairman, Ron Dennis, this weekend 
as a new job opportunity opened up at Williams withthe retirement of Felipe 
Massa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/01/felipe-massa-announces-retirement-from-formula-one>
.

Button, who will be 37 next season, has been with McLaren since 2010 but is 
out of contract at the end of the season and McLaren are widely expected to 
replace him with the gifted Stoffel Vandoorne, who at 24 is anxious to 
establish hisFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> career.

Williams, who often prefer to sign experienced drivers rather than take a 
chance with youth, have already spoken about the attractions of signing Button. 
But his wage bill would be high and the British team may be more attracted by 
Force India’sSergio Pérez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sergio-perez>, who 
brings heavy bags of sponsorship money from Mexico.

Button, preparing for this weekend’s Italian Grand Prix, said on Thursday: 
“I’m sure I will speak to Ron this weekend. When you’re first talking about 
something it normally takes a little while. But progress is there.”

McLaren will hold a board meeting within the next week or two and announce a 
decision on their driver lineup by the end of the month.Force India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/force-india>, who are having another 
impressive season and are fourth in the constructors’ championship, are still 
planning to field a team of Pérez and Nico Hülkenberg next year.

But Pérez, who is also wanted by Renault, is uncertain of his movements, which 
are likely to be decided by commercial considerations. He said here on 
Thursday: “I hope to announce my future by Singapore [on 18 September],” he 
said. “It looks like what will happen is what I always wanted.”

Button said he had been surprised by Massa’s retirement, announced on 
Thursday. “I didn’t know it was going to happen,” he said. “I started two years 
before him, so I’ve been here the whole time he’s been racing in F1. He’s 
achieved a lot. He’s won many races and had some bloody tough team-mates, 
including Michael [Schumacher]. And he was one point away from winning a world 
championship. So he should be proud of his achievements.”

“If he thinks it’s the right decision it’s the right decision. He’s had a 
bloody good career. You’re not here for 15 years if you haven’t had a good 
career.

“We’ve been through three different eras of motorsport, V10s, V8s, V6s, with 
very different regulations. We’ve been around for definitely the best years of 
Formula One. He was a great driver and a great person and Formula One will miss 
him.”

Massa, 35, who won 11 grands prix for Ferrari between 2006 and 2008, said he 
had decided some months ago that this season would be his last. “After 15 years 
in Formula One ... this will be my last,” he said. “The last eight races in 
Formula One I will really enjoy as much as I can.”
 