
You could argue that standup was born in the Catskill mountains of upstate New 
York – the so-called Borscht Belt where Jewish New Yorkers holidayed in the 
middle of the 20th century (partly because they weren’t widely welcomed 
elsewhere). That’s where Lenny Bruce and Jackie Mason, Woody Allen and Joan 
Rivers cut their teeth as performers – and that’s what theUK Jewish Comedy 
festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/25/first-uk-jewish-comedy-festival> 
celebrated this weekend with an event entitled Sol Bernstein’s Borscht Belt 
cabaret. I went along hoping for an insight into the genesis of the art form I 
spend so many of my evenings watching – but that’s not quite what I got.


The first UK Jewish comedy festival: ‘We’ve kept our heads down too long’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/25/first-uk-jewish-comedy-festival> 
The evening was, at best, a qualified success, for a variety of reasons – 
partly to do with atmosphere and expectation. The shows this event was 
commemorating sound like unpretentious affairs, performed to holidaying 
audiences of working- and middle-class New York Jews of, presumably, a wide 
range of ages. This weekend’s cabaret took place on a Sunday night – never 
great for letting your hair down – in a conference room, to a mainly senior 
audience, a fact to which several of the acts referred. “Bingo soon!” quipped 
daft prop comic Steve Best as another joke met with a muted response.

I’d guess there was a disconnect in expectations too – between an audience 
that had come to see a fond tribute to classic Jewish comedy of years gone by 
(or, like me, to pursue a scholarly interest in comedy history) and a show 
honouring Borscht Belt comedy in the spirit rather than to the letter. So there 
was a house band, The Maurie Berkowitz Plutzers, playing jazzy tunes, there was 
a wordplay comic (Leo Kearse <http://www.leokearse.co.uk/index.html#msg-box5-4]>
 as “Punman”), an old-school prop comic (Best) and two musical acts – Kate 
Dimbleby and Oliver Darley – between the jokers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fuk-jewish-comedy-festival-sol-bernstein-borscht-belt-cabaret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01255bea7ffdc118eb5021223d4bb44dba7c3050%2F1205_1569_2251_3477%2F2251.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jewish%20humour%20ain't%20what%20it%20used%20to%20be&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fuk-jewish-comedy-festival-sol-bernstein-borscht-belt-cabaret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jewish%20humour%20ain%27t%20what%20it%20used%20to%20be&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fuk-jewish-comedy-festival-sol-bernstein-borscht-belt-cabaret%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01255bea7ffdc118eb5021223d4bb44dba7c3050%2F1205_1569_2251_3477%2F2251.jpg>
 Wordplay comic … Leo Kearse as Punman 
The act that delivered most straightforwardly on the evening’s promise was 
Simon Schatzberger in his Woody Allen guise, performing classic 60s Allen 
routines. His was also the least interesting turn, unfortunately, mimicry-lite, 
a living museum piece that didn’t really take flight into comedy. In compereSol 
Bernstein <http://www.solbernstein.co.uk/>, the gig delivered another 
what-it-says-on-the-tin fix, in the sense that Bernstein (real name Steve 
Jameson) offers an unsubtle pastiche of Jackie Mason-style vintage Jewish 
comedy. But the other acts were more leftfield, and unlikely to appeal to the 
same audience that might enjoy Darley’s easy listening, soulless soul music 
covers elsewhere on the same bill.

The most Marmite act went by the name Morty “the Wheeze” Mandel: like 
Bernstein, a spoof of the tuxedoed lite-ent of yesteryear, albeit a more 
extreme one. Like an emphysemic version ofGregg Turkington’s anti-comic Neil 
Hamburger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/23/neil-hamburger-entertainment>, 
Mandel’s whiskery gags about “an Italian, a Frenchman and a Jew”, or about 
“schtupping” this or that girl were forever interrupted by rasps, wheezes and 
groans of discomfort. “Is this meant to be funny?” the bewildered oldsters next 
to me asked one another, and their running commentary on Mandel’s awfulness 
punctuated the rest of his act like a chorus. A gag about wiping his schlong on 
the curtains? (“He’s very poor.”) A gag about Jewish bras making mountains out 
of molehills? (“Not one of his jokes has been original!”)

That was the point, of course, but I doubt that couple were alone in missing 
it. I’d bet that a sizeable portion of the audience were there to enjoy vintage 
(Jewish) comedy unironically. But Bernstein’s gig insisted on the necessity of 
irony, seeming to believe that these kinds of material – puns, classic 
one-liners, gentle-chauvinist gags about nationalities and henpecking wives – 
can no longer be performed without it. (Anyone who’s seen Jackie Mason in 
recent years will know this not to be true.) That left us with a very curious 
event, awkwardly poised between tribute and piss-take, even condemnation, of 
the old-school standup with which the Borscht Belt was associated. Insights 
into comedy history were in short supply, then. Insights into comedy present – 
where what’s held to be funny or legitimate, with and without irony, is 
contested territory – were more forthcoming.

 * The UK Jewish Comedy festival <https://www.jw3.org.uk/comedy> is at JW3, 
London, until 7 December. Box office: 020-7433 8988.

Three to see

My Big Fat Weirdos Christmas Wedding
Fifth annual outing for the “alternative Christmas panto” staged by a 
collective of leftfield comics, including Ben Target, Beth Vyse and John 
Kearns. “Expect love, violence, music and poorly made cardboard props,” it says 
here. All proceeds go to Great Ormond Street Hospital Charity.
• Leicester Square theatre <http://www.leicestersquaretheatre.com/>, London, 
7-9 December. Box office: 020-7734 2222.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fnish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nish%20Kumar%3A%20What%20can%20a%20satirist%20do%20with%20our%20post-truth%20politics%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fnish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nish%20Kumar%3A%20What%20can%20a%20satirist%20do%20with%20our%20post-truth%20politics%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fnish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video&media=>
Nish Kumar: What can a satirist do with our post-truth politics? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/jul/15/nish-kumar-satirist-post-truth-politics-video>
Nish Kumar
Last touring dates for one of the country’s preeminent political comics, as 
Kumar takes his award-nominatedEdinburgh show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/17/nish-kumar-review-smart-skewering-from-britains-cheery-clown-preacher>
 – about gig-going, gentrification and the post-Brexit landscape – to the 
nation.
• West End Centre 
<https://uk.patronbase.com/_WestendCentreEvents/Productions/WS23/Performances>, 
Aldershot, 7 December. Box office: 01252 330040.Exeter Phoenix 
<http://www.exeterphoenix.org.uk/events/nish-kumar/>, 8 December. Box office: 
01392 667080. Thentouring <http://www.nishkumar.co.uk/gigs/>.

Sofie Hagen
Also reaching the end of her tour, Danish comic Hagen embarks on a London run 
with her sophomore showShimmer Shatter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/08/sofie-hagen-edinburgh-festival-review-shimmer-shatter>
, framing a discussion of her anxiety issues within a story about relationship 
failure and getting married to a block of wood.
• Soho theatre 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/sofie-hagen-shimmer-shatter>, London, 5-17 
December. Box office: 020-7478 0100
 