
It will come as no surprise to those who have followed Jez Butterworth’s 
career that hisnew play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/31/sam-mendes-returns-to-london-stage-with-jez-butterworth-play>
, although set at the time of the hunger strike during the Troubles, takes 
place not in Belfast but in the countryside. Few details have been released, 
but The Ferryman will be set in rural Derry in 1981, where a multi-generational 
farming family is about to bring the harvest in and, said Butterworth this 
week, “where the past comes back into the present in a way that shows it was 
never really buried”. It will be a “big play”, he said, “on the scale of 
Jerusalem”, words that will quicken the heart of any theatre lover. Even the 
news that the play will be directed by Sam Mendes, with whom the writer has 
worked on the last two Bond films, wasn’t greeted with the same excitement: a 
new Butterworth play is the draw.

Sam Mendes returns to London stage with Jez Butterworth play
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/31/sam-mendes-returns-to-london-stage-with-jez-butterworth-play>
His previous plays, with the exception of his debut, Mojo, which was set in 
Soho, have remote backdrops or the liminal setting of the suburbia of his 
childhood. But this play may also signal a curious swerve. Butterworth seems 
such an English writer, suffused with English mythology, whether in the 
gangland folklore of 1950s London inMojo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/nov/13/mojo-review> or in The River 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/oct/27/the-river-jez-butterworth-review>
, wherein a man and woman are holed up in a cabin on a fishing trip (the bait 
used to catch the trout is that very English of snacks, a pickled onion Monster 
Munch). His most famous hymn to England is the phenomenon that was his 2009 play
Jerusalem <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/feb/10/jerusalem-review>, 
taking in as it does the very marrow of national identity: St George and 
Stonehenge, Jack-of-the-Green and the Queen, Morris dancers and pub car parks, 
custard creams, Pot Noodles and Little Chefs.


Butterworth seems, says the Guardian’s theatre critic, Michael Billington, 
“haunted by the nature of Englishness: he constantly asks how we preserve 
ancestral memories and countryside rituals in an age of ribbon development and 
hi-tech advance.” Audiences will be intrigued to see how he handles Irish 
history.


Both of his parents were part Irish Catholics, though Butterworth was born in 
London and grew up, the second youngest of five, on a 1960s cul-de-sac in St 
Albans (two brothers are also writers, with whom Butterworth has worked; 
another is a producer and their late sister Joanne was registrar at the drama 
school Lamda). Butterworth grew up watching films, not plays. He said he 
watched “thousands and thousands of hours of movies” at home on television. “I 
was going to the Odeon to see Rocky IV, or Fatal Attraction, films like that. 
And I remember thinking, ‘This bit here could be better’,” he said in 2013 
(later, he would do exactly that, brought in as a “script doctor” to improve 
screenplays).


At Cambridge, where he followed his older brother from comprehensive school, 
Butterworth discovered drama; he wrote a play based on Katharine Whitehorn’s 
Cooking in a Bedsitter, which he and his brother Tom took to the Edinburgh 
fringe. After university, Butterworth worked briefly as an office boy in an 
advertising agency before he and Tom signed on, left London and lived an 
impoverished life in a cottage in a Wiltshire village (which would later serve 
as the model for Flintlock in Jerusalem) and focused on writing. They wrote a 
TV film, Christmas, together, and Butterworth created his first proper play, 
Mojo.


It was, remembers Ian Rickson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/14/ian-rickson-betrayal>, who 
directed the play at the Royal Court, “a thrilling first read. It had 
incredible verbal energy but a deep, mythic quality too”. Rickson has directed 
all of Butterworth’s plays – the writer’s decision to elope with Mendes is a 
rarity – and Butterworth has said Rickson is “the most important thing in my 
career”.


Rickson says of his friend and collaborator: “Jez is completely consumed in 
his own unique universe, drawing from his personal mythology, reaching deep 
into the shadows, to generate his extraordinary plays.” He recalls the first 
time he met the writer: “He looked dashing in a big black coat, was open, 
responsive, and seemed very ready to seize his moment. He did.”


Mojo was the first debut play to be staged in the theatre’s main space since 
John Osborne’sLook Back in Anger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/30/how-look-back-in-anger-john-osborne>
 in 1956, and it was a success. At the time, Butterworth spoke about the 
pressure he felt to follow it up. “You are as tyrannised by your successes as 
you are by your failures,” he said in 1996. “You can walk away from your 
failures, but you can’t walk away from your successes … it is difficult to shed 
that kind of initial impact for the first thing you do, and get on and do the 
next.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjez-butterworth-playwright-without-equal-turns-his-gaze-on-the-troubles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea8318442356e1132ff684379f2e2e61175dabe9%2F0_0_1330_798%2F1330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jez%20Butterworth%3A%20playwright%20'without%20equal'%20turns%20his%20gaze%20on%20the%20Troubles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjez-butterworth-playwright-without-equal-turns-his-gaze-on-the-troubles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jez%20Butterworth%3A%20playwright%20%27without%20equal%27%20turns%20his%20gaze%20on%20the%20Troubles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjez-butterworth-playwright-without-equal-turns-his-gaze-on-the-troubles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea8318442356e1132ff684379f2e2e61175dabe9%2F0_0_1330_798%2F1330.jpg>
 Nicole Kidman in Jez Butterworth’s Birthday Girl. Photograph: Liam Daniel/AP 
Butterworth didn’t write another play for years (his next, The Night Heron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/apr/19/theatre.artsfeatures>, was 
staged at the Royal Court seven years later). In the meantime, he had started 
working in film – he wrote screenplays with his brother, directed the film 
version of Mojo and wrote and directed the filmBirthday Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/nov/29/artsfeatures.dvdreviews>, with 
Nicole Kidman as a “mail-order” Russian bride; neither did terribly well. There 
were also personal repercussions – Mendes had wanted to direct the Mojo 
adaptation. “Sam didn’t talk to me for years afterwards,” Butterworth later 
said. And a lot of the time was spent in the pub.


In 2002, Butterworth explained his absence from the theatre: “For a long time 
I didn’t feel that, if I sat down to write a play, I would have anything 
different or interesting to say, and I was damned if I was going to do the same 
thing again just because I could.” Two more plays relatively quickly followed; 
he had started the play that would become Jerusalem but it wasn’t working. 
Butterworth, who had moved back to London, left again for the countryside; he 
and his wife bought a smallholding and had two daughters. By the spring of 
2009, the Royal Court had been booked and the company was expecting a play. 
Butterworth was struggling. His attention was also elsewhere (he was working on 
the film Fair Game). He left it to the very last minute, writing it within 
weeks.


Mackenzie Crook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/18/mackenzie-crook-recruiting-officer-office>
 met him on the first day of rehearsals for Jerusalem and says there wasn’t 
even a finished script. “He came along with a skeleton of a script and an idea 
that he fully admitted he didn’t know what it was yet,” says Crook, who played 
Rooster’s crony Ginger. “There were characters in there he thought weren’t 
going to make it to the final cut. He would be in every day, watch us rehearse 
and come in the next day with some new pages and hand them over. The play 
evolved in that way.”


Of the writing, he says: “It blew me away how anyone could come up with these 
beautifully crafted lines, the rhythm of them. It was just a joy to read, and 
the easiest lines I’ve ever had to learn. Badly written lines are almost 
impossible to learn, because the rhythm isn’t accurate to how people speak.”

Rickson, explaining Butterworth’s strong sense of rhythm says: “He often sees 
his plays as songs.”


Did Crook find the writing-on-the-fly process nerve-racking? “It was. In 
hindsight I should have relaxed and trusted it. [I wasn’t] very experienced in 
theatre, it all seemed a little bit chaotic to me. I remember one day he came 
in and said it was going to be a three-act play with two intervals. I remember 
my heart sinking, thinking no one is going to come and see that, you can’t ask 
people to sit through three hours. Of course, people flocked to see it and 
didn’t even notice how long it was.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjez-butterworth-playwright-without-equal-turns-his-gaze-on-the-troubles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0a6c9d93d218f0798ff4f36abc340173ae27494%2F0_103_2800_1681%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jez%20Butterworth%3A%20playwright%20'without%20equal'%20turns%20his%20gaze%20on%20the%20Troubles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjez-butterworth-playwright-without-equal-turns-his-gaze-on-the-troubles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jez%20Butterworth%3A%20playwright%20%27without%20equal%27%20turns%20his%20gaze%20on%20the%20Troubles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fjez-butterworth-playwright-without-equal-turns-his-gaze-on-the-troubles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0a6c9d93d218f0798ff4f36abc340173ae27494%2F0_103_2800_1681%2F2800.jpg>
 Mark Rylance and Mackenzie Crook in Butterworth’s Jerusalem at the Royal 
Court. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Jerusalem – shown first at the Royal Court, and then in the West End, and on 
Broadway 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/22/theater/reviews/jerusalem-with-mark-rylance-review.html>
 – was a mega-hit, with people queuing in the early hours of the morning to get 
tickets. For Mark Rylance, who played the lead, Johnny “Rooster” Byron, the 
defiant demigod of dwindling power, it has become the defining stage 
performance of his career. Unlike the period after the success of his first 
play, Butterworth wasn’t derailed by Jerusalem’s blaze. “The hardest stage for 
a playwright is producing the second and third plays,” says Rickson, 
“particularly after a big hit. Jez may have taken some time to process the 
success of his first play, but, crucially, has gone on to develop an enduring 
and compelling body of work.” What themes obsess him? “The plays are often 
haunted by abandonment and betrayal, and the challenges of real intimacy.”


Butterworth is unusual in that he switches so easily between theatre and film 
– and not arthouse film, but blockbusters, such as the Bond franchise. 
“Screenwriting and playwriting always strike me as like different sports that I 
can play,” he has said. “It’s like cricket and football; they don’t really have 
much to do with each other except a lot of strenuous activity. I can go from 
doing a play to doing a screenplay and it’s like one feeds the other in some 
way, I’m not sure exactly how.”


The film director Doug Liman brought Butterworth in to work on the script of 
his film Mr and Mrs Smith. Nicole Kidman, who had originally been hired to star 
opposite Brad Pitt, had suggested the writer. “The script needed work,” says 
Liman. “There was a draft of a script and it didn’t have the humour that I 
wanted.” Usually when an actor suggests a writer, he says, “it’s your worst 
nightmare. But in this case Jez came in with his brother John Henry and in 
three weeks they set a tone for the movie that ended up on screen. It was the 
single most positive experience I’ve ever had of a writer coming in to rewrite 
a script.”


Liman and Butterworth worked together again on the spy drama Fair Game and the 
Tom Cruise sci-fi filmEdge of Tomorrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/01/edge-of-tomorrow-review-tom-cruise-emily-blunt-born-again-blockbuster>
. Butterworth, he says, “is amazing at character, and amazing at story 
structure to bring out what is most interesting about that character.” What is 
he like to work with? “He is brutally honest.” When Butterworth was holed up in 
a New York hotel, struggling with the time travel intricacies in Edge of 
Tomorrow, he and Liman would meet up every day. “I would criticise things that 
weren’t working, and he would lash out viciously. And then at the end he told 
me ‘if I ever lash out at you, attack you personally, it means I know I’m wrong 
and you’re right’.” Heated writer sessions are not unusual, but Butterworth’s 
apology and self-awareness was, he says. “Those who make more commercial movies 
are really lucky that there is somebody like Jez who so perfectly straddles 
both worlds. He doesn’t really have an equal.”


Even in 2011, Butterworth said he still considered himself to be in “a kind of 
apprenticeship”, and as for where he stands within British playwriting history, 
Billington says he is hard to place, “for several reasons. One is that his 
theatrical output is still relatively small. Another is that we live at a time, 
I believe, when there is a plurality of voices rather than dominant playwriting 
figures as in the era of Osborne and Pinter. Having said that, Butterworth has 
an exceptional gift.” We’ll have to wait until next April to see what his new 
work brings, but in Jerusalem he has already written one great play, which is, 
points out Billington, “more than many dramatists do in a lifetime”.

 