
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> looms. Yes, 
it’s still a little way off, but it always helps to remember what’s needed. 
Have you decided who will be with who on the day? Are you glooming already 
about the presents? Well, my son had an alternative suggestion for the family 
last year: instead of us all having to find gifts for five people, he teamed 
each of us with one other to give to. It sounds a bit organised, but it worked 
very well.

Have you remembered that Aunt J only drinks tea or sherry, so just offering 
wine won’t do? If you’ve got a family habit, it helps to remember it even if 
you’ve decided not to do it this year. I heard way back of a family of seaside 
farmers who ate their festive meal on the beach; another of parents who were so 
keen to get it right about Father Christmas for the kiddiwinks that they broke 
a window (well at least they didn’t try to come down a chimney).

Probably the only thing you’d really regret is leaving people out: you can 
just about stand anybody if it’s only for a few hours or even days. Where I 
live is opposite a church, so though only a few of the street are serious 
Church of England, we all like to go to the carols and the charity sales and 
each other’s Christmas parties. And, as one of my relations used to say, 
playing on blood being thicker than water: “You have to be nice to family – the 
bloody ones come first.”

When I spent Christmas in Finland years ago I admired the way they would sing 
to the gravestones of their relations so they wouldn’t be left out. And the 
Australian who shares my house at the moment is going back to Sydney, where 
they eat seafood for their seasonal meal. Christmas is much as you make it – if 
you plan it.

What do you think? Have your say below
 