
In a disused youth club behind a carwash in east Manchester, Joanna Scanlan is 
wriggling urgently out of a red dress. What was once Crossley House has become 
Friday Street police station, the rundown home to Scanlan’s fearless police 
chief Vivienne Deering and her motley band of detectives.

Deering is in her office, getting changed into more formal attire, when in 
walks her new boss: sour-faced DCI Christine Lickberg, played bySarah Solemani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/24/sarah-solemani-had-to-hide-pregnancy-worked-until-due>
, fresh from Bridget Jones’s Baby. Rule-abiding Lickberg does not approve of 
Deering’s unorthodox policing. Outside the office, in a very realistic-looking 
police bullpen, a dozen or so extras busy themselves with paperwork. If they 
look like they know what they’re doing, it’s because they do: they are all 
former coppers.

Scanlan is a quarter of the way through filming the second series of Paul 
Abbott’s comedy-drama cop show, No Offence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/15/paul-abbott-dont-need-damage-to-be-good-writer-no-offence-shameless>
. The highly praised first series ended with a gasp, and the surprise 
revelation of the serial killer and rapist with a fetish for women with Down’s 
syndrome whom Deering and her crew had been hunting.

Season two begins with Deering back at work after taking some much needed and 
well deserved time off. Barely has she clocked back on when a gangland feud 
ignites, leaving her to mediate between warring families from the city’s Irish 
and Nigerian criminal underworld. She had put on the red dress to receive an 
outstanding female officer award, only to have to change out of it as things 
take a dramatic turn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fno-offence-joanna-scanlan-paul-abbott-female-police-sexual-being%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2acf238c990fbb713e88ca45207ebc7ef80ef6b7%2F0_300_2346_1407%2F2346.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joanna%20Scanlan%3A%20'I'm%20a%20sexual%20being.%20I%20feel%20I'm%20attractive%20to%20men%20%E2%80%93%20including%20my%20husband'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fno-offence-joanna-scanlan-paul-abbott-female-police-sexual-being%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joanna%20Scanlan%3A%20%27I%27m%20a%20sexual%20being.%20I%20feel%20I%27m%20attractive%20to%20men%20%E2%80%93%20including%20my%20husband%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fno-offence-joanna-scanlan-paul-abbott-female-police-sexual-being%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2acf238c990fbb713e88ca45207ebc7ef80ef6b7%2F0_300_2346_1407%2F2346.jpg>
 Refreshing … Joanna Scanlan. Photograph: Ian Derry/Channel 4 
It is far from the only time we see Deering in her smalls – this is just one 
of the many refreshing aspects of her character, a short but wide 
fiftysomething woman with an absolute, uncompromising belief in her own 
sexuality. So often on screen, bigger women are the butt of the joke where sex 
is concerned (see:Miranda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jan/01/miranda-ends-for-good-pratfalls-panache-mixed-farewell>
 and anything starringMelissa McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/28/melissa-mccarthy-love-woman-doesnt-play-rules-ghostbusters>
). But Deering is shown as an object of desire with no apology or irony. When 
her sexuality is played for laughs – like when she mistakes her intimate 
feminine spray for her breath freshener, or vigorously dries her nethers with a 
towel – she is always in on the joke.

It shouldn’t feel unusual, says Scanlan, who has previously stolen the show as 
supporting characters inThe Thick of It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-thick-of-it> and Rev. “I feel 
that there’s a bit of a mismatch in life between the representations of women’s 
sexuality on TV and the reality. To me it doesn’t feel odd because that’s my 
life. I am a sexual being, I feel that I am attractive to men,” she says, 
hurriedly adding, “including my husband.”

She continues. “That’s my norm, so it didn’t feel strange to carry that over 
into the character. The portrayals and representations of women’s sexuality are 
anomalous because we tend to associate sexuality with youth and beauty. But the 
reality is that people have sex at all stages in differing ways, in massively 
surprising ways, even to themselves. So Deering is obviously somebody who feels 
confident, sexually. She dresses in a way that brings attention to her earthy 
femininity – and she’s going to go out and get it if she wants it. If she 
doesn’t, she is very confident in repelling it as well.”

Deering is never short of a put-down. Attending a funeral at the start of the 
new series in a black leather dress, she is told by one of her detectives: 
“Ma’am, you’ve got a dry cleaning label hanging out the back of your dress.” 
Deering doesn’t miss a beat. “You haven’t,” she replies. “When was the last 
time yours was cleaned?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fno-offence-joanna-scanlan-paul-abbott-female-police-sexual-being%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F394eaea773a3d7130d1154a395f6bbffd7c353c2%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joanna%20Scanlan%3A%20'I'm%20a%20sexual%20being.%20I%20feel%20I'm%20attractive%20to%20men%20%E2%80%93%20including%20my%20husband'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fno-offence-joanna-scanlan-paul-abbott-female-police-sexual-being%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joanna%20Scanlan%3A%20%27I%27m%20a%20sexual%20being.%20I%20feel%20I%27m%20attractive%20to%20men%20%E2%80%93%20including%20my%20husband%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fno-offence-joanna-scanlan-paul-abbott-female-police-sexual-being%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F394eaea773a3d7130d1154a395f6bbffd7c353c2%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Families at war … Nigerian and Irish families in Manchester are pitted against 
each other. Photograph: Ryan McNamara/Channel 4 
Scanlan is delighted to be back playing Deering, largely because of Abbott. 
“He’s incredibly creative and poetic,” she says. “He never writes something 
that’s on-the-nose, straightforward. He will always wrap it up in something or 
make it linguistically interesting. He lives life in a riddled way – I think he 
is Chaucerian in his approach to language and to story. And there’s something 
about working with that, a bit like the phrases in music – the phrases don’t 
leave you. They run around your brain and always have an element of mystery. He 
is shooting for the moon, every time, and that is very exciting as an actor.” 
It’s also quite hard to get right, she says. “I find the learning of it hard, 
the rhythm. But that’s the job. I just have to do the homework.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fno-offence-joanna-scanlan-paul-abbott-female-police-sexual-being%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff621df566ddff16a5cf84ebe884eb32b8869b2ed%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joanna%20Scanlan%3A%20'I'm%20a%20sexual%20being.%20I%20feel%20I'm%20attractive%20to%20men%20%E2%80%93%20including%20my%20husband'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fno-offence-joanna-scanlan-paul-abbott-female-police-sexual-being%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joanna%20Scanlan%3A%20%27I%27m%20a%20sexual%20being.%20I%20feel%20I%27m%20attractive%20to%20men%20%E2%80%93%20including%20my%20husband%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fno-offence-joanna-scanlan-paul-abbott-female-police-sexual-being%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff621df566ddff16a5cf84ebe884eb32b8869b2ed%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
 Ignition … filming the new series of No Offence. Photograph: Ryan 
McNamara/Channel 4 
The other refreshing thing about No Offence is that the lead characters are 
all women. As well as Deering and Lickberg (both names with more than a little 
nominative determinism, given the daring nature of the former and the 
brown-nosing of the latter), there is the gutsy Polish-Mancunian Dinah 
Kowalska, played by the actually very Irish Elaine Cassidy; and the more 
timorous but no less brave Joy Freers, promoted to detective sergeant above 
Dinah following one of the latter’s digressions. Along with Lickberg, the other 
key female character of season two is Nora Attah, the matriarch of the Nigerian 
crime family, played with fearsome steel by Rakie Ayola.

Again, says Scanlan, the female lineup shouldn’t seem unusual. “It’s something 
I just forget. Because, while they are women, they are first and foremost the 
characters. It replicates an environment I recognise. The world has changed, 
hasn’t it? As an ambitious woman, you are no longer confronted directly by a 
wall of men in real life. I think very few women would say they are.”

 * No Offence returns on Channel 4 on 4 January at 9pm. Watch series one on 
channel4.com <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/no-offence>  