
Francesco Totti, two days short of his 40th birthday, scored his 250th Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> goal for Roma on Sunday 
but it was not enough as they lost 3-1 at Torino.

Joe Hart, who made a costly error on his Torino debut, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/11/joe-hart-torino-error-on-debut-atalanta-serie-a>
 made his fourth appearance since joining the club on aseason-long loan deal 
from Manchester City. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/29/joe-hart-torino-loan-manchester-city>
 The England goalkeeper revelled in thwarting his former City team-mate Edin 
Dzeko on several occasions at the Stadio Olimpico as Torino claimed their 
second win of the league campaign.

Real Madrid held to draw by Las Palmas after Cristiano Ronaldo substituted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/las-palmas-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> were undone by two goals from 
Iago Falque, a player they loaned to their opponents at the start of the 
season, as they slipped to a second successive away defeat.

Andrea Belotti headed Torino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> in 
front in the eighth minute and they struck again when Falque converted a 
penalty in the 53rd after Belotti was tripped by Bruno Peres.

In between, the Torino goalkeeper Hart twice denied his former Manchester City 
team-mate Dzeko an equaliser for Roma from close range. The visitors battled 
for form throughout, with veteran playmaker Totti pressed into service at 
half-time in a bid to reverse their fortunes. Roma were themselves then awarded 
a penalty in the 55th minute and Totti, playing his 25th season at his only 
professional club, sent Hart the wrong way to score his second goal of the 
campaign.

Falque restored Torino’s two-goal lead 10 minutes later with a shot which took 
a wicked deflection off the former Tottenham defender Federico Fazio, leaving 
Roma with 10 points from six games and Torino with eight.

Totti, Serie A’s second all-time leading scorer, is 24 goals short of Silvio 
Piola’s record of 274, reached in 1954.
 