
Wembley will play host to its third must-win game in eight days when Saracens 
entertain Toulouse at the home of English football on Friday night. A 
resounding victory for Sarries in front of more than 50,000 fans would not only 
bolster theirHeineken Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> 
prospects but enhance the claims of a number of England players hoping to face 
Australia in the first autumn international on 2 November.

No fewer than six Saracens – the Vunipola brothers, Chris Ashton, Joel Tomkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/16/joel-tomkins-england-rugby-squad>
, Owen Farrell and Alex Goode – are pushing for places against the Wallabies, 
although the uncapped Tomkins will have to make his impact from the bench after 
Mark McCall selected the US international Chris Wyles to start at 
outside-centre. It is not the ideal scenario for Stuart Lancaster as theEngland 
head coach weighs up his midfield options 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/oct/15/england-stuart-lancaster-autumn-internationals>
 in the absence of another injured Saracen, Brad Barritt, and Manu Tuilagi but 
the venue does hold good memories for Tomkins. He scored a memorable long-range 
try, instigated by his brother Sam, for Wigan against Leedsin the 2011 
Challenge Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/aug/27/leeds-rhinos-wigan-warriors-challenge-cup>
 before opting to head south later that year.

Another illustrious former Wigan man, the England assistant coach Andy 
Farrell, knows all about the problems of mastering a new code but believes 
Tomkins will rise to the challenge if and when it comes. "It is a big game for 
a few people," said Farrell, who used to coach at Saracens and played a part in 
Tomkins's move to union before taking the England job full time. "It doesn't 
get much better thanToulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse> at 
Wembley, a side with a host of international stars. Joel just has to make sure 
he realises that having an impact on a game is not just about ball in hand. He 
is getting that now.

"The hardest thing about coming across, especially when you are an influential 
player who likes to get his hands on the ball, is the fact that you don't 
always get that opportunity in union. I didn't make it, did I?

"Where Joel has improved massively is that he has realised he is going to get 
judged on lots more things in union than in league. His breakdown work, for 
example, which was completely alien to him. At the beginning of last year, he 
wanted to offload the ball all the time. Now he is more selective."

Farrell also regards Tomkins as a good organiser who understands the 
importance of creating space for others by unselfish decoy running and has the 
requisite desire to succeed. "He was super-keen [to come to union] and that 
shows in his determination to make it through to this squad as quickly as he 
has done. His thirst to get to this level is one of the reasons we brought him 
over in the first place."

If anyone can advise Tomkins on the highs and lows of cross-code life it is 
Ashton, his former schoolmate at St John Fisher Catholic high school. The 
winger is just eight days younger than Tomkins and Farrell has been impressed 
by his form after a tricky period last season.

"There are a lot of things that have improved in his game but the main thing 
is the intent. You can see the fire and the hunger back in him to get on with 
it without making any excuses. He is just letting his rugby do the talking and 
that is what we all want to see."

Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> will also tackle 
Toulouse with Jacques Burger and Billy Vunipola on the flanks and Ernst Joubert 
at No8. Marcelo Bosch, the new Argentinian signing, will be on the bench for 
the club's 10th visit to Wembley. The crowd is expected to be a record for a 
Heineken Cup pool game staged in Britain and Ireland.
 