
Joey Barton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/joey-barton> has been signed 
off from Rangers’ training ground with stress since Friday, with the 
midfielder’s permanent exit from Ibrox moving ever closer. Barton may become a 
free agent before the end of this week, with talks at an advanced stage to 
terminate his contract.

Barton resumed training, alongside Rangers’ under-20 players, last midweek 
after a club-imposed suspension in mid-September but was last seen at the 
complex on Thursday.

Talks are understood to be nearly concluded regarding a settlement for the 
remainder of Barton’s deal, which is worth £20,000 per week and is due to run 
until the end of the 2017-18 season.

Barton was banished from Rangers after a training-ground row with the manager, 
Mark Warburton, and his team-mate Andy Halliday in the wake of the club’s5-1 
defeat by Celtic on 10 September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/celtic-rangers-scottish-premiership-match-report>
.

Joey Barton remains suspended after meeting with Rangers officials
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/28/joey-barton-remains-suspended-rangers-meeting>
The impasse ended last week and the club issued a statement citing “the 
conclusion of a disciplinary procedure”. However, it swiftly emerged Barton 
would remain apart from the Rangers first team. There has never been any 
expectation that the player who left Burnley last summer would turn out for
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> again.

Fifa regulations assert that training facilities have to be made available by 
clubs to contracted players. Last month the Burnley manger, Sean Dyche, 
suggested there may be a route back to the club for Barton.

Barton is due to appear before the Scottish Football Association on 17 
November to answer charges relating to alleged betting on matches. This emerged 
after the imposition of the 34-year-old’s club suspension.

Rangers refused to comment on the Barton situation. The player’s 
representative did not immediately respond to the Guardian’s request for 
comment.
 