
John Gunter, who has died aged 77, nine years after being diagnosed with 
Alzheimer’s disease, was responsible for the look of some of the most memorable 
shows in postwar British theatre: Edward Bond’s stark, poetic and brutal Saved 
(1965) at the Royal Court, the DH Lawrence trilogy at the same theatre in 1968, 
Richard Eyre’s glorious 1982 revival of Guys and Dolls at theNational Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre> (the stage was a riot of 
neon-lit Broadway billboards and adverts), and Jeffrey Bernard Is Unwell 
(1989), starring Peter O’Toole, at the Apollo in the West End.

In the last of these, the titular character woke at five in the morning in his 
preferred Soho hostelry, the Coach and Horses, and Gunter’s lovingly accurate 
interior tilted on a diagonal axis, as if seriously hung over itself and 
sleepily prepared to entertain O’Toole’s antics and memories. Gunter 
specialised in such architectural feats. He was a past master at putting 
houses, contraptions or edifices on the stage: David Storey’s The Contractor 
(1970) at the Court featured a huge tent that was erected, decorated and then 
dismantled over three acts; the whole of Bath filled the Olivier stage for the 
NT’s revival of The Rivals in 1983, each character’s house emerging from the 
stone facade of the Royal Crescent; and in Trevor Nunn’s 1986 Glyndebourne 
production of Porgy and Bess, the teeming world of Catfish Row poured through 
the ramshackle, transparent remains of an 18th-century colonial mansion.

Richard Eyre on how John Gunter used stage design to transform space
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/08/john-gunter-obituary-letter> 
Gunter was the younger son of Herbert Gunter, a popular GP in Billericay, 
Essex, and his wife, Charlotte, an actor. John was educated at Bryanston school 
in Dorset and, after showing an aptitude for drawing and making model 
aeroplanes, was encouraged by his mother to apply to the Central School of Art 
and Design in London. On graduating, his first job was making costumes for The 
Rivals at the Belgrade theatre in Coventry. He followed a stint of making 
birdcages and copper fruit trees for antique shops with further spells in rep 
at Hornchurch and the Bristol Little theatre, before winning a competition and 
joining the Royal Court as resident designer in 1965.

It is hard to think of a designer who consistently created such a world of 
serious pleasure for the spectator. And yet Gunter emerged at the rigorously 
austere Royal Court – where the governing, Brechtian aesthetic was that of 
putting an actor, and other less animate objects, on the stage, before any 
scenery. At the head of a group of similarly talented colleagues – John Napier, 
William Dudley,Hayden Griffin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/apr/01/hayden-griffin> and the costume 
designerDeirdre Clancy <http://clancy.uk.com/> – Gunter went on to design 28 
Court productions, including Heathcote Williams’s counter-culture classic 
AC/DC, Christopher Hampton’s box-office smash The Philanthropist, David Hare’s 
Slag andJohn Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/24/john-osborne-a-natural-dissenter-who-changed-the-face-of-british-theatre>
’s West of Suez. He quickly acquired an international reputation and, after 
spending four years as resident designer at the Zurich Schauspielhaus 
(1970-73), returned to pursue a freelance career in London, New York and many 
opera houses.
 John Gunter specialised in architectural feats, and was a past master at 
putting houses or contraptions on the stage 
Gunter had been in Vancouver with the Mermaid theatre in 1967 when he met 
Micheline McKnight, a New York-born dancer withGlen Tetley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/jan/30/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
’s company, and they married in 1969; she came with him to London and danced 
with Robert Cohan’s new London Contemporary Dance theatre. Gunter’s first 
design for the National was for Michael Rudman’s 1979 revival of Arthur 
Miller’s Death of a Salesman withWarren Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/14/warren-mitchell>, at the 
Lyttelton. But the Olivier auditorium was his true domain. Guys and Dolls and 
The Rivals were still in the repertory when a third great city design hit the 
Olivier stage: a turbulent, revolutionary Florence in Alfred de Musset’s 
Lorenzaccio was conjured with huge statues, sweeping curtains, ladders and 
scaffolding. Then, for Michael Frayn’s gorgeous rewrite of Anton Chekhov’s 
Platonov as Wild Honey (1984), he provided four immaculate, atmospheric 
settings including the terrifying sight of an onrushing train.

This rich vein of work was shared with the Royal Shakespeare company for 
which, in 1981, he set Nunn’s beautiful 19th-century All’s Well That Ends Well 
(withPeggy Ashcroft 
<http://www.nytimes.com/learning/general/onthisday/bday/1222.html> making her 
last stage appearance as the Countess) in a gigantic conservatory. He also 
spread David Edgar’s political epic, May Days (1983), with some flourish across 
the Hungarian uprising, an English university and Greenham Common. He designed 
Benjamin Britten’s Albert Herring and Giuseppe Verdi’s Falstaff for Peter Hall 
at Glyndebourne in the 1980s and opened the new house on the Sussex Downs with 
designs for The Marriage of Figaro in 1994. At the Royal Opera House he 
designed Simon Boccanegra and – one of his personal favourites – The Flying 
Dutchman.

A lot of his opera work was in Germany, but there were also designs for 
English NationalOpera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> at the 
Coliseum, including a rare revival in 2006 of Ralph Vaughan Williams’s Sir John 
in Love with a delightful, twisting configuration of Tudor houses in the shadow 
of Windsor Castle. His last theatre designs were for the Peter Hall company 
over several seasons, a meticulous Peter Gill revival of Osborne’s second play, 
Epitaph for George Dillon, starring Joseph Fiennes and Anne Reid, at the Comedy 
in 2005 and a monolithic slab of ecclesiastical grey stone for John Patrick 
Shanley’s Doubt at the Tricycle, north London, in 2007.

After his Alzheimer’s diagnosis, Gunter was encouraged by his doctors to 
continue drawing and making sculptures, and these comprised an exhibition at 
Lauderdale House in Highgate, north London, in 2012. His love of music was 
enduring;his nominated luxury on Desert Island Discs in 1983 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p009mjdc> had been “more William Walton” and 
he took pleasure latterly in the work of Philip Glass and John Adams.

He is survived by Micheline, their daughters, Jessica and Nicolette, five 
grandchildren and his brother, William.

• John Forsyth Gunter, born 31 October 1938; died 22 March 2016
 