
One of the most famous stories about John Osborne concerns a meeting with 
Kenneth Tynan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2011/may/15/archive-1956-kenneth-tynan-john-osborne>
, who had just been appointed literary manager of the National Theatre. “Come 
and join us at the National and make history,” said Tynan. “I’ve already made 
it,” snapped Osborne, turning on his heel.


 It is perfectly true that if Osborne, who has died aged 65, had written only 
Look Back in Anger his place in the history books would be secure: its premiere 
at the Royal Court in May 1956 not only put the English Stage Company on the 
map, but proved to a generation of writers that it was possible to put 
contemporary Britain on stage. But there was more – much more – to Osborne than 
that single resonant play.

 He was, in my view, a much misunderstood writer. Because of Look Back in Anger
 <https://www.theguardian.com/news/1956/may/09/mainsection.fromthearchive>, he 
was instantly dubbed an Angry Young Man – a phrase coined by the Royal Court’s 
press officer – and seen as a flame-throwing socialist who eventually turned 
Right.

 The truth is that Osborne was a congenital outsider: a truculent 
individualist with a gift for lacerating invective and with little time for 
political parties or handed-down truths. I always saw him as a somewhat Byronic 
figure, viewing the passing world with satirical disdain. He once recorded how 
one of his wives described him – probably more accurately – as a Welsh Fulham 
upstart. Either way, he was a compulsive non-joiner whose gift for rhetoric 
re-charged British drama in the 1950s and 1960s and who ultimately produced two 
outstanding, self-punishing volumes of autobiography.

 As with all writers, his upbringing explains his later attitudes. He was born 
in Fulham in 1929, the son of an advertising agency copywriter and a barmaid. 
Describing Christmas get-togethers in A Better Class of Person, he writes that, 
“What the two families shared was the heart pumped from birth by misgiving. Not 
a proud misgiving of the spirit but a timid melancholy or dislike of joy, 
effort or courage.” It was a world of lower middle-class bitterness which 
Osborne sought to escape, but by which he was always partially claimed.

 From the start, he was always a rebel. When a master struck the 16-year-old 
Osborne at school, he responded by striking back – a gesture for which he was 
expelled and which suggested his permanent symbol was the untugged forelock.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Fdec%2F24%2Fjohn-osborne-a-natural-dissenter-who-changed-the-face-of-british-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F16%2F1418731083751%2F0a088a12-33d4-489b-9de8-20d37725d95a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Osborne%3A%20a%20natural%20dissenter%20who%20changed%20the%20face%20of%20British%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Fdec%2F24%2Fjohn-osborne-a-natural-dissenter-who-changed-the-face-of-british-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Osborne%3A%20a%20natural%20dissenter%20who%20changed%20the%20face%20of%20British%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Fdec%2F24%2Fjohn-osborne-a-natural-dissenter-who-changed-the-face-of-british-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F16%2F1418731083751%2F0a088a12-33d4-489b-9de8-20d37725d95a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 John Osborne, right, with Kenneth Haigh who played Jimmy Porter in Look Back 
in Anger in 1956. Photograph: Frank Pocklington/Getty Images 
 A desultory period as a journalist working for trade papers – Gas World, 
Nursery World and the Miller – was followed in 1948 by entry into the theatre 
as assistant stage manager on a 48-week tour of No Room at the Inn, and by a 
long, productive period as a rep actor. He may not have been a brilliant actor 
– he once described his Hayling Island Hamlet as “a passable impersonation of 
Claudius after a night’s carousing” – but he learned his craft, co-wrote a 
couple of plays, and married his first wife, Pamela Lane. In a revealing letter 
about that period, he once wrote to me that he joined his wife in Derby, where 
she was playing Hester Collyer – a woman almost destroyed by her inability to 
find an answering passion in her lovers – in Rattigan’s The Deep Blue Sea. “My 
notional role in life,” said Osborne, “was that of Freddie Page (the object of 
the heroine’s love). In fact, I was Hester.”

 It is a revealing remark because it shows Osborne’s affection for the older 
generation of writers – Rattigan especially – whom he was to displace. But it 
also explains a lot about Osborne’s most famous hero: Jimmy Porter in Look Back 
in Anger, which George Devine bravely put on at the Royal Court in 1956. Jimmy 
is, in some ways, a male Hester: his tragic flaw is that he seeks in others a 
passionate enthusiasm to match his own. Of course, as memorably incarnated by 
Kenneth Haigh in Tony Richardson’s production, he also became a symbol of 
angry, alienated modern youth railing at the English class system and the whole 
gummed-up Establishment. But Jimmy’s rage and rhetoric is also part of a quest 
for what he himself calls “a burning virility of mind and spirit that looks for 
something as powerful as itself”.

 However you look at it – as social document or Strindbergian study in 
self-torment – it remains a great play. It also turned Osborne into an 
overnight celebrity. The 26-year-old playwright was endlessly interviewed, 
courted and nibbled at by gossip columnists – one of whom described him, 
libellously, as “the original teddy-boy”.

 Amidst all this, he found time to write a second play for the Court, The 
Entertainer, which elicited from Olivier one of his greatest performances as 
the seedy, third-rate music-hall comic, Archie Rice. Those of us lucky enough 
to have seen it will never forget Olivier’s leering, painted public mask or his 
private howls of self-loathing. What subsequent revivals have shown is that it 
is also a brutally bitter play about family life: the Rices’ endless 
recriminatory rows must have owed a lot to Osborne’s own Fulham origins.

 Osborne’s life was changed by fame and success. He married Mary Ure. He 
bought houses in Chelsea and the Kent countryside. He earned a bob or two. But, 
at heart, he remained a natural dissenter and he soon learned that he had not 
won the affection either of Fleet Street or the theatre-going public. In 1959, 
he wrote a musical about gossip columnists, The World Of Paul Slickey, which 
earned vitriolic reviews and which led, on the first night, to Osborne being 
pursued up Charing Cross Road by parties of irate theatre-goers. Osborne’s 
vivid description of the scene in Almost A Gentleman suggests he got a high 
from being so hated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Fdec%2F24%2Fjohn-osborne-a-natural-dissenter-who-changed-the-face-of-british-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F16%2F1418732111009%2Fcf53ecef-1d03-499d-af54-0de093e28248-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Osborne%3A%20a%20natural%20dissenter%20who%20changed%20the%20face%20of%20British%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Fdec%2F24%2Fjohn-osborne-a-natural-dissenter-who-changed-the-face-of-british-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Osborne%3A%20a%20natural%20dissenter%20who%20changed%20the%20face%20of%20British%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Fdec%2F24%2Fjohn-osborne-a-natural-dissenter-who-changed-the-face-of-british-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F16%2F1418732111009%2Fcf53ecef-1d03-499d-af54-0de093e28248-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A leering, painted public mask and private howls of self-loathing … Laurence 
Olivier as Archie Rice in Osborne’s The Entertainer. Photograph: Hulton-Deutsch 
Collection/Corbis 
 Through all the private traumas of the 1960s – in 1963 he married Penelope 
Gilliatt, and in 1968 Jill Bennett – he continued to write plays and one 
famously successful, money-spinning film script, Tom Jones. But his work was 
still characterised by unassuaged discontent. In 1961, he wrote a Brechtian 
chronicle play about the founder of Protestantism, Luther, but once again the 
hero seemed like a projection of Osborne himself. As Tynan shrewdly noted at 
the time, “Luther in Christendom, like Mr Osborne in the microcosm of the 
theatre, was a stubborn iconoclast of lowly birth, resentful of authority and 
blind to compromise.”

 It was followed in 1964 by an even more remarkable play, Inadmissible 
Evidence, in which Nicol Williamson gave an unforgettable performance as a 
middle-aged solicitor watching the total disintegration of his life – “a kind 
of Willy Loman in striped English serge”, as Ronald Bryden wrote. But in the 
hero’s blistering rhetoric and punitive self-laceration it was again not 
difficult to detect something of Osborne’s own private rage and sense of being 
permanently wounded.

 But Osborne’s biggest play of that period, A Patriot for Me, was also one 
that in 1965 fell foul of the Lord Chamberlain’s arbitrary power of censorship. 
Staged at the Royal Court as a club production for consenting theatre-goers, it 
was a turbulent epic about Alfred Redl, a homosexual spy in the 
Austro-Hungarian army. It allowed Osborne to write on a big canvas, to pursue 
the subject of sexual ambiguity – by which he had always been fascinated – and 
to create one brilliantly theatrical scene in which a group of 
exquisitely-gowned figures dancing to Mozart turned out, on close inspection, 
to be men. One of Osborne’s richest plays, it had to wait until Ronald Eyre’s 
1983 Chichester production, with Alan Bates, to achieve the success it deserved.

 After the high peak of A Patriot for Me, Osborne enjoyed fluctuating 
fortunes. The Hotel in Amsterdam – written in 1968 and scarcely revived since – 
was an elegant tone-poem about a group of six friends, all fleeing from the 
influence of a tyrannical film producer. West of Suez, in 1971, was seen by 
many as the moment when Osborne turned Right. Set in a former British colony, 
it was widely viewed as a hymn to lost empires: one of the first plays I ever 
reviewed in these pages, I wrote at the time that it was actually about “the 
break-up of any civilisation that no longer puts its trust in reason, in 
respect for other people’s values and, above all, in language”. It was a view 
from which I gather Osborne himself did not entirely dissent.

 But where Osborne had once been claimed as the spokesman for a generation, he 
came in later years to be seen as a rancorous theatrical Thersites. A Sense of 
Detachment, in 1972, with its attack on the corruption of language and the 
prevalence of pornography, found few supporters. Watch It Come Down, staged at 
the Old Vic in 1976, was an intriguing but intellectually muddled attempt to do 
a latterday Heartbreak House. And Deja Vu, a 1992 update on the life and times 
of Jimmy Porter, while full of vintage Osborne bile, failed to take the West 
End by storm.

So how important a writer was John Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/johnosborne>? Without a shadow of doubt, he 
helped to change the face of postwar British theatre, and nothing can take that 
away from him. He also wrote at least half-a-dozen plays that will have a claim 
on posterity. But I suspect he will be remembered as well for his two volumes 
of autobiography, A Better Class of Person and Almost a Gentleman, which reveal 
him as one of the most incandescent prose writers of his generation. And to 
those who object to the vicious assault on his former wife, Jill Bennett, I can 
only quote the remark of a friend who said to me that he must have once loved 
her a lot to have hated her so much.

 As for the man himself, he was a bundle of contradictions. From my slight 
acquaintanceship, I found he could be as charming and courteous in private as 
he could be blisteringly rude in print. And in later years, though he achieved 
domestic happiness with his fifth wife, Helen Dawson, there was something 
saddening about his alienation from the current theatrical scene. In the course 
of a very funny letter to me about Terence Rattigan, he reflected on the short 
period of popularity most dramatists enjoy, and remarked: “I seem to incite 
only dislike and indifference in whatever I attempt. I never did have much of a 
following. Now even that remnant is apparently gone. It’s a mistake to stick 
around too long.”

 But though Osborne fell out of theatrical fashion, the best of his work will 
survive. He once described his plays as “lessons in feeling”. And his unique 
gift was to create fiercely articulate dramatic heroes who embodied his own 
wounded and damaged spirit. He was, to the very last, a man with a talent for 
dissent.

• John James Osborne, born 12 December 1929; died 24 December 1994
 