
John Hurt has withdrawn from this summer’s revival of The Entertainer in 
London. The actor, 76, was due to appear oppositeKenneth Branagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kenneth-branagh> in the production of John 
Osborne’s play but doctors have advised him against taking to the stage.

Kenneth Branagh on The Entertainer: 'I've been bending Rob Brydon's ear about 
standup'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/09/kenneth-branagh-rob-brydon-entertainer-garrick-theatre-ken-dodd>
Commenting on his withdrawal, Hurt said: “I have recently been in hospital 
with an intestinal complaint and although I am much improved and on the road to 
a full recovery, my doctors have advised that it is too soon for me to 
undertake a lengthy and arduous stage role. It is therefore with great sadness 
and disappointment that I must withdraw from The Entertainer.”

Hurt was due to play the retired music-hall star Billy Rice, father of the 
lead character, Archie, who will be portrayed by Branagh. Directed by Rob 
Ashford, The Entertainer is the closing production of theKenneth Branagh 
Theatre Company’s first season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/nov/06/kenneth-branagh-plays-at-the-garrick-theatre-in-pictures>
 at the Garrick theatre, in the West End, where previews of the show begin on 
20 August. Its current production isRomeo and Juliet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/29/romeo-and-juliet-garrick-branagh-review-lily-james-james-madden>
, starring Lily James and Richard Madden.

John Hurt given all-clear on cancer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/14/john-hurt-given-all-clear-on-cancer>
Speaking to the Guardian earlier this year, Branagh said of The Entertainer: 
“You could argue that this is perhaps a more revolutionary play than, say,Look 
Back in Anger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/09/look-back-in-anger-jinny-review-derby-theatre>
 [John Osborne’s best known play]. And I think it gives voice to what you might 
call the angry young woman in [Archie’s daughter] Jean Rice. I’m trying to come 
at it from a different kind of place. Despite Archie being at the centre of 
things, there’s a youthful fire in the play.”

Hurt’s replacement has not yet been announced. The Entertainer’s cast includes 
Sophie McShera as Jean Rice and Greta Scacchi as Archie’s wife Phoebe.
 