
“They were great days, halcyon days,” John Robertson says as the most 
momentous times of his life unfold again on an autumnal afternoon at the City 
Ground in Nottingham. The years fall away like leaves that turn and change 
colour as Robertson recounts his amusing and moving memories.

Robertson was Brian Clough’s favourite player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/10/brian-clough-miracle-nottingham-forest-european-champions-film-jose-mourinho>
 – and the manager often ribbed the slightly chubby, unkempt character of a 
footballer he compared to Picasso. Robertson, now 62, re-emerges as the star 
player in an outstandingnew documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/sep/15/i-believe-in-miracles-trailer-documentary-nottingham-forest-video>
 about Nottingham Forest’s rise under Clough and Peter Taylor as the club 
soared from the dregs of the old Second Division, in 1975, to winning the 
European Cup for a second successive season five years later.

Brian Clough and the miracle of Nottingham Forest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/10/brian-clough-miracle-nottingham-forest-european-champions-film-jose-mourinho>
Ten days ago Robertson saw I Believe in Miracles for the first time. The 
premiere was held at the City Ground, where Robertson played 386 games for 
Forest between 1970 and 1983 – before moving to Derby County and then returning 
for a brief second spell with Forest in 1985.

“There was a bit of a tear in my eye when watching it,” he admits. Robertson 
has survived scarring grief and so he understands the beauty, frivolity and 
fragility of life. “I don’t want to sound depressing,” he says in his 
Glaswegian accent, “but the older we get the less tomorrows we have than 
yesterdays. I don’t want to overdramatise it but you’d go to war with them [his 
team-mates]. They were a great bunch of lads. You could trust them.”

In Daniel Taylor’s riveting forthcoming book 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Believe-In-Miracles-Remarkable-Cup-winning/dp/1472233581>
 about the years mined by the film, it becomes clear that those at the heart of 
the Forest surge were convinced Robertson was a better player than various 
football greats from Real Madrid’s Paco Gento to Tom Finney and Stanley 
Matthews. John McGovern, who captained Robertson, offers a more contemporary 
comparison: “John Robertson was like Ryan Giggs but with two good feet, not 
one. He had more ability than Ryan Giggs, his ratio of creating goals was 
better and overall he was the superior footballer.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fjohn-robertson-interview-brian-clough-nottingham-forest-european-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e88b7614bf608bf81a321f58590619e0c1019a1%2F0_89_3900_2343%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Robertson%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20took%20Clough%20and%20Taylor%20for%20me%20to%20realise%20my%20talent%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fjohn-robertson-interview-brian-clough-nottingham-forest-european-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Robertson%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20took%20Clough%20and%20Taylor%20for%20me%20to%20realise%20my%20talent%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fjohn-robertson-interview-brian-clough-nottingham-forest-european-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e88b7614bf608bf81a321f58590619e0c1019a1%2F0_89_3900_2343%2F3900.jpg>
 The Nottingham Forest side celebrate after beating Malmo in the 1979 European 
Cup final. ‘They were a great bunch of lads,’ says John Robertson. Photograph: 
Bob Thomas/Getty Images 
An afternoon with Robertson stretches far beyond football. The death of his 
brother, Hughie, a few days before one of Forest’s defining European Cup games, 
is not mentioned in the film. The struggle of his daughter, Jessica, born with 
cerebral palsy and who died in 1996 when she was 13, also remains outside the 
remit of a film which, instead, does justice to a footballing “miracle” 
conjured up by Clough and Taylor.

Yet the bright light and dark notes of life pour out of Robertson. As a 
footballer, he had an endearingly infamous reputation for being a heavy smoker. 
His fondness for a fag continued until 2013 when his heart nearly gave up 
during a tight tennis match against his former team-mate Gary Mills, who now 
manages Wrexham.

“I was determined to finish it,” Robertson says. “I won it on a tie-break! 
When I stopped running [the pain in his chest] stopped. It was only when I 
started running again that it started up again. My son called an ambulance and 
when I got to hospital they said I’d had a small heart attack. I’d wanted a fag 
before I got into the ambulance but they wouldn’t let me. I loved a cigarette 
but I wanted to play tennis. I knew the fags were doing me no good so I’ve not 
had one since.”

The work of the great artists, even on a football field, is steeped in hard 
graft and so Robertson waves away apocryphal tales that Clough would allow him 
to disappear for a cigarette at half-time. “The only time I remember was when I 
came back after being at Derby two years. Cloughie said: ‘If you want a fag, 
you have one.’ That was at Luton and I didn’t play great the second half. Urban 
legend really.”

Allan Brown didn't think I worked hard enough. He was right. I was feeling 
sorry for myself

Before Clough arrived at Forest in January 1975, after his disastrous 44 days 
at Leeds United, Robertson had been drifting under the previous manager Allan 
Brown. “It started badly with Allan,” Robertson remembers. “He said: ‘How you 
doing, Jimmy?’ I said: ‘It’s John.’ That was me finished with him. He didn’t 
rate me as a player and he didn’t think I worked hard enough. He was right. I 
was feeling sorry for myself. It took Clough and Taylor to come in for me to 
realise my talent.”

Clough understood that Robertson needed to move from central midfield to the 
left wing. But it was only when Taylor arrived at Forest 18 months later, in 
the summer of 1976, to reunite a brilliant managerial partnership, that 
Robertson was transformed from a wasted talent into one of the most influential 
players in Europe for a few years.

“Peter really tore me apart in Germany [on a pre-season tour in 1976]. I 
wasn’t living right. I lived the life of a footballer without proving myself to 
be one. Fortunately, he threw me a carrot. Peter said: ‘Brian and I think you 
can play … what’s your problem?’ I started to blame everyone else but he said: 
‘Nah, it’s you, mate. Look in the mirror.’ The effect was immediate. The next 
night I came on at half-time and from then on I was not out the side for eight 
years.”

Robertson pinpoints Clough’s inspirational qualities. “When he shouted ‘John!’ 
and gave you that little sign [Robertson uses his thumb and index finger to 
make Clough’s trademark circle of approval] you felt 10 feet tall. The biggest 
compliment was when, after we had beaten Ipswich 5-0 in the Charity Shield, he 
just said: ‘You’re a good player, son.’ You think you would be more excited if 
he was gushing and saying you’re a brilliant, superlative footballer. But he 
kept it simple. That’s why I didn’t believe the cliche about Cloughie ruling by 
fear. You can’t express yourself if you’re full of fear. Some people just dig 
up the negatives. They say: ‘What did you think of Clough calling you a scruffy 
git?’ I reply: ‘What about the time he said I was like Picasso?’ I knew 
Cloughie loved me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fjohn-robertson-interview-brian-clough-nottingham-forest-european-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b234f21778d46bda6cd5f767ef72cad225bff63%2F22_40_3299_4948%2F3299.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Robertson%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20took%20Clough%20and%20Taylor%20for%20me%20to%20realise%20my%20talent%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fjohn-robertson-interview-brian-clough-nottingham-forest-european-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Robertson%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20took%20Clough%20and%20Taylor%20for%20me%20to%20realise%20my%20talent%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fjohn-robertson-interview-brian-clough-nottingham-forest-european-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b234f21778d46bda6cd5f767ef72cad225bff63%2F22_40_3299_4948%2F3299.jpg>
 John Robertson celebrates with the European Cup trophy after Nottingham Forest 
beat Malmo 1-0 in the 1979 final. Photograph: Colorsport/Rex Shutterstock 
Robertson loves books but he chose not to read David Peace’s The Damned United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/aug/19/sportandleisure.shopping> – a 
broadly fictionalised account of Clough’s doomed spell at Leeds. Robertson saw 
the film and he offers a nuanced reaction which pays particular attention to 
the largely admirable acting. But he makes a clear distinction between the 
movie and real life. “The Clough I knew came after the Clough of Damned United. 
They talk about his drinking. Well, I’m sorry, but between 1975 and 1983 I 
didn’t see it. He liked the odd drink, but he was as sharp as a tack.”

Clough and Taylor could also be compassionate. The most obvious example was 
evident before the 1979 European Cup semi-final first leg. After the cruel way 
in which they had lost at the same stage of the competition with Derby County, 
against Juventus in 1973, they were desperate for Robertson to play against 
Cologne. Tragedy then struck.

“On [Saturday] 7 April we played at Chelsea. After I got back I went out with 
a mate of mine, and our wives. We got home from this nightclub around 2am and 
the phone rings. I spoke to my brother-in-law and he said: ‘I’ve got really bad 
news.’ I said: ‘It’s my dad, innit?’ My brother-in-law said: ‘No. It’s Hughie 
and Isobel … they’ve been killed.’ Jesus.”

Robertson rubs his face. Hughie, his older brother, and his wife were both 35. 
He was driving the Vauxhall Viva that Robertson had given to him after Clough 
arranged for all the Forest players to receive a new Toyota Celica. Before such 
generosity Hughie and Isobel had relied on public transport.

“My niece was orphaned,” Robertson says. “She was only eight. I went up to 
Scotland the next morning and it was very sombre. My mum was in bits. My dad 
was in bits. In fact my dad only lasted a year after that. He was so devastated.

“We were playing Cologne on the Wednesday and I phoned Cloughie. He and Peter 
were fantastic. Cloughie said: ‘Do what you have to do, son. You have our best 
wishes.’ It was a big night for them. They wanted to play their best team but 
they were more concerned about me.”

We got home from this nightclub and the phone rings. My brother-in-law said: 
'I've got really bad news …'

It was the funeral the following morning but Robertson’s family encouraged him 
to play. Forest went 2-0 down on a filthy night. But they clawed back two goals 
before, in the 63rd minute, Robertson launched himself at the ball to put 
Forest ahead. “I fuckingscored <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7t8cgQcNRsU>,” 
he exclaims 36 years later, his voice thick with wonder. “I looked up and said: 
‘That’s for you son …’”

His face almost crumples before Robertson laughs. “I’ve never scored a header 
in my life. A diving header too.”

I’m even more moved after we remember the death of his daughter. “Jessie …” 
Robertson murmurs. “She’s been gone 19 years. She would have been 32 now.”

When he was still a smoker Robertson would “go up to the cemetery every week 
on Wilford Hill and have a five-minute smoke with her. I still go most weeks, 
but I don’t smoke now. There is a great poem on the headstone …”

Robertson recites the words in a clear voice.

Whatever happens
Fire, flood or cold
Travel or trouble or just growing old
Our lives are stitched together by a thread of gold
That cannot change
Whatever changes come
You’re my lass for ever

His words die away. “My wife Sally saw that and I thought it was great. It’s 
really lovely.”

We talk for another 30 minutes, crisscrossing the years as Robertson recalls 
his career as a coach – assisting Martin O’Neill, his Forest team-mate, at 
Wycombe, Norwich, Leicester, Celtic and Aston Villa.

Robertson is also insightful when describing the merits of his two favourite 
sportsmen, Roger Federer and Lionel Messi.

Inevitably we return to the halcyon days and Robertson talks about the way 
Forest would prepare for big matches – either going down to a cafe called 
McKay’s for chip butties or taking a stroll with Clough and Taylor through 
Amsterdam’s red-light district the night before the 1980 European Cup 
semi-final against Ajax.

“I swear I wouldn’t swap it for the money footballers make today,” Robertson 
says. “Never. It was a great life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fjohn-robertson-interview-brian-clough-nottingham-forest-european-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0cd6933f487126ced5eb2d48044e79d3c6bb03e%2F0_212_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Robertson%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20took%20Clough%20and%20Taylor%20for%20me%20to%20realise%20my%20talent%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fjohn-robertson-interview-brian-clough-nottingham-forest-european-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Robertson%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20took%20Clough%20and%20Taylor%20for%20me%20to%20realise%20my%20talent%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fjohn-robertson-interview-brian-clough-nottingham-forest-european-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0cd6933f487126ced5eb2d48044e79d3c6bb03e%2F0_212_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 John Robertson gave up smoking after suffering a heart attack while playing 
tennis with former team-mate Gary Mills. Photograph: Fabio De Paola for the 
Guardian 
Robertson set up Trevor Francis’s winner in the 1979 European Cup final and 
scored the only goal against Hamburg a year later as Forest became European 
champions again. “Things just seemed to go my way. Incredible.”

As we amble around the City Ground, Robertson has the gravitas of a man who 
has lived a long life. “It’s strange isn’t it?” he says as he reflects on the 
elation of football and the pain of life. “Chalk and cheese. I don’t know … 
life just happens. You have to make the most of it.”

Robertson made the most of his extraordinary talent and he is proud when 
remembering the praise he received from Bill Shankly and Bob Paisley. I take 
out my phone and show him a quote that features in Daniel Taylor’s book in 
which Jimmy Gordon, the man who ran Clough’s training sessions at Forest, 
stressed that, compared to Finney and Matthews, Robertson “had something extra 
on top”.

He puts on his glasses to read the words. “I never knew that. That means a lot 
to me because Jimmy was fantastic.”

We begin walking again and Robertson switches back to a swooning appreciation 
of Federer’s artistry and having “a heart like Muhammad Ali” on court.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fi-believe-in-miracles-trailer-documentary-nottingham-forest-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20Believe%20in%20Miracles%3A%20exclusive%20trailer%20for%20the%20Nottingham%20Forest%20film%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fi-believe-in-miracles-trailer-documentary-nottingham-forest-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20Believe%20in%20Miracles%3A%20exclusive%20trailer%20for%20the%20Nottingham%20Forest%20film%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fi-believe-in-miracles-trailer-documentary-nottingham-forest-video&media=>
Watch the trailer for I Believe in Miracle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/sep/15/i-believe-in-miracles-trailer-documentary-nottingham-forest-video>
s. 
He laments his contrasting mental disintegration in epic tennis matches these 
days against Liam O’Kane, another former team-mate. “Liam plays the big points 
better than me. You wouldn’t believe the times I’ve been 5-1 up and lost.”

“Do you fancy a game one day?” Robertson asks. I say “Yes” instantly.

Robertson laughs when I warn that I’ll be shouting out Jimmy Gordon’s quote to 
divert him at match point.

In the Forest car park, the great old footballer plays an imaginary peach of a 
backhand down the line. It looks like a beautiful winner. Robertson stretches 
out his hand. “We’ll have a good game,” he says. “That’s all that matters in 
the end.”

I Believe in Miracles is available on Blu-ray and DVD from 16 November
 