
If it is true, as Shelley contended, that poets are the unacknowledged 
legislators of the world, then perhaps novelists are its unacknowledged 
historians. Certainly many of the mighty ones of the 19th century –George Eliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeeliot>, Tolstoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/leonikolaevichtolstoy>, Balzac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/25/human-comedy-balzac-review-nicholas-lezard>
 – wrote as if that was indeed what they considered themselves to be. At the 
dawn of the 20th century, however, modernism put an end to such grandiloquent 
notions, in Europe, anyway. However, even if Americans in exile –Ezra Pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ezra-pound>, TS Eliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ts-eliot>, Gertrude Stein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2009/jun/12/gertrude-stein> – 
were some of the movement’s main makers, the great gale of modernism ran out of 
puff before it reached US shores. As a result, the 19th-century novel is alive 
and thriving over there on the far side of the Atlantic.

Which is not to say that American novelists are still writing to the European 
model. As long ago as 1837, in “The American Scholar”, his radical address to 
the Phi Beta Kappa Society at Cambridge, Massachusetts, Emerson declared: “Our 
day of dependence, our long apprenticeship to the learning of other lands, 
draws to a close. The millions, that around us are rushing into life, cannot 
always be fed on the sere remains of foreign harvests.” That text was nothing 
less than a second Declaration of Independence, an affirmation that the United 
States was not an attempt at remaking Europe in the new world, but a new 
construct the old world could not have dreamed possible.

Emerson is one of Richard Ford’s touchstones – perhaps, indeed, the main one – 
and is frequently invoked in the pages of his novels. Indeed, Ford’s America is 
an Emersonian phenomenon. “The world, – this shadow of the soul, or other me, 
lies wide around,” Emerson writes, in a breathtaking assertion of the hegemony 
of the self. It would make a fitting epigraph for all of Ford’s work, and 
especially for the Frank Bascombe series, of whichLet Me Be Frank with You is 
the fourth volume.

Frank is Ford’s Everyman, a disenchanted, rueful and humorous witness to his 
country’s faltering resolve at the close of the American century and the 
opening of a new and newly menacing millennium. Back there for a while, after 
the breaching of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of a variety of tyrannies, 
large and small, it seemed to the generation of America’s baby-boomers, whose 
entire lives had been lived in dread expectation of the ultimate nuclear boom, 
that they were in for a period of well-earned peace and quiet. However, 
humankind cannot bear much tranquillity, and now, a quarter of a century later, 
in a new Age of Catastrophe, the land of the brave finds itself “crouching,” in 
Philip Larkin’s shudder-inducing phrase, “under Extinction’s alp”, as multiple 
empires of evil square up against it.

As if America’s human foes were not enough, over the last few decades Mother 
Nature joined in the onslaught, with monster volcanic eruptions, 
skyscraper-high waves and storms of a kind that formerly were only seen in 
Ridley Scott movies. The latest of these “superstorms” was Hurricane Sandy, 
which, having battered various Caribbean islands, made landfall near Atlantic 
City in New Jersey in late October 2012 and with biblical fury laid waste all 
before it. Nearly 300 people died in seven countries the storm passed through, 
and in the US the cyclonic winds and giant seas caused an estimated $68bn in 
damage to property and business.

The action of Let Me Be Frank with You – not, perhaps, the wisest choice of 
title – takes places in New Jersey and environs in the weeks coming up to 
Christmas 2012, in the wake of Hurricane Sandy, as the country staggers to its 
feet and woozily begins the task of making good what the storm left for bad. 
Given the times through which America is living, when all manner of destruction 
comes flying at it out of the air, Hurricane Sandy, though a nightmare for its 
victims, was a novelist’s dream. Ford is far too subtle an artist to push 
Sandy’s symbolic possibilities, yet an air of millennarian dread pervades the 
book, however jaunty the tone and however good the one-liners.

The book comprises four longish sections, which might be considered as 
separate but related stories, or as the chapters of a relaxedly organised 
novel. Late style, in Ford, is loose-limbed, allusive, jokey in a rueful way, 
and mutedly elegiac. If his country is in deep trouble, Frank Bascombe too has 
his woes, the most engrossing though hardly the worst of which is the fact that 
he is getting old – the fact, indeed, that he is old. Also, he is in emotional 
trouble, as usual. Not big emotional trouble. In the past he suffered through 
bereavement, divorce, erotic entanglements of varying difficulty, and even, in 
one instance, a bar-room brawl; now he has reached a plateau of something like 
peace, though the air up here is shot through with flashes of lightning and a 
cold rain falls.

We were first introduced to Frank in The Sportswriter 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/sportswriter.html> (1986), when he was 38 and 
divorced from the woman whom throughout the book he referred to only as X. They 
had three children, though one of them died young. Frank had wanted to be a 
novelist, and in the far past managed to complete a book of short stories that 
was bought by the movies, allowing him to acquire a large house in Haddam, New 
Jersey, and a new young girlfriend – “I am pretty certain I’m in love with her 
(I haven’t mentioned anything about it for fear of making her wary).” Over one 
Easter, we followed him on various lugubrious adventures until at the close he 
reached, somehow or other, “this glistening one moment, this cool air, this new 
living”.

Nine years later, in 1995, came Independence Day 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/independence-day.html>, in which we found 
Frank entered on a confused and difficult mid-life stage, with a change of 
career and a new job as a real estate agent. The book ended with a superb 
account, at once funny and desolating, of a holiday outing by Frank and his 
difficult son Paul that began and went on disastrously yet ended, again, with a 
sort of affirmation, at that most banal and endearing of occasions, a Fourth of 
July march – “The trumpets go again. My heartbeat quickens. I feel the push, 
pull, the weave and sway of others.”

The Lay of the Land <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/lay-of-the-land.html> 
appeared in 2006, though it was set at Thanksgiving in 2000, when the country 
was in turmoil after the controversial presidential election of that year, 
which many considered was hijacked by George W Bush and his supporters, with 
the connivance of the US Supreme Court. Frank was now 55 and had a real-estate 
business in Sea-Clift, New Jersey, and was, this time, in bad trouble. His 
second wife Sally had walked out on him, and he had been diagnosed with 
prostate cancer. Once more, though, old Frank pulled through, and at the end we 
left him in not such bad shape: “Here is necessity. Here is the extra beat – to 
live, to live, to live it out.”

Now, in the new book, Frank has retired from the property business and is 
living still in Sea-Clift with Sally, who has come back to him. Though somewhat 
content with his lot, he has no illusions about his lifetime’s achievement and 
his place in the great scheme of things, “since flogging suburban houses on 
cul-de-sacs that once were cornfields in West Windsor rarely gets you noticed 
by the folks at the Stanford linear accelerator”. He has also arrived at some 
clear-eyed conclusions about what it is to be alive and an actor in the world’s 
ongoing, humdrum performance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Fjohn-banville-richard-ford-bascombe-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415297569885%2F26f8bdef-ba7e-4c33-a137-a3e45ceb23a3-1352x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Banville%20celebrates%20Richard%20Ford%E2%80%99s%20Bascombe%20books%3A%20the%20story%20of%20an%20American%20Everyman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Fjohn-banville-richard-ford-bascombe-novels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Banville%20celebrates%20Richard%20Ford%E2%80%99s%20Bascombe%20books%3A%20the%20story%20of%20an%20American%20Everyman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Fjohn-banville-richard-ford-bascombe-novels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415297569885%2F26f8bdef-ba7e-4c33-a137-a3e45ceb23a3-1352x2040.jpeg>
 The joy of American suburbia is a favourite topic of Ford’s. Photograph: Chris 
Daniels/Corbis 
Character, to me, is one more lie of history and the dramatic arts. In my 
view, we have only what we did yesterday, what we do today, and what we might 
still do. Plus, whatever we think about all of that. But nothing else – nothing 
hard or kernel-like. I’ve never seen evidence of anything resembling it. In 
fact I’ve seen the opposite: life as teeming and befuddling, followed by the 
end.

This passage of negative dialectics is central not only to this book, but is a 
crystallisation of Ford’s artistic mode throughout the Frank Bascombe series – 
throughout, indeed, all his work, from the superb story collection Rock Springs 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/rock-springs.html> to his previous, 
non-Bascombe novel, the masterlyCanada 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/canada-5.html>. His authorial voice from the 
start has been that of a relaxed existentialist. He recognises the essentially 
contingent and slippery nature of our being here, and the necessity 
to manoeuvre our way through the world as best we can. Emerson again, from his 
great essay “Experience”: “We live amid surfaces, and the true art of life is 
to skate well on them.” Ford’s is, of course, an essentially male view of 
things, and it is no coincidence that he is one of the few novelists nowadays 
whose work is read by men. You’ve got to be tough to survive, is Frank’s 
conviction, but the odd joke doesn’t hurt.

In the book’s first section, titled “I’m Here”, Frank is contemplating the 
awful aftermath of the great storm. The opening pages vividly communicate the 
exuberant tactility of contemporary American life, as folk go busily about the 
repair of their homes and their lives. Customers are filing out of the local 
DIY store burdened like ants, one of them with “an entire front stoop teetering 
on a giant shopping cart”. Once home, Frank is called up by Arnie Urquhart, a 
wealthy fishmonger to whom in the boom time he sold his Sea-Clift house for 
“two-point-eight”, the same house that has now been destroyed. Arnie has been 
offered half a million dollars for the wreckage and the site, and wants Frank’s 
advice. Or is it that he wants to blame Frank for what happened, as if Frank 
might have known Sandy was on the way, all those years before she struck? The 
episode ends in a wince-makingly comic scene, with Frank locked unwillingly in 
Arnie’s emotional embrace and with no alternative but to hug him back. Old 
Ralph Waldo was right, Frank gloomily concludes: “an infinite remoteness 
underlies us all”.

As so often with Ford, the book consists of a series of encounters, with the 
hapless and menacing Arnie; with a black woman, “Ms Pines”, middle-aged and 
erotically interesting, who calls at Frank’s house and tells him an appalling 
story from the past; with Ann Dykstra, his first wife, formerly known as “X”, 
who is in the early stages of “the Big P” – Parkinson’s disease – and, finally, 
in an archetypical Ford tour-de-force, with an old acquaintance from the 1970s, 
one Eddie Medley, at that time an MIT whizz kid who went into business and made 
“a shitload of dough”. Frank hears Eddie doing a call-in to a radio show, 
recognises his voice, and gets in contact, which ultimately proves not to have 
been such a good idea, since the dying Eddie has something to tell him that he 
would rather not hear.

The scene at Eddie’s death bed – “So many things can go wrong, it’s strange 
any go right” – is both hideous and hilarious, and Frank escapes from it with 
relief into a magically mild December morning and the last encounter of the 
book. This is with Ezekiel, a fuel delivery man, “a strapping, smiling, 
shaved-head, spiritual dynamo” who greets Frank cheerfully and, against all the 
odds, manages to cheer him up just by being what he is, a man, like Frank 
himself, making his hard way in a tough world and refusing to be defeated.

Few writers could get away with a scene such as this, at once mundane and 
luminous; Ford does it with consummate skill, tact and grace. In 
a truly inspired little coup de la page, he has Ezekiel ask after Frank’s 
surviving son, Paul, but by mistake call him Ralph, which was the name of the 
son who died tragically young, and whose death probably led to his parents’ 
divorce. The delicacy with which Frank passes over the sad awkwardness of the 
moment shows just what a marvellous writer Ford is. “Then he goes. And I go. 
The day we have briefly shared is saved.”

• Let Me Be Frank with You is published by Bloomsbury (£18.99). To order a 
copy for £13.99 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/let-me-be-frank-with-you.html> or call 0330 
333 6846.
 