
Monty Python and the Holy Grail review – timelessly brilliant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/15/monty-python-and-the-holy-grail-review-rerelease>
The funniest film I’ve ever seen 

I remember howling as a kid when I first saw Monty Python 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/monty-python> And The Holy Grail. It was 
like a whole new sensation, laughing that much. I couldn’t breathe for big 
chunks of that film.

The funniest joke I’ve ever heard

I always thought Richard Herring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/richard-herring> had the best opening line 
ever. He’d walk on and say: “Who is it that says ‘po-tah-to’ anyway? Because 
someone should tell them they’re definitely wrong.” Completely apropos of 
nothing.

The funniest word

I like coming up with radio-friendly swearwords on the Radio X show I do with 
Elis James. Ones that have stuck are “coin”, “tube” and once, after losing a 
quiz on air, Elis ducked out of the F-word by exclaiming: “Ffffffridge magnet 
that says ‘sad’ on it!” That really made me laugh.

Katherine Ryan, Simon Evans and John Robins dissect their comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/18/behind-joke-katherine-ryan-simon-evans-john-robins-comedy>
The funniest book I’ve ever read

My girlfriend Sara Pascoe <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sara-pascoe> has 
read a daunting number of books, and her own book Animal: The Autobiography Of 
A Female Body, is the funniest book I have ever read.

The funniest item of clothing I’ve ever owned

On non-uniform day in 1996 I wore a studded leather dog collar with matching 
bracelets to school. There was no turning back after that.

The funniest TV show I’ve ever seen

A straight tie between Bottom, I’m Alan Partridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-partridge>, The Day Today and 
Reeves & Mortimer. It’s a constant frustration to my girlfriend that I have 
never seen Seinfeld, 30 Rock or Orange Is The New Black, yet there are episodes 
of Bottom I have watched 50 times.

The funniest hairstyle I’ve ever had

I had a fetching bird’s nest-type affair, shaved at the sides, long on top, 
that looked absolutely ludicrous. It gradually thinned into a mohican over the 
years, remaining just as ludicrous. I got rid of it after my first term at uni, 
giving rise to the nickname No-hican John.

The funniest number

Three. Books have been written about it.


The Elis James & John Robins Experience is touring to 14 Nov
 