
Jonathan Kodjia was on his way to becoming an accountant before he got the 
break that led to him becoming the subject of the biggest transfer deal in the 
history of the Championship. Aston Villapaid Bristol City £11m in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/30/bristol-city-jonathan-kodjia-aston-villa-championship-record-fee>
 to sign the striker but the fee could rise to £15m, depending on achievements; 
a record for England’s second tier. “It’s a big honour, I was surprised when I 
was told it was a record because I would never have dreamed of that,” the 
affable 26-year-old says at the Bodymoor Heath training ground. “I didn’t 
really have a club until I was 18.”

Bristol City’s Jonathan Kodjia joins Aston Villa for potential £15m fee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/30/bristol-city-jonathan-kodjia-aston-villa-championship-record-fee>
Kodjia was born and bred in Seine‑Saint-Denis, the same commune in the 
northern suburbs of Paris that produced France internationals such as Alou 
Diarra and Moussa Sissoko and around a dozen other players who have enjoyed 
solid careers. Being such fertile territory, the place is teeming with scouts 
but Kodjia had not caught the eye of any of them by the time he left school in 
2007, so he enrolled at college to build on his baccalaureate in accountancy.

“There are a lot of scouts in the Paris region but there are also a lot of 
talented players and I wasn’t lucky enough to be spotted,” he says. “I just 
played in my neighbourhood team. Then one day, when I was 18, an agent got in 
touch and said he’d seen me playing and found me interesting. He asked, very 
politely, would it be possible for me to have a trial with a professional club? 
I was thrilled because I had started thinking it was never going to happen.”

The agent arranged a trial with Stade de Reims, then in the second division. 
Kodjia recalls: “When I turned up people were quite surprised, looking at me as 
if to say: ‘Can this guy play?’ I didn’t really look like a footballer. They 
were all in Nike boots and flashy gear and I was dressed, let’s say, 
nonchalantly, clothes all creased, not exactly elegant. But it went very well: 
I scored three goals and afterwards the coach asked me if I’d play for the 
club’s youth team. Six months later I signed a professional contract.”

Mellow and jovial off the pitch, the player whom Villa have signed stands out 
on it for his speed and directness but even after turning professional, it took 
him years to develop into a potent force. Kodjia rarely played and never scored 
for the Reims first team in his first four seasons, his most productive 
campaign being when he made 13 appearances after the club dropped into France’s 
third tier. “At the start I was often injured and I think that’s because I 
didn’t have any proper training when I was young, having come into football 
late. I found it hard to put up with the strain at first.”

We know that the fans expect wins and we need that, too, so that we can be a 
bit happier in training

Successful loans at Cherbourg, Amiens and Caen earned him a permanent move in 
2014 to Angers. His 15 league goals helped fire that club to promotion to 
France’s top flight, earned him the award for Ligue 2 player of the year and 
attracted a bid of around £2m fromBristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity>. He admits he had doubts 
about the move. “People said my style was well suited to England, that if I 
could combine my speed and dribbling and so on then I could do damage to 
defences there, but, to be honest, I was a little afraid – bearing in mind how 
the start of my career went and the fact that I knew the English league was 
very tough physically. Making the move was a gamble.

“I didn’t know anyone in England and no one at Bristol spoke French, so 
everything was new to me. But I chose the adventure and did my utmost to 
succeed.

“As expected, I found the biggest difference between football in England and 
France is the intensity: it really is full-on here for 90 minutes and not every 
player coming from France can cope. I was lucky enough to be able to adapt and 
I’m quite proud of that because it was something I’d wondered about.”

He adapted so well, scoring 20 goals in all competitions for Bristol City last 
season, that Villa decided they needed him to help blast their way out of the
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>. To get him 
the club had to bid more than the offers City said they had rejected from 
Premier League clubs. However, before that Kodjia received not one but two 
international call-ups.

“The Benin Football Association got in touch with me first because the name 
Kodjia comes originally from Benin but both my parents are Ivorian and that’s 
who I always wanted to play for,” says the player, who fulfilled that ambition 
by making his debut in a friendly against Hungary in May before scoring in his 
next two appearances, at home against Gabon and Sierra Leone. “Nobody inIvory 
Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast> knew me before that and 
afterwards they were hailing me as the new [Didier] Drogba,” he says with a 
laugh. “Obviously, I know I’m way off doing what he did but we all have to try 
and it was great to feel such warmth.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fjonathan-kodjia-ivory-coast-new-didier-drogba-aston-villa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb15a4742d81ca6c56375f0f07d10378595897a6f%2F196_99_2626_1576%2F2626.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jonathan%20Kodjia%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20are%20going%20to%20be%20pleasantly%20surprised%20by%20Aston%20Villa%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fjonathan-kodjia-ivory-coast-new-didier-drogba-aston-villa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jonathan%20Kodjia%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20are%20going%20to%20be%20pleasantly%20surprised%20by%20Aston%20Villa%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fjonathan-kodjia-ivory-coast-new-didier-drogba-aston-villa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb15a4742d81ca6c56375f0f07d10378595897a6f%2F196_99_2626_1576%2F2626.jpg>
 Jonathan Kodija celebrates his goal for Aston Villa against Brentford. 
Photograph: Matt Bunn/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
Kodjia has made a strong start at Villa, too, opening his account in his 
second match,against Brentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/aston-villa-brentford-championship-match-report>
, with the sort of goal that Villa fans hope to see more of, a sweet curler 
into the net following a dash past the opposing defence. That match ended in a 
draw as Villa conceded a late equaliser, a recurring theme in a season that has 
not begun as expected for a club who spent around £50m in an effort to jump 
straight back to the Premier League. Villa are 18th in the Championship as they 
go into Saturday’s match against a club who have begun recovering slightly 
better froma similar fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/11/newcastle-united-devastated-relegation-managing-director-lee-charnley>
, Newcastle United.

“We know the fans expect wins and we need that, too, so that we can be a bit 
happier in training,” Kodjia says. “We have a lot of new players and all we 
need is time for everyone to gel. We have players with immense qualities and a 
manager [Roberto di Matteo] who has won the Champions League, and knows 
football very well. We have everything going for us. It’s just about 
fine‑tuning details, getting a bit more luck and, also, becoming more killer in 
front of goal. Once we’ve done that, I don’t think anyone will be able to stop 
us. People are going to be pleasantly surprised.” Pleasantly surprising people 
has become a habit for Kodjia.
 