
The Ghana striker Jordan Ayew has accused his club Lorient of pricing him out 
of hisanticipated move to Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/24/aston-villa-jordan-ayew-lorient>
, claiming the Ligue 1 club raised their demands at the last minute.

The 23-year-old, who scored 12 league goals last season, flew into the UK on 
Friday to discuss personal terms after Villa made a bid of around £9m in an 
effort toreplace Christian Benteke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/22/liverpool-christian-benteke-transfer-aston-villa>
. However, Ayew, whose brother André joined Swansea this summer from Marseille, 
told L’Equipe on Saturday that Lorient had changed his asking price. He called 
the club’s conduct “imcomprehensible”.

Aston Villa closing in on signing of Jordan Ayew from Lorient
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/24/aston-villa-jordan-ayew-lorient>
“They said I could go for €10m or €12m,” he told the paper, “but now they want 
£10m with £2m in add-ons, which makes it about €17m. It’s nonsense! I’m really 
annoyed, it’s amazing what they are doing to me. They pointed out how many 
millions Villa paid for [Jordan] Amavi [£10m] but I’m not Amavi. We’re two 
different players.”

He continued: “It’s finished for me. They bought me for €5m and they are 
blocking me now. I am in Birmingham, I am off toAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> and nothing will change my 
mind. My whole family wants to go to England. It’s the right time.

“I am not going to training [with Lorient] again. That’s over for me. It is 
true that I have a contract but I had a good year, so they make a good profit 
and you cannot change the rules like that … In my head, in any case, I have 
left.”

Alex Hayes, vice-president of Lorient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lorient>, told LeTélégramme in response: 
“Jordan is under contract, so we expect him back here tonight [for a friendly 
against Caen]. As it stands we are in negotiations. He only leaves if both 
clubs agree. If the deal is done, it will be great for him. Otherwise he will 
be forced to return. We hope for a positive outcome.”
 