
Sevilla have appointed Jorge Sampaoli as their new manager after the Spanish 
side confirmed that the former Chile coach agreed a two-year deal with the 
Europa League champions tosucceed Unai Emery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/sevilla-jorge-sampaoli-unai-emery>
.

“Sevilla are counting on the best coach of America in 2015, who begins his 
first adventure in Europe,” Sevilla said of the man who led his country to their
 first Copa América triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/05/chile-argentina-copa-america-final-match-report>
 last year.

The 56-year-old, out of a job since stepping down as Chile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chile> coach in January, lost out to the 
Barcelona coach Luis Enrique for the 2015 Fifa World Coach of the Year award 
after making the three-man shortlist following his Copa América success.

Sampaoli has promised the fans he will play attacking football, saying: “[It 
is] such an important club, which has won so many things, is a big 
responsibility, but also very exciting.

“Undoubtedly I am a person who is tremendously passionate about attacking. 
They will see me as a coach who will never attempt to cede the spotlight. And 
for that we need a lot of spirit spread to the group of players so we try to 
make this team respected throughout Europe, as it is now.

“I hope I can fulfil the expectations that the fans have of the team and me.”

Emery, who steered the team to the last three Europa League crowns, was under 
contract withSevilla <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> until June 
2017 but negotiated a release from his contract.

“With 106 victories, he is the coach with the most wins at Sevilla in domestic 
and international competition and the second coach behind Joaquín Caparrós with 
the most games managed, 205,” Sevilla said. “We wish Emery the best of luck in 
his next adventure.”

The Spanish tactician has been linked with the vacant coaching job at Paris 
Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/unai-emery-laurent-blanc-paris-saint-germain-sevilla>
 after the big-spending Ligue 1 championsparted ways with Laurent Blanc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/paris-saint-germain-laurent-blanc>
 on Monday.

Sevilla finished seventh in La Liga last season but have qualified for next 
season’s Champions League via theirEuropa League victory over Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/liverpool-sevilla-europa-league-final-match-report>
.
 