
José Mourinho is prepared to wait until the close season to become the 
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
manager but if the position is not offered then, he will explore other options 
because he has no wish to be left in limbo all summer.

As Louis van Gaal prepares to take United to Shrewsbury Town for Monday 
night’s FA Cup tie,his position continues to be precarious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/20/louis-van-gaal-jose-mourinho-midtjylland-manchester-united>
. The2-1 defeat at Midtjylland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/18/midtjylland-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
 in the Europa League last-32 opening leg, following the2-1 Premier League 
reverse at relegation-threatened Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/13/sunderland-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
, has heightened the pressure on the manager.

Louis van Gaal: Shrewsbury may not be afraid of Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-shrewsbury-fa-cup>
Although there has been no firm contact between United and Mourinho regarding 
the job, the former Chelsea manager remains open to succeeding Van Gaal. Ed 
Woodward, the executive vice-chairman, continues to monitor the position of his 
manager but is reluctant to sack him. Mourinho is aware of this but is also 
mindful he cannot wait indefinitely to be formally approached by the club.

After Shrewsbury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury>, United 
face Midtjylland in Thursday’s return leg at Old Trafford, requiring only a 1-0 
victory to progress on the away goals rule. If Van Gaal is still in place for 
the tie, and United do progress, it would constitute a surprise if the 
64-year-old was not in charge for Sunday’s visit of Arsenal to Old Trafford.

This pattern of Van Gaal remaining in his job on a tenuous basis may continue 
until the end of the season, when he could be removed or be minded to resign. 
Mourinho has no guarantee that even if a vacancy occurs he will be the 
preferred candidate. Appointing Ryan Giggs, Van Gaal’s No2, may be another 
option, although whether Woodward would be prepared to take a gamble on the 
inexperienced Welshman is unclear.

With the season entering its closing phase, Woodward is under pressure to make 
a firm decision regarding who is to take charge of the club. If he does not act 
quickly enough he faces the prospect of losing Mourinho, whose track record 
suggests he is a manager who can make United serious title challengers once 
more.

The low morale at the club is reflected in Van Gaal admitting teams may no 
longer fear facing United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-shrewsbury-fa-cup>
 and he faces a challenge to raise his players’ battered confidence to ensure 
they are not beaten at Shrewsbury.

Should Micky Mellon’s side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/20/shrewsbury-manchester-united-fa-cup-micky-mellon>
, who are 21st in League One, knock out United, Van Gaal’s position may become 
untenable. Yet, given he could have been sacked after theBoxing Day defeat at 
Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/26/stoke-city-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 or then thedefeat by Southampton a month later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/23/manchester-united-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
, there is no guarantee Van Gaal’s tenure would be ended.
 