
The worst-kept non-secret in sport is finally out. As of Monday afternoon José 
Mourinho will, barring last-ditch turbulence, be appointedManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> manager, the 
consummation of an epic, slow-burn seduction that has hovered behind the 
headlines for six months.

For United’s players Saturday’s FA Cup final victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/crystal-palace-manchester-united-fa-cup-final-match-report>
 against Crystal Palace has turned out to be less a new dawn, more a kind of 
Viking funeral for the Louis van Gaal era after two seasons of meandering 
stasis. Even as Van Gaal was marching into a sullen Wembley press conference 
with the trophy under his arm, pictures were filtering through of Mourinho just 
across town at the David Haye fight at the O2 looking coy and sultry and 
pregnant with mischief.

José Mourinho can mould an exciting, attacking Manchester United side | 
Michael Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/22/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-old-trafford>
Van Gaal is a revered football coach, for all the social media snark and 
newspaper ribbing he has attracted during his time at this drifting, stalled 
Manchester United. But this was a humiliating experience: a proud man, sitting 
with the venerable shiny cup plonked defiantly on the table in front of him 
while the assembled global media were already peering over his shoulder at the 
next guy. How very Mourinho – ruthless even in absentia.

The talk now is of a three-year deal for Mourinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/22/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-old-trafford>
 at Old Trafford, resolution at last of an extended public courtship curated by 
a cast of super-agents, deal-makers and willing media accomplices. Indeed there 
is a feeling of delayed destiny about the whole process, a relationship that 
has sparked at one remove ever since the first sighting 12 years ago of this 
thrillingly handsome, absurdly young coach – dubbed by the Sun “a Portuguese 
man of Pwhoaar” – sprinting along the Old Trafford touchline as his Porto team 
eliminated United from the Champions League.

And so here we are. Darth Vader has entered the Death Star. The only real 
question now is why so many people around the club, from fans to directors to 
associated media, seem to think this is unquestionably a good idea.

It might sound odd for such a successful coach but Mourinho to United is 
essentially a celebrity appointment. The only sense in which it resembles a 
perfect fit is as an injection of glitz, a burnishing of the brand. Mourinho 
does not deliver thrilling attacking football. In swapping him for Van Gaal 
United have traded gruelling possession play for gruelling defensive 
counterattack, albeit with a cinematic presence gesticulating on the touchline.

José Mourinho's career – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2013/jun/03/jose-mourinho-career-in-pictures>
Mourinho does not behave nicely. He does not bring young players through. He 
is as far from that more preciously nurtured idea of how United like to see 
themselves as the vampiric corporate owners, the Glazer family, for whom the 
club has simply been awondrous source of income 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/17/manchester-united-malcolm-glazer-children-15m-year>
, the ATM that never closes.

It seems obvious that the right move for United, driven purely by the will to 
build again, would be to hire the best youngish manager in Europe and shower 
him with support, cash and patience – Unai Emery, for example,a triple Europa 
League winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/liverpool-sevilla-europa-league-final-match-report>
with Sevilla, or Thomas Tuchel of Borussia Dortmund, Germany’s fashionably 
beaky and brainy coming man – someone with a clear plan, no cobwebs, a sense of 
genuine unspent energy.

Instead a listing giant has hitched itself to another star vehicle in need of 
an uplift. Mourinho may have wontwo league titles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/may/03/chelsea-v-crystal-palace-premier-league-live>
 in the past five years and been sacked by a close rival this season. He may 
have seemed frazzled in the end times at Chelsea, obsessed with pointless 
detail, diminished on some fundamental level. But he remains unanswerably 
A-list – famous, charismatic, endlessly quotable – even if this is to a degree 
the equivalent of a celebrity marriage of convenience designed to revive a pair 
of flagging middle-aged careers, a McBusted of a managerial appointment.

And yet such is Mourinho’s drive and United’s depth of resource there is still 
a strong argument this could all end up working out nicely. At the very least 
he will surely bring a return to the top four and Champions League football. 
Above all he really, really wants this. As long ago as 2009 Mourinho was 
already pouting in United’s direction. In 2012 he thought he had the job once 
Sir Alex Ferguson was gone, only for United to appoint the desperately paddling 
David Moyes. Mourinho has simpered and sweated and haggled for this 
opportunity. And now Heathcliff has finally got his hands on Wuthering Heights. 
It is unlikely to be dull.

For one thing Mourinho has the will and the self-possession to take a 
sledgehammer to United’s jerry-built squad, a fudge of odds and ends assembled 
under three very different managers. He will want to buy a huge amount of 
players instantly, as he has in the past. At Chelsea more than £70m of 
post-Soviet fossil fuel wealthwas disbursed in his first year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/12/chelsea-sign-cesc-fabregas-from-barcelona>
.

Money will be spent, but it would take a wilful kind of vandalism not to trust 
in the progress of supremely talented players such as Anthony Martial or even 
Marcus Rashford, a lovely, bold, athletic, ball-playing forward who produced 
United’s best moments at Wembley. Wayne Rooney, a José favourite, will no doubt 
remain a key peg.

Mainly, though, he will build in the usual style, from the back: two strong 
centre-halves, full-backs who defend, muscle in midfield. And beyond that a 
sprinkling of José power, that fine-point attention to detail and the 
inspiring, inflammatory presence of a manager who believes the game itself 
starts with his first pre-match press conference.

In this respect it is easy to tire of Mourinho, as many of his players have. 
But it is also easy to overlook the best of him in that fug of bile and 
misdirection.

There have been three outstanding periods in his career. Winning the Champions 
League with Porto in 2004 is a feat to rank close to, if not alongside,Claudio 
Ranieri winning the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/02/claudio-ranieri-leicester-premier-league-champions>
with Leicester. Internazionale’s Champions League win was a triumph of will, 
spirit and organisation. Driving Chelsea on to league titles in 2005 and 2006, 
huge pot of spending money notwithstanding, was a fine standalone achievement.

What all these have in common is their tinge of underdog. Mourinho has not 
quite been Mourinho when success has been expected, as at his three seasons at 
Real Madrid, when his job has simply been to deliver with a certain elan. He 
functions best as an outsider, a spoiling force, there to stomp over everybody 
else’s party.

And from this point of view perhaps this really is the ideal moment for 
Mourinho finally to land the United job. He goes there with the brief of 
revival, regearing, reeling others back in. United have finished 7th, 4th and 
5th the past three seasons. Upwardly mobile success, tweaking the nose of those 
who have forged ahead, suddenly looks like a very José kind of brief.

There are those who say even this will be beyond him, that Mourinho has had 
his decade at the top, the usual life span of the über-manager. There are 
simply too many battles for him to fight now, a renewal of hostilities with 
Arsène Wenger overshadowed by the very personal bile of his relationship with 
Pep Guardiola, who will take over at Manchester City this summer.

All that really seems certain is that in the end Mourinho to United became 
pretty much unavoidable, the only move left on the board for both parties; that 
– who knows – United might just have appointed the right man, if perhaps for 
the wrong reasons; and that above all it promises to be horribly watchable.
 