
José Froilán González, who has died aged 90, made a notable mark in a brief 
career as a Formula One driver. At the end of this month Fernando Alonso will 
be seeking victory in the British grand prix atSilverstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> for Ferrari: his Argentinian 
predecessor secured Ferrari's very first win in the championship, on the same 
circuit in Northamptonshire, in 1951.

Enzo Ferrari, the founder of the racing team and manufacturing company, once 
expressed a degree of wonderment as to how González used racing cars to such 
impressive effect, considering the lather into which the substantial driver 
seemed to work himself. This contemporary of the five times world championJuan 
Manuel Fangio <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/formula1/20258984> was nicknamed 
"the Pampas bull" by British fans, but "El Cabezón" (Fat head) by his 
colleagues.

At the wheel of the new non-supercharged V12-engined 4.5-litre Ferrari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> 375, González scored an impressive 
victory in 1951 over Fangio's supercharged straight-eight cylinder Alfa Romeo 
158. Arms flailing at the wheel and with his considerable bulk overhanging the 
sides, González caught and passed his compatriot and pulled away to clinch a 
decisive win. Nevertheless, González came into the pits for his final scheduled 
stop half expecting to be asked to relinquish his car to his team leader, 
Alberto Ascari, whose sister car had retired with gearbox trouble four laps 
earlier. González made as if to climb from the cockpit, but Ascari placed a 
sympathetic hand on his shoulder and indicated he should remain at the wheel.

In fact, González was far from unfit. The son of a Chevrolet dealer in 
Arrecifes, north-west of Buenos Aires, he was a chubby baby who grew into a 
chubby adult. Yet he was a keen athlete from a young age, a good swimmer, a 
crack shot, a cyclist and a production-car road racer just like Fangio. His 
father set him up in the trucking business and by 1949 he had enough experience 
and cash to join Fangio on their first European tour together.

For the first couple of seasons on the international circuit, González 
struggled for results. But when Mercedes-Benz resurrected a trio of their 
prewar supercharged W163 cars and shipped them toArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina> for a couple of prestigious 
Formula Libre races at the start of 1951, González triumphed in these 
high-profile events. It was his entry ticket to the works Ferrari team for 
which he would score that splendid win at Silverstone.

In 1952, González switched to the Maserati factory team in time for the 
Italian grand prix at Monza, but suffered a serious accident. He then did a 
full season for the team in 1953, punctuated by a crash in a sports car race at 
Lisbon, sidelining him with a fractured veterbra, before switching back to 
Ferrari in 1954.

At the wheel of a Ferrari Tipo 625 he repeated his 1951 success at Silverstone 
– his second and final Formula One win in 26 appearances – trouncing the might 
of Mercedes yet again. He came second in the Formula One drivers' championship 
and also shared the winning sports Ferrari with the FrenchmanMaurice Trintignant
 <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/feb/18/guardianobituaries.sport> in 
that year's Le Mans 24-hour endurance classic.

At then end of that season, González crashed a sports Ferrari in practice for 
the Tourist Trophy race at Dundrod, Co Antrim. Thereafter he raced aFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> car in Britain only once again, 
in the 1956 grand prix at Silverstone, where his guest appearance in a Vanwall 
ended before it had begun when a driveshaft joint broke on the start line.

Gonzalez's final Formula One outing came in a Ferrari Dino 246 in the 1960 
grand prix in Buenos Aires, where he finished 10th. Thereafter he seldom went 
to races, staying in Argentina and concentrating on his car sales business.

He is survived by his wife, Elena.

• José Froilán González, racing driver, born 5 October 1922; died 15 June 2013
 