
José Mourinho polarises opinion and, true to form, the seemingly Chelsea-bound 
coach was cheered and jeered in equal measure as he concluded three years in 
charge of Real Madrid with a4-2 home win against Osasuna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/01/real-madrid-osasuna-live-jose-mourinho>
.

Played out before a two-thirds full Bernabéu stadium with Madrid second in La 
Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>, well adrift of the 
champions Barcelona, it was not the finale the 50-year-old Mourinho might have 
envisaged. Despite having three years remaining on his contract, Mourinho 
agreed to depart by "mutual consent", the divorce evidently suiting both 
parties.

After falling out with the Spanish media, not to mention certain key players, 
Mourinho has talked longingly about England as a place where he "is loved" and
the agreement with his former employers at Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/may/21/jose-mourinho-chelsea-manager>
 appears virtually done and dusted.

Before Saturday's game he issued a brief farewell statement on Madrid's 
website, reflecting on three always turbulent and sometimes triumphant years in 
charge.

"I wish all of Real Madrid's supporters much happiness in the future," 
Mourinho said. "I want to thank many fans for their support, and I respect the 
criticism of others. I repeat, happiness to all, and above all, good health. 
Hala [Forward] Madrid!"

After the win against Osasuna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/osasuna> – 
in which Cristiano Ronaldo's absence due to a supposed "back strain" prompted 
fevered speculation that Manchester United's former favourite son could be 
poised for a Premier League return – Mourinho stepped forward from the 
technical area, arms aloft, before waving to the fans and disappearing down the 
tunnel one last time.

Earlier he had waited until the last possible moment ahead of the kick-off 
before emerging and quickly settling into the dugout. Almost immediately, he 
ventured out of his seat and was instantly engulfed by photographers. Security 
staff were required to usher them away.

The reception from home fans embraced assorted "political" positions, 
including Madrid's ultras, who brandished signs emblazoned with messages such 
as "Thanks for everything, Mou" and chanted his name. Another segment of 
supporters whistled in protest, largely upset with the manager's treatment of 
certain players, the team's lack of major titles this season and the 
Portuguese's claims that he is not "loved" in Spain.

After securing the Copa del Rey in his first season and the La Liga title in 
his second, Mourinho and Madrid parted following a third campaign that saw only 
the Spanish Supercup added to the trophy cabinet. As ifbowing out at the 
semi-final stage of the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/30/real-madrid-borussia-dormund-champions-league>
 for a third consecutive year under the former Porto, Chelsea and 
Internazionale coach was not bad enough, Madrid trailed Barcelona from the 
start of the season and lost the Copa del Rey final to fierce rivals Atlético 
Madrid.

In a damning indictment arguably more damaging than the less than glorious 
trophy haul, Mourinho has been heavily criticised by supporters and journalists 
alike for his persistent benching of Iker Casillas, Madrid's goalkeeper and 
captain.

In recent months he has fallen out with other players, including Pepe, but 
other Madrid players made clear their desire to wish Mourinho well for the 
future. "Many thanks for everything. It has been a pleasure," the defender 
Alvaro Arbeloa tweeted.

If his Madrid exit was rather less glorious than hoped for, at least he signed 
off with a win. Gonzalo Higuaín, captaining a side missing a number of 
regulars, opened the scoring with Real's 100th goal of the season.

Next Michael Essien, on loan from Stamford Bridge, headed in a corner and 
sprinted across to dedicate the goal to Mourinho, who brought him to Real 
following the injury problems which undermined hisChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> career.

Osasuna, also with nothing left to play for, reduced the deficit courtesy of a 
raking, low shot from Roberto Torres. Alvaro Cejudo then headed an equaliser.

No matter. Superlative skill on Mesut Ozil's part set up Karim Benzema for 
Madrid's third goal before José Callejón completed the scoring in the 87th 
minute.

As is his wont, Mourinho exited, stage left, a winner.
 