
José Mourinho has prioritised the signing of an A-list centre-forward when he 
becomes Manchester United manager, with the Portuguese considering a move for 
the free agentZlatan Ibrahimovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/zlatan-ibrahimovic>, whose favoured 
destination is Old Trafford.

Mourinho’s decision to target an elite striker in the summer market confirms 
Wayne Rooney will no longer regularly play in attack. The captain has 
previously acknowledged Marcus Rashford and Anthony Martial are now better 
suited to the No9 role.

Eric Cantona: ‘I love José Mourinho but he is not Manchester United’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/24/eric-cantona-mourinho-manchester-united-guardiola>
If Mourinho decides to sign Ibrahimovic or any other high-class finisher, it 
means Rashford would be the deputy centre-forward and Martial would continue to 
operate mainly from a wide left position. Rooney would drop back into midfield, 
where he operated in the closing part of the season, and also offer an option 
at No10.

Mourinho enjoyed a good relationship with Ibrahimovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/29/jose-mourinho-zlatan-ibrahimovic-easy>
 when the 53-year-old was in charge of Internazionale, between 2008 and 2010. 
The pair worked together in the Portuguese’s first season before Ibrahimovic 
left for Barcelona. At 34 the Swede is vastly experienced and a proven leader 
of the attack in La Liga, Serie A and Ligue 1, three of Europe’s major leagues.

United do not have Champions League football to help attract elite players. 
Ibrahimovic is entering his career’s final phase and as United is his first 
choice he may prove Mourinho’s best option. Ibrahimovic is viewed by the United 
executive as being an ideal commercial acquisition, given his global profile. 
He would cost nothing so the club would countenance paying him the 
£250,000-a-week salary the Swede may demand, given the revenues yielded by his 
presence at the 20-times champions.

José Mourinho just the man to shake Manchester United out of their torpor | 
David Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/24/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-premier-league-louis-van-gaal>
Mourinho could be officially announced as Louis van Gaal’s successor as early 
as Wednesday although it may take until the end of the week to finalise his 
contract. United’s executive vice-chairman, Ed Woodward, met Jorge Mendes, the 
representative of Mourinho, in London on Tuesday to discuss the Portuguese’s 
demands. It is understood that complexities around Mourinho’s image rights plus 
the precise terms of his backroom staff are slowing discussions down. Mourinho 
is expected to seal a three-year deal worth in excess of the £7.5m salary he 
earned at Chelsea beforebeing sacked last December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/17/jose-mourinho-chelsea-michael-emenalo-palpable-tensions>
.

Ryan Giggs <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ryan-giggs> has been offered 
a role on Mourinho’s coaching staff but could still decide to end a 25-year 
association with the club. The Portuguese is likely to want to work with his 
long-term assistant, Rui Faria, casting doubt on the role which has been 
offered to Giggs.

No official confirmation on the remainder of Van Gaal’s backroom team has been 
made, but it has been reported that the assistant coaches Albert Stuivenberg 
and Frans Hoek, as well as the performance analyst Max Reckers, have left.

Giggs has been assured there is a future at United for him. The Welshman must 
decide if he wishes to continue at United or that now is the time to leave. As 
the No2 to Van Gaal, whowas sacked on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/23/louis-van-gaal-sacked-manchester-united-jose-mourinho>
, Giggs was viewed as a potential successor to the Dutchman. Now that he has 
been overlooked for Mourinho, Giggs may decide to leave a club he first 
represented as a player in 1991.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fjose-mourinho-special-one-manchester-united-louis-van-gaal-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%3A%20how%20would%20the%20Special%20One%20fare%20at%20Manchester%20United%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fjose-mourinho-special-one-manchester-united-louis-van-gaal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%3A%20how%20would%20the%20Special%20One%20fare%20at%20Manchester%20United%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fjose-mourinho-special-one-manchester-united-louis-van-gaal-video&media=>
José Mourinho: how would the Special One fare at Manchester United? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/may/22/jose-mourinho-special-one-manchester-united-louis-van-gaal-video>
Daley Blind has become the first United player to defend Van Gaal. The 
Dutchman, who made 57 appearances under the 64-year-old last season, said: “I 
always worked well with him and would have been keen that the co-operation 
lasted longer. A manager who has achieved so much already deserved more respect.

“Even though there was so much being written about him losing his job over the 
last months, he always looked to protect and shelter us.

“It is not easy for a coach if you are repeatedly being fired in the 
newspapers. Still, we as a squad kept believing in the manager andshowed that 
with our FA Cup win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/crystal-palace-manchester-united-fa-cup-final-match-report>
. That we did together for the supporters, the manager and for ourselves. It 
was in the end a good finish to the season. If it is true that José Mourinho is 
coming, then it is also a manager who has achieved much. I will have to show 
what I can do.”

Memphis Depay, who Van Gaal dropped from the FA Cup final squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/20/manchester-united-drop-memphis-depay-fa-cup-final-squad>
, welcomed Mourinho’s arrival, saying it would be a “nice prospect”. Of his now 
former manager the winger, whoVan Gaal signed for £25m last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/08/manchester-united-memphis-depay->
, Depay told De Telegraaf: “A love-hate relationship? I do not know. And now he 
leaves – this is how things go in football and in life. You learn and you 
become stronger.”
 