
Ronald de Boer has warned Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> that José Mourinho 
possesses the same traits as Louis van Gaal.

Van Gaal was widely criticised for overseeing an uninspiring style of football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/21/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-sack>
 and fora reported dictatorial manner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/22/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-players-near-mutiny>
 during his two years in charge and Mourinho isexpected to be confirmed as his 
successor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/24/manchester-united-ed-woodward-jose-mourinho-agent>
.

José Mourinho may bring Zlatan Ibrahimovic to Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/24/jose-mourinho-zlatan-ibrahimovic-manchester-united>
De Boer played under his fellow Dutchman Van Gaal at Ajax before joining him 
at Barcelona, where Mourinho was the assistant. De Boer remains in contact with 
Van Gaal via the former United manager’s wife, Truus, to whom he sent a text 
message beforethe exit from Old Trafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/23/louis-van-gaal-sacked-manchester-united-jose-mourinho>
 was announced.

Having worked under both managers and seen reports of player disillusionment 
at United, De Boer believes there is a risk of the same. He also, however, 
expects Mourinho to improve their disappointing results.

“He is similar,” De Boer, 46, said. “Most of the time from what I know – and 
it’s the same with Mourinho – you hate him or you love him. People run away 
with the impression of Mourinho and it’s the same with Van Gaal.

“There will always be players who are not playing who will dislike him. Always 
– but generally most of the players will for sure like Van Gaal, the way that 
he treated them and took his managing role in the team.

“[Mourinho] is very good. He can shape a team and go straight for results. He 
is like Van Gaal, a workaholic and prepares perfectly on how to win. Sometimes 
it is not pretty but he knows how to grind out wins. That is what you get.

“I sent [Truus] a message: ‘Did you pack your bags already?’ and she said: 
‘Yes’. It was on Sunday, I think.”

Some of the few positives from Van Gaal’s reign surround the introduction of 
the trainees Marcus Rashford, Timothy Fosu-Mensah, Cameron Borthwick-Jackson 
and Jesse Lingard to United’s first team. He also recruited the promising 
Anthony Martial and Memphis Depay, ultimately respecting United’s traditions of 
encouraging younger players.

There are reports that Zlatan Ibrahimovic – like Rashford, a striker – could 
follow Mourinho to United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/24/jose-mourinho-zlatan-ibrahimovic-manchester-united>
 and it is those traditions De Boer is concerned may be lost, even if he 
believes Depay can prove himself where he has so far struggled.

“I worry about Man Utd’s academy, can it have an effect on the players on the 
pitch?” he said. “If you get a foreign legion again – results, prizes for 
winning, people forget that – but people love to see their own youth coming up 
and being the local hero – and that is the risk when you take Mourinho.

“Mourinho is a manager in my eyes who goes straight for ‘arrived’ players, 
experienced players, who can directly fulfil that job. Some young players: not 
so good.

“Maybe [Rashford] will be picked with the national team. He will get a chance 
for sure. But maybe Mourinho will think: ‘OK, Rashford, nice, but I need an 
experienced one also with him’.

“And then the experienced one will play and Rashford won’t play. That will be 
critical, of course, for his career and he must make it so difficult [not to 
drop him].

“Memphis is still a young lad and he has to adapt. Sometimes it takes one or 
two years. I’m sure he has the quality to be a superstar. He can really do it.”
 