
José Mourinho says the pitch for Manchester United’s Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> group match may 
require a “miracle” to be playable and has questioned why Uefa allowed their 
final tie, against Zorya, to be played in mid‑December in Ukraine.

Mourinho and Mkhitaryan target Europa League progress against Zorya
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/mourinho-mkhitaryan-europa-league-zorya-manchester-united>
A pitch inspection is scheduled at 10am local time but temperatures at 
Odessa’s Chornomorets Stadium are expected to plummet to -9C overnight. 
Mourinho believes the frozen pitch, which was covered on Wednesday evening, 
could prove too dangerous a surface to stage the game. United trained on a 
small section of of the pitch at around 7pm local time when the turf was rock 
hard.

“They are putting some warmth on it, but it’s very difficult and people cannot 
make miracles,” Mourinho said. “Let’s hope everything goes OK. The pitch is 
hard and very icy. I thinkUefa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa> know 
the conditions of the pitch and everybody knows that in mid-December the 
conditions in Ukraine and Eastern Europe are more difficult.

“If Uefa are worried about it they should change the fixtures and not allow 
them to be played in mid-December. If the fifth fixture is here it’s the end of 
November and not mid-December, and that’s the problem. The hotel is good, 
stadium good, pitch bad. But it’s very cold. I know it’s difficult to have a 
better pitch. The stadium is beautiful and new. The pitch is the same. They are 
trying.”

Mourinho left Michael Carrick, Matteo Darmian, Antonio Valencia, Memphis Depay 
and Morgan Schneiderlin behind but chose a squad for the match that included 
Wayne Rooney, Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Paul Pogba.

“The players I had to leave out to protect, I left them in Manchester,” he 
said. “The ones that I brought, I brought them to play and not to protect them.”

United require a point to be sure of reaching next year’s knockout stage and 
are yet to win away in Group A, havinglost at Fenerbahce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/fenerbahce-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
 and Feyenoord. “Welost to Feyenoord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/feyenoord-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
 in a game we should win. The team played well and had the game always under 
control. When the team was pushing to win we lost,” Mourinho said.

“In Fenerbahce, another difficult place to go, we conceded in the first minute 
which gives the home team the best conditions to win. It’s a reality.

“If you want to qualify you cannot lose three matches away. That’s why we need 
points here.”
 