
José Mourinho smiled his winning smile and those in attendance watched his 
features soften. The analogy was to the family cat, when it is tickled under 
the chin.“I am the Happy One,” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/10/jose-mourinho-chelsea-return-happy-one>
 Mourinho declared, and the soundbite fizzed around the world. It was June 
2013, he was back for a second spell at Chelsea – where his love affair with 
English football had begun – and he was making all the right noises.

The enemy of football? Come on. Mourinho had learned from his previous 
indiscretions, he was older, wiser and more mellow and he simply wanted to work 
hard to getChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> back on top. 
As ever the delivery was faultless. Mourinho can be the actor supreme or, to 
paraphrase his rival, Pep Guardiola, “the boss of the press room”, yet it was 
his next quotation which bears revisiting.

“I have the same nature, I am the same person, I have the same heart,” 
Mourinho told the room. “I have the same kind of emotions relating to my 
passion for football and my passion for my job.”

Manchester United’s Ed Woodward meets José Mourinho’s agent in London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/24/manchester-united-ed-woodward-jose-mourinho-agent>
Manchester United have agonised long and hard over whether to appoint Mourinho 
and it is no exaggeration to measure the time-scale of the deliberations in 
years. The clubconsidered moving for him as the replacement for Sir Alex 
Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/26/jose-mourinho-cried-manchester-united>
 in 2013 only to conclude that his style and personality were not what was 
required.

They are now to take the plunge and the elders at Old Trafford – men like Sir 
Bobby Charlton and Ferguson – hope that they will witness Mourinho’s warm and 
charming side. It is sure to be on show when he is unveiled as the successor to
Louis van Gaal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/louis-van-gaal> later in 
the week, at the kind of box-office occasion over which he has long 
demonstrated a mastery.

It is probably fair to say at this point that Mourinho has found his 
professional fit in England, his spiritual home from home. Unlike in Spain or 
Italy, say, there is a media preoccupation with personality and all of the 
attendant trimmings. Mourinho recognises the buttons and he knows how to press 
them. As an aside, it will be interesting to see how the Manchester City-bound 
Guardiola copes with this aspect of the job.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fjose-mourinho-special-one-manchester-united-louis-van-gaal-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%3A%20how%20would%20the%20Special%20One%20fare%20at%20Manchester%20United%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fjose-mourinho-special-one-manchester-united-louis-van-gaal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%3A%20how%20would%20the%20Special%20One%20fare%20at%20Manchester%20United%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fjose-mourinho-special-one-manchester-united-louis-van-gaal-video&media=>
José Mourinho: how would the Special One fare at Manchester United? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/may/22/jose-mourinho-special-one-manchester-united-louis-van-gaal-video>
Football in Manchester is about to get tastier and one of the questions 
concerns whether Mourinho will be able to become the figurehead that United 
want. Could the experiences of his most recent tenure at Chelsea influence him? 
Might he have learned any lessons from the manner in which it unravelled?

Mourinho’s second stint at Stamford Bridge followed a familiar pattern. There 
was the initial uplift and the glory of trophies before the sense that the 
world was against him fuelled the personal outbursts and eventually created an 
atmosphere of weariness.

That said, the way that it imploded was spectacular and it continues to feel a 
trick of the mind that Chelsea went from being the defending champions to a 
position one point above the relegation places last December, when Mourinho was 
dismissed. His players had patently stopped listening to him or, to borrow a 
phrase, there was“palpable discord” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/17/jose-mourinho-chelsea-michael-emenalo-palpable-tensions>
 between them and him.

But this authentic managerial great is not a person to worry about bending to 
the will of others, nor to doubt himself. The ego makes sure he will not and 
the accumulated silverware offers further fortification. To recap, the 
53-year-old has won eight league titles in four countries, the Champions League 
with two different clubs, the Uefa Cup, the FA Cup, three League Cups, the 
Spanish Cup and the Italian Cup.

Change his ways and the uncompromising methods that have made him? Even if 
Mourinho truly wanted to, he could not. An early charm offensive at Old 
Trafford can be expected but there will come a point when the win-at-all-costs 
impulse and the other internal complexes form their usual irresistible force.

It is worth remembering how Mourinho spoke, in the summer of 2013, of having 
buried the hatchet with Arsène Wenger, his old adversary at Arsenal. In 
February 2014 he was back on more familiar ground, branding Wenger a“specialist 
in failure” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/14/jose-mourinho-arsene-wenger-chelsea-arsenal>
.

Mourinho has always given the impression that he needs confrontation – either 
with rivals such as Guardiola, Wenger or Claudio Ranieri [from his time at 
Internazionale] to groups that have ranged from governing bodies to referees’ 
committees toUnicef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/apr/28/jose-mourinho-real-madrid-barcelona>
, the charity partner of Barcelona. United know what they are getting, for 
better or for worse, and Mourinho knows they are backing him. Otherwise they 
would once again have looked beyond him.

Even when Mourinho is wrong, as he was with the inexcusable attack on Eva 
Carneiro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/07/eva-carneiro-chelsea-doctor-jose-mourinho-constructive-dismissal-public-apology>
, the Chelsea doctor, at the beginning of the season, he feels that he is 
right. Their dispute is set to reach a public tribunal next month, as Mourinho 
has so far been against an out-of-court settlement. This is because he believes 
he has not been out of order. He also felt that Chelsea’s failed title defence 
could be attributed to the lack of investment in the squad and a disrupted 
pre-season – and the negative momentum that subsequently became unstoppable.

United look ripe for a bit of Mourinho-therapy. He will galvanise the place 
and plenty of the players will love his enthusiasm. After the torpor of Van 
Gaal anybody – or any style of football – is likely to be more enjoyable. It 
should be said, however, that, like Van Gaal, Mourinho places an emphasis on 
discipline and analysis. He first made his name on the technical side of the 
game as an analyst. His attention to detail is painstaking and he is known for 
the constant demands he puts on his players.

The squad that Mourinho will inherit does not appear to be heavy on the type 
of physical powerhouse that he has tended to favour while it will be 
interesting to see whether he trusts the young players like Jesse Lingard and 
Marcus Rashford. Mourinho has often preferred the more experienced ones to 
execute his orders. Changes are inevitable and it is easy to feel that they 
could or should be sweeping. Mourinho is a man to shake things up.
 