
Australia’s environment and energy minister, Josh Frydenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/josh-frydenberg>, has welcomed 
Donald Trump’s commitment to lift Obama administration’s restrictions on fossil 
fuel exploration within his first 100 days in the White House, saying the move 
will be a boon for consumers.


Frydenberg was asked about Trump’s declaration about various executive actions 
he would take in the opening phase of his presidency during an interview with 
Sky News on Wednesday.

In a message posted on YouTube on Tuesday, Trump declared he would cancel 
“job-killing restrictions on the production of American energy, including shale 
energy and clean coal” to create jobs.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fa-potential-disaster-trump-dumps-the-trans-pacific-partnership-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20outlines%20job%20plan%20in%20YouTube%20clip%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fa-potential-disaster-trump-dumps-the-trans-pacific-partnership-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20outlines%20job%20plan%20in%20YouTube%20clip%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fa-potential-disaster-trump-dumps-the-trans-pacific-partnership-video&media=>
Donald Trump outlines plan for first 100 days in YouTube clip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/22/a-potential-disaster-trump-dumps-the-trans-pacific-partnership-video>
The environment minister was asked whether that move would impact the global 
task of reducing carbon emissions. Frydenberg’s response was that Trump’s 
decision would be good news for consumers.

“I’m always in favour of cutting red tape and regulation,” he said. “I 
absolutely welcome efforts to reduce regulation and to encourage gas 
exploration and energy development.”

He said state governments in Australia should follow suit. “In fact this is 
one of the problems we are having in Australia and I’ve been outspoken on, 
which is the effective moratoriums on gas development both in Victoria, my home 
state, and in New South Wales.

“This is good news for consumers in the United States because they have gone 
through the shale gas revolution where they are paying only two to three 
dollars a gigajoule for gas, whereas in Australia we are paying eight to nine 
dollars.

“This hurts households and investors, so we need more gas, more exploration.”

Frydenberg was also asked about a signal Trump sent in an interview with the 
New York Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-paris-climate-deal-change-open-mind>
 when he said he had an “open mind” about the Paris climate agreement despite
campaigning against it during the presidential race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/26/donald-trump-environmental-policy-climate-change-keystone-xl>
.

Trump said asked about the agreement: “I’m looking at it very closely. I have 
an open mind to it.”

Fight the 'blight' of windfarms near my golf courses, Trump urges Ukip leader
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/trump-british-allies-against-windfarms-golf-courses-scotland>
Frydenberg reacted cautiously to the abrupt volte-face. The Australian 
government has said previously it would take the US four years to withdraw from 
the Paris agreement in the event Trump decided to pull out.

Malcolm Turnbull said when he announced that Australia would ratify the Paris 
agreement thatthe government would follow through 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/10/turnbull-signals-australia-wont-follow-trumps-lead-on-paris-climate-agreement>
 regardless of what the US did.

Frydenberg said Australia would collaborate with the US on climate change with 
or without the Paris deal.

“I don’t want to pre-empt what Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and his administration will 
do, other than to say Australia will continue to work very effectively with the 
United States in reducing global emissions and lifting efficiency standards,” 
he said.
 