
The funniest standup I’ve ever seen 

In terms of straight, pure standup, it’s Rhod Gilbert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jan/07/rhod-gilbert-live-comedy-review>
’s Mince Pie show, which he did in Edinburgh in 2008. I don’t think I’ll ever 
see anything like that again in my life. He’s got five or six minutes on buying 
a duvet. You think: “How can he get five or six minutes out of buying a duvet?” 
But it’s genuinely some of the most unbelievable standup I’ve ever seen.

The funniest book I’ve ever read 

Woody Allen’s The Complete Prose. It’s just the best selection of comic 
writing by one author. You know it’s good comedy when you get quite demoralised 
about yourself.

'Booed off in 17 seconds' – comedians recall their first gigs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/01/comedians-first-gigs-paul-merton-susan-calman-shappi-khorsandi-isy-suttie-omid-djalili>
The funniest item of clothing I’ve ever owned 

In about 1994, Spliffy took over our school as a fashion. It was black jeans 
with white cotton trim and a picture of a cartoon character smoking weed on the 
back pocket. I bought the jeans and jacket, so I was in full Spliffy. But I 
couldn’t afford the real Spliffy so I had to get the knock-off ones with only 
one F in it. When I’m describing it, it doesn’t sound like a real thing, but at 
the time it was totally cutting edge.

The funniest person I know 

Tim Key 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/live/2014/aug/08/tim-key-live-qa-post-your-questions-now>
. Conversationally, he’s probably the funniest person in British comedy.

The funniest heckle I’ve ever had 

A couple of years ago during a show, the owner of the venue came up to me and 
said: “Someone wrote a note to one of their friends during your set, do you 
want to see it?” And on the note it just said: “Is he the guy from The Hobbit?” 
Which is really a slow-burn heckle. She wrote it and an hour later I was 
feeling the hit.

The funniest joke I’ve ever heard 

I was once doing a gig with Tim Vine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/21/tim-vine-review>; he was 
backstage, and there was one of those long strings of polystyrene coffee cups. 
He picked up the whole stack of about 20, walked on stage and then said: 
“Bloody hell this coffee’s hot!” which I think is the funniest thing anyone has 
ever said.

Josh Widdicombe is touring to 8 Dec <http://www.joshwiddicombe.com/tour/>
 