
It would have been the 100th birthday of Julia Child on Tuesday, an American 
icon who brought two of the most beloved items in the US, food and television, 
together.

So in recognition of her contributions to American culture, let us celebrate 
one of the country's most endearing characters.

Child's culinary career began after she graduated from the prestigious Cordon 
Bleu culinary school in France, and made her name authoring the 752-page 
cookbook Mastering the Art of French Cooking. This followed her stint as a spy 
with top-level security clearances, naturally.

She then she ingratiated herself with the everyday American on her show The 
French Chef, which premiered in 1963 and aired for a decade on National 
EducationTelevision <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television>, the 
publicly-funded precursor to PBS.

On The French Chef, Child didn't use cutesy abbreviations or branding 
gimmicks, she simply offered straightforward cooking technique with a heavy 
dose of real world wisdom. The French Chef wasn't the glossy, over-edited 
cooking production of today, but a fun and lighthearted class in truly 
excellent cooking.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTVdI85jb8xg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTVdI85jb8xg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTVdI85jb8xg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
''We should enjoy food and have fun,'' Child said in 1990 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/06/20/garden/julia-child-boiling-answers-her-critics.html>
. ''It is one of the simplest and nicest pleasures in life.''

After The French Chef, Child's infectious enthusiasm for food, penchant for 
wine and soaring voice carried a slew of other shows through 2000, when Julia & 
Jacques Cooking at Home, a show she co-hosted with French chef Jacques PÃ©pin, 
aired its final episode.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4YVKD7J69Ds%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4YVKD7J69Ds%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4YVKD7J69Ds%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
She died of kidney failure in 2004, a couple of days before her 92nd birthday, 
in her home state ofCalifornia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>.

Cooking a Julia Child meal is a culinary rite of passage in the US and her 
birthday isbeing celebrated in some of the pre-eminent restaurants 
<http://jc100.tumblr.com/post/27121784173/julia-child-restaurant-week-august-7-15-2012>
 in the US. Google has also honored her with theever-prestigious day's doodle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2012/aug/15/julia-child-honoured-google-doodle>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FtGg4njImm0Y%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FtGg4njImm0Y%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FtGg4njImm0Y%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=> 