
Tayo Aluko wrote and performed the remarkable Call Mr Robeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jan/10/call-mr-robeson-review>, which 
charted the tragic persecution of the great American singer-actor. Now Aluko is 
back with another one-man show, this time about Tunji Sowande, who left Nigeria 
to study law in Britain and who in 1968 became the first black head of a major 
barrister’s chambers. Although more diffuse than its predecessor, it is a 
fascinating show that interweaves politics, music and Sowande’s abiding 
passion, cricket.

Aluko seizes on the fact that 1968 was a turning point in Sowande’s legal 
career to bring together the themes that animate the show. We are reminded of 
that year’s internal conflicts in Africa that were part of the imperialist 
legacy, of the assassinations of Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy and of 
theblack power salute by two African-American athletes at the Mexico City 
Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/30/black-power-salute-1968-olympics>
. While deeply aware of all this, Sowande was at the Oval watching Basil 
D’Oliveira score 158 against the Australians – an event that had political 
repercussions, as it led to the eventual cancellation of an England tour to 
South Africa because of D’Oliveira’s Cape Coloured origins.

I would have liked to have heard more about Sowande’s legal career. After 
initially being told by a bigoted senior barrister to go back to “Bongo-Bongo 
land”, he seems to have enjoyed smooth progress on the way to becoming a 
part-time crown court judge. But we learn little about the problems faced by 
black and Asian lawyers in postwar Britain. The most revealing observation is 
that Sowande tended to hand high-profile cases over to his juniors to avoid 
race becoming an issue in court.

There are gaps in the story, but it seems churlish to complain about a 
90-minute show that packs in so much. Directed by Amanda Huxtable and with 
Horacio López Redondo at the piano, it also gives Aluko the chance to sing a 
variety of songs – from Victorian ballads to Yoruba anthems – and to remind us 
that the modest, multifaceted Sowande was as much cricket-mad musician as legal 
pioneer.

• In rep at Theatro Technis <http://www.theatrotechnis.com/show.php?id=547>, 
London, until 28 January. Box office: 020-7387 6617.
 