
When the V&A launched its Tommy Cooper archive 
<https://www.vam.ac.uk/articles/tommy-cooper-collection> in August, coverage 
pounced on a conspicuous omission. “V&A acquires Tommy Cooper archive of jokes 
and props,” ranthe Guardian’s headline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/26/v-and-a-museum-acquires-tommy-cooper-archive-jokes-props-no-fez>
, “but no fez.” Cooper’s fez is an icon of 20th-century comedy – hence the 
V&A’s relief now to have acquired one, from Dutch former ad executive Hans van 
Rijs. Cooper loaned Van Rijs his hat while negotiating a part in a wine gums 
commercial in 1984 – then died before the ad man could return it. (The last fez 
from Cooper’s estate wassold at auction 
<http://www.christies.com/lotfinder/memorabilia/tommy-cooper-5374937-details.aspx>
 in 2010 for £4,750.)

Cooper’s act is hard to picture without his tasselled hat, which – 
incongruous, unexplained, perched atop the lumbering, 6ft 4in comic – 
identified him instantly as silly and strange. The arbitrariness was part of 
the appeal: not only did the fez have little to do with Cooper’s act, but when 
one crowd, early in his career, tried to dislodge it by throwing bread rolls, 
Cooper demanded that they stop (according to his contemporary Eric Sykes 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=n5CxcNJ-XoAC&pg=PT9&lpg=PT9&dq=%E2%80%9Cbecause+I+haven%E2%80%99t+got+an+ad+lib+for+people+throwing+bread+rolls+at+my+hat%E2%80%9D.&source=bl&ots=UZIqWDpY5-&sig=SW3adWoUdIHYGdpxMXULTorB_ag&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjPwcP7j93QAhVqAcAKHR2EDB8Q6AEIHTAA#v=onepage&q=%E2%80%9Cbecause%20I%20haven%E2%80%99t%20got%20an%20ad%20lib%20for%20people%20throwing%20bread%20rolls%20at%20my%20hat%E2%80%9D.&f=false>
) “because I haven’t got an ad lib for people throwing bread rolls at my hat”.

The origin story of the standout headgear finds Cooper lifting it from an 
Egyptian waiter’s head moments before a Cairo gig during the second world war. 
(Originally,he performed in a pith helmet 
<http://h2g2.com/edited_entry/A2116496>.) What would then have seemed a 
pragmatic appropriation might today be condemned as cultural appropriation, or 
maybe not: the man-childish innocence of Cooper’s persona might have defanged 
criticism, just as no one in Honolulu seems bothered byMilton Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/milton-jones>’s Hawaiian shirts.

Is there an equivalent to Cooper’s fez among his comedy inheritors? The 2014 
Edinburgh comedy award champion,John Kearns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/16/john-kearns-review>, performs 
with equine false teeth and a tonsure wig.Spencer Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/28/spencer-jones-at-edinburgh-festival-review-something-delightful>
 gives himself a hunchback and a bowl cut. Both could easily one day be 
household names. No Ken Dodd archive would be complete without a tickle stick, 
nor Lee Evans without, er, a bucket of sweat. But Cooper’s Egyptian hat exists 
on a more rarefied plane where – alone with Chaplin’s bowler and cane, and 
Groucho Marx’s specs and ’tache – the mere sight of it spells comedy ... just 
like that.
 