
Juventus restored their three-point lead in the Serie A title race on Sunday 
whileInternazionale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale> 
reignited their challenge for a top-three finish.

Massimiliano Allegri’s Bianconeri were joined at the top by their Scudetto 
rivals Napoli on Saturday night but re-established their advantage as a rare 
goal from the defender Andrea Barzagli and a late strike from the substitute 
Mario Lemina settled a 2-0 victory overAtalanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> at the Stadio Atleti Azzurri 
d’Italia.

The reigning champions found a response to Napoli’s 3-1 win against Chievo 
through an unfamiliar source, with centre-back Barzagli scoring his first goal 
since May 2012 when Mario Mandzukic’s pass fell to him in the 24th minute.

The on-loan Marseille midfielder Lemina skipped past two Atalanta defenders 
before rifling home Juve’s second with four minutes remaining in Bergamo.

Inter overturn 3-0 deficit but lose Coppa Italia shootout to Juventus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/02/internazionale-juventus-coppa-italia-match-report>
The result also means the veteran goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon is now in a 
position to set a record for the longest unbeaten goalkeeping run inSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> history.

His clean sheet against Atalanta means he has gone nine games without 
conceding and he could surpass Dino Zoff’s achievement of the 1972-73 campaign 
when Juve host Sassuolo on Friday.

Inter are back in the hunt for a Champions League place after dominating 
Palermo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> to win 3-1 in the late 
game at San Siro. Goals from Adem Ljajic, Mauro Icardi and Ivan Perisic enabled 
the former leaders to close to within two points of fourth-placed Fiorentina.

Palermo got on the scoresheet through Franco Vázquez but the Sicilians are 
flirting with relegation as Frosinone can drag them into the drop zone next 
week.

The promoted side, Frosinone, are only a point from safety after beating 
Udinese 2-0 at Stadio Matusa thanks to goals from Daniel Ciofani and Leonardo 
Blanchard.

Earlier 10-man Sassuolo dealt Inter’s city rivals Milan a heavy blow in their 
attempt to qualify for Europe by defeating them 2-0.

The Neroverde started the day six points behind sixth-placed Milan but will 
now look to overtake them after goals from Alfred Duncan and Nicola Sansone 
secured an impressive victory.

Eusebio Di Francesco’s men even managed to dominate the final exchanges 
despite losing Grégoire Defrel to a late red card.

Lucas Biglia scored a late penalty as Lazio held Torino 1-1 in a mid-table 
battle. The Argentina midfielder stroked home a 78th-minute spot-kick in 
response to Andrea Belotti’s early opener.

Elsewhere Luca Rigoni eased Genoa’s relegation fears with a goal to secure a 
vital 1-0 victory over Empoli; and Bologna are practically assured of another 
top-flight campaign after sharing the spoils from a goalless draw with Carpi at 
the Stadio Renato Dall’Ara.
 