
In the five years since Germany overtook Italy in Uefa’s rankings, stealing a 
Champions League berth away from clubs on the peninsula, pundits have 
pontificated at length on the lessons thatSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> might learn from the 
Bundesliga. Many have called for a greater focus on youth and homegrown talent, 
as well as the construction of stadiums.

Juventus were ahead on both fronts, and have reaped the rewards as they romped 
to five consecutive Scudetti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/26/juventus-enjoy-improbable-march-to-success-and-lift-fifth-successive-serie-a-title>
 but 2016 may go down as the year when they took the Teutonic template a step 
further. Instead of drawing inspiration from Germany’s top division, the
Bianconeri now appear to simply be imitating Germany’s top club.

In a move straight from the Bayern Munich playbook, Juventus entrenched their 
domestic dominance this summer by prising star players away from their two 
closest rivals.From Napoli, they took Gonzalo Higuaín 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/26/gonzalo-higuain-moves-napoli-juventus>
 – fresh from the most prolific season in Serie A history.From Roma, they took 
Miralem Pjanic <> – whose 12 assists were joint-most in the league last season.

Perhaps Juventus overpaid for Higuaín 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/27/crazy-transfer-fee-gonzalo-higuain-theatre-absurd-football>
. The decision to invest €90m in a player who will turn 29 before Christmas 
already looked a little reckless before he showed up for pre-seasonlooking 
decidedly doughy around his midsection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/12/gonzalo-higuain-football-fans-overweight-players-argentina-juventus>
.

Even when he does get up to full speed, awkward questions will remain about 
where Higuaín fits into Massimiliano Allegri’s tactics. The Argentinian has 
done his best work as the central striker in a 4-3-3 but to accommodate him 
there would require shifting Paulo Dybala – coming off a brilliant first season 
as the deeper-lying forward in Juventus’s two-man attack – out to the wing.

Pjanic, by contrast, was a steal at €32m and should go a long way toward 
filling the creative voidleft by Paul Pogba’s departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-united-sign-paul-pogba-93-million-juventus>
. Juventus will miss the Frenchman’s ball-winning talents and may yet add 
another midfielder to compensate but in the meantime have strengthened 
elsewhere with the additions ofDani Alves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/14/dani-alves-barcelona-happier-before-fame>
, Mehdi Benatia and Marko Pjaca.

Mirth about girth: Gonzalo Higuaín brings fans’ pet pastime to the fore | 
Jacob Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/12/gonzalo-higuain-football-fans-overweight-players-argentina-juventus>
Overall the team who finished nine points clear at the top of Serie A have 
added yet more depth and variation to their squad but before we give up hope 
altogether of a title race in 2016-17, perhaps we should pause to listen to the
new Internazionale manager, Frank de Boer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/internazionale-appoint-frank-de-boer-roberto-mancini-serie-a>
.

“[Juventus’s] squad is exceptional …” he told Gazzetta dello Sport. “But at 
the same time Pogba has left. We need to understand how they are going to play 
now in midfield, and it’s not a given that they will be stronger than last 
year. They have great names, but we don’t know yet if the great names will know 
how to be a team.”

Even if not, though, who will challenge them? Are Napoli still capable of 
fighting for a title without Higuaín? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/16/gonzalo-higuain-napoli-gunnar-nordahl-record-serie-a>
 An optimist may point out the man who gets the first shot at replacing him, 
Manolo Gabbiadini, has had a quietly impressive strike rate since joining the 
club in January 2015 – averaging one goal for every 107.7 minutes played in 
league matches. Napoli’s newly acquired alternative, the 22-year-old Poland 
striker Arkadiusz Milik,is not too shabby either 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/poland-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
.

The Partenopei are expected to make further additions but their prospects of 
challenging Juventus will rest more heavily on their ability to keep hold of 
the players they already have.Kalidou Koulibaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/10/chelsea-target-kalidou-koulibalys-future-to-be-resolved-this-week>
 and Lorenzo Insigne were key figures in the run to second place last season 
but both are said to be disgruntled over the club’s failure to offer them 
improved contracts, and each has plenty of admirers at home and abroad.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fjuventus-serie-a-title-race-higuain-inter-napoli%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbddcb6d71abf95e2da7a8e152f999ebd0891a8a1%2F185_328_2662_1597%2F2662.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juventus%20to%20dominate%20Serie%20A%20title%20race%20but%20there%20will%20be%20plenty%20of%20drama%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fjuventus-serie-a-title-race-higuain-inter-napoli%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juventus%20to%20dominate%20Serie%20A%20title%20race%20but%20there%20will%20be%20plenty%20of%20drama%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fjuventus-serie-a-title-race-higuain-inter-napoli%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbddcb6d71abf95e2da7a8e152f999ebd0891a8a1%2F185_328_2662_1597%2F2662.jpg>
 New Inter manager Frank de Boer and his players stroll the streets of Limerick 
before the friendly against Brendan Rogers’ Celtic. Photograph: Claudio Villa - 
Inter/Inter via Getty Images 
Roma, third last season, have needed to run just to stand still this summer, 
using a large chunk of their transfer budget to convert loanees such as Mohamed 
Salah andStephan El Shaarawy into permanent signings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/27/stephan-el-shaarawy-loan-roma-milan>
. Unfortunately, they were not able to work the same magic on Lucas Digne, who 
returned to Paris Saint-Germain before signing for Barcelona.

It is not entirely clear how the left-back will be replaced. The summer 
arrivals Juan Jesus and Thomas Vermaelen have each played the position but lack 
the pace to get forward and overlap with Roma’s flying wingers as Digne did. 
Bruno Peres, an astute addition from Torino, can bring an equivalent energy to 
the opposite flankbut where does that leave Alessandro Florenzi? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/08/alessandro-florenzi-italy-versatile-giallorosso-euro-2016>

If nothing else, Roma have options. And although they have lost one 
world-class midfielder in Pjanic, the hope is they may be about to rediscover 
another one – withKevin Strootman back at last from the knee injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/23/kevin-strootman-surgery-roma-former-doctor-manchester-united-target>
 and complications that kept him off the pitch for the best part of two years.

Are there any other teams capable of competing for the title? What about De 
Boer’s Inter? This has been an eventful summer for theNerazzurri, who were 
taken over by the Chinese retail giant Suning in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/06/internazionale--chinese-ownership-suning-holdings-serie-a>
 but onlyparted ways with Roberto Mancini on 8 August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/08/inter-frank-de-boer-roberto-mancini-departs>
.

How to explain this late change of direction? The Italian press have noted the 
owners’ close relationship with Kia Joorabchian – the agent to Carlos Tevez – 
with whom Mancini did not exactly see eye-to-eye in his Manchester City days. 
It has not escaped the attention that both De Boer and Inter’s top remaining 
transfer target, João Mário, is also represented by Joorabchian.

Whatever the circumstances, the Dutchman has inherited a squad of significant 
potential. It is easy to forget Inter were top of the table last Christmas and 
had room for growth this season even before any signings were made.Geoffrey 
Kondogbia is 23 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/22/internazionale-sign-geoffrey-kondogbia-monaco>
 and should improve with a year of Serie A experience under his belt. Ivan 
Perisic, too, can kick on after an impressive Euro 2016 showing.

De Boer has some welcome dilemmas ahead as he seeks to incorporate those two 
into his starting XI along with the newly acquired Éver Banega, Antonio 
Candreva and, perhaps, João Mário. Even the manager, though, doubts he can make 
it all work right away. Asked by Gazzetta how long it would take him to make 
his mark on the team, he replied with a specific: “Four months”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fjuventus-serie-a-title-race-higuain-inter-napoli%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47d4df864b9ab3d85ffead6812fd515e271dba60%2F0_166_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juventus%20to%20dominate%20Serie%20A%20title%20race%20but%20there%20will%20be%20plenty%20of%20drama%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fjuventus-serie-a-title-race-higuain-inter-napoli%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juventus%20to%20dominate%20Serie%20A%20title%20race%20but%20there%20will%20be%20plenty%20of%20drama%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fjuventus-serie-a-title-race-higuain-inter-napoli%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47d4df864b9ab3d85ffead6812fd515e271dba60%2F0_166_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Roma may have lost Miralem Pjanic, but welcome back midfielder Kevin Strootman 
from a knee injury that has kept him out for almost two years. Photograph: 
Luciano Rossi/AS Roma via Getty Images 
A slow start from any of the frontrunners could favour Fiorentina, who have 
undergone no such major upheaval. The biggest question facing Paulo Sousa is 
how to incorporate Giuseppe Rossi into his side after the forward returned from 
a moderately productive six-month spell at Levante. Well, that and how to break 
it to Cristian Tellothat he is not in Florence for a stag do 
<https://twitter.com/acffiorentina/status/765196629460733952?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
.

And what of Milan, as they prepare to move into the post-Berlusconi era? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/05/milan-silvio-berlusconi-serie-a-club-sale-chinese-investors>
 The slow progress of theRossoneri’s own Chinese takeover has prevented them 
from making significant forays into the transfer market and left the new 
manager, Vincenzo Montella, to instead build something from the ashes of a 
miserable end to last season. At least, with no European competition to 
distract them, Milan can put all of their energies into improving on their 
seventh place.

Sassuolo, who pipped them to Italy’s final Europa League berth, may find it 
tricky to repeat such an achievement with Sime Vrsaljko and Nicola Sansone 
having departed. At least they have held on to Domenico Berardi.

Elsewhere fascinating sub-plots abound. Can tiny Crotone succeed where Carpi 
and Frosinone failed by extending their first top-flight jaunt beyond one 
season? Will Mario Balotelli return to Serie A,perhaps with Bologna or Chievo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/13/mario-balotelli-no-future-liverpool-jurgen-klopp>
? And what indignity will next befall Lazio, following a summer in whichMarcelo 
Bielsa resigned after two days as the manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/08/marcelo-bielsa-resigns-as-lazio-manager-after-just-two-days>
, and the owner, Claudio Lotito, was reported to have very nearlyscared off a 
signing by smashing a plate of rocket and bresaola 
<http://www.repubblica.it/sport/calcio/serie-a/lazio/2016/08/08/news/lazio_lotito_bresaola_leitner_candreva_lite-145629051/>
?

We may not see a compelling title race in Serie A this season. For better or 
for worse, however, such as Lotito guarantee there will always be drama.
 