
Paulo Dybala scored twice as Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> closed in on a fifth successive 
Serie A title with a 3-0 win against 10-man Lazio.

Mario Mandzukic opened the scoring for Juventus with his third goal in four 
matches by redirecting a cross within the box from Paul Pogba near the end of 
the first half.

Then after the Lazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> right-back 
Patric was sent off as a result of his second yellow card, Dybala converted a 
penalty and finished off a counterattack for his 16th goal of the season.

The Serie A title race is done, the real battle is down at the bottom | Paolo 
Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/18/serie-a-title-race-napoli-juventus-carpi-frosinone>
With four matches remaining, Juventus restored their nine-point lead over 
Napoli, who routed Bologna 6-0 on Tuesday.

It was the first defeat for the new Lazio coach Simone Inzaghi, who won his 
first two matches in charge.

The night’s theatrics were provided by 39-year-old Francesco Totti, who came 
off the bench to score two late goals inRoma’s 3-2 win against Torino.

Totti struck a difficult equaliser just seconds after coming on late in the 
second half, and then converted a penalty for the winner, a performance that 
will surely spark more heated discussion over his disputed future with the only 
club for whom he has played. Totti’s contract is due to expire at the end of 
the season and he apparently has not yet been offered an extension.

The victory moved third-place Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> 
back to within five points of Napoli and opened up a seven-point lead over
Internazionale in the race for the final Champions League spot. Inter were 
beaten 1-0 atGenoa.

Andrea Belotti had given Torino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> 
the lead with a penalty after being held by Kostas Manolas and the Greece 
international redeemed himself by equalising in the 65th, rising above a crowd 
of players to meet a corner with a header.

Josef Martínez seemed to have scored the winner for Torino after being left 
unmarked by Maicon to redirect in a cross at the far post but Totti then came 
on and turned the match around.

In Genoa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa>, Sebastian De Maio 
scored the only goal in the 77th minute, firing in at the far post to conclude 
a clever move that included headed passes from Ezequiel Muñoz and Panagiotis 
Tachtsidis.

Fiorentina’s troubles in the second half of the season continued in a 2-1 
defeat atUdinese, who took an early lead through Duván Zapata and won it with a 
goal from Cyril Théréau after Mauro Zárate’s equaliser.

Elsewhere Chievo Verona defeated Frosinone 5-1, Empoli edged out Hellas Verona 
1-0, andPalermo and Atalanta drew 2-2.

Sassuolo were held to a 0-0 draw by 10-man Sampdoria after failing to convert 
a late penalty. TheSampdoria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> 
goalkeeper Emiliano Viviano leapt to his left to stop Domenico Berardi’s low 
spot-kick one minute from the end. Viviano also made several other impressive 
saves after the defender Andrea Ranocchia was sent off with two yellow cards 
midway through the first half.

On Thursday, the new Milan coach Cristian Brocchi aims to make it two wins 
from two matches as the Rossoneri host relegation-threatened Carpi.
 