
Juventus needed an own goal from the Genoa defender Sebastian De Maio to 
maintain their pursuit of theSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> leaders, Napoli.

With Napoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> winning 2-0 at Lazio 
on Wednesday night, Juve had to win to stay within two points of the top. They 
did so, but thanks only to an unfortunate moment for the centre-back De Maio, 
who turned Juan Cuadrado’s cross into his own net in the 30th minute to give 
Juve their 1-0 victory.

Lazio’s Serie A match against Napoli halted due to racist chanting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/04/lazio-napoli-serie-a-match-halted-due-to-racist-chanting-kalidou-koulibaly>
Simone Zaza was sent off at the death for Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> who have now won 13 consecutive 
league games.

It was Gonzalo Higuaín’s 23rd goal of the season that propelled Napoli towards 
success at the Stadio Olimpico. The in-form Argentinian striker made it seven 
goals from his last five outings with a first-half strike, and José Callejón 
doubled the lead a few minutes later.

Fiorentina held on to third place thanks to Mauro Zárate, whose stoppage-time 
goal downedCarpi 2-1 in Tuscany.

The relegation-threatened club were within seconds of extending their unbeaten 
run to six games after Kevin Lasagna cancelled out Borja Valero’s early opener, 
but Zárate rescuedFiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> 
with a curling effort at the death.

Roberto Mancini’s ailing Internazionale beat Chievo 1-0 despite the best 
efforts of Andrea Seculin. Mauro Icardi’s goal separated the teams at San Siro, 
but the fourth-placedNerazzurri might have run riot if not for the heroics of 
Chievo’s goalkeeper.

Napoli have 53 points from 23 games, Juventus 51, Fiorentina 45 and Inter 44.

Milan followed up Sunday’s derby triumph with a 2-0 win at Palermo that 
brought them within six points of the Champions League spots.

Goals from Carlos Bacca and M’Baye Niang ensured Sinisa Mihajlovic’s men 
continued their steady rise up the table, with Roma (41 points),Internazionale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale> and Fiorentina now firmly 
in their sights. Roma won 2-0 at Sassuolo on Tuesday.

At the other end of the table, Hellas Verona celebrated a first victory of the 
season after recovering to defeat 10-manAtalanta 2-1.

Hellas triumphed at the 23rd time of asking thanks to goals from Luca 
Siligardi and Giampaolo Pazzini. Andrea Conti had givenAtalanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> the lead but the Bergamo side 
were weakened by the dismissal of their left-back Boukary Dramé.
 