
I read it on the bus one day when I was rehearsing Nick Grosso’s Peaches, 
directed by James Macdonald upstairs at the Royal Court. James was also doing 
Blasted and he gave me the part of Cate. I hadn’t done very much theatre at all.
Sarah’s writing was really shocking and surprising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/feb/23/guardianobituaries.lyngardner>. 
The first scene is quite naturalistic – you don’t expect it tobecome as extreme 
as it does <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/oct/28/theatre.stage>. Some 
of the stage directions are so striking: there are lines like “He eats the 
baby.” I was a bit worried about the blowjob scene. I didn’t know how we’d do 
some of the scenes in such a small, intimate space. But I was young and excited 
by it all.

Cate is a great character – the audience go into the play through her, 
experiencing the hotel room, her relationship with Ian and then the war through 
her eyes. I was fascinated by how Sarah had come to it all. I had no idea, when 
I first read it, what is was about and why she had written it.

At the read-through, some people at the Court were saying that it would be so 
dark and hard to do. But it was the opposite in rehearsals: we were all 
laughing all the time. The way I remember it, Sarah was there every day during 
rehearsals. She was really confident about her writing and had thought long and 
hard about the play. She was very pedantic about the grammar – what was a comma 
and what was a full stop. She was very bright and very funny; we were about the 
same age and got on really well. After Blasted I was in a production of Woyzeck 
that she directed.

The whole run of Blasted seemed to be charged with energy. I was shocked by 
the response from the critics – we weren’t expecting it at all. There was a 
real level of curiosity about the play. A friend of mine told me that she was 
in Manchester and a cab driver was talking about Blasted becauseStephen Daldry 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/about-us/artistic-directors/stephen-daldry/>, 
the Court’s artistic director at the time, had been talking toJack Tinker 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-jack-tinker-1360766.html>, 
one of its harshest critics, on Newsnight. It was incredible that such a small 
play had that sort of reach.


We sold out and there were queues around the block for returns. It felt like 
everyone was sitting up in their seats – although people would faint sometimes. 
On the last night, Pip Donaghy, who played Ian, cut his thumb badly while 
opening a bottle of champagne. He turned to the audience and said, “This is a 
dark play but not that dark – I’m going to get a plaster.” So I turned my back 
to the audience and waited for him to return. Then I had to redo the line after 
which my character is supposed to laugh and then cry hysterically. So I had to 
do it all over again!

There was talk of Blasted transferring to the West End. If we’d all been free 
I think it would have gone directly into a theatre. But I had another 
commitment so it didn’t happen. I do remember feeling quite relieved because it 
really is a dark play. It was only on at the Court for three or four weeks – I 
couldn’t have stomached a long run.

Lyn Gardner: Blasted was dismissed by a handful of critics but the 
conversation has changed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jan/12/sarah-kane-blasted-was-dismissed-by-critics>

A blast at our smug theatre: Edward Bond on Sarah Kane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/12/edward-bond-sarah-kane-blasted>

Sarah Kane: Why can’t theatre be as gripping as footie? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/12/sarah-kane-theatre-football-blasted>

 * Blasted is revived next month at the Other Room in Cardiff 
<http://www.otherroomtheatre.com/en/> and as part of Sheffield Theatres’ Sarah 
Kane season <http://www.sheffieldtheatres.co.uk/event/blasted-15/>  