
The funniest TV show I’ve ever seen 

The Soup <http://www.eonline.com/uk/shows/the_soup> remains one of the most 
consistently funny shows. The writing on that encouraged me to keep talking 
about celebrity culture in a smart way and feel like eventually I’d find an 
audience.

The funniest book I’ve ever read

Sara Pascoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/13/sara-pascoe-my-mum-has-heckled-me>
’s Animal: The Autobiography Of A Female Body. It’s vulnerable and reflective 
and will have you crying with laughter on the train. Sara is my friend and my 
hero and the genius voice of our generation. The thing that I am most grateful 
for in my life is that my young daughter has access to her.

Sara Pascoe: Animal review – God, pubes and glow worms in a fun, fresh show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/17/sara-pascoe-animal-review-soho-theatre-london>
The funniest joke I’ve ever heard

I don’t know who to credit because it’s just a meme I saw today, but it goes: 
Remember when your parents would say, “I’ll give you something to cry about” 
and you thought they were going to hit you but really, they were destroying the 
housing market?

The funniest person I know

All my friends are funny, but I can’t even look at Joe Lycett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/23/joe-lycett-edinburgh-festival-review-pleasance-courtyard>
 without laughing. If I was dying, I would want Joe to break the news to me. 
Because I would find it hilarious.

The funniest heckle I’ve ever had 

I was talking about Canada and a man shouted out that he’d been to Alberta to 
repair trucks. We had a chat about that and moved on. Forty minutes later, as I 
was wrapping up, he yelled “But what about the trucks?!” Obviously he’d 
expected that some meta-narrative about trucking would’ve materialised by now 
to eclipse the show. It hadn’t.

The funniest word

Garbage.

The funniest hairstyle I’ve ever had

I cut all my hair off the same year I got braces, almost like some form of 
protest against dating. My dad loved it.

The funniest sketch I’ve ever seen

A friend showed me clips of a New York collective called Three Busy Debras 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/the-three-busy-debras-interview-456> recently 
and it left me both captivated and terrified. Also, Rose Matafeo works on a New 
Zealand show called Funny Girls and you can find their sketch Career Girl 
online. It’s an advert for a board game aimed at girls with job ambitions. 
That’s my favourite one right now.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4uI0FGGRAmk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4uI0FGGRAmk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4uI0FGGRAmk&media=>
Katherine Ryan plays Hammersmith Apollo, W6, Saturday
 