
The world, his cameraman and a Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> supporters' bus from County 
Donegal came to Cumbernauld yesterday and this Lanarkshire new town did not 
disappoint. The occasion was described beforehand as a circus as often as a 
Scottish Cup tie, with the pictures beamed from Cork to China.

The reason was Roy Keane's debut for Celtic. But this was far better than 
anything Billy Smart could have staged. To say it was entertaining is an 
understatement that may not be beaten in the remainder of 2006.

This is the sort of place readers of Irvine Welsh might recognise but 
yesterday it was all sunshine and smiles. Not from Keane, though. This 
performance from Celtic was of the variety that made Manchester United's 4-1 
defeat at Middlesbrough in October look measured.

Keane's vitriolic reaction to that United effort ended with his departure from 
Old Trafford and explained why here in the land of Glasgow overspill he was 
participating in the famous Celtic huddle at five to one on a Sunday afternoon.

One imagines Keane's views on huddles would include the word "bollocks". That 
will definitely have been his private verdict of a Celtic debut that was 
utterly overshadowed by men fromClyde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/clyde> who earn as much as Â£150 per week.

In historic terms Celtic, the cup holders, have only to go back six years to 
recall a day of equal humiliation but it is hardly consoling. That was the 3-1 
home defeat in the same round of the same competition by Inverness Caledonian 
Thistle. It regenerated the "Super Caley Go Ballistic Celtic Are Atrocious" 
headline and spelled the end of the Kenny Dalglish-John Barnes management dream 
team.

Under Martin O'Neill Celtic lost again to Inverness in the Scottish Cup two 
seasons later - in the Highlands. But uncomfortably for O'Neill's successor 
Gordon Strachan there is a more recent gauge of embarrassment, this season's 
5-0 defeat in the Champions League qualifier by Artmedia Bratislava, Strachan's 
first game.

Strachan described Celtic's first-half display yesterday as "worse" than 
against Bratislava. He added he felt "disappointed" and "saddened" but not 
"humiliated". There were no public words from Keane, just a few silent 
handshakes on the final whistle and a gestured promise to exchange his No16 
jersey in the tunnel. Keane may have been contemplating the shock of the new.

Wearing an all-green strip as opposed to Celtic's hoops, Keane had got his 
first touch in Scottish football after two minutes. That was the same minute he 
administered his first complaint. It was directed at Stephen McManus, one of 
Celtic's centre-halves.

The Chinese loan signing Du Wei was McManus's partner and, like Keane, Du Wei 
was making his Celtic debut. An indication of how traumatic Du Wei found Clyde 
came in the question to Strachan afterwards about whether Du Wei would be 
retained. Strachan was diplomatic but the answer is surely "no way".

Du Wei was replaced at half-time yesterday. Celtic were 2-0 down and they were 
lucky it was not 3-0. Clyde had one legitimate goal disallowed, another 
correctly ruled out for offside and they missed a penalty.

The referee Kenny Clark gave Celtic the benefit of doubt all afternoon. Du Wei 
was twice the recipient; in the 15th minute he was shoulder-charged off the 
ball fairly by Tom Brighton - or Super Tommy Brighton as the Clyde fans know 
him. Having seen off Du Wei Brighton slid the ball into the back of the net 
only for Clark to give a free-kick to Celtic.

That was a bad decision but not as poor as some of those being made by 
Celtic's players. Relatively advanced at times in front on Neil Lennon, Keane 
might have been questioning his own decision-making. Real Madrid were playing 
Villarreal yesterday. And just how good are Burton Albion?

Soon Keane would be displaying that familiar arms-outstretched pleading pose. 
Then as he scurried to rescue a worrisome Clyde attack caused by John Hartson's 
careless header, Keane's tackle on Stephen O'Donnell inadvertently took the 
ball into the path of the left-back Eddie Malone.

Malone delivered a great cross but it was missed by everyone including the 
Celtic goalkeeper Artur Boruc. At the far post, however, Craig Bryson stole in 
to nod Clyde in front. All of Broadwood Stadium, well most of it, nodded at the 
justice of it.

That was the 32nd minute; three more passed before Du Wei upended Brighton in 
the Celtic area. Unquestionably it was a penalty, but would Clark dismiss Du 
Wei? No. Clyde fumed and the steam emerging from their ears roared out when 
Boruc dived to his right to save O'Donnell's penalty.

But a corner followed, O'Donnell took it and Clyde had their deserved second 
when Malone connected beautifully with O'Donnell's cross. A rasping volley left 
Boruc with no chance. Clyde's fans who had baited their rivals Partick Thistle 
from the kick-off now sang "Keano for Thistle".

Celtic had to improve in the second half, but it was marginal. With seven 
minutes left Maciej Zurawski pulled one back but there was to be no equaliser. 
Clyde, managed and organised superbly by Graham Roberts, had their victory and 
a fourth-round tie with another rising club, Gretna. The circus will have left 
Cumbernauld by then. For Keane it will continue a while yet.

Man of the match Eddie Malone (Clyde)

Keane clockwatch

3 min First touch is short pass to Stephen Pearson from Neil Lennon knock-back.

4 min Interchange with Paul Telfer on the right flank.

8 min Breaks up Clyde attack down left.

15 min Unhappy with mistake by the defender Du Wei which allows Tom Brighton 
to put the ball in the net for Clyde, though the goal is disallowed.

23 min Steven Masterton shot takes slight deflection off Keane but Artur Boruc 
saves.

24 min Denied shooting opportunity by the Clyde defender Neil McGregor.

32 min Unable to prevent Clyde taking the lead through Craig Bryson. 36 min 
First to congratulate Boruc for saving Stephen O'Donnell penalty but can do 
little about Eddie Malone's goal which makes it 2-0.

44 min First word with official Kenny Clark when he questions why foul was not 
given for challenge on Shaun Maloney.

45 min Clyde keeper Peter Cherrie makes good save from Keane header after 
Shunsuke Nakamura free-kick.

56 min Attempted link-up with John Hartson fails on the edge of Clyde penalty 
area.

62 min Great ball through the middle sets up Aiden McGeady but Celtic's 
substitute striker is off target.

71 min Tackle prevents an Alex Williams break.

90 min Poor cross cannot set up Maloney for a possible equaliser.
 