
Alcohol. Fun, isn’t it, for various reasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2016/nov/29/drink-and-be-merry-why-alcohol-makes-us-feel-good-then-doesnt>
. The Christmas holidays are a period ofparticularly heavy drinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/10/12-pubs-christmas-new-festive-craze>
 for many of the UK population, so much so that January often feels like one 
long national hangover. This often combines with the sense of “starting afresh” 
and the ritual ofNew Year’s Resolutions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/new-year-eve-resolution-tradition>
 and results in a period of abstention. In recent years, it’s become 
fashionable to swear off alcoholfor the whole of January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2016/jan/05/alcohol-abstain-dryathlon-dry-january-health-science-spoof>
, often (but not always 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/feb/08/abstinence-campaigns-charities-dry-january-stoptober-fundraising>
) as part of an overall effort to improve general fitness and lose weight.

But, is this necessary? Or is it possible to have your pint and down it, and 
lose weight while carrying on indulging in the booze?

On paper, it looks like a big ask. It’s easy to see why people find giving up 
drinking a bit of a challenge. It has pleasurable effects, it aidssocial 
interaction 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/ulterior-motives/201208/social-drinking-helps-people-get-along>
, in the UK at least it’s often expected that you’ll drink at social occasions, 
and if you’re a regular drinker then you’re brain and body will likely have
adapted to expect a regular intake 
<http://www.alternet.org/it-habit-or-addiction-what-happens-your-brain-when-you-start-get-hooked>
.

But all this comes at a cost to the body. Alcohol is second only to fats in 
terms of the amount ofenergy per mass it contains 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Food_energy>. In plain English, alcohol delivers 
about 7 caloriesper gram consumed (fat delivers closer to 9 calories per gram). 
And that’s just the pure alcohol, the ethanol, in your drink. The stuff around 
it (the beer, the stout, the cocktail ingredients, the mixers)add substantially 
more 
<https://www.caloriesecrets.net/low-calorie-alcoholic-drinks-drink-wisely-without-gaining-weight/>
. What’s more, these are “empty” calories. The point of drinking is to get the 
intoxicating effect, not to nourish the body in some way, so physiologically 
we’rejust pouring pointless calories 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/alcohol/Pages/calories-in-alcohol.aspx> down our 
throat.

However, scientific analysis offers some way to potentially “game the system”, 
and not just lose weight while continuing to drink, but use the effects of 
alcohol to increase your chances of getting in shape! Here are a few 
suggestions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fkeep-lit-how-to-lose-weight-without-giving-up-alcohol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27e4b3133d0c299602f37196a443a267a8fad496%2F0_68_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Keep%20lit%3A%20how%20to%20lose%20weight%20without%20giving%20up%20alcohol%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fkeep-lit-how-to-lose-weight-without-giving-up-alcohol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Keep%20lit%3A%20how%20to%20lose%20weight%20without%20giving%20up%20alcohol%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fkeep-lit-how-to-lose-weight-without-giving-up-alcohol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27e4b3133d0c299602f37196a443a267a8fad496%2F0_68_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 If you stir kale into your shots, it counts as a superfood. Probably. 
Photograph: Courtesy of Juice Crawl 
Pub runs

One of the problems with drinking from a weight-gain perspective is that, as 
well as pointless calories, it also involves very little physical movement. 
Sitting down and talking for hours isn’t exactly good cardio. You need to 
engage in a lot more physical movement if you wantto burn off those calories 
<http://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/weight-loss/in-depth/metabolism/art-20046508>
.

So, if you really do fancy a drink, don’t stroll to the local, jog there. In 
fact, don’t go to your local, pick a pub on the other side of town and jog 
there instead. Or pick several pubs and sprint from one to the next each time 
you finish a drink, more of a pub sprint than a pub crawl. This has the added 
bonus of, at the end of the night, if you arrive at the last pub red-faced, 
struggling to speak or walk, you’ll fit right in.

You might look at this and decide it’s not worth it just for a drink so opt to 
stay in. If so, fine. That’s good for your health too. So really, you can’t 
lose here.

Indulge in impulsivity

One thing alcohol is known to do is make people more impulsive. The complex 
interaction between alcohol and our brainsand genes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/17/gene-mutation-htr2b-linked-impulsive-behaviour-alcohol>
 means our higher-reasoning areas and those that supress impulsivity are often 
hampered by drink, resulting in us doing and saying things we’d normally shy 
away from.

You can exploit this effect to improve your health by signing up for fitness 
classes, marathons,Tough Mudder runs <https://toughmudder.co.uk/>, and things 
like that. You may have consumed a lot of empty calories but thanks to drink 
you’re now going to burn those off, and then some.

Obviously, once you sober up, you could just change your mind. It’s harder 
than you think though, as our brains are reluctant togo back on a decision once 
it’s made <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low-ball>. This is especially true if 
you madethe decision in front of people 
<https://psychcentral.com/encyclopedia/normative-social-influence/>, who will 
now think worse of you if you go back on it.

When you wake with a pounding head saying “What the hell did I agree to last 
night?”, it may well have been good for you in the long run.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fkeep-lit-how-to-lose-weight-without-giving-up-alcohol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ca3e1601ef3d3fc280b763d3186677c6fe69d94%2F0_79_5481_3289%2F5481.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Keep%20lit%3A%20how%20to%20lose%20weight%20without%20giving%20up%20alcohol%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fkeep-lit-how-to-lose-weight-without-giving-up-alcohol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Keep%20lit%3A%20how%20to%20lose%20weight%20without%20giving%20up%20alcohol%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fkeep-lit-how-to-lose-weight-without-giving-up-alcohol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ca3e1601ef3d3fc280b763d3186677c6fe69d94%2F0_79_5481_3289%2F5481.jpg>
 Interesting fact - people often look the same after a heavy workout session as 
they do after a heavy drinking session Photograph: ronstik/Getty 
Images/iStockphoto 
Embrace the anger

One other unpleasant effect of alcohol, which ties in with greater 
impulsivity, is an increase in irritability and anger. There aremany 
neuropsychological explanations 
<http://www.choosehelp.co.uk/topics/anger-management/why-does-drinking-release-the-rage-understand-alcohol-related-anger-and-aggression>
 for this; an inability to correctly work out people’s intentions from their 
behaviour, a drop in ability to plan actions and predict consequences, 
releasing pre-existing stresses and issues that you usually supress, and so on.

One consequence of increased anger is an increase in “approach” motivation. 
The brain seems to have two separate motivations systems,approach and avoidance 
<http://link.springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.1007%2F978-1-4419-1428-6_1749>. 
Things we want to deal with, we’re motivated to approach. Things we are wary or 
scared of, we’re motivated to avoid. Anger increases the power of the approach 
system, meaning we “get stuck in” where we otherwise wouldn’t.

So, if you’re drunkenly tempted to pick a fight with the biggest bruiser in 
the room, go ahead. The realisation of what you’ve done will soon get through 
your alcohol-infused brain, triggering an adrenaline-rushfight-or-flight 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fight-or-flight_response> response. You’ll have 
no choice but to get moving to stay ahead of the enraged beast, burning many 
calories as he chases you with a pool cue.

Blank the workout

Alcohol, at the right doses, can and does disrupt the ability to form new 
memories 
<https://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/arh27-2/186-196.htm?ictd%5Bmaster%5D=vid~871b3daa-bfa6-4811-bd8c-cc00c7cd147e&ictd%5Bil726%5D=rlt~1424993007~land~2_4757_direct_>
. So, if you have a gym session or exercise routine planned, you could dry 
quickly getting so drunk beforehand your brain can’t form new memories, but you 
can still complete your workout before passing out from intoxication. When you 
eventually wake up, you should have no memory of exercising, so will think you 
still need to do it. Voila; you get to drink and actuallydouble the exercise 
you partake in.

It’s a delicate balancing act though, to get the timing and intake just right 
to hit that narrow window of usefulness. So practice is needed, which may well 
render the whole thing pointless.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fkeep-lit-how-to-lose-weight-without-giving-up-alcohol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b88268fbe469c45bb713aad506e11d76b1c0342%2F550_73_2892_1735%2F2892.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Keep%20lit%3A%20how%20to%20lose%20weight%20without%20giving%20up%20alcohol%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fkeep-lit-how-to-lose-weight-without-giving-up-alcohol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Keep%20lit%3A%20how%20to%20lose%20weight%20without%20giving%20up%20alcohol%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fkeep-lit-how-to-lose-weight-without-giving-up-alcohol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b88268fbe469c45bb713aad506e11d76b1c0342%2F550_73_2892_1735%2F2892.jpg>
 Wine is made from grapes. Grapes are a fruit. Fruit is good for you. So, 
therefore...

I’ll be honest, I’m really reaching here. Photograph: Thorben Maier / Alamy 
Stock Phot/Alamy Stock Photo 
Try moderation

You may think all these suggestions fall into the category of “terrible” or 
maybe even “downright hazardous to health, life and liberty”. And you’d be 
right.

Truth is, alcohol isn’t ever really going to be helpful if you’re trying to 
lose weight and get in shape. That’s just not how our bodies work. But that 
doesn’t mean youhave to cut it out entirely. Each to their own, and many people 
justcut down and/or increase their physical activity 
<https://prettyfeetpoptoe.com/2016/12/31/forget-your-faddy-diet-plans-how-i-dropped-three-stone-and-kept-boozing/>
, or some combination of the two. You need to find what works for you.

Of course, this involves navigating the onslaught of “expert” advice and 
trendy “diets” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2015/mar/17/paeleo-diet-new-from-science>
 we are bombarded with at this time of year. It’s enough to drive you to drink.

Dean Burnett ‘s book The Idiot Brain is available now in the UK 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/370462/s/idiot-brain/>
, USA 
<http://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/idiot-brain-dean-burnett/1122688091?ean=9780393253788#productInfoTabs>
, Canada <http://www.harpercollins.ca/9781443450065/the-idiot-brain> and many 
other countries.

He is appearing at Dry Humour 
<https://www.alcoholconcern.org.uk/Event/dry-humour-cardiff-2017>, an 
alcohol-free comedy night on Friday the 13th in Cardiff, in aide of Alcohol 
Concern <https://www.alcoholconcern.org.uk/>.
 