
It’s all about food on the go in Bangalore. The capital of Karnataka state is 
India’s silicon valley, and as such has attracted workers from all over India, 
and the world. It’s now one of the country’s most diverse cities, and 
entrepreneurs have begun satisfying this appetite for diversity by setting up 
food trucks – like their counterparts in the US and Europe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fbangalore-street-food-trucks-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F683f5bc9022161814b1815f92b1fe12497e74ee9%2F0_155_4412_2647%2F4412.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Keep%20on%20trucking%20%E2%80%A6%20Bangalore%E2%80%99s%20food%20cart%20boom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fbangalore-street-food-trucks-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Keep%20on%20trucking%20%E2%80%A6%20Bangalore%E2%80%99s%20food%20cart%20boom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fbangalore-street-food-trucks-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F683f5bc9022161814b1815f92b1fe12497e74ee9%2F0_155_4412_2647%2F4412.jpg>
 Le Casse-Croûte’s Monsieur Dupleix, a toasted sandwich with chicken curry and 
mayonnaise 
And following this fashion, many of Bangalore’s food trucks specialise in 
cuisine from America’s southern states. Jai Das runs theFuel Up food truck 
<http://fuelupfuelup.com/> with wife Deepthi at Bangalore’s Manayata technology 
park. A lunchtime queue of hungry workers snakes around the truck, and over a 
deliciously spicy burrito, Jai tells me: “Indians associate food trucks with 
American food, so our hot dogs and burgers are popular, but the Mexican dishes 
are best-sellers because there’s always lots of rice, which Indians love.”

However, the increasingly varied cuisine on offer reflects locals’ appetites 
for anything new. “Bangaloreans embrace different cuisines,” says Nishanth 
Rajkumar, co-founder of theAs On Fire truck <http://asonfire.com/>, which has 
its own wood-fired pizza oven. “They’re busy and want things quickly, which is 
why the concept is so successful.”

10 of the best restaurants and street food snacks in Goa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/nov/03/10-best-restaurants-street-food-snacks-goa-india>
Nishanth got his inspiration on a visit to Cambodia, where he spotted a street 
vendor selling fresh pizza. He went home and created Bangalore’s first pizza 
and barbecue food truck, but with an India twist – the menu includes paneer 
pizzas and fiery barbecue drumsticks. “We coat the chicken with my mother’s 
secret spice blend,” he says.

The food truck boom has attracted chefs from as far afield as France. Last 
September, three French ex-pats founded Bangalore’s first French food truck,Le 
Casse-Croûte <http://www.le-casse-croute.com/>. What’s their best-seller? The 
Monsieur Dupleix, a toasted sandwich with chicken curry and mayonnaise, named 
after the former governor of France’s Pondicherry territory.
 