
"Service with a Smile", Locum's January Genius, seems generally to have been 
well received, except by Ian of Bexley, who found the homophones involved so 
painful as to cause actual bodily harm, rather than a smile. But it threw up 
some liturgical debate. The instructions spoke of "a traditional series of 
eight" and the word traditional was there on purpose in order to rule out 
"modern" changes, such as the abolition of Prime by the Second Vatican Council 
in 1962, which reduced the number of canonical hours to seven, and the fact 
that Matins (or Mattins) may now also be called the Office of Readings.

However, we did not expect to find quite so many real traditionalists among 
you, for whom the last 1,000 years were nowhere near enough. Somewhere between 
the fourth and fifth century AD, it became established that there should be a 
night service, Vigils, and seven day offices, making a total of eight. By about 
the end of the fifth century, it seems, Vigils had become Matins (or Mattins). 
But, not wishing to seem prejudiced against the Dark Ages, we have allowed 
Vigils, as well as Matins (or Mattins), as an acceptable answer to the extra 
question asked.

The number of correct entries was respectable at 124, with the first received 
from Uxbridge, Middlesex at 0910 on the first day. There were two entries after 
the deadline, so may I remind you that we now have one? It is 2359 GMT on the 
Saturday before the first Monday of the following month: decoded, this means 
that the deadline for the February puzzle is 2359 GMT on Saturday March 3.

_____

Martyn from south-east London asked whether Chifonie was being brilliantly 
topical with his clue on January 26 (No 23,984, 1 across): "Jade is last seen 
in Senegal (8)" for SLATTERN [S<latter>N]. Like so many good things in life, 
the timing of the clue was entirely serendipitous; it was not intentionally 
making any reference to Big Brother and was not intended in any way to give 
offence to Ms Goody, of whose vacation plans Chifonie assures me he knew 
nothing.

_____

I have been taken to task by Jill B and others for writing in December that 
"The media is famously reluctant to admit error". As a general rule, it has 
always seemed to me that the quick admission of error avoids worse nastiness 
later. But, in this case, I am sticking to my guns on "media" and calling the 
Oxford Dictionary of English for the defence. It says: "The traditional view is 
that it [media] should ... be treated as a plural noun. ... In practice, in the 
sense of 'television, radio and the press collectively' it behaves as a 
collective noun (like staff or clergy, for example), which means that it is now 
acceptable in standard English for it to take either a singular or a plural 
verb." Collins and the Chambers 21st Century Dictionary both have similar, if 
admittedly slightly less wholehearted, defences of my position!

_____

Just in case you cannot get enough puzzles on line, you might like to know 
that the Guardian setter, Orlando, has launched a new offering at
crossword-crazy.co.uk/index.html <http://www.crossword-crazy.co.uk/index.html>. 
It has a daily Quick and Cryptic puzzle and an ingenious puzzle called 
Codewords, where you have to swap letters for numbers to complete the grid. 
There is also an archive of other puzzles and a range of aids for solvers, 
including a tutorial on solving cryptics. This site is in addition to the 
puzzles and pastimes at his existing site,thinks.com <http://www.thinks.com>. 
The new one is aimed more specifically at Brit crossword fans (and/or fanatics).

_____

I have been asked by what time you should by rights expect to be able to 
download each day's puzzles. In the light of past experience, you will 
understand my reluctance to offer hostages. The "system" has accepted that the 
existing crossword software is not "fit for purpose" and the process of 
replacing it is in train. That is the good news. The bad news is that we are 
talking months rather than weeks before it is bought, fitted, tested and 
running. Meanwhile, in principle, each day's puzzles are uploaded automatically 
at 0600 London time (GMT now, BST in the summer). So you should be able to 
download them from your computers, say, five minutes later. There is a 
re-upload at 0700 London time, in case there was some failure an hour earlier. 
So, if your puzzles are not available to you shortly after 0700 London time, 
something more serious has gone wrong, which may take a while to put right.

_____

Dave Tilley and John Henderson tell me that they have only a few copies left 
of "The Cunning Linguist", their tribute edition of Bunthorne puzzles. They are 
intending to send the proceeds to M�decins Sans Fronti�res at the end of 
February, so hurry while stocks last! Cost £5 + postage (£1 for UK, £2 for 
Europe, £3 for the rest of the world), orders by email to
bunthornebook@btinternet.com <mailto:bunthornebook@btinternet.com> or by mail 
to 15 Harley Wood, Todmorden, Lancs OL14 8HT, cheques to "Bunthorne Book" or 
payment by Paypal.

· Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor.
 