
Loris Karius will make his competitive Liverpool debut at Derby County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/derbycounty> on Tuesday with Jürgen Klopp 
claiming he does not have a No1 goalkeeper at Anfield.

The £4.7m summer signing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/24/liverpool-sign-loris-karius-mainz-goalkeeper-simon-mignolet>
 will start the EFL Cup third-round tie at the iPro Stadium having been 
sidelined at the start of the season by a broken hand.

Jürgen Klopp says Liverpool will press on following capital gains | Roger 
Chapman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-press-on-capital-gains-london>
Karius featured in pre-season when Simon Mignolet was on a break following 
Euro 2016 and, eight weeksafter sustaining the injury against Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/29/football-liverpool-loris-karius-breaks-hand-injured-chelsea>
, their competition to be Liverpool’s first‑choice keeper can commence with the 
23‑year‑old’s inclusion against Nigel Pearson’s struggling side.

Liverpool’s manager insists his decision to buy Karius from Mainz does not 
guarantee he will be preferred to Mignolet. But, despite the Belgium 
international’s encouraging form this season, Klopp admits the No1 position is 
not taken.

“Loris will play, if nothing happens,” Klopp confirmed. “He was a really 
strong Bundesliga goalkeeper and that means a lot. Germany is a goalkeeper 
country. We have no issue with goalkeepers. The best keeper in the world plays 
at Bayern Munich and is German. We have always had good ones, maybe not always 
the best in the world, but good ones.

“The German mentality is we like this job. The kids like to wear gloves. It’s 
good to be in goal for a Bundesliga team. I saw his way. He had a bad start at 
Mainz, when no one wanted him, to become an outstanding goalkeeper. We wanted 
him, I spoke to him and that is what we got.

“What we want is two really strong goalkeepers and that is what I think we 
have got. Loris had an advantage in pre-season but could not use it because of 
injury. In this moment Simon came back from the national team and did a 
brilliant job.

“I really don’t want to make a big battle of these two goalkeepers, why should 
I? Goalkeepers need to feel secure but you can’t play your whole life as a 
keeper without conceding goals.

“You will always feel a bit guilty, more or less, but you want a manager who 
will say you can still stay and feel confident. I can’t say ‘today, him and 
then today him’. The pressure on the players is big enough. I don’t have to 
make any more, they have to do their best and then when I have a feeling for 
something I will change, or not.

“It is not because we paid money for Loris and did not pay money last year for 
Simon that I make the decision.

“It is about what I see in training, and what I see is two very good 
goalkeepers and another for the future we gave to Huddersfield [Danny Ward]. 
The business is done for this position hopefully and now they have to perform.”

Ronald Koeman insists it is ‘crazy’ to consider Everton title contenders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/19/ronald-koeman-insists-it-is-crazy-to-consider-everton-title-contenders>
Mignolet has responded well to the threat posed by the arrival of Karius, 
although his distribution was an occasional and obvious source of irritation to 
the Liverpool managerduring the 2-1 victory at Chelsea on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/chelsea-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
. Klopp refused to confirm whether the former Sunderland goalkeeper would 
return to the team for the Premier League game against Hull City at Anfield on 
Saturday irrespective of Karius’s display at Derby.

He said: “Where is my possibility to answer? If I say ‘Yes’ what does that 
mean for Loris? If I say ‘No’ what does that mean for Simon? The question makes 
sense but the answer would not.

“There is no No1 at this moment, there is no decision, it is just about 
performing and showing how good you are. For all players it is the same. I 
won’t say someone is our centre-half for the next 15 months. It is about 
performing and improving. Show how much you can help the team.”

Liverpool will have Roberto Firmino available for the cup tie with the 
Brazilian forward back in training having missed the visit to Stamford Bridge 
with a minor groin problem. The Germany midfielder Emre Can, who has been 
sidelined by an ankle injury sustainedin the EFL Cup victory at Burton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/burton-albion-liverpool-efl-cup-match-report>
 last month, is also in contention for a recall.
 