
There has been so little to cheer for Leeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited> fans over the past decade or 
so that nights such as this are perhaps to be truly savoured. It was a far from 
vintage performance from Garry Monk’s side, but, really, that is the point; 
Leeds are not only winning tough, they are winning games that matter and as the 
season approaches its midway point, they find themselves thoroughly in the mix 
for promotion to the Premier League after a 12-year absence as they leapt into 
fourth place.

For Villa, this was a first loss in eight games under the stewardship of Steve 
Bruce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/13/steve-bruce-aston-villa-championship-sunderland-hull-birmingham>
, and the result means they lose ground on the play-off places after falling to 
a defeat sparked Kemar Roofe’s well-taken first goal for Leeds in a genuinely 
rare moment of quality in front of more than 32,000 fans.

The quality, or lack thereof, will matter little to Monk and Leeds. The 
manager’s office at Elland Road has welcomed more new faces in recent years 
than Leeds fans will care to remember, but, in Monk, there is strong evidence 
to suggest Leeds have finally got it right after another encouraging 
performance.

As Swansea fell to another catastrophic defeat in the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/tottenham-hotspur-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
, there will have perhaps been an envious glance at Monk’s progression in his 
new job following his departure from theSwans 12 months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/garry-monk-swansea-sacking>
.

“We’ve had a few games where we’ve not been at our best but you have to win 
different ways at this level,” Monk said. “These young lads are learning all 
the time and they understand it has to mean something to win at this level. 
It’s going well of course, but I’m very balanced.”

The first meeting between these two sides for 12 years – and the first outside 
the top flight since 1988 – was a cagey affair. The in-form Jonathan Kodjia was 
Villa’s most threatening outlet on a frustrating night for the visitors, but 
the closest he came was when he fired over during a fairly forgettable first 
half.

Leeds came close when Pontus Jansson headed over from six yards out, before 
the Swede provided a more important contribution six minutes from half-time, as 
he slid in to deny Gary Gardner after the midfielder had been set free by 
Ashley Westwood.

Half-time brought about a welcome improvement in tempo and intensity. The fact 
that a pitch invader’s mazy run around five hapless stewards was the most 
entertaining sight of the first 50 minutes spoke volumes about the quality in 
the final third up to that point, but chances for Albert Adomah and Westwood 
sparked the sides into life.

After Roofe had what, on first glance at least, seemed a decent penalty shout 
turned down, he broke the deadlock on 68 minutes after latching on to the end 
of a magnificent cross from Souleymane Doukara, sending the home fans – and 
Monk on the touchline – into raptures.

“It was important for him,” said Monk of Roofe, who had taken 23 games to 
score his first goal since signing from Oxford. “It has been coming. He has 
been unlucky not to [score], but his performances in recent weeks have really 
helped him, and helped the team.”

That goal prompted Bruce to call for the cavalry from the bench, with Gabriel 
Agbonlahor, Jordan Ayew and Jack Grealish all coming on, but it was Leeds who 
struck again late on, Chris Wood tapping in from close range to secure victory 
and enhance Leeds’s position in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> play-off places, as well as 
Monk’s burgeoning reputation in West Yorkshire.

“It’s been a great start but this game sums up the Championship,” Bruce said. 
“It’s not all about silky football, it’s about who makes the least mistakes and 
today, we’ve made a crucial one for the first goal – but there’s still 
everything to play for.”
 