
Kenny Jackett has become Rotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham> United’s fifth manager in the 
last 14 months after the club confirmed on Friday morning that the 54-year-old 
had been appointed on a three-year contract.

Jackett takes the reins at the New York Stadium following the sacking of Alan 
Stubbs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/rotherham-sack-manger-alan-stubbs-bottom-championship>
 on Wednesday and he is tasked with ensuring their Championship status. That 
will be no mean feat as he inherits a side already six points adrift of safety 
who have lost their last six games.

Rotherham sack manager Alan Stubbs with club bottom of the Championship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/rotherham-sack-manger-alan-stubbs-bottom-championship>
“It was probably the best interview I have had with somebody since I took over 
the club,” said Rotherham’s chairman, Tony Stewart. “Kenny was available and we 
acted swiftly because we knew that he has got the experience, he has managed a 
great club like Wolves and if you check the stats out his record is superb.

“We had a good feeling he would be right, then when we sat down to interview 
him I liked his enthusiasm. We talked about the players, the style of play and 
he was talking our language – he was talking Rotherham football.

“We had long meetings with him,” Stewart added. “He spoke with confidence and 
the board members who were present were very impressed with what he had to say, 
and what he could do for Rotherham United.

“I’m not looking for miracles, I’m looking for a guy that knows what he is 
doing and can get the systems working like we have seen in the past and start 
making statements in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>, but more importantly 
getting the points that we feel we’ve lost.”

Jackett has been out of work since leaving Wolves in the buildup to the new 
campaign and arrives in South Yorkshire with a wealth of experience, having 
taken charge of over 800 games.

He has managed in the Championship with Watford, Millwall and Wolves while 
also taking the latter two to promotion from League One – an achievement that 
may have been taken into consideration by the club’s board owing to their 
current plight.

Jackett’s appointment sees him become the fifth manager since September 2015, 
following in the footsteps of Steve Evans, Neil Redfearn, Neil Warnock and 
Stubbs. Stubbs was appointed on a three-year deal in June but became the club’s 
shortest serving manager, getting fired after just 14 games, and he leaves with 
statistically the worst record in the club’s history with a win ratio of just 
7%.

Jackett’s first game in charge will be Saturday’s Championship visit of 
Reading, where the Millers will hope to avoid equalling a club-record seven 
straight defeats in a single season.
 