
Kevin Gameiro scored twice after missing a first-half penalty to help Sevilla 
beat Celta Vigo 4-0 in the first leg of theirCopa del Rey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa-del-rey> semi-final on Thursday.

Gameiro had his penalty saved by Celta’s goalkeeper Ruben Blanco in the 28th 
minute, but made amends with goals from counterattacks in the 59th and 62nd 
minutes. His fellow Frenchman Adil Rami had putSevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> on the board with a header just 
before half-time, and the Danish midfielder Michael Krohn-Dehli rounded off the 
scoring in the 87th.

How ‘a historic humiliation’ left Gary Neville fighting for his Valencia 
future | Sid Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/04/gary-neville-valencia-job-barcelona-historic-humiliation->
Sevilla and Celta created good scoring chances from the start at the Ramon 
Sanchez-Pizjuan Stadium in Seville, but the hosts were in control for most of 
the match.

Blanco had made two difficult saves before Celta’s defender Sergi Gómez fouled 
Machín Vitolo inside the area to concede the penalty. But the goalkeeper 
stopped Gameiro’s spot-kick by diving to his left to make the save.

Rami finally opened the scoring with a header from a corner in the 45th 
minute, and Gameiro added his goals by taking advantage of the open space left 
by the Celta defence in the second half. Both times he started his run from 
Sevilla’s own half before getting in front of Blanco in one-on-one situations. 
Celta’s best chance was a header from Sergi Gómez that hit the crossbar in the 
first half.

It was the first of three games between Sevilla and Celta in a week. The teams 
will also meet in a Spanish league game on Sunday in Vigo.

Seeking their first Copa del Rey title, Celta made it to the semi-finals by 
upsetting Atlético Madrid in the quarters. The last time they reached the final 
was in 2001, when they lost to Real Zaragoza after eliminating Barcelona in the 
semis. Sevilla are the only team to have won all seven of their Copa del Rey 
matches this season. The team last won the competition in 2010. The second leg 
of the semi-final is next week in Vigo.

The defending champions ,Barcelona, routed Valencia 7-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/03/lionel-messi-luis-suarez-hat-tricks-barcelona-valencia>
 in the first leg of the other semi-final on Wednesday.
 