
Another football club has imposed a ban on another newspaper. 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2015/news/football-club-bars-weeklys-reporters-for-second-time/>
 The chairman of Swindon Town has decided that his club will not longer 
entertain the Swindon Advertiser, which is the second such arbitrary ban on the 
paper in a year.

This is but one of several examples of clubs banning journalists from their 
grounds. Others include Newcastle United, Port Vale, Rotherham United,
Nottingham Forest <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> and 
Crawley Town.

These bans were condemned by MPs in an early day motion in December 2013,  
<https://www.nuj.org.uk/news/mps-condemn-football-clubs-which-ban-the-press/>
which stated: “Journalists working for a free press in a democratic society 
must be able to express themselves as they see fit within the law, without fear 
of petty and vindictive corporate sanctions.”

Signed by 28 MPs, <http://www.parliament.uk/edm/2013-14/844> it called on the 
Premier League and Football Association “to implement a code of conduct in 
respect of the treatment of working journalists”.

Nothing came of it, of course. But, without wishing to equate the Charlie 
Hebdo murders with sporting bans, I think the media should stand together in 
“Je suis” fashion when clubs act high-handedly.

It is a denial of press freedom to impose bans. And when a club bans one 
outlet, the rest of the media covering that club should walk away as an act of 
solidarity.

I know that sports writers help each other out in such circumstances by 
passing on information gleaned at press conferences to their banned colleagues. 
That’s fine, but it doesn’t deal with the injustice itself.

Clubs, although they like to think otherwise, depend on media coverage. So, 
next time it happens, I’d like to see newspapers, broadcasters and bloggers 
acting in concert. It’s time to ban the banners by kicking this undemocratic 
practice into touch.

Sources: HoldTheFrontPage 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2015/news/football-club-bars-weeklys-reporters-for-second-time/>
/NUJ 
<https://www.nuj.org.uk/news/mps-condemn-football-clubs-which-ban-the-press/>/
Parliament <http://www.parliament.uk/edm/2013-14/844>

 