
The Australian production company behind commercial theatre shows such as 
Kinky Boots and Les Misérables has signed an agreement to prioritise hiring 
local actors over international talent.

The industry union has hailed the deal between Michael Cassel Group and the 
Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance “a groundbreaking first for Australian 
theatre”.

The three-year agreement comes into force this week and lays out transparent 
guidelines around the hiring of international actors with the aim of maximising 
employment of Australians.

John Polson: Tropfest lost its way and I take some responsibility
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/01/john-polson-tropfest-lost-its-way-and-i-take-some-responsibility>
The agreement was reached after Australian performers aired their frustrations 
about the casting of international performers over Australians in both lead and 
supporting roles in major local productions of Aladdin, Kinky Boots and the 
Book of Mormon.

The MEAA said they hoped the outcome would usher in the revival of “a rigorous 
consultation process” for the use of international talent across the entire 
Australian performing arts industry.


The agreement comes four years after Live Performance Australia terminated the 
foreign artists agreement 
<http://liveperformance.com.au/sites/liveperformance.com.au/private/files/resources/circ_11-12_wr.pdf>
, which placed restrictions on the use of international talent in live theatre, 
dance, drama, ballet, opera and musicals. The LPA said at the time that 
consultation with its member companies had yielded “a unanimous view that the 
agreement had outlived its usefulness 
<http://liveperformance.com.au/sites/liveperformance.com.au/private/files/resources/circ_11-12_wr.pdf>
”.

Actors, directors and playwrights, including Geoffrey Rush, Neil Armfield, 
Rachel Griffiths and David Williamson, opposed the termination of the foreign 
artists agreement in 2012,publishing an open letter 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/theatre-stars-want-foreign-performers-to-exit-stage-left-20120923-26fal.html#ixzz49AlGDtib>
 calling for LPA to reinstate the agreement.

Frustrations peaked again earlier this year when the highly sought-after role 
of Jasmine in the big-budget musical Aladdin was offered to American actor 
Arielle Jacob for its Australian season.

BuzzConf 2016: gaming and tech meets bush doof in country Victoria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/australia-culture-blog/2016/dec/01/buzzconf-2016-gaming-and-tech-meets-bush-doof-in-country-victoria>
Erin James, an actor and editor of AussieTheatre.com, wrote at the time the 
issue of local actors missing out on big roles was “an issue which really isn’t 
a new one 
<http://aussietheatre.com.au/blogs/erin-james/so-you-arent-happy-with-producers-importing-artists-onto-australian-stages>
 in our industry. It’s just becoming more relevant to artists right now 
because, well, what we feared would happen is actually happening.”

Live Performance Australia have been contacted for comment. 
 