
A remote arctic settlement, with a centre dominated by a car park, Kiruna 
feels like the sort of city that might be forgotten about. The place is eerily, 
unnervingly quiet; the streets so empty I half expect a tumbleweed to pass by 
as a punchline. At one point, the gentle silence is broken by a procession of 
Harley-Davidsons roaring through the town. They don’t seem to stop.

This is Sweden’s northernmost city, situated 90 miles into the Arctic Circle 
and a 75-mile drive away from the nearest town, Gällivare. Home to about 23,000 
people and 11,000 snowmobiles, Kiruna has gained an unlikely fame over the past 
year, as the world hears of its plans. This remote and rather unprepossessing 
place is to become the city that gets moved: two miles to the east, to be 
precise.

Kiruna’s current location hinges on the reason for its very existence, as well 
as its potential demise: this particular patch of Lapland – usually 
bright-white snow and reindeer – is, in fact, home to one of the largest iron 
ore deposits in the world. After theLuossavaara-Kiirunavaara Aktiebolag 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LKAB> (LKAB) mining company was established in 
1890 and a railway to the area built, the city was founded in 1900. Kiruna grew 
quickly, and so did the mine.

But now the extent of the mining is threatening the city itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/oct/22/kiruna-sweden-town-moved-east-iron-ore-mine>
. The expansion of LKAB’s mining activity is leading to ground subsidence that 
is causing buildings to crack and collapse – and it will only get worse.

They will fail dramatically. They are threatening the very existence of Kiruna
Timo Vilgats, of the local Green Party  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437668038015%2F4171f054-9e14-4d8a-8c28-562834e13cb0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kiruna%3A%20the%20arctic%20city%20being%20knocked%20down%20and%20relocated%20two%20miles%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kiruna%3A%20the%20arctic%20city%20being%20knocked%20down%20and%20relocated%20two%20miles%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437668038015%2F4171f054-9e14-4d8a-8c28-562834e13cb0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kiruna’s new city centre. Photograph: White architects 
In a highly unusual case of urbanism, the whole town centre and its 
surrounding neighbourhoods are to be demolished – and rebuilt at LKAB’s expense 
two miles away, leaving behind some unaffected areas which will now become the 
western edge of the new city. The 3,050 homes that would be affected by the 
impact of the mining – in addition to shops, offices, schools, the city hall 
and the hospital – will all be bought by LKAB, knocked down and relocated. The 
process of moving the city will happen in phases, with the majority estimated 
to be completed by 2040.

As I arrive, a series of government-organised public events is drawing to a 
close that celebrate “Kiruna in transformation”. On a sunny, bright Saturday, a 
stage and tent sit on a vacant piece of land outside of the city. What feels 
like an underwhelming festival is in fact an opportunity to get people thinking 
more about their moving town: this particular spot overlooks the future centre 
of Kiruna. A group of runners arrive, having raced in a special marathon from 
the existing centre – perhaps to demonstrate how close the new city will be.

It’s not the first time that Kiruna has had to demolish buildings for the 
mining to increase. “But never on this scale and never the city centre,” Peter 
Niemi, Kiruna’s municipal chief executive, tells me at the event. If the mining 
is set to continue, I wonder, is a move of only two miles enough to keep the 
town safe? “As far as we know,” Eva Ekelund, head of the department of land and 
development, replies, “but iron is under the new town centre, too.” So could 
the city move again in another 100 years? “It will be too expensive for LKAB to 
move the city again,” Peter says simply.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437481348437%2F322d8b46-da2d-4b40-ac21-8680219e10a5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kiruna%3A%20the%20arctic%20city%20being%20knocked%20down%20and%20relocated%20two%20miles%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kiruna%3A%20the%20arctic%20city%20being%20knocked%20down%20and%20relocated%20two%20miles%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437481348437%2F322d8b46-da2d-4b40-ac21-8680219e10a5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Apartment blocks due to be demolished in Kiruna’s town centre. Photograph: 
Francesca Perry 
Kiruna is not the only place LKAB is having to spend money in order to move 
neighbourhoods away from a mine. Roughly three miles away from Gällivare, 
Kiruna’s closest neighbour, is Malmberget. LKAB has another major iron ore mine 
there, and its impact on the environment is forcing a similar process of 
relocation. Buildings have been moved in a piecemeal way for 50 years as a 
result of a huge hole opening up in the centre of the town. But the plan is for 
Malmberget to be relocated “almost completely” to neighbouring Gällivare, 
explains Anders Lundgren, development manager for LKAB. Unlike Kiruna, which 
just has to move down the road, Malmberget and its community will be 
assimilated into another town entirely.

The first stage of Kiruna’s move will be the building of the new central area: 
a town hall named “the Crystal”, with 10 surrounding blocks of shops, homes, 
offices, hotels and public space. A high school, college, hospital, public 
swimming pool and a cultural centre with a library are also planned. Designed by
White architects following a competition 
<http://www.white.se/en/project/268-the-new-kiruna>, this first phase of the 
new city centre (which the firm calls“Kiruna 4-ever” 
<http://www.white.se/en/project/268-the-new-kiruna>) should be ready by 2019. 

Kiruna is shrouded in darkness and snow for much of the year. My visit falls 
in summer, but there is a bizarre atmosphere in a snow town without its snow. 
Look for a bustling centre of the city, a public space where people come 
together, and you will be left searching. The town hall sits on a motorway. A 
hotel overlooks a large car park dotted with vehicles. A parade of shops – 
seemingly unchanged in the last 20 years – leads you to yet another car park 
without bumping into a single person. Considering this, it is no wonder that 
the plans take on a completely new design. “We want to build something that’s 
more special than what we have today: a more attractive town,” says Peter. 
“Today the town centre is a parking lot. It won’t be like that in the new city.”

For 15 years, we have been trying to move to the city centre – but now the 
centre is coming to us
Mikael, a local resident  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437482513249%2F9bbbdcfc-7463-4c58-beb2-d5e3c2412667-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kiruna%3A%20the%20arctic%20city%20being%20knocked%20down%20and%20relocated%20two%20miles%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kiruna%3A%20the%20arctic%20city%20being%20knocked%20down%20and%20relocated%20two%20miles%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437482513249%2F9bbbdcfc-7463-4c58-beb2-d5e3c2412667-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Houses in the east of Kiruna that will be safe from demolition. Photograph: 
Francesca Perry 
In the meantime, demolition of apartment blocks in Kiruna’s centre has already 
begun. Twenty one selected buildings – chosen, I am told, in consultation with 
citizens – are to be retained and moved. “It’s important to have old buildings 
as part of the new city, too, otherwise it is built quickly and all looks the 
same,” Eva says. “More buildings could be moved depending on the owners and 
structural conditions,” she explains. “But many will be destroyed.”

LKAB is currently negotiating with the owners of the buildings that need to be 
demolished: the company will either pay for the house or replace it with a 
similar one in the new city. “One person refused to sell their house and is 
going to court,” Eva says. “But most citizens are very positive.” Nevertheless, 
it didn’t take long to discover the core group of citizens who oppose the move. 
As soon as I say goodbye to Peter and Eva, I am whisked aside.

“They will fail dramatically. They are threatening the very existence of 
Kiruna.” Timo Vilgats and Gunnar Selberg, from the local Green Party and Centre 
Party respectively, are among those staging a “peaceful protest” at the event 
to share concerns about the city’s plans. “In 1934, people in Kiruna had a 
vision that God would send a boat to pick them up, so they sold their houses 
and waited for the boat,” Timo recounts. “But nothing happened. This will be 
the same. People have been forced out of their homes. The local government 
hasn’t asked for guarantees from LKAB that they will be rebuilt, and they’re 
not providing guarantees themselves.” Mikael, a local teacher I speak to at the 
event, agrees: “I’m concerned that the iron ore prices are going down, which 
implies LKAB are running out of money. I’m worried that they will destroy the 
buildings in the city and not have enough money to rebuild them.”

Their fears are not simply that people’s homes will go unbuilt. There is 
another concern if they are constructed: affordability. As these homes will be 
new builds, rents will be more expensive. But LKAB insist they are planning to 
help make up the difference. “We will give the tenants a lower rent for just 
over five years when they move to a more expensive apartment,” explains 
Lundgren.

But Timo and Gunnar aren’t convinced. “In bigger cities, there are 
alternatives if you can’t afford the higher rents,” they explain. “But here 
there is no choice. You would have to move away from the city altogether.” 
Considering Kiruna’s remote location, that would be quite a move – and many of 
the city’s residents rely on the mine as a primary source of employment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437481678046%2F559b5ec0-837c-4d6a-829b-c9536d084757-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kiruna%3A%20the%20arctic%20city%20being%20knocked%20down%20and%20relocated%20two%20miles%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kiruna%3A%20the%20arctic%20city%20being%20knocked%20down%20and%20relocated%20two%20miles%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437481678046%2F559b5ec0-837c-4d6a-829b-c9536d084757-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kiruna’s church, which will be dismantled and reassembled in a new location. 
Photograph: Francesca Perry 
“Nobody is asking the people about these plans,” Timo and Gunnar complain. But 
is that really the case? “We asked the citizens which buildings meant something 
to them,” says Marianne Nordmark, Kiruna council’s information officer. “A 
couple of years ago we ran a project to ask citizens what they liked about the 
city today and what they want in the new city,” she adds. What the respondents 
wanted, apparently, was a new central square with shops and meeting places and 
a cultural centre. “Citizens felt they don’t really have that today. Right now 
it’s spread out.”

Sam Keshavarz, a landscape architect from White architects who is working on 
the project, explains that they have been working with citizens to discuss the 
public space design. “We want the public to be very involved and make these 
public spaces their own,” he says.

Mostly, everyone is surprisingly matter-of-fact about the whole thing, as if 
opposing the plan or finding fault with it simply isn’t necessary or realistic. 
What’s more, not everyone has to move. “We are lucky we are not affected, we 
don’t have to move because we live on the eastern edge of the city,” Mikael 
explains. “For 15 years, we have been trying to move to the city centre – but 
now the centre is coming to us!”

“There might be some concerns, but the mine has to keep operating, so the city 
needs to move” Annette, a local resident, says brightly. This, it seems, is the 
general mood of the town’s residents. The mine defines, dominates and sustains 
the city: what the mine wants, the mine gets. The continuance of its operations 
is vital both to the local economy as well as community.

If the mine needs the town to move, then that’s just what will need to happen
Kostas  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437481544517%2Fb3054015-4586-4c92-b8fa-700576d8cfca-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kiruna%3A%20the%20arctic%20city%20being%20knocked%20down%20and%20relocated%20two%20miles%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kiruna%3A%20the%20arctic%20city%20being%20knocked%20down%20and%20relocated%20two%20miles%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fkiruna-the-arctic-city-being-knocked-down-and-relocated-two-miles-away%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437481544517%2Fb3054015-4586-4c92-b8fa-700576d8cfca-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The view of the mine in the distance from the city centre. Photograph: 
Francesca Perry 
“Most know that the town relies on the mine, so if the mine needs the town to 
move, then that’s just what will need to happen,” says Kostas, who works in 
Kiruna’s tourist office. “Other people have concerns, but they’re not trying to 
stop it.” Those working in Kiruna’s local tourism industry, Kostas explains, 
are largely pleased about the move as it gives the city an opportunity to shape 
a new identity that isn’t solely based on the mine.

But what of those who have to move? The town’s church is one of the 21 
buildings that has been selected to be saved and relocated to the new city 
centre – understandably, considering it was voted the country’s most beautiful 
public building by the Swedish people. Due to its design, the church will need 
to be carefully deconstructed, wooden beam by wooden beam, and painstakingly 
reassembled in its new location.

The church sits atop a hill, overlooking the mine across the valley, as if 
competing for prominence – a battle it seems to have lost. But Lars Jarlemyr, 
the minister of the church I speak with on a Sunday afternoon, is not fazed by 
the building’s relocation.“People aren’t really worried now. And the building 
will stay here for another 10 years,” he says. I wonder whether this is the 
crux of the lack of concerns: that the move itself still feels far enough in 
the future to be quite abstract.

Radioactive city: how Johannesburg’s townships are paying for its mining past
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/06/radioactive-city-how-johannesburgs-townships-are-paying-for-its-mining-past>
Lars is the only person I meet whose house has to be demolished. He concedes 
that the newly built apartment block he will move to will be more expensive to 
live in. “I’m not worried but there are people who are concerned about where 
they’re going to live.” What troubles Lars is not the buildings – they can 
easily move, he says. It is the social networks and relationships in the town 
that he hopes will not be affected by the city’s changes.

As I am driven around the city by retired resident Reinhold Brynefall and his 
wife, places affected by the move are pointed out to me. “Behind these houses,” 
Reinhold says, gesturing to a row of colourfully painted wooden homes, “that’s 
where the line of demolition goes up to.” The people living on one road are 
safe, their neighbours on the parallel street are not. It strikes me that the 
buildings may not be the only things lost. Will a division be created? “I think 
there will be two cities,” a check out girl at a supermarket in the city centre 
tells me. “The old city and the new city. So that might be a problem.”


Kiruna is a town whose lifeblood is the mine it grew up around. Clearly, there 
are hopes that this massive transformation will draw people together rather 
than push them apart. “We have lived side by side for 125 years,” Peter says at 
the event, “so when we move, we move together.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 