
Kit Harington, the Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> star who found 
himself at the centre of a row over theatre audiences’ behaviour this week, has 
said criticising young fans could kill theatre.


Harington rejected claims made by award-winning theatre producer Richard 
Jordan in The Stage 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/opinion/2016/richard-jordan-is-this-worst-west-end-audience-ever/>
 that audiences had behaved inappropriately at the final night of hisDoctor 
Faustus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/26/doctor-faustus-review-kit-harington-duke-of-yorks-theatre-game-of-thrones>
 at London’s Duke of York’s theatre.

Harington, who rose to fame as Jon Snow in the TV series, said: “I am afraid 
that, if the theatre is going to die of anything, it will be from exactly this 
type of stereotyping and prejudice aimed towards a new and younger generation 
of theatregoers.

“I have been a theatregoer since childhood and I didn’t feel that our 
audiences were disrespectful in the slightest. In the whole run of 10 weeks, I 
can count one time that a phone went off in the audience.

Game of Thrones fans 'ruined theatre show by eating chicken nuggets'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/13/games-of-thrones-fans-ruined-theatre-chicken-nuggets-kit-harington>
“Of course pictures were occasionally taken, as unfortunately cannot be 
avoided in any audience anywhere today, but on the whole it was not a huge 
amount and definitely not off-putting as a performer. I found our audiences to 
be hugely enthusiastic, energised and responsive. I can’t think of a greater 
support I’ve had as an actor on the stage.”

Jordan wrote that television audiences enticed to the West End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/westend> by big stars were ruining the 
experience for others by talking, eating loudly and answering their mobile 
phones.

“What amazed me most was this audience, many of them Game of Thrones fans, 
could see nothing wrong in talking, eating and taking pictures throughout the 
show – or complaining when asked to stop,” he wrote inThe Stage 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/opinion/2016/richard-jordan-is-this-worst-west-end-audience-ever/>
.

“A couple saw nothing wrong in producing from their bag a box of McDonald’s 
Chicken McNuggets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/13/games-of-thrones-fans-ruined-theatre-chicken-nuggets-kit-harington>
 and a large side of fries. At the interval, they had popped out and purchased 
these to consume through the second half.

“Munching certainly seemed to be the order of the day. The couple to my left 
ate their way through a large tub of popcorn during act I, while the couple on 
my right chomped through a packet of crisps. It was like listening to eating in 
Dolby Stereo, and sadly at the expense of being able to properly hear the lines 
being spoken on stage.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fkit-harington-game-of-thrones-defends-theatregoers-criticised-for-eating-and-talking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a288f5a9b1c137cd980eb9dd9d8ad8d789550e7%2F0_51_2584_1551%2F2584.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kit%20Harington%20defends%20theatregoers%20criticised%20for%20eating%20and%20talking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fkit-harington-game-of-thrones-defends-theatregoers-criticised-for-eating-and-talking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kit%20Harington%20defends%20theatregoers%20criticised%20for%20eating%20and%20talking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fkit-harington-game-of-thrones-defends-theatregoers-criticised-for-eating-and-talking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a288f5a9b1c137cd980eb9dd9d8ad8d789550e7%2F0_51_2584_1551%2F2584.jpg>
 Harington said: ‘If the theatre is going to die of anything, it will be from 
exactly this type of stereotyping and prejudice.’ Photograph: Marc Brenner 
Others in the arts world agree that audience behaviour has declined, but say 
that young people are not the worst – or only – offenders.

Anthony Biggs, artistic director of the Jermyn Street theatre in central 
London, said: “The issue of young people misbehaving at the theatre is a 
complete red herring. I don’t know why critics are demonising them. Every time 
you go to a West End theatre, you see people texting, talking on their phones 
and eating. Age has nothing to do with it any more.”

Biggs did not believe that theatres had to put up with this behaviour to keep 
audiences. He said: “The West End is doing better than ever. There’s no 
shortage of audiences, so theatres should not shy away from being strict about 
enforcing standards.

“If you want to stop young people using their phones, you have to be 
draconian,” he added. “The best way to do that is to say you’ll physically 
remove offenders from the theatre, but that’s not realistic: it’s more 
draconian to get someone out of the auditorium during a performance than it is 
to ignore what’s going on.”

Instead, Biggs said, theatres should install phone blocks that prevent devices 
from working in auditoriums, stop selling noisy food and embarrass anyone who 
continues to offend by training a spotlight on them during performances. 
“There’s nothing more effective than public embarrassment,” he added.

But bad behaviour is not inevitable among audiences, even those that have 
never been to a theatre before, saidWendy Spon, casting director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/may/21/casting-directors> for the 
National Theatre. “The young people who came to see Daniel Radcliffe in Man and 
Superman at the National recently behaved perfectly well,” she said. “I would 
think there were lots there who were at the theatre for the first time and 
there were no problems at all.”

Kit Harington in Doctor Faustus: lewd, crude and essential for the West End
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/may/02/kit-harington-faustus-west-end-jamie-lloyd>
Gary Sullivan, a theatre producer and director, agreed that bad behaviour was 
not limited to younger audiences. He said, however, that theatres were to blame 
for falling standards, not the public.

“It’s not just young people: people in general can’t concentrate nowadays for 
two hours without checking their phones or eating something,” Sullivan said. 
“But theatres don’t help themselves by selling the nosiest of foods and 
theatregoers aren’t to blame for eating it: plays are on at lunchtime and 
dinnertimes, when people are hungry.

“If a play attracts younger audiences, then you have to accept that they’re 
probably just starting to learn about the theatre experience. Why are theatres 
so shy about helping them learn? Cinemas don’t have scruples about showing two 
or three short films about not using phones and that even the light of the 
screen is disturbing to others. Theatres should be equally robust.”

Richard Gresham, a frequent theatregoer, was moved to draw up the Theatre 
Charter <http://theatre-charter.co.uk/> in 2014, detailing expected audience 
behaviour: no rustling sweet wrappers, no mobile phones, definitely no eating 
McDonald’s. Attracting the signatures of more than 1,000 theatregoers, the 
charter has drawn support from numerous celebrities, including Stephen Fry.

“If Kit Harington <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kit-harington> defended 
his audience’s behaviour, then Kit has never sat in an audience and experienced 
it himself, because behaviour nowadays is atrocious. You can’t miss it,” said 
Gresham, who started his campaign because of the increasing use of phones in 
the theatre. More recently, he said, the consumption of food had become just as 
much of an issue.

“Theatres sell food and that encourages people to eat it and even go out in 
the interval and bring takeaways back in with them. Anything goes: Spud-U-Like, 
McDonald’s, sushi. I’ve seen it all,” he said. “I don’t want to discourage 
young people from going to the theatre, but they have to be taught how to 
behave. I don’t understand why people can’t sit still for two hours without 
eating, using their phones or chatting.”
 