
What?

Banana Surprise Yum Station (coolshop.co.uk, £18.99 
<https://www.coolshop.co.uk/product/banana-surprise-yum-station/AJ68NV>). Fruit 
secured in a cradle is hollowed by an annular cannula, with fillings injected 
via pipette.

Why?

Bananas aren’t stupid enough.

Well?

This week, a machine that lets you impregnate a banana – and this sentence is 
the least worst thing about it. To clarify, it burrows a hole through one, so 
you can pump it full of bespoke filling like you’ve always wanted. Mmmm. As 
with the best products, I can’t figure out its name: Banana Surprise? Banana 
Yumstation? They’re both Yewtree-alerting internet search terms, so it doesn’t 
matter. With its selection of catheters, the set resembles My First Urology Kit 
and is immediately harrowing to use.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fkitchen-gadgets-review-banana-surprise-yumstation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bbd2e432cac6888beb7de6b2e7c3cbd77955f58%2F0_0_2174_2347%2F2174.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kitchen%20gadgets%20review%3A%20Banana%20Surprise%20Yumstation%20%E2%80%93%20an%20insult%20to%20God&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fkitchen-gadgets-review-banana-surprise-yumstation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kitchen%20gadgets%20review%3A%20Banana%20Surprise%20Yumstation%20%E2%80%93%20an%20insult%20to%20God&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fkitchen-gadgets-review-banana-surprise-yumstation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bbd2e432cac6888beb7de6b2e7c3cbd77955f58%2F0_0_2174_2347%2F2174.jpg>
 Banana Surprise … child’s play? Photograph: Rhik Samadder 
To begin, I snip the tip and secure my fruit within a flange. The instructions 
don’t help. It’s hard to hear “put banana in the Yumstation”. Is this an adult 
episode of In the Night Garden, where Igglepiggle and Upsy Daisy get jiggy in 
the Pinky Ponk? I slide a tube inside the fruit, extracting it full of flesh. 
(“Put thumb over hole of tool before pulling,” says the booklet. I read the 
same advice in Cosmo as a curious teen.)

The instructions suggest filling the well with fruit, which is taking the 
pith. Other ideas include toffee, syrups or cream. So … why does the box have a 
picture of a banana overflowing with what looks like blood? The child hoisting 
her Bobbitt-ed herb aloft is a chilling image. It makes your blood run banana.

Reluctantly, I load the filling bottle with strawberry jam and pump it through 
a teat. I’m not sure how well I’m expecting any of this to turn out, but the 
result is not good. When I peel my banana, there is subcutaneous haemorrhaging. 
(Again: not a sentence I want on my medical record.) This happens time and time 
again, jam weeping everywhere. It’s impossible to accurately feed the curved 
tube through the fruit unseen without it poking out the side. Horrific. There 
are no winners. Poor bananas, already the buffoons of the fruit world without 
these Frankensteinian torments. This circumcision-slash-botched-injection set 
is aimed at kids, but only ones who need a distraction from torturing cats. The 
carpet and my mental health are both irreparably stained. It’s a banana 
surprise! Hahahaha!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fkitchen-gadgets-review-banana-surprise-yumstation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb693a4a4187458fd2dacc046e91ea87f3ff29525%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kitchen%20gadgets%20review%3A%20Banana%20Surprise%20Yumstation%20%E2%80%93%20an%20insult%20to%20God&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fkitchen-gadgets-review-banana-surprise-yumstation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kitchen%20gadgets%20review%3A%20Banana%20Surprise%20Yumstation%20%E2%80%93%20an%20insult%20to%20God&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fkitchen-gadgets-review-banana-surprise-yumstation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb693a4a4187458fd2dacc046e91ea87f3ff29525%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
 Rhik Samadder’s banana surprise – with jam. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the 
Guardian 
Any downside?

‘Bananas never tasted so good!’ the box says. Which is kind of an insult to 
God.

Counter, drawer, back of the cupboard?

There will be blood. 0/5
 