
KitKat lovers can eat happy in the knowledge that the chocolate bar will not 
be downsized to cut Brexit-related costs.

Dame Fiona Kendrick, Nestlé’s boss in the UK and Ireland, said the 
four-fingered version of the much-loved biscuit bar would not be reduced to 
three to lower costs.

“Not while I’m sitting here as chairman and CEO [chief executive],” she told 
BBC Radio 4’s Today programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qj9z>.

In November, the makers of Toblerone outraged fans by revealing plans to widen 
the gaps between the chocolate bar’s triangular chunks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/toblerone-gets-more-gappy-but-its-fans-are-not-happy>
 in an effort to avoid raising its prices. Mondelez International said higher 
costs for ingredients meant it was cutting the weight of two bars in 
Toblerone’s UK range. It has reduced 400g bars to 360g and 170g bars to 150g to 
maintain retail prices.

Kendrick said Nestlé would do all it could to absorb any price rises 
internally before passing them on to customers. “We want to make sure thatNestlé
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nestle> does everything it can to try 
and save costs and to ensure that we absorb as much as possible ourselves,” she 
said, adding that the company would not take risks with well-loved brands for 
the sake of short-term cost increases.

KitKat goes unprotected as European court rejects trademark case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/16/kit-kat-unprotected-european-court-rejects-trademark-case>
“We will look at every single opportunity to try and take costs out before we 
put pricing through and we will do that in a very responsible way. We’ve got 
fantastic, iconic brands and we’re not going to obviously do anything 
short-term in order to manage the immediate cost issues there.”

The pound has fallen sharply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/brexit-economy-falling-pound-rising-inflation-fuel-fears-brexit-watch>
 against other major currencies since the Brexit vote in June, making imports 
more expensive and driving up costs for UK manufacturers which buy raw 
materials and ingredients from abroad. The pound is down 17% against the dollar 
at about $1.23.

Economists including those at the Bank of England have said higher costs will 
increasingly feed through into consumer price inflation in 2017. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation>
 The headline inflation rate is expected to rise to about 3% next year from a 
current level of 1.2%.
 