
Two things are striking about Kyle Bartley: his size and his maturity. As he 
wanders down a corridor in the Billy Bremner Suite at Elland Road the 
25-year-old defender jokes about his 6ft 4in physique: “I think I’m still 
growing.” Taking a seat in a back room Bartley displays a self-ease gained from 
overcoming the challenges presented by his peripatetic career.

Leeds United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited>, who play 
Liverpool on Tuesday night in the EFL Cup quarter-final, is his sixth club 
since the debut for Arsenal in 2009. “Six clubs and my debut was at 18 so 
they’ve been over seven years,” he says. “It is tough – by the time I was 21 
I’d lived in Wales, England and Scotland. It’s something maybe other people 
don’t see or hear about on the outside but as a football player it’s part of 
the game and that’s what you get paid for.”

Liverpool’s Philippe Coutinho set for scan with ankle ligament fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/liverpool-philippe-coutinho-scan-ankle-ligament-damage>
Of his professional bow, against Olympiakos in a Champions League group game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/dec/09/champions-league-olympiakos-arsenal-match-report>
, Bartley says: “That was a long time ago now. My family was there, it was a 
great experience. I only found out the day before as one of the defenders got 
injured and I was thrown into it; but it was fantastic and I enjoyed it.

“I always remember Mikaël Silvestre sat me down before the game and said: 
‘Enjoy it, Kyle, you won’t get this moment back again, go out there and give it 
100%, and what will be will be.’ He was a fantastic guy and had a fantastic 
career. And I think as a young player that’s sometimes what you need – an older 
head and a few wise words.”

This is now Bartley’s role in Garry Monk’s Leeds team despite his relative 
youth: to be a strong dressing-room influence. After becoming the seventh 
manager of Massimo Cellino’s turbulent ownership Monk persuaded Bartley to sign 
on loan for the season; he had handed the player a three-year contract when 
Swansea City manager.

“Yeah, that was one of the things that got me really wanting to come here,” 
Bartley says. “He wanted me to be a leader, someone the lads can look up to. I 
try to help every day, especially the young ones, and make sure everyone’s as 
good as they can be.

“For me it was a really important time of my career, I needed to be playing 
games and playing games in the right way as well – so having his style and 
guidance really helped with my decision.”

Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> can expect Monk’s 
Leeds to take the contest to them at Anfield. “We like to give it a go, that’s 
for sure,” Bartley says. “But he stresses before every game to enjoy it, 
express yourself. At that same time winning is the most important thing, that’s 
all that matters.”

Football has been Bartley’s sole focus since a particularly young start at 
Fletcher Moss Rangers, the club that includes Danny Welbeck and Marcus Rashford 
as former players.

Bartley says: “I’ve got an older brother who’s a keen footballer. We were 
living in Withington [Manchester] at the time. I was three years old, quite 
big, and I talked my mum and dad into telling the football team I was five so I 
could play straightaway. So I started at three years old and absolutely loved 
it and thankfully here I am now.”

Bartley names two classy central defenders as favourites when he was younger. 
“Rio Ferdinand was always the one for me. Overseas – Fabio Cannavaro was one I 
really looked up to. It was fantastic how he was only 5ft 10 and yet was still 
one of most dominant centre-halves.

“From about 11 I went into defence. I was a striker before then, I liked the 
glory. Once I got to Bolton Wanderers they put me in defence and I really stood 
out.”

After two years there, Bartley, who was born in Stockport, was spotted by 
Arsenal. “When I was 15 I played in the Victory Shield for England and Arsenal 
had scouts there. It all happened quick, a few weeks later they contacted my 
parents. We discussed things and I made the move.

“At 15, moving south was a bit daunting but it was a massive club, great 
structure, and obviously a fantastic manager. It really helped me as a person 
and a player. I learnt a lot – on and off the pitch. Even now when I step out I 
try to play the game in the Arsenal mould.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fkyle-bartley-leeds-united-efl-cup-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3f4f71a333bcea47261b2d30f55370233032a15%2F0_132_2534_1520%2F2534.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kyle%20Bartley%3A%20Even%20now%20when%20I%20step%20out%20I%20try%20to%20play%20the%20game%20in%20the%20Arsenal%20mould&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fkyle-bartley-leeds-united-efl-cup-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kyle%20Bartley%3A%20Even%20now%20when%20I%20step%20out%20I%20try%20to%20play%20the%20game%20in%20the%20Arsenal%20mould&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fkyle-bartley-leeds-united-efl-cup-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3f4f71a333bcea47261b2d30f55370233032a15%2F0_132_2534_1520%2F2534.jpg>
 Kyle Bartley, left, then playing for Swansea, tussles with Arsenal’s Theo 
Walcott in a 2013 FA Cup tie. Bartley made one appearance for Arsenal in 2009. 
Photograph: David Davies/PA 
Bartley captained the reserves, won the 2009 FA Youth Cup and made that sole 
appearance under Arsène Wenger in a 1-0 defeat at Olympiakos. He was loaned out 
twice each to Sheffield United and Rangers before leaving permanently for 
Swansea in 2012. There he gained Premier League experience and, again, went out 
on a temporary basis to Birmingham City before rejoining Monk.

Now, Bartley craves stability. “I would like to settle down at one club, be 
first-choice, have a good stretch of years and really enjoy it. But at this 
moment I’m on loan and we’ll see what happens.”

He is proving a success at Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/leeds-rely-on-marco-silvestri-heroics-to-send-norwich-city-crashing-out>
. He was man of the match in Saturday’s 2-1 win at Rotherham United and is a 
key part of Leeds’ rise to fifth place in the Championship.

And, despite playing down Tuesday’s tie as “just another 90 minutes”, Bartley 
says: “It will be fantastic – especially a night game, under lights, a really 
good buzz.”

Philippe Coutinho, Daniel Sturridge and Adam Lallana may be injured but Jürgen 
Klopp can still select from a squad who include Roberto Firminio, Jordan 
Henderson and Sadio Mané. Liverpool are also second in the Premier League, 
having lost only once.

Bartley is calm regarding the challenge. “We know they’re a great team but if 
we’re great and they’re not, we’ve got every chance.”

Expect Bartley to offer a similar message to his team-mates before walking out 
at Anfield.
 