
Another year for Australian cinema, another three dozen films starring Shane 
Jacobson. Just kidding: he doesn’t even get a mention in the ten titles listed 
below.

The best of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/20/the-10-best-australian-films-of-2015>
 offered a motley array of titles, from heart-wrenching documentaries to the 
return of acertain dog of a certain colour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/25/red-dog-true-blue-review-a-splashy-sun-drenched-slice-of-australiana>
.

The 2017 lineup looks similarly eclectic. Here are ten films to look out for. 

Sweet Country, director Warwick Thornton 

Many of us watched director Warwick Thornton’s first feature film Samson & 
Delilah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/apr/11/samson-and-delilah-rewatching-classic-australian-films>
 in cinemas in 2009 and left clutching the walls. His highly anticipated return 
to the chair is a sun-splotched slice of Australiana, with a bullet: a cowboy 
drama about a young boy who witnesses an Aboriginal stockman kill a white 
station owner.


Australian westerns are surprisingly hard to come by (The Proposition and 
western-ish Chips Rafferty films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/13/the-overlanders-rewatched-ealing-studios-produced-australian-western>
 among the best) – even moreso those with an Indigenous flavour. On the 
guntotin’ heels of last year’sGoldstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/09/goldstone-review-a-masterpiece-of-outback-noir-that-packs-a-political-punch>
, let’s hope this become a trend.

Ben Elton: there is no wisdom involved in being massively wealthy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/26/ben-elton-on-arts-funding-put-the-money-into-grassroots-the-high-end-will-look-after-itself>
Three Summers, director Ben Elton

Deborah Mailman, Magda Szubanski and Michael Caton appear in the first 
Australia-set film from British novelist and veteran crack comedy writer Ben 
Elton (The Young Ones, Mr Bean, Black Adder etc).

The Western Australia-shot Three Summers promises to be a rib tickler set over 
three years at an Australian music festival. Does that mean we get to see Daryl 
Kerrigan in rave pants, or Sharon Strzelecki in a mosh pit? Either way, there 
will be portaloos.

Cargo, directors Ben Howling and Yolanda Ramke

“It’s not a zombie film!” actor Martin Freeman told the Sydney Morning Herald 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/movies/martin-freeman-is-making-cargo-in-australia-but-dont-call-it-a-zombie-film-20160923-grn0mj.html>
 when asked about his new movie about, erm, a deadly infection that creates a 
new species of undead. Whatever it is, we’re looking forward to it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fkylie-minogue-and-guy-pearce-reunite-and-nine-other-australian-films-to-watch-in-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff70399804b5d1d05d64ed0d279bb97b09987e413%2F0_240_2720_2586%2F2720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kylie%20Minogue%20and%20Guy%20Pearce%20reunite%20%E2%80%93%20and%20nine%20other%20Australian%20films%20to%20watch%20in%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fkylie-minogue-and-guy-pearce-reunite-and-nine-other-australian-films-to-watch-in-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kylie%20Minogue%20and%20Guy%20Pearce%20reunite%20%E2%80%93%20and%20nine%20other%20Australian%20films%20to%20watch%20in%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fkylie-minogue-and-guy-pearce-reunite-and-nine-other-australian-films-to-watch-in-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff70399804b5d1d05d64ed0d279bb97b09987e413%2F0_240_2720_2586%2F2720.jpg>
 Martin Freeman, who stars in Sherlock and the Office, has been cast in 
not-zombie-film Cargo – based on the 2013 Tropfest short film of the same name. 
Photograph: Vittorio Zunino Celotto/Getty Images 
The 2013 Tropfest short film Cargo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gryenlQKTbE> may not have won the festival’s 
top prize – a garish fake fruit bowl – but Hollywood agents offered directors 
Ben Howling and Yolanda Ramke’s something even better: their own feature film, 
buoyed by an international star.


What tickled tinsel town’s fancy? Perhaps it was the way the young film-makers 
broke new ground by showing us an undead man with a baby on his back and a bag 
of bloodied meat connected to a horizontal tree branch stuck to his shoulder. 
He looked a lot like a zombie but we don’t want to upset Martin; let’s just say 
he got out of bed on the wrong side.


Casting JonBenét, director Kitty Green


Australian documentarian Kitty Green turned heads with her 2013 film Ukraine 
is Not a Brothel. Her latest is an American crime story financed by Screen 
Australia and Film Victoria, aboutthe sensational (and still-unresolved) murder 
case of six-year-old American beauty queen JonBen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/jonbenet-ramsey-the-brutal-child-that-still-haunts-america>
ét Ramsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/jonbenet-ramsey-the-brutal-child-that-still-haunts-america>
.

Casting JonBenet will premiere at Sundance and later arrive on the cyber 
shelves of Netflix (their first acquisition of 2017), who will hoping for a 
Making a Murder-esque cult following.

Flammable Children, director Stephan Elliott

Writer/director Stephan Elliott (Priscilla: Queen of the Desert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/09/the-adventures-of-priscilla-queen-of-the-desert-rewatching-classic-australian-films>
,Welcome to Woop Woop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/20/welcome-to-woop-woop-rewatched-gloriously-batty-love-letter-to-australia>
) is up to mischief again – something about setting fire to minors.

The film-maker reunites with star Guy Pearce, and pairs him with his former 
Neighbours co-starKylie Minogue <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kylieminogue>
, for a coming of age period piece based in Dee Why in the mid-70s. There have 
been promises of surf mats, goon bags and KFC. It’s bloody ‘Straya mate.

Glenn Dunks (@glenndunks) 
Guy Pearce and Kylie Minogue have made a movie together and, well, who can say 
no to this? No *your* eyes are bugging out.pic.twitter.com/mOmy3ZSbGL 
<https://t.co/mOmy3ZSbGL>
 <https://twitter.com/glenndunks/status/816506584553504768> January 4, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/glenndunks/status/816506584553504768> 
After the Apology, director Larissa Behrendt

Could the number of Aboriginal children being removed by welfare agencies 
actually be higher today than during the time of the Stolen Generation? It’s a 
shocking proposition – and one that academic, writer and documentarian Larissa 
Behrendt sadly argues in the affirmative.


Behrendt has previously observed a 65% increase in Indigenous child removal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/13/seven-years-later-have-kevin-rudds-promises-in-the-apology-been-forgotten>
 rates since Kevin Rudd’s apology in 2008. The 2017 release of After the 
Apology marks the 20th anniversary of the watershed the Bringing Them Home 
report.

The Nightingale, director Jennifer Kent

After The Babadook: Jennifer Kent's new film tackles Australia's violent 
colonial history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/30/the-nightingale-not-horror-like-the-babadook-but-a-pretty-horrific-world>
Writer/director Jennifer Kent scared the bejeezus out of everybody with her 
feature debut The Babadook, the most Babadookian film to ever Babadook. 
Hollywood came knocking on her door, presuming making all sorts of scary sounds 
in the dead of night. But Kent apparently asked herself “What would David Lynch 
do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/30/the-nightingale-not-horror-like-the-babadook-but-a-pretty-horrific-world>
?” – and then found herself for some reason in Tasmania.

The Nightingale is based in a particularly brutal chapter of the island 
state’s history (circa 1829), and follows a revenge-seeking Irish convict as 
she chases a British soldier through the wilderness.Tassie has been getting 
some attention on our screens recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/24/how-tasmania-became-the-gothic-muse-of-australian-film-and-tv>
, in TV shows The Kettering Incident and Rosehaven, and feature films Lion and 
A Little Between Oceans.

Mystify, director Richard Lowenstein
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fkylie-minogue-and-guy-pearce-reunite-and-nine-other-australian-films-to-watch-in-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F362e3c7d8927615e5f33705ddf38a29d5927c4f8%2F0_92_2096_1321%2F2096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kylie%20Minogue%20and%20Guy%20Pearce%20reunite%20%E2%80%93%20and%20nine%20other%20Australian%20films%20to%20watch%20in%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fkylie-minogue-and-guy-pearce-reunite-and-nine-other-australian-films-to-watch-in-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kylie%20Minogue%20and%20Guy%20Pearce%20reunite%20%E2%80%93%20and%20nine%20other%20Australian%20films%20to%20watch%20in%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fkylie-minogue-and-guy-pearce-reunite-and-nine-other-australian-films-to-watch-in-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F362e3c7d8927615e5f33705ddf38a29d5927c4f8%2F0_92_2096_1321%2F2096.jpg>
 Michael Hutchence. Photograph: Newspix/Rex Features 
There’s a chance this one won’t arrive until 2018, but we’re including it 
anyway. There is no a better choice of film-maker to make a documentary about 
the life of Michael Hutchence than Richard Lowenstein, who directed the late 
INXS star (also a close friend) in the scuzzy 1986 classicDogs in Space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/aug/08/dogs-in-space-rewatched-michael-hutchence-in-a-couch-crashing-classic>
 and helmed the majority of the band’s music videos and concert films.

Lowenstein has eked out a compelling body of work as a documentarian, 
including recently co-directing two fine films with Lynn-Maree Milburn: 
Autoluminescent: Rowland S Howard, and last year’s surreal, under-watched, part 
detective story and part biographyEcco Homo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/17/ecco-homo-review-an-intense-surreal-look-at-elusive-australian-artist-troy-davis>
.

The Berlin Syndrome, director Cate Shortland

The third feature film of director Cate Shortland (following 2004’s Somersault 
and 2012’s Lore) has been picked to make its world premiere at this year’s 
Sundance film festival.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fkylie-minogue-and-guy-pearce-reunite-and-nine-other-australian-films-to-watch-in-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F187d31d6e698ff5bf338ce05b4b3b9be3df081e1%2F0_0_1000_562%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kylie%20Minogue%20and%20Guy%20Pearce%20reunite%20%E2%80%93%20and%20nine%20other%20Australian%20films%20to%20watch%20in%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fkylie-minogue-and-guy-pearce-reunite-and-nine-other-australian-films-to-watch-in-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kylie%20Minogue%20and%20Guy%20Pearce%20reunite%20%E2%80%93%20and%20nine%20other%20Australian%20films%20to%20watch%20in%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fkylie-minogue-and-guy-pearce-reunite-and-nine-other-australian-films-to-watch-in-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F187d31d6e698ff5bf338ce05b4b3b9be3df081e1%2F0_0_1000_562%2F1000.jpg>
 Teresa Palmer in Berlin Syndrome. Photograph: Aquarius Films 
The Berlin Syndrome is a psychological thriller about an Australian 
photographer (Teresa Palmer, recently cast as Andrew Garfield’s love interest 
in Hacksaw Ridge), who gets locked in the apartment of a creepy one night stand 
(Max Riemelt, from Netflix’s Sense8).

Hotel Mumbai, director Anthony Maras

Starring alongside Nicole Kidman in Lion, and with another high-profile 
locally produced drama – Hotel Mumbai – on its way, Dev Patel is quickly 
approaching “honourary Australian” status.

Here he stars alongside Armie Hammer and Tilda Cobham-Hervey as an Indian 
waiter in this dramatisation of the 2008 Mumbai terrorist attacks on the Taj 
Mahal hotel: a four-day siege by Islamiist militants that left 160 people dead.

First-time feature film-maker Anthony Maras has already scored a coup in the 
backing of Weinstein Co, which acquired distribution of the film last year.
 