
You can tell the season is about to start when it might not be about to start 
after all. With barely a fortnight to go, the Spanish players' union called a 
strike over more than €50m of unpaid wages and on Wednesday morning another 
meeting between the league and the players' union, the AFE,broke down 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2011/aug/17/spanish-strike-action-talks-collapse>
. According to the AFE president José Luis Rubiales, in the last two years 
alone 200 players have been affected by salaries that have gone unpaid. So, 
here we are: three days to go and there's no football.

Another meeting is scheduled for Friday morning. This time Rubiales, who 
missed Wednesday morning's meeting because he had just become a father, will be 
there. Game on? Game off. That meeting will be held less than 24 hours before 
the season starts (or doesn't start) and the strike proposal involves refusing 
to play in weeks one and two of the league season. Could the league go ahead? 
Don't rule it out, but the words used on Wednesday morning were: "practically 
impossible". Meanwhile, the words used by the LFP and the AFE were largely 
pretty angry ones.

Only, strike threats and last-minute turn around are familiar; threats are 
easily dismissed. Nah, there's no way they will actually go through with it. 
Every year it seems like the season won't start for one reason or another. Or 
that if it does, there will be something wrong, something missing. Like footage.

The obligatory TV disputes have been at the heart of many of the threats and 
proposed strike action is nothing new. It is also just another manifestation of 
the dire financial state of football here.

There have been opening weekends when, just days before, no one knew who was 
playing when. A few years ago, Sevilla were the only team in the league that 
didn't have a TV deal so they retaliated by banning all cameras from all their 
games. Real Sociedad got round the problem of their fans not knowing the score 
when they played Sevilla by recovering the old tradition ofletting off 
fireworks over the Bay of Biscay every time a goal was scored 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2006/sep/11/europeanfootball.sevilla>. 
Trouble was, no one knewwhich goal had been scored.

Last season there were two proposed strikes; there was even one led by the 
clubs themselves in a clumsy and frankly baseless protest at the law that 
protects one game a week on free to air. On both occasions the show went on. 
For all the threats, it always does.

This threat, though, feels different: a team photo of almost a hundred 
footballers, with Spain captain Iker Casillas and a load of other big names at 
its head, was designed to show how serious they are. There really is a chance 
that this won't happen. If it doesn't, no one really knows how they'll fit in 
the extra two weeks; will they play over Christmas? Will week one (and week 
two?) be crowbarred in somewhere else or will the entire fixture list be 
shifted on a week? (If so,Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> will be at the World Club Cup 
when they are supposed to be playing Real Madrid).

There is huge uncertainty. But then again the only certainty in the Spanish 
league is uncertainty. La Liga is, as one wit put it,played by geniuses and run 
by idiots 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2010/dec/06/osasuna-barcelona-la-liga-train>
. The strike may happen but the threat of it is nothing new and it is a 
consequence of deep, structural problems that have been growing by the year – 
much like the gap between Madrid and Barcelona and the rest. This season there 
will be games at 6, 8, and 10 on Saturdays, 12, 4, 6, 8, and 10 (yes, 10 at 
night) on Sundays, and 9 on Mondays. But don't bother asking when they will be 
and certainly don't bother trying to arrange a trip to see them … no one will 
know that until eight days before.

Still, there are some certainties. Although Qatari-owned Málaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/malaga> have built a fascinating and 
strikingly sensible project that may in the long term be able to compete (but 
more of them in Sunday's Observer), even an LFP president can see that Madrid 
and Barcelona will be the top two.

Both have reinforced this summer. Despite winning league and Champions League, 
Barcelona are conscious of the need to evolve tactically, adding new qualities 
to their game. They also recognise that, in terms of key injuries in midfield 
and attack, they got lucky last season. With a compact season – one that might 
be about to get even more compact if the strike goes ahead – and with the World 
Club Championships to play, they have signed Alexis Sánchez and Cesc Fábregas. 
Then there is Barcelona B's Thiago Alcántara, whose brilliant performances over 
the summer suggest that he will have a greater part to play.

Cesc is symbolic of that desire to add depth and variety. Yes, his signing 
responds to a kind of emotional need,the Catalan boy coming home 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2011/aug/15/cesc-fabregas-barcelona-return>
, and the most pressing necessity is the future one of replacing Xavi Hernandez 
and maintaining the continuity of progression in the Barcelona midfield (Xavi 
is 31, Iniesta 27, Thiago 20: at 24, Cesc fits perfectly in the middle, 
guaranteeing a degree of continuity). But he also gives an element of drive, 
speed and the ability to shoot from mid-distance that Barcelona arguably 
lacked. Alexis offers what is often described asprofundidad – the directness 
that helps make the pitch longer, to run at and get beyond defenders.

Madrid's signings have been interesting too. Mourinho's long, public 
insistence on a third striker last year has disappeared – for now at least. It 
may be a tactic and privately he has reiterated the desire for one more 
signing. But Madrid's director general Jorge Valdano, the man who once likened 
Mourinho's football"to shit on a stick" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2007/may/08/newsstory.sport8>, and the man 
whose positionalways appeared untenable from the very start 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2010/aug/29/jose-mourinho-real-madrid>
, has gone. Mourinho now has total power – a manager not just a coach.

Many have criticised Mourinho and in many cases for good reason. But one thing 
that has been forgotten is that on this issue at least Mourinho was right: 
Madrid's model did need to change. In handing him power, president Florentino 
Pérez has not only revealed his desperation but also his recognition that the 
model he built did not work – even if the media is not exactly falling over 
itself to point that out.

Madrid's signings reflect Mourinho's new role. It is not immediately apparent 
where any of them fit in the starting eleven – even Nuri Sahin, probably the 
most exciting of them and, at €10m, a potential bargain too. But Madrid, who 
already had an extraordinary squad, arguably the best and certainly the most 
expensive in history (last season they went in to the Champions League 
semi-final with a bench that included Kaká, Higuaín and Benzema), have an 
incredible collection of players. And they are players that Mourinho believes 
he can mould and trust.

Just looking at the fees is frightening: Pepe €30m, Ramos €27m, Di María €25m, 
Kaká €65m, Diarra €20m, Gago €18m, Ozil €18m, Alonso €30m, Benzema €35m , 
Ronaldo €95m. And those are the players that were already there. Some of them, 
unwanted, won't be there for very much longer.

They have been joined by Sahin and Hamit Altintop, who are yet to play; 
Spanish football's very own Jedward, José Callejón; Raphaël Varane and Fabio 
Coentrao – who has been perhaps the summer's outstanding player from a variety 
of positions, but not the left-back slot it was assumed he would play. The best 
performer, though, has been Karim Benzema. Leaner, faster,he had a wonderful 
run last season 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2011/mar/21/karim-benzema-kitten-of-war>
, only to find himself playing 57 minutes in the run of fourclásicos against 
Barcelona that ultimately defined the season. Ozil, too, suddenly slipped out 
of the side when the moment of truth arrived. The Super Copa first leg against 
Barcelona suggests a more aggressive, more attacking Real Madrid.

Thing is, Madrid only got a 2-2 draw on Sunday night 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2011/aug/15/barcelona-real-madrid-super-cup>
. At home. Against a Barcelona side without Puyol, Piqué, Xavi and Busquets, 
beforelast night's second leg 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2011/aug/18/cesc-fabregas-barcelona-debut-madrid>
.

And that's the thing: there may be differences between Madrid and Barcelona 
but they are nothing like the differences between them and the rest. Both are 
far too good for La Liga's 'other' clubs. The title may well boil down to the
clásicos – two games out of 36, in which the smallest details could have the 
greatest of impacts – or to the odd unexpected draw in a league where draws are 
the new defeats. Madrid lost last year's title because Barcelona were the 
better team, but also because they failed to score againstMallorca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmallorca>, Levante, Osasuna, 
Sporting, and Deportivo.

What, though, about the other teams? Sadly, the response is too often: what 
about them? Here's what:

Athletic Bilbao: So much for loyalty. Athletic coach Joaquín Caparrós was 
criticised for talking to other clubs in the summer rather than committing to 
Athletic. Then he did, but president Fernando Macua lost the elections and 
Caparrós was out of a job. His replacement is Marcelo Bielsa and Athletic's 
style is about to undergo a dramatic change; more technical, more complex, 
shorter. They have the players, too, with Ander Herrera joining Iker Muniaín, 
Javi Martínez, Fernando Llorente and Andoni Iraola. A European place is likely; 
maybe even more. Will certainly be fun.

Atlético Madrid: Sergio Agüero has gone, David de Gea has gone and Diego 
Forlán is going. AtAtlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> people are always leaving 
– except the two men that really should leave. They have though made some 
interesting signings led by Arda Turan, with a striker likely to come.

Betis: At last they're back. Arguably, the funnest and funniest team in La Liga
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> return to the top 
flight. And the league kicks off –if it kicks off – with the Seville derby, 
which should be fantastic and has been missed. Unlike Manuel Ruiz de Lopera, 
the president who has finally gone. Stuck in administration, they're likely to 
struggle though.

Espanyol: Callejón, De La Peña, David García, and Chica have all gone and it 
looks like Osvaldo will be going, Kameni too. The president Daniel Sanchez 
Llibre has also departed after almost 15 years. Didac, who left last winter, is 
back though – on loan from Milan. Last year's eighth place may be possible 
again but looks unlikely.

Getafe: Hang on a minute. Weren't these supposed to be golden days for Getafe? 
Taken over by Dubai-based owners Royal Emirates, the promise was of €30m a year 
– enough to establishGetafe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/getafe> as 
regular challengers for a European place. There were going to be big signings 
galore. So, Manu, Parejo, Boateng, Víctor Sánchez, Albín, Marcano and a handful 
of others have … erm, gone?

Granada: Udinese's Spanish branch. Granada, propped up by the Italian club 
where their president and ubiquitous club administrator Quique Pena worked, had 
12 Udinese players on loan last season. That was enough to come up via the 
play-offs. Will that support be enough to stay up. Back in the First Division 
31 years later.

Levante: Last year's miracle, this year's first team down? The lowest budget 
in the division 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2010/sep/27/levante-real-madrid-sid-lowe>
, they have lost coach Luis García, the motivational geniuswho brought them 
together <http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2011/feb/28/la-liga-levante>, 
and they have also lost nine players,including top scorer Felipe Caicedo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2010/sep/27/levante-real-madrid-sid-lowe>
.

Málaga: Money, money, money. Sheik Abdullah bin Naser al Thani took over last 
summer and brought in a new manager and new players. Halfway through the 
season, it wasn't working: they were going down. So they sacked the coach and 
brought some new players. This time it did work,with Julio Baptista leading the 
way 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2011/may/09/sid-lowe-la-liga-malaga-baptista>
. Now they have signed a load more players, from Van Nistelrooy to Monreal, 
from Toulalan to Joaquín andIsco to Cazorla 
<http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/2011/writers/sid_lowe/07/28/malaga/index.html>
. Cazorla cost €19m: more than Málaga's entire budget a couple of seasons ago. 
Suddenly their budget has shot to €150m, making it the league's third biggest, 
and they have spent more than €50m. But it is not just about money: there is 
solidity to this project that suggests that this might even work.

Mallorca: Safe all season 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2011/apr/11/let-them-eat-paella-real-mallorca>
, the project finally looking secure on and off the pitch, suddenly Mallorca 
found themselves within a goal of going down on the final day. Should not 
suffer the same fate this season but if Jonathan de Guzman gets his wish of a 
move to Villarreal, it will be a mighty blow.

Osasuna: Osasuna were in relegation trouble right to the end of the league and 
finished ninth. Which kind of says it all about the different strata in Spain. 
They're used to suffering, which is a good job really. Josetxo has gone but, 
somehow, Patxi Puñal – the man who used to cycle to training after his morning 
shift at the factory - is still around.Osasuna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/osasuna> have signed Nino from Tenerife, 
which sounds like a good idea when you consider the 17 and 14 goals he has 
score in the least two years, but then it hits you: he was relegated both times.

Racing: Remember Ali Syed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2011/apr/27/racing-santander-la-liga>? 
He arrived at Racing as the saviour, going bonkers in the directors' box and 
promising big things. Well, now he has disappeared and refuses to answer the 
phone. Racing are in administration, their coach has gone and so have a load of 
their players – most of them a little worse off after going unpaid. The new 
coach is Hector Cúper, the man who if there wasa competition for coming second 
would still come second 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2005/may/31/europeanfootball.sport>. Sadly, 
it wouldn't be a huge surprise if he did it again. Second bottom.

Rayo Vallecano: Madrid's self-consciously left-wing club from the 
neighbourhood of Vallecas. Rayo's players went on strike last season. Their 
owners - the, erm, 'controversial' Ruiz-Mateos family - were finally kicked out 
after 20 years. And they ended up in administration. Still they came up, eight 
years later. Great fun in their three-sided ground (the fourth is just a huge 
board covered with adverts), the thing is they are almost certain to go 
straight back down again. Half the team have gone and there are rumours that 
the coach may yet walk with four more players after administrators tried to 
enforce a 70% pay cut upon them.

Real Sociedad: The departure of coach Martín Lasarte came as a surprise – not 
only had he broughtla Real up but for much of last season they over-performed. 
But his relationship with the club's directors had long been difficult. The new 
man in charge is Philippe Montanier from Valenciennes and the man who achieved 
three promotions in a row with Boulogne. His ability to bring through young 
players is a key reason for la Real turning to him – 19 of the first team squad 
have come up fromReal Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realsociedad> B.

Sevilla: Fredi is staying. The legs are creaking and he's slower than ever but 
Sevilla could not be happier. Kanouté is, some fans insist, the best signing 
the club has ever made. This summer he talked about finally walking away, six 
seasons two Copa del Reys and two Uefa Cups later. Such is the respect that
Sevilla <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> said they would let him 
decide and simply wait for him. One day, he announced he was staying. In a team 
that has desperately lacked a touch of quality of late, he may be important 
too. Under new management – Marcelino has joined from Racing – and with Rakitic 
giving a degree of control, the aim will be Champions League football.

Sporting: They've been arguing all summer about the new kit at Sporting. And 
in the end the fans got their way, too. The team is a different matter: José 
Ángel has gone to Roma, Javi Poves decided to ditch football all together for 
moral and political reasons and by far their best player Diego Castro has gone 
to Getafe. Not one of their current players got more than 10 goals last season. 
It won't be easy to do so this campaign either.

Valencia: Amidst all the talk of Madrid, Barcelona and Málaga, few have noticed
Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> slowly adding to an 
already impressive squad – and last season they were the only team that 
consistently caused Barcelona problems. Joaquín and Isco have gone, but Parejo, 
Piatti and Canales have all joined (even though Canales won't be able to play 
against Real Madrid). Lille's Adil Rami, at centre-back, is a vital addition 
too. Coach Unai Emery never seems especially well liked at the club, but he's 
starting his fourth successive season.

Villarreal: It has been a difficult summer for Villarreal. Joan Capdevila and 
Santi Cazorla both departed – two of the funniest, nicest guys you could wish 
to meet in football and the impact on the squad has been genuinely important. 
Financially,Villarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> are 
struggling after years of being one of Spain's most stable clubs and departures 
were inevitable. Cazorla was Villarreal's key creative player last season. The 
good news is that Giuseppe Rossi didn't join Barcelona and Borja Valero is 
still around.

Zaragoza: Zaragoza haven't got any money and are in voluntary administration 
having racked up debts in excess of €130m. In Spain, administration brings no 
footballing penalties. In fact,Zaragoza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realzaragoza> have been largely 
unaffected. They signed goalkeeper Roberto from Benfica for €8m. Only they paid 
1% of that: the goalkeeper was instead bought by an investment fund in which 
Jorge Mendes and Peter Kenyon are involved. Other clubs were annoyed but 
suggested they would do the same, bringing the prospect of widespread 
third-party ownership (which is not illegal) to Spain. Five others have joined, 
including three from Madrid and Barcelona's B teams. Aguirre dragged them out 
of relegation trouble last season. It is likely to be much the same battle this 
time round.
 