
The Australian film-maker Stephan Elliott once jokingly told me that he’d made 
The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert to bring screen musicals back 
from the grave into whichXanadu had put them. Yet despite reports of their 
death, musicals have never gone away, providing the backbone of the movie 
business in key territories such as India, and regularly flourishing elsewhere 
across the globe. In 2008, Phyllida Lloyd’s film of the Abba-festMamma Mia! 
became a record-breaking UK hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/dec/17/mamma-mia-uk-highest-grossing-film>
(paving the way forSunshine on Leith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/06/sunshine-on-leith-filth-review> 
et al), while stage-to-screen adaptations, fromChicago to Les Misérables, have 
consistently charmed Oscar voters in America.

Alongside Baz Luhrmann’s Moulin Rouge!, early 21st-century cinema has given us 
everything from Lars von Trier’sDancer in the Dark to Japanese provocateur 
Takashi Miike’sThe Happiness of the Katakuris and Irish muso John Carney’s 
trilogy ofOnce, Begin Again, and Sing Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/sing-street-review-schoolboys-pop-band>
. Meanwhile,Hairspray and High School Musical, and Disney hits such as Frozen 
andMoana, have continued to introduce young viewers to the age-old magic of 
musicals.

The locations combine the street-smart choices of Jim McBride’s Breathless 
with the nocturnal mysteries of David Lynch

Enter La La Land, writer-director Damien Chazelle’s triumphant follow-up to 
Whiplash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/18/whiplash-review-drummer-miles-teller-mark-kermode>
,which last week swept the board at the Golden Globes. Since debuting at Venice 
last year, Chazelle’s second musical (after his jazzyGuy and Madeline on a Park 
Benchin 2009) has been hailed as doing for the genre what The Artist did for 
silent movies.

Indeed, from its cheeky “presented in CinemaScope” opening, through its 
Singin’ in the Rain shenanigans and heavily signposted nods to Casablanca, La 
La Land invites us to welcome the return of something lost, the revival of a 
golden age. Yet as delightful as it may be, it no more marks the rebirth of the 
musical thanThe Adventures of Priscilla did all those years ago. It is simply a 
splendid continuation of cinema’s ever-evolving love affair with song and dance.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Ryan Gosling on La La Land: ‘The world is quick to shame you for trying’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/13/ryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
We open with a Jacques Demy-style sequence on a gridlocked freeway, where a 
multicultural chorus of Angelenos pile out of stationary vehicles and twirl 
across their roofs and bonnets like west coast cousins of the kids fromFame. 
Caught in the sunny jam are aspiring actor Mia (Emma Stone) and taciturn jazz 
freak Sebastian (Ryan Gosling), his honking horn breaking her concentration as 
she rehearses lines for a forthcoming audition. She works in a coffee shop on a 
studio lot; he gets fired from his piano-playing gig for going musically 
off-piste. One enchanted evening, they dance in the artificial moonlight and 
sing about how “you’re not the type for me… I’d never fall for you”. Next 
thing, he’s taking her to seeRebel Without a Cause at the Rialto and she’s 
teaching him about staying true to your dreams. “City of stars, are you shining 
just for me?” sing the young lovers, until compromise comes calling, offering 
to fill their pockets, but not their hearts…


Shooting the musical numbers in what look like single takes (the opening shot 
recalls and rivals that ofThe Player), Chazelle builds upon the visual 
acrobatics ofWhiplash, with Linus Sandgren’s camera weaving, swerving, swooping 
and flying around the performers in breathtaking fashion. At times,La La Land 
resembles the missing link between the nostalgic creakiness of Woody Allen’s 
throwback musicalEveryone Says I Love You and the futuristic fluidity of 
Alfonso Cuarón’s sci-fi adventureGravity (not least during a swooning fantasy 
sequence in the iconic Griffith Observatory). The colours are a symphony of 
rich reds, gorgeous greens, beautiful blues and scrumptious yellows, while the 
LA locations combine the street-smart choices of Jim McBride’sBreathless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/dec/17/3> with the strange nocturnal 
mysteries of David Lynch.

Significantly, citing Djibril Diop Mambéty’s Senegalese 70s drama Touki Bouki 
and French director Claire Denis’s Djibouti-setBeau Travail as influences, 
alongside Hollywood staples such asSummer Stock and The Band Wagon, Chazelle 
has said that he wanted “to make a movie that would embrace the magic of 
musicals but root it in the rhythms and texture of real life”. To this end, he 
is aided by a note-perfect Stone (the scene in which she revisits that traffic 
jam speech is a Brando-esque performance masterclass) and a likably dour 
Gosling, drawing on his Disney Channel hoofing roots. Both are excellently 
served by choreographer Mandy Moore, who pushes them just far enough (they’re 
no Fred and Ginger), along with composer Justin Hurwitz, and lyricists Benj 
Pasek and Justin Paul.

That Chazelle should cling boldly to a bittersweet melody that recalls the 
melancholy Happy Endings of Scorsese’sNew York, New York only amplifies the 
joys ofLa La Land. Like the musical itself, the film has timeless charm and a 
brave sense of adventure. Bravo!
 