
Up in Pamplona, a girl wearing a red and black bra and not much else 
brandished a banner declaring: "Cruchaga, if you don't want my tits to get 
cold, give me your shirt" but Carlos Cruchaga took no notice. Tears in his 
eyes, shirt on his back, he climbed into the directors' box and, for the last 
time, celebrated with theOsasuna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/osasuna> 
fans who have supported him for 15 years. Over in Santander, Roberto Soldado 
had given away his shirt and was losing a lot more besides, one gleeful Getafe 
fan hanging over the hoardings and removing his shorts while a few hundred 
kilometres away a handful of kids missed their cue, staring blankly into the 
camera as the reporter raved about "an incredible party".

Along the coast in Gijón, Mate Bilic disappeared into a crowd of delirious 
Sporting fans as his coach punched the air and shook his head in happy 
disbelief. Meanwhile, down in Seville, Borja Valero peeled off his shirt, 
looked up, decided that reaching the third tier was asking a bit much and began 
applauding instead. High above him, Real Valladolid's fans applauded back, 
relieved. All around them, there was silence; the few seats still occupied were 
taken by supporters staring into space, bewildered. Most had gone but not gone 
far. Delighted, they invaded the pitch at Sporting's El Molinón and Osasuna's 
El Sadar; devastated, they invaded the directors' box at Betis's stadium. Then 
they tried to invade the dressing room.

Week 38 in La Liga, the final day of the season. Sporting versus Recreativo de 
Huelva, Osasuna versus Real Madrid,Racing Santander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/racingsantander> versus Getafe and Betis 
versus Real Valladolid. Five teams, four matches and one relegation place; five 
teams in trouble but with destiny in their own hands: Osasuna, Sporting, Betis, 
Getafe, and Valladolid all knew a win would see them safe. Valladolid's fans 
had plastered the training ground with flyers, a paper patchwork of 
motivational slogans covering every surface; Getafe had laid on buses to 
Santander; Sporting's fans had camped overnight for tickets; Osasuna had 
helpfully reminded Madrid they had nothing to play for; and Betis's owner, 
Manuel Ruiz de Lopera, demanded his players give "every last drop of blood" – 
and, licking his lips, probably meant it.

By Sunday night, Betis's fans would take him at his word; it was payback time. 
A few weeks ago, they pelted the players with eggs; now, they waited to pelt 
them with something altogether less runny. Barriers were thrown, rocks hurled, 
fireworks launched. A sit-down protest followed, police wading in with big 
sticks. Outside the kitsch den Ruiz de Lopera calls home, fans gathered to 
demand his departure. Inside his club's modestly named Ruiz de Lopera Stadium, 
fearful footballers were holed up in the dressing room refusing to come out. 
Much as they have done all season, in fact.

No wonder fans were furious. Forget Osasuna, the team who had been in the 
relegation zone longer than anyone else; or Getafe, with few fans and hardly 
any history; or free-falling, cash-strapped Valladolid; orSporting Gijón 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sportinggijon>, making their first 
top-flight appearance in a decade. It is Betis who are going down – the club 
with 40,000 season ticket holders, some of the noisiest, most passionate and 
downright loony fans in the country. The club who won the Copa del Rey and 
reached the Champions League just four years ago, who spent more than €40m 
(£35m) on signings, boasting Emana Achille, Mehmet Aurelio, Ricardo Oliveira, 
Sergio García, Mark González and Edu. However much they ignore it and hope it 
will go away – Betis's official website devoting a whole 167 discreet words to 
it – it is the club whose owner claimed to have built the best squad in history 
who have gone down.

'Twas not always thus. In fact, 'twas not often thus. Even during the final 
day, relegation seemed impossible. For 22 minutes, as laSexta's split screen 
frantically flipped between Pamplona and Gijón cunningly missing everything, 
Osasuna were going down. Really down: Madrid had taken the lead. An Iker 
Casillas-aided equaliser four minutes later changed nothing; Osasuna were for 
the drop. Then Recreativo de Huelva scored in Gijón. Sporting were down. On 34 
minutes, Racing went 1–0 up against Getafe; on 38 it was 1–1 and in first-half 
stoppage timeValladolid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valladolid> took 
the lead against Betis. But still Betis weren't down; Sporting were.

Betis looked even safer when Oliveira scored on 49 minutes to make it 1–1. On 
57 minutes, Sporting equalised; Osasuna were down again. Two minutes later, 
Juanfran thumped in a brilliant volley: 2–1 to Osasuna, Sporting were down. 
Then Luis Morán scored at the Molinón. Sporting were 2–1 up, jumping five 
places. Suddenly, Betis were down. But there was plenty of time and it was 
closer than ever. With 24 minutes of the season left, a solitary point 
separated all five teams; a solitary goal could send all five down: a goal for 
Madrid and Osasuna were down, a goal for Recre and Sporting were, a goal for 
Betis and Valladolid were down; a goal for Racing andGetafe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/getafe> were; no goals at all and Betis 
were down.

A header agonisingly close for Recre, a post for Betis, a crossbar for 
Osasuna, a save from Casillas. The clock ticked down. The Betis goalkeeper 
Ricardo joined the attack. But there were no goals. The final whistle went, 
first in Santander, then in Seville, Gijón and Pamplona, fans steaming on to 
the pitch. Betis were down. Institutional crisis, a power vacuum, a lack of 
leadership or commitment, a training ground with rusting equipment, and the 
absence of a fitness coach or proper staff had done for them. So had a solitary 
goal. A single goal against Valladolid would have saved them; a single goal in 
any of the other games would have saved them. In fact, a single goal inany one 
of the 38 games they played all season would have saved them. Level with 
Getafe, Betis went down on goal difference: minus 6 to minus 7.

As cameras cruelly picked out tearful fans and police picked out angry ones, 
they were laughing their heads off across the city. In 1997 Betis deliberately 
lost to Sporting to send Sevilla down; in 2000Sevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> took revenge by deliberately 
losing to Oviedo to send Betis down. This seasonSevillistas are proudly 
claiming to have done it again. Back in February Betis beat them 2–1. When 
Fredi Kanouté scored in the fourth minute of injury time, it was an irrelevant 
goal no one celebrated. Suddenly, three months on, his consolation goal has 
provided real consolation after all. Suddenly, three months on, Sevillistas are 
celebrating the goal that sent Betis down.

Week 38 talking points

• Atlético Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> are 
back in the Champions League, with another thumping goal from Diego Forlán and 
one from Kun Agüero (who admitted: "I haven't always given my all this season") 
and Raúl García. The question now is, how many of their players will still be 
there next season? Agüero and Forlán's post-match comments were far from a 
declaration of eternal love for Atlético.

• Goodbye to Raúl Tamudo, the best player in Espanyol's history and La Liga's 
top scoring Catalan of all time. Trulycojonudo, he's off to Greece after more 
than a decade at the club and, sadly, won't now play at the new stadium next 
season. He signed off with a hat-trick – his first for the club. It looks like 
Mauricio Pochettino won't be staying either, which is a major blow for the 
budgies.

• By losing 2–1 at Osasuna, Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> have rounded off their worst 
run in history by losing their final five games, just as they did at the end of 
the 2003-2004 season – David Beckham's first in Spain. They were helped by a 
whole load of players getting "injured" in the build-up to the game. Apparently 
Guti's "leg hurt".

• Barcelona missed out on Madrid's record of 107 goals for the season, 
grabbing only one against Deportivo. Mad Madridista Tomás Roncero had declared 
that proof that Madrid were better. And not proof thatBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> were so good they eased up in 
their final three games.

• And now the fun starts – Florentino Pérez is the new Real Madrid president, 
without even having to go through the inconvenience of voting. Here goes a 
long, hot summer of star name after star name, not leastHim 
<http://www.manutd.com/default.sps?bioid=91960&pagegid=%7BFE60904B-C2A8-4E60-9B05-700DBBC29BBC%7D&section=playerProfile>
.

Results: Real Mallorca <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmallorca> 2–3 
Villarreal; Deportivo 1–1 Barcelona; Atlético 3–0 Almería; Valencia 2–0 
Athletic Bilbao; Numancia 0–2 Sevilla; Espanyol 3–0 Málaga; Osasuna 2–1 Real 
Madrid; Racing Santander 1–1 Getafe; Sporting 2–1 Recreativo; Betis 1–1 
Valladolid

Champions: Barcelona

Champions League places: Real Madrid, Sevilla, Atlético

Europa League places: Villarreal, Valencia, Athletic Bilbao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/athleticbilbao> (as Copa del Rey 
runners-up)

Relegated: Recreativo, Numancia, Real Betis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realbetis>.

Pichichi: Diego Forlán [32], followed by Samuel Eto'o [30], David Villa [28] 
and Leo Messi [23]

Zamora: Víctor Valdés

That final day final outcome, from 18th up: Betis [42], Getafe [42], 
Valladolid [43], Osasuna [43], Sporting [43]

Final La Liga table  
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?CTID=29&Lang=0>
 