
Real Madrid broke a club record as a fourth straight La Liga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> win of the campaign over 
Espanyol took them three points clear at the top.

Atlético Madrid thump Sporting Gijón as Fernando Torres bags two late goals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/atletico-madrid-sporting-gijon-la-liga-match-report>
The Colombian playmaker James Rodríguez – who had been linked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/29/football-transfer-rumours-chelsea-to-sign-real-madrids-james-rodriguez>
 with a summer move away from the Estadio Bernabéu – marked his first start of 
the campaign with Real’s opener in a 2-0 victory, their 16th league triumph in 
a row to eclipse the previous best mark set in 1960-61.

Rodríguez received the ball from the substitute Toni Kroos, saw off challenges 
from Hernán Pérez and Pape Diop before letting fly with a left-foot shot from 
outside the area, which he directed inside theEspanyol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/espanyol> goalkeeper Diego López’s 
left-hand post.

Karim Benzema, the only member of the feared BBC strike force to feature with 
Cristiano Ronaldo and Gareth Bale sidelined, scored the second with a 
close-range finish to round off an accomplished team move.

At the other end of the table Valencia’s pointless start to the season 
continued into a fourth match as they relinquished a 1-0 lead to lose 2-1 away 
toAthletic Bilbao.

The Basque side have also made an unconvincing start to the campaign and their 
coach, Ernesto Valverde, must have been fearing the wrath of the San Mamés 
crowd when Álvaro Medrán fired Los Che in front after less than two minutes.

But Athletic’s veteran Spain forward Aritz Aduriz turned the tide to put the 
home side in front by half-time. First he headed home a cross from Beñat 
Etxebarria midway through the opening half and then clipped a second over the
Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> goalkeeper, Diego 
Alves, from another Beñat assist to heap more misery and pressure on Valencia’s 
coach, Pako Ayestarán.

Villarreal secured a third consecutive win thanks to a goal of the season 
contender from Nicola Sansone in a 2-1 success at home toReal Sociedad.

Alexandre Pato missed a penalty after a quarter of an hour for the Yellow 
Submarine before Sansone opened the scoring with a cool finish from Roberto 
Soriano’s disguised pass.

He added a second with a 60-yard strike that caught the Sociedad goalkeeper, 
Geronimo Rulli, off his line in the 25th minute, with Yuri’s angled drive 
halving the deficit for the visitors 10 minutes later.

In the early game Celta Vigo secured their first point of the season with a 
goalless draw againstOsasuna in Pamplona to leave Valencia as the only side yet 
to open their account. The visitors struck the woodwork twice through Daniel 
Wass and Iago Aspas.
 