
Joe Lycett at Edinburgh festival review – he makes funny seem easy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/23/joe-lycett-edinburgh-festival-review-pleasance-courtyard>
I’m inside Meer Shisha Lounge, a former Spearmint Rhino that has been 
converted into a cavernous series of cushioned rooms. It’s dark and 
extraordinarily decadent, with bordello-red walls crumbling like a Weimar 
republic sex club. Joe Lycett is reclining on a sofa, wearing an enormous fur 
coat and blue suede shoes. I feel as if I’ve been grantedan audience with 
Macklemore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/12/macklemore-ryan-lewis-systemic-racism-isnt-going-get-clicks>
. He offers me a beer. It is 2.30pm.

The Solihull-born comedian, one of the fastest-rising young standups working 
today, has agreed to show me around Birmingham, the city where he still lives. 
I’d been expecting Cadbury World, maybe the Sea Life Centre, and some 
career-focused chat; in fact, Lycett has planned a degenerate pub crawl that 
will last many hours, become surreally odd, and eventually ruin my body. “If 
you don’t headline this article ‘Getting Fucked Up The Brum!’, there’s 
something wrong with you,” he announces.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPNRPOp7SbEM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPNRPOp7SbEM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPNRPOp7SbEM&media=>
I’m not the only one struggling to keep up with Lycett. Ever since he won the 
2009 Chortle student comedy award, he has not let the grass grow. He’s a 
regular fixture on shows such as 8 Out Of 10 Cats, Never Mind The Buzzcocks and 
Live At The Apollo. He’s releasing a DVD (the brilliantly titled That’s The 
Way, A-Ha A-Ha, Joe Lycett) and currently piloting a nightly US-style chatshow 
for ITV. He’s soon to grace the establishment pinnacle of the Royal Variety 
Show, yet his act is deceptively subversive. He elevates anti-authoritarian 
pettiness to the level of absurd art: a story of his overturning a parking 
ticket through a series of bizarre letters went viral afterhe recounted it on 8 
Out Of 10 Cats Does Countdown last year 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Gkiw7zpULo>. He’s a witty rebel with a series 
of very small causes – and now he’s written a book about them.Parsnips, Buttered
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/parsnips-buttered.html> is a guide on how to 
“boycott modern life, one email at a time” with chapters on how to stop Isis, 
how to use selfies as a weapon, and how to sell fake celebrity stories to a 
newspaper. (“My celebrity of choice is Matt Baker, host of BBC1’s The One Show. 
I’ve tried to sellso many stories about him.”)

Birmingham bids to host 2026 Commonwealth Games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/30/birmingham-bids-to-host-2026-commonwealth-games>
We move to The Railway pub, one of the few holdouts from the gentrification 
sweeping Birmingham. The goodwill that accompanies the comedian is enormous; 
here, as with most places we visit, the barmen ask for selfies. Lycett clambers 
on to the table, spreading his legs. We’re soon joined by a couple of his 
friends. One, Ben Kane, is a well-connected local fixer who resembles a young 
Philip Seymour Hoffman; the other isactual Labour MP Jess Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/06/jess-phillips-someone-to-believe-in>
. They met recently at The Brummies, an awards show celebrating the pride of 
Birmingham, and are now firm friends. Lycett teases Phillips as she tries to 
explain the implications of a hard or soft Brexit. “If I’m gonna do something, 
I want it hard or not at all,” he jokes. Phillips, in her own words, is hoping 
for a tender Brexit. “You want to spoon Belgium? It’s the right shape,” Lycett 
shoots back.

They continue their double act in The Victoria, where Lycett claims, 
worryingly, to have spent his childhood. We order rounds of cocktails. Phillips 
is on tea, as she’s going back to work; she’s between appointments campaigning 
for justice for the Birmingham Six. “I’ve bombed in a few pubs in my time, 
including this one,” quips Lycett, who used to test early standup sets in the 
room above. It’s indicative of the edgy material he can get away with. Affable 
and vocally reminiscent of Julian Clary, his comedy is more interested in suave 
mischief-making, rather than offensive trolling. Not that he’s uncritical of 
the licence charisma affords. “People say I’m charming, but I’m uneasy with 
that word. Quentin Crisp said: ‘Charisma is the ability to influence without 
logic’, which is terrifying.”

Phillips has to go back to doing MP things and disappears. So a discussion 
springs up as to which local institution should be our next destination. 
Suggestions include Original Patty Men, which serves a burger fried inside a 
Krispy Kreme doughnut; the terrifying-sounding Coffin Works museum; or
Birmingham’s Walk Of Stars 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birmingham_Walk_of_Stars>. Who’s on that, then? 
“Lenny Henry, Aston Villa in 1982, the concept of the Archers, and Beverley 
Knight.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fbirmingham-pub-crawl-with-comedian-joe-lycett%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F253eb2c5a07fd72164277856f9e6ab956dd8a70d%2F0_783_3149_3937%2F3149.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20MPs%2C%20fur%20capes%20and%20UB40%3A%20a%20wild%20night%20with%20Joe%20Lycett%2C%20comedy's%20new%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fbirmingham-pub-crawl-with-comedian-joe-lycett%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20MPs%2C%20fur%20capes%20and%20UB40%3A%20a%20wild%20night%20with%20Joe%20Lycett%2C%20comedy%27s%20new%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fbirmingham-pub-crawl-with-comedian-joe-lycett%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F253eb2c5a07fd72164277856f9e6ab956dd8a70d%2F0_783_3149_3937%2F3149.jpg>
 Photograph: Will Ireland for the Guardian 
NextUp: can it become the Netflix for British standup comedy?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/16/nextup-stream-netflix-for-british-standup-comedy>
Lycett settles on another watering hole, possibly the strangest I’ve ever seen.
Ana Rocha 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwi0hNC7pLLQAhWE1RoKHXwYDDoQFggtMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fanarocha.co.uk%2F&usg=AFQjCNEwleFNIFnupKrCyVYKDTxVmi2ePQ&sig2=o9gJTTIDMNNfZkg-6zJkcg&bvm=bv.139250283,d.d2s>
, in Birmingham’s Jewellery Quarter, is a nearly empty antiques warehouse 
gallery cum tapas bar with a deli fridge in the corner, and an R&B playlist. 
Lycett strides over a red carpet to inspect the wares. A gold-plated lamp 
depicting Disney characters, on sale for £41,000. A stool with real gazelle’s 
legs. An enormous silver throne, next to a Victorian pram of creepy dolls. It’s 
like someone tried to recreate Michael Jackson’s Neverland ranch, but ran out 
of money. Lycett orders an un-drinkably spicy cocktail garnished with a massive 
chili, something in a jam jar with thyme poking out of it, and a beer. He sits 
beside two oversized herons, assembling a gingerbread house we have with us for 
some reason. There’s a strange charm in the tackiness of the place. “The thing 
about Birmingham is, no one spends their evening looking over your shoulder 
thinking: ‘Is that Nick Grimshaw?’ and wondering if there’s a better night they 
could be on. Because there isn’t.”

Spending time with Lycett occasionally feels like being in the West Midlands 
Goodfellas. A man called Tommy Corners turns up, offering to drive us to the 
Kings Heath side of town. (He’s called that, someone explains, because during 
the Euros he found you could put all sorts of bets on the number of corners won 
in matches, and now he can’t stop.) “My car’s full of soil,” says Corners as we 
clamber into the back seat, pushing aside a job lot of aftershaves. He doesn’t 
seem to be inviting any more questions on the topic, so off we go. Lycett has a 
habit of picking up followers. Does he ever spend time alone to recharge? “I’m 
not sure if I’m an introvert or extrovert. I love being around people, but 
sometimes I do need to go off and fart.”

Having passed so many career milestones, what’s next? “World domination was 
never the plan,” he says. “I’ve exceeded my own expectations; now I just want 
to keep things interesting.” By “interesting” he seems to mean “actively trying 
to get chucked out of his local pub”. We’re now at the Actress & Bishop, where 
Lycett is urging me to “touch the pump”. The pump is full of Coors Light, and 
has been clad in ice as a promotional gimmick. Having got in trouble a few 
weeks ago for partially de-icing the machine by inadvertently resting his hand 
on it, Lycett’s chief ambition is now to finish the job. The rebellious mood is 
infectious. Young Philip Seymour Hoffman rests a hot hand on the icy pump and 
attempts to order drinks. The manager assures him he’ll get nothing unless he 
moves his hand. They stare at each other. “We’re coming back here with 
miniature pickaxes,” promises a gleeful Lycett as we leave the premises.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fbirmingham-pub-crawl-with-comedian-joe-lycett%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6258a4e850a2a398f98cdc447aa8ddec940f133%2F0_0_4724_2834%2F4724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20MPs%2C%20fur%20capes%20and%20UB40%3A%20a%20wild%20night%20with%20Joe%20Lycett%2C%20comedy's%20new%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fbirmingham-pub-crawl-with-comedian-joe-lycett%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20MPs%2C%20fur%20capes%20and%20UB40%3A%20a%20wild%20night%20with%20Joe%20Lycett%2C%20comedy%27s%20new%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fbirmingham-pub-crawl-with-comedian-joe-lycett%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6258a4e850a2a398f98cdc447aa8ddec940f133%2F0_0_4724_2834%2F4724.jpg>
 Samadder and Lycett drink up. Photograph: Will Ireland for the Guardian 
It’s late. We make our way to the Hare & Hounds. A plaque informs us that this 
was the site ofUB40 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ub40>’s first gig, as 
good a recommendation as any. We knock back Craig Davids: a shot of tequila 
followed by a shot of pineapple, which is a revelation. At this point, we 
realise Brian Travers, founding saxophonist with UB40, is actually drinking at 
the bar. Has he been here since 1979? What’s more, he’s a fan of Lycett. “I’m 
not being funny, but you are a funny guy,” Travers hails him. And he’s full of 
advice for the rising star. “You know how long it takes to become an overnight 
sensation? Fifteen years.”

More people have joined us. Jess Phillips has reappeared, and is explaining 
trade tariffs using pint glasses and salt cellars. She’s like Tony Benn with a 
vape instead of a pipe. Brian from UB40 is still dispensing advice, while Joe 
contemplates religion. “Some say we live on through the family and friends who 
remember us,” he says. “But I’d rather live on through my DVD and book, which 
are available now.” I am profoundly drunk and my phone is dead. It’s time to go 
home. “I’ll get you an Uber,” says Phillips. “You don’t want to get stuck at 
Milton Keynes unless you’re there for an all-night rave, trust me.”

“I love you; always remember that,” says Lycett in parting. In the car, the 
driver asks me to confirm my name. “Jess Phillips?” I say, wondering whether 
it’s illegal to impersonate an MP. As we speed away, I miss the mayhem. Like 
his audiences, I want more time with this urbane rascal. To be vicariously 
reckless, unpredictable, fun. (Lycett, I later learn, has passed out, still 
wearing his fur coat.) Recalling his thoughts on Birmingham, the classy double 
entendre suddenly becomes apparent: if you’re up the Brum with Joe, there 
really isn’t a better night out.

Parsnips, Buttered is out now; That’s The Way, A-Ha A-Ha, Joe Lycett Live is 
out on DVD on Mon <http://www.joelycett.com/news.html>
 