
‘We are supposed to live in a democracy’


I felt so strongly about the Cuadrilla proposal that I demonstrated outside 
Lancashire County Council in Preston on two occasions when the council were 
voting on the applications.


Since the decision my view hasn’t changed. I am willing to be involved in 
non-violent protest and demonstration. I have already signed petitions and 
written to my MP and also Greg Clark, who was the minister responsible at the 
time of the appeal. We are supposed to live in a democracy but this is not 
operating when a government can ride roughshod over democratic decisions taken 
at local level

Joan Thompson, retired primary school teacher living in Freckleton 

‘We are campaigning more than ever’


My view hasn’t changed and our group, Frack Free Formby, is campaigning more 
than ever. We held an awareness raising meeting here in Formby on 18 October 
and had about 150 people there. OurFacebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/frackfreeformby/> has had over 500 likes since then 
and we are working closely with neighbouring groups.

We are approaching local parish councils, our MP and the local landowners for 
support. We are also in touch with the national groupFrack Off 
<http://frack-off.org.uk/> and Friends of the Earth. All this work began about 
three months ago so it is early days, but we hope to make people more aware of 
the implications of fracking.

Kathryn Monaghan, primary school headteacher living in Formby 

‘We stand to save the environment we call home’


My view hasn’t shifted in the slightest since the decision was made a month 
ago.Fracking <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/fracking> is going 
against everything we are working towards as a society, it’s a false hope given 
to people who are deliberately deceived by some parts of the media, energy 
companies, and the government themselves. They claim fracking is a replacement 
to the depleting gas fields in the North Sea, when the reality is they don’t 
truly know how much shale gas is down there, nor do they know the destruction, 
devastation and livelihoods it will ruin along the way.

Climate change is inevitable now, but we have the chance to reduce the impact. 
The UK is the windiest place in Europe, yet our government make it near 
impossible to build a wind turbine on land, due to its ‘visual impact’. 
Fracking will turn the Fylde Coast, an area of beautiful country side, small 
villages and towns into a baron waste last, full of toxic chemicals that will 
destroy every living organism it touches.

My campaign is a little different; I’m currently in Australia on holiday. So 
I’m using social media and support groups to demonstrate the severity of the 
situation we currently find ourselves in. We stand together, against a giant 
corporation, who only care for profits, not for people, against the government 
who have betrayed a democratic vote and effectively spat in our faces. We stand 
for what is right, we stand for future generations and we stand to save the 
environment we call home. Together our voices can’t be ignored.

Leigh Edwards, 25-year-old geography graduate

‘Local communities should have a say in their own futures’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Flancashire-readers-on-the-cuadrilla-fracking-decision-one-month-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c616f7fa9bde1475a3b47d23b0c75ae82a06353%2F127_0_1376_825%2F1376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lancashire%20readers%20on%20the%20Cuadrilla%20fracking%20decision%20one%20month%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Flancashire-readers-on-the-cuadrilla-fracking-decision-one-month-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lancashire%20readers%20on%20the%20Cuadrilla%20fracking%20decision%20one%20month%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Flancashire-readers-on-the-cuadrilla-fracking-decision-one-month-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c616f7fa9bde1475a3b47d23b0c75ae82a06353%2F127_0_1376_825%2F1376.jpg>
 Photograph: Karl Axon 
Our group Roseacre Awareness Group <http://www.ragfrack.co.uk/> (RAG) is part 
of theFrack Free Lancashire <http://frackfreelancashire.org.uk/cms/> (FFL) 
alliance. Many community groups living in the area are opposed to fracking 
here. We also have a renewable energy group looking at, and actively 
supporting, green solutions.

We are still campaigning very strongly, and are actually holding a national 
anti-fracking march next Saturday in Manchester with groups from all over the 
UK coming along. We still require significant funds to fight but our group 
lacks these resources. One possibility is for us to raise money nationally via 
a fundraiser if needed. However we will continue to lobby local and national 
politicians about this issue.


We firmly believe extracting fossil fuels is incompatible with our climate 
change targets and that they need to be left in the ground. Also the risks and 
impacts of fracking on local communities is totally unacceptable. We believe 
local communities should have a say in their own futures. This is not just 
about us. So many communities face this threat further down the line.


Barbara Richardson, former chair of RAG living in Roseacre

‘Fracking would have a devastating effect on the farming community’


I think it’s important to inform people of the effect this polluting industry 
has had in places such as Queensland, resulting in a wasteland. Fracking would 
also have a devastating effect on the farming community of West Lancashire. The 
only people who seem to be supporting fracking are those who will make money 
from it and that wont be ordinary householders!


Phillip Buchanan, 56-year-old living in Halsall

 