
At this time of year I always congratulate myself for having the foresight to 
live across the road from the council’sChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> tree collection point. On 
the day my wife decides enough is enough, I can simply drag the tree out the 
front door, a few stubborn ornaments still buried in its branches, and launch 
it like a caber on to the pile. I think they compost them or something, but I 
won’t pretend I have any real interest in the rest of my tree’s journey.

The first week of January brings on a kind of temporal jet lag. We’ve already 
seen in the new year,making rash promises to ourselves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/29/old-habits-hard-new-year-resolution-personality-succeed>
 and investing the next 12 months withall manner of false hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2017/jan/01/new-years-resolutions-why-setting-career-goals-is-a-waste-of-time>
, but the trappings of last year still surround us: an open bottle of wine that 
must be drunk or disposed of before one’s new relationship with alcohol can 
begin; unfinished books and box sets begun in the post-Christmas lull; old 
bills as yet unpaid. Two defining factors of 2017 –Donald Trump’s inauguration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/02/rebecca-ferguson-says-she-will-play-trump-inauguration-if-she-can-sing-strange-fruit>
 and the triggering ofarticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50> – are still a few weeks ahead 
of us. And that stupid Christmas tree is still up.

Some of this is comforting. As previewed, 2017 promises to be a dystopian 
wasteland patrolled by driverless cars, so a brief transition period – neither 
one year nor the other – is certainly welcome. There is probably something 
therapeutic to be derived from pretending none of it’s happening yet. After 
all, If you’d known what 2016 was going to be like, you probably would have 
kept drinking right through January. Maybe you did anyway. If so, well played.

Dog days 

On the other hand, there’s a lot to be said in favour of moving on, for good 
or ill. I recall that this time last year I was faced with a dog that needed 
putting down. We’d been preparing ourselves for the inevitable, but it’s not 
the sort of thing one wants to do over Christmas.

It turns out it’s not the sort of thing one wants to do in January either – or 
ever. But by then it had become a bit urgent, so that’s how I spent my first 
business day of 2016: kneeling on the floor of the vet’s surgery, scratching an 
old dog’s ears for the last time.

I’m not recommending it – I’m glad there’s nothing like that in my diary for 
the coming week – but if there’s a time of year for that sort of chore, this is 
certainly it. A week set aside for sad business, regrets and bleak 
reassessment. Either you can imagine that the rest of the year will be upbeat 
by comparison, or you can say that at least you’ve started as you mean to go on.

Another pine mess

I could not have known that this would be the morning my wife decided the 
Christmas tree had to go, or that she would not be dissuaded by my claims that 
I was busy. Her sense of urgency meant the annual“undecoration” of the tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/house-and-homes-blog/2012/jan/05/remove-christmas-decorations-tree>
 was not the wistful, contemplative exercise it sometimes can be. As two 
separate strands of Christmas lights became hopelessly entwined during removal, 
I threatened an unpleasant expediency.

“I’m going to cut them off with gardening shears,” I said.

“Fine,” my wife said. “I’ll get the shears.”

“Don’t be insane,” I said. In the end we pulled the whole tangled mess over 
the tree’s head, like a jumper, and I dragged it across the road.

As I hoisted it on to the already substantial pile, I could not help but 
notice that the temporary fencing that normally defines the collection point’s 
parameters hadn’t been set up. Either I was a day early or the service has been 
discontinued, and I was simply participating in a massively popular form of 
fly-tipping. I suppose I’ll find out in the next day or two. But by then I’ll 
have already moved on.
 