
Eight years ago, while returning home from a stag do in Blackpool, Scott Gibson
 <http://www.scottgibsoncomedy.co.uk/> began getting headaches that were so 
excruciating he rang the NHS’s 24-hour helpline and then had a stroke while on 
the phone. They sent an ambulance, but he turned it away and simply took to his 
bed instead – for four days. As he lay there, one thought kept going through 
his head: “I must be OK because I’m young and healthy.” Finally, he tried to 
head back to work, only to find himself going blind in one eye. Somehow he made 
it to hospital, where doctors diagnosed an aneurysm an inch-and-a-half deep 
behind his right ear. He needed major brain surgery, they said. The operation 
took seven hours.

After Gibson pulled through, he was determined to live life to the full – to 
live the life he’d always dreamed of, in fact. “I always wanted to be a 
storyteller,” says Gibson. “And, from day one, I knew this would be the first 
story I’d tell.” So, as a lifelong comedy lover, the Glaswegian embarked on a 
college standup course and was soon gigging regularly. In 2012, he took 
redundancy – £632 – from the call centre where he worked to focus fully on his 
new career.

But it wasn’t until last year that he made his Edinburgh fringe debut – after 
a false start in 2015, when the StandComedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> Club, which has venues in 
Newcastle, Glasgow and Edinburgh, refused to book Life After Death, as he 
called his show. “I don’t know why,” says Gibson, now 32. “I don’t know if they 
thought I was worthy of a room.”
A clip from Scott Gibson’s show Life After Death on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=apJXCAIiI1U> 
At no point did I think: ‘I’m going to win an award with my debut show'

In Edinburgh, however, he proved an overnight sensation. The unheralded 
Glaswegian swiped the covetedbest newcomer comedy award 
<http://www.comedyawards.co.uk/best-newcomer> with a show you’d happily watch 
even if there were no laughs in it, so gripping is his near-death tale. Looking 
back, Gibson says he is glad about the enforced wait: the extra year’s work 
contributed, he believes, to his extraordinary success. I could fill this whole 
article with quotes expressing the burly Scotsman’s astonishment at winning his 
gong, joining a pantheon that includesSarah Millican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/16/sarah-millican-outsider-review-saucy-postcard-rural-life>
,the Mighty Boosh <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/the-mighty-boosh> and 
Tim Minchin <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/tim-minchin>. “I never thought 
in a million years I’d even be nominated,” he says, having arrived at the 
festival with “no manager, no PR, no buzz. Didn’t even have a press release. I 
don’t know if that helped, having no expectations. But at no point did I think, 
‘I’m going to win an award with my debut show.’”

Even being shortlisted, says Gibson, propelled him into a glamorous new world. 
“The nominees turned up to have press pictures taken – and there’s free coffee 
and bacon rolls! I’m thinking, ‘This is how the other half live!’” Of 18 acts 
nominated, Gibson believes he was the only one without an agent or manager. He 
credits his venue,the Gilded Balloon <http://gildedballoon.co.uk/>, with 
providing the support that made his triumph possible.

What made it doubly sweet, he says, was that the main award was won by his 
compatriotRichard Gadd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/12/richard-gadd-review-banshee-labyrinth-edinburgh>
, a first ever Scottish double-whammy and a rare instance of Edinburgh’s comedy 
awards recognising local talent. “Rightly or wrongly,” says Gibson, “we 
[Scottish comics] have an idea we don’t belong at the fringe. There is a voice 
in our heads saying we cannot compete with London, or the establishment.”

Related: Scott Gibson review – near-death experience brought to life by standup
 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/26/scott-gibson-review-standup> 

That’s partly because, for Scottish acts, the fringe is awkwardly positioned 
between home gig and alien environment. “It’s a home gig in that it’s in 
Edinburgh,” says Gibson, “but not in terms of the audience.” Then there’s the 
lack of a sustainable comedy circuit in Scotland, meaning acts can only ever do 
short sets in pubs, and seldom the hour-long narrative or themed shows that 
prosper on the fringe.

“It’s a hard apprenticeship,” says Gibson. “But it’s the best, because if you 
come through it, you can play anywhere.” So will his triumph be a 
confidence-booster for Scottish acts? “There’ll have been comics in Scotland 
who heard the result and went, ‘Brilliant! Next year, I’m going.’ And others 
who’ll say, ‘Well, that’s us for another 25 years.’ That’s unfortunately how we 
think, and it’s stupid.”

At any rate, Gibson will be back, with a show called Like Father Like Son, 
about “the male figures in my life and how those relationships formed me”. 
Already nearing completion, it will be one in the eye, Gibson promises, for 
anyone thinking: “All right, one-trick pony, let’s see what you’ve got.”

In the meantime, he is midway through a run at Soho theatre in London. Before 
his fringe success, getting a gig there was all he dreamed of, the apex of his 
ambition. However, his aspirations have not been much affected by awards glory. 
“I just love doing standup,” he says. “If you can pay your bills, go on holiday 
once a year, and do standup … ” The ex-call centre employee’s voice tails off. 
“I don’t know what else you’re wanting. It’s just a good life. Life’s good, 
man.”

•Scott Gibson: Life After Death 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/scott-gibson-life-after-death> is at Soho 
theatre, London, until 14 January.
 