
When English Heritage announced its latest batch of eight blue plaques 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/25/freddie-mercury-and-ava-gardner-in-eclectic-gang-honoured-with-blue-plaques>
 to adorn the former London homes of famous figures this week, a member of the 
committee remarked the lineup would make a great dinner party: the film star 
Ava Gardner, the playwright Samuel Beckett, the dancer Margot Fonteyn, the 
comedian Tommy Cooper, the cook Elizabeth David, the singer Freddie Mercury – 
and the footballers Bobby Moore and Laurie Cunningham.

You could certainly sell tickets to a tête-à-tête between Beckett and Cooper 
(just imagine the one-liners). But an equally interesting conversation might 
well have been that between Fonteyn, the glittering star of the Royal Ballet 
for 40 years, and Cunningham, who signed forLeyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient> at the age of 16 after 
turning down a rather different offer from the Ballet Rambert.

Cunningham loved dancing. He met his first long-term girlfriend, the one who 
was with him through his years at Orient,West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> and his move to Real Madrid, 
when they danced together at a nightclub. She didn’t even know he was a 
footballer until she saw him on the television, coming on as a substitute to 
make his first-team debut. When George Petchey, his first manager, started 
fining his quick-footed young winger for arriving late at training sessions, 
Cunningham entered dance competitions to win the money to pay the escalating 
penalties.

Those habits did not make him a bad boy. He was quiet and well mannered and 
spoke thoughtfully in interviews.In Benjamin Turner’s excellent biographical 
documentary <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MiEk3-3uChs> for ITV a few years 
ago, we learned he taught Peter Reid how to peel a king prawn and showed Mark 
Bright the proper way to use cutlery. He had already impressed Bright by being 
the first English footballer he had met who spoke a foreign language. Reid also 
remembered his sense of style, and how he had the jacket and trousers of his 
FA-issue England travelling kit specially lined to make them hang more 
elegantly.

In a few days’ time, on 8 March, Cunningham would have celebrated his 60th 
birthday. To some that will seem barely believable, given he exists in the 
minds of those who saw him in action as an eternally youthful figure. His death 
in a road accident in 1989, aged 33, came after injuries had already deprived 
him of the speed that was one of his prime assets, but his playing career still 
had one last chapter waiting to be written on that July day in Spain when his 
car collided with another vehicle parked with a flat tyre on the side of the 
road.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Flaurie-cunningham-dancing-footballer-richard-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ec3eb75132f2254c69bd91033da3ec78db659b8%2F0_83_2987_1794%2F2987.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Laurie%20Cunningham%3A%20the%20dancing%20footballer%20with%20eternal%20youth%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Flaurie-cunningham-dancing-footballer-richard-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Laurie%20Cunningham%3A%20the%20dancing%20footballer%20with%20eternal%20youth%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Flaurie-cunningham-dancing-footballer-richard-williams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ec3eb75132f2254c69bd91033da3ec78db659b8%2F0_83_2987_1794%2F2987.jpg>
 Laurie Cunningham joined Real Madrid in 1979 and was the first British 
footballer to play for the Spanish side. Photograph: Popperfoto 
One reason we remember him as such a pristinely youthful figure is that he 
first went to Spain when he was only 23. Foreign league matches were not shown 
on British TV in those days, and meetings betweenReal Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> and Football League clubs 
were few. English fans saw little of the two good years that included a Spanish 
league and cup double before a serious knee injury inflicted by a team-mate on 
the training ground began his decline. His return home – for brief appearances 
with Manchester United, Leicester City and Wimbledon – was not lasting or 
significant enough to shift the image he had created in his youthful prime.

It was 40 years ago this April that he scored a goal that lives in the bank of 
first-hand memories alongside others by Ian Storey-Moore, Dejan Savicevic and 
Zinedine Zidane. The Montenegrin and the Frenchman happened to score theirs in 
European Cup finals, in 1994 and2002 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2002/may/16/championsleague.sport1> 
respectively, but the two Englishmen suffer not at all by comparison.

Storey-Moore’s masterpiece – against Arsenal on Boxing Day 1971 – is perhaps a 
tale for another occasion. Cunningham’s came on a spring day at Stamford 
Bridge, when Orient beat Chelsea 2-0 in a perfectly ordinary fixture in the old 
Second Division. The home side, still smarting from relegation, were on their 
way to finishing the season in 11th place under Eddie McCreadie, two places 
ahead of Petchey’s Orient.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Flaurie-cunningham-dancing-footballer-richard-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36d9b72f32bb719190787c4dd02c757d58f638b7%2F0_182_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Laurie%20Cunningham%3A%20the%20dancing%20footballer%20with%20eternal%20youth%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Flaurie-cunningham-dancing-footballer-richard-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Laurie%20Cunningham%3A%20the%20dancing%20footballer%20with%20eternal%20youth%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F26%2Flaurie-cunningham-dancing-footballer-richard-williams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36d9b72f32bb719190787c4dd02c757d58f638b7%2F0_182_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Leyton Orient unveil a blue plaque in memory of Laurie Cunningham. 
Cunningham picked up the ball on the left wing, somewhere near the halfway 
line, with the entire Chelsea rearguard – including Kenny Swain at right-back 
and David Hay, Steve Wicks and Ron Harris as the three central defenders – 
between him and the goal. One by one his adversaries challenged in vain as he 
accelerated and swayed past them with a dancer’s footwork before striking a 
shot from 25 yards that left John Phillips helpless. After that, the only 
surprise was that it took another year before a First Division club secured his 
services.

West Brom paid around £100,000 for his signature in March 1977 – enough to 
improve the drainage of the Brisbane Road pitch and to keep the east London 
club afloat. Ron Atkinson arrived at The Hawthorns that summer and set about 
creating the team who came close to winning the league in 1978-79. The Baggies 
became what their manager later described as “probably everybody’s second 
favourite club”, the status enjoyed today by Leicester City, whose play this 
season is imbued with a matching optimism, confidence and simplicity.

‘We got off the coach and the National Front was there … People spat at us’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/25/west-brom-three-degrees-book-extract>
The indelible first-hand memory of that particular team is of seeing them run 
out at the Baseball Ground in the spring sunshine wearing their away strip of 
yellow and green striped shirts and green shorts. With Cunningham, Cyrille 
Regis, Bryan Robson, Len Cantello and Brendon Batson, they looked unbeatable 
before the game had even begun.

Cunningham was the first of a group of homegrown black wingers who illuminated 
English football in the 1970s and 80s. The others included Vince Hilaire at 
Crystal Palace, Mark Chamberlain at Stoke City, Mark Walters at Aston Villa and 
John Barnes at Watford and Liverpool. Cunningham was the first black player to 
represent England’s Under-21s but was narrowly beaten to a similar distinction 
at senior level by Viv Anderson. His total of six full international caps under 
Ron Greenwood now seems like a ludicrously inadequate reward when compared with 
– no disrespect intended - Theo Walcott’s 42.

The black players of Cunningham’s generation were required to turn a deaf ear 
to chants of “Coon” and “Zulu” and to put up with having everything from 
bananas to ball bearings hurled at them by fans to whom the National Front’s 
newspaper was sold by vendors operating openly outside the grounds. The blue 
plaque on an ordinary family house in Stroud Green, where Cunningham’s Jamaican 
mother and father brought him up, will be celebrating a courage that lives on 
just as vividly, and just as significantly in terms of the history of the 
English game, as his glorious artistry.
 