
Alexis Petridis: ‘Eventually I found myself tuning out’


Lazarus arrives in London trailing an intriguing reputation as the solitary 
stumble in what looked likethe most perfectly stage-managed exit in rock history
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-death-worldwide-tributes-death-work-of-art>
. Virtually everything Bowie did between his 2013 return to music and his death 
on 10 January this year generated critical praise, but when it opened in New 
York last December, Lazarus got what you might politely call “mixed notices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/08/lazarus-david-bowie-review-roundup-new-york-premiere-michael-c-hall-ivo-van-hove>
”.

Even the critics who praised it thought the play – a sequel to the 1976 film 
The Man Who Fell to Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/the-man-who-fell-to-earth-review-nicolas-roeg-david-bowie>
 – was incomprehensible, beyond the general gist of what’s going on: the 
sozzled, lovelorn alien Newton wants to get back to his own planet, in which 
task he is variously abetted and hindered by figures who may or may not exist.

Lazarus review – Michael C Hall is a loving alien in spectacular Bowie fantasy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/08/lazarus-review-david-bowie-kings-cross-theatre-michael-c-hall>
A degree of opacity isn’t really a problem for long-term Bowie fans: the fact 
that the lyrics of Joe the Lion are pretty indecipherable hardly impedes one’s 
enjoyment. But there’s a world of difference between listening to a song with 
incomprehensible lyrics and watching an incomprehensible play with wilfully 
stilted dialogue, in which puzzling epigrams collide with clunky exposition: 
“You were sent here from another planet and you never got back home to your 
family. You got real rich – started a bunch of companies. You tried to leave 
once before and these people did experiments on you.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du_EE7Zun90E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du_EE7Zun90E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du_EE7Zun90E&media=>
You can rewind a song and pick it apart later, not a luxury afforded the 
theatregoer. Eventually, I found myself tuning out and just concentrating on 
the music. There are songs here that work really well as part of a musical: the 
stuff Bowie wrote specifically for the piece, including the title track, and 
the less obvious dips into his back catalogue such asIt’s No Game Part 1 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iIpyzKgIExw> and Always Crashing in the Same 
Car <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u_EE7Zun90E>. The former is sung by 
Michael C Hall, as Newton, in a less histrionic manner than Bowie did on Scary 
Monsters; the latter by Amy Lennox as Elly, Newton’s housekeeper, who for 
reasons that aren’t entirely clear, starts dressing like his former lover Mary 
Lou. She sings it slumped by a fridge, gin bottle in hand, which, given the 
lurid stories aboutBowie’s Berlin period 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/13/david-bowie-berlin-years-heroes-just-a-gigolo>
, may well have been how the song was written in the first place.

Lindsay Kemp: I tried to get David Bowie to do Puss in Boots
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/12/lindsay-kemp-david-bowie-ziggy-stardust-interview>
For a mercy, what you might call the Broadway-ification of some of Bowie’s old 
songs, audible on the original cast album, seems to have been dialled down, but 
there are still a lot of moments where songs have been crowbarred in with 
craven clumsiness. Even in the WTF? all-bets-are-off atmosphere of this play, 
there’s something jarring about a female character singing the opening lines of 
Life on Mars?, apparently in reference to herself, when she visibly doesn’t 
have mousy hair.

The one big number that survives the transition to the stage is “Heroes” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mb6O-b6Z6_4>. Whether much is added to the 
song by its staging – which sees Hall and Sophia Anne Caruso slide around in a 
milky liquid – is a moot point, but sonically at least, their duet highlights 
its underlying sense of fatalism and despair, rescuing it from the air-punching 
triumphalism it seems to have acquired in recent years.

It’s one of a handful of really good things about Lazarus, to which you might 
add: Hall’s performance and the band positioned on stage, who sound fantastic 
throughout. But this is a deeply flawed piece of work.Lazarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/lazarus> might concentrate on Bowie’s alien 
side, but it stands as a reminder that he was human after all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Flazarus-musical-david-bowie-kings-cross-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ec79c59ec7f6db195cdde6761ca64cd4c9a919d%2F0_245_5034_3020%2F5034.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lazarus%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20jukebox%20musical%20for%20people%20who%20are%20too%20hip%20for%20We%20Will%20Rock%20You%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Flazarus-musical-david-bowie-kings-cross-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lazarus%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20jukebox%20musical%20for%20people%20who%20are%20too%20hip%20for%20We%20Will%20Rock%20You%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Flazarus-musical-david-bowie-kings-cross-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ec79c59ec7f6db195cdde6761ca64cd4c9a919d%2F0_245_5034_3020%2F5034.jpg>
 ‘Cringingly subservient female characters’ … Amy Lennox as Elly in Lazarus. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Hadley Freeman: ‘My God, the last half hour is tediously po-faced’

Lazarus is, really, a jukebox musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/15/at-thriller-live-theres-a-fight-in-the-stalls-my-three-week-journey-into-jukebox-musicals>
 for people who think they’re too hip for We Will Rock You: alongside a few new 
songs, there are old reliables such as Changes and Absolute Beginners, shoved 
with varying degrees of awkwardness into the story. All of this could have been 
fun, were it not for the impenetrable plot, absurd dialogue and cringingly 
subservient female characters.

The two main female roles in the play, Elly and Girl (Caruso), are merely 
Manic Pixie Dream Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jul/16/why-the-manic-pixie-dream-girl-must-never-return>
 with even fewer clothes than the role usually demands. Elly is hired to be 
Thomas the Alien’s PA, even though he doesn’t do anything but drink gin. 
Despite this not exactly attractive proposition, and the fact that she’s 
married, she is suddenly overwhelmed with love and incapable of keeping her 
clothes on around him. Girl, meanwhile, is a figment of Newton’s imagination, 
twirling around him as if she’s singing China Girl on The X Factor. Both exist 
to save Thomas and be saved by him, but neither can save themselves from the 
ridiculous lines they’re forced to say.

Hall, often sounding just like Bowie when he sings, gives emotional depth to a 
character the play’s script seems determined to diminish. At one point a 
character describes him as “sorta sad, sorta unknowable in the way that you 
imagine reclusive, rich, eccentric men to be”. Right, really nailing the 
archetypes there!

Jan Versweyveld’s set is clever, with Thomas’s boredom with the world 
reflected in his long beige bedroom, the most boringly earthbound room that 
ever existed. More fabulous are the video designs, especially the scene in 
which it seems there are two Michael C Halls. Michael Esper as the 
knife-wielding Valentine provides a welcome ripple of menace. But my God, the 
last half hour is tediously po-faced. Bored by Bowie: just when you think 2016 
has reached rock bottom, it goes that extra mile.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Flazarus-musical-david-bowie-kings-cross-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e650c14a25d0430bfc6feb8c6eb06a150a54978%2F0_546_5175_3105%2F5175.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lazarus%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20jukebox%20musical%20for%20people%20who%20are%20too%20hip%20for%20We%20Will%20Rock%20You%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Flazarus-musical-david-bowie-kings-cross-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lazarus%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20jukebox%20musical%20for%20people%20who%20are%20too%20hip%20for%20We%20Will%20Rock%20You%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Flazarus-musical-david-bowie-kings-cross-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e650c14a25d0430bfc6feb8c6eb06a150a54978%2F0_546_5175_3105%2F5175.jpg>
 ‘It can feel like listening to a friend tell you about their dream’ … Lazarus. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Hannah Jane Parkinson: ‘It’s like a friend telling you about their dream’

Lazarus is a beautifully sketched portrait of mental illness, loneliness and a 
psyche disintegrating – but that is both the show’s greatest success and, 
ultimately, its downfall. The plot is loose-fitting, like the clothes that the 
depressed Newton wears throughout. Confined to his apartment and living off 
cereal, gin and ennui, he’s a refugee in New York City, unable to head home and 
stuck between life and death, shrinking into grief over a lost love. Newton is, 
as writerEnda Walsh <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/enda-walsh> has put it, 
“going insane”.

There are interesting ideas and narratives, but it’s slow. So slow. Grief, 
rejection, success, unrequited love, failure: all are addressed here, often 
well, but the meandering structure means that Lazarus can feel like listening 
to a friend tell you about their dream. We all know how that is.

I wasn’t expecting Bowie: The Musical. But it’s odd to see the creation of a 
man who so excelled at showmanship – perhaps the best pop star who ever lived – 
and feel so deeply underwhelmed. Some might enjoy seeing the band playing live 
behind glass. I found it a bit “web stream of Radio 1 Live Lounge”.

Ivo van Hove: ‘I give it all as Bowie gave it all – in a masked way’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/06/ivo-van-hove-i-give-it-all-like-bowie-gave-it-all-in-a-masked-way-lazarus-interview>
Hall deserves his salutes, but few of the songs make an impact. Unfathomably, 
in a show about a fallen star, there is no Rock’n’Roll Suicide, one of many 
strange omissions. I’m almost grateful.

The best thing about Lazarus – and this is not good for a musical – is Walsh’s 
script, which has clever lines among the Hamlet references and depression 
argot. My favourite, from when Newton spots Elly trying on Mary Lou’s clothes: 
“What are you doing? I know you have clothes of your own; I’ve seen you wearing 
them.”

Lazarus nails the landscape of depression; the blue light of an empty fridge 
and a bed that makes Emin’s look like Soho House (“I need to sleep”, says 
Newton, minutes after waking). It’s accurate, but … why would anybody want a 
night out at the theatre to watch this?

•Lazarus <https://lazarusmusical.com/> is at King’s Cross theatre, London, 
until 22 January
 