
Huddersfield Town endured their first defeat of the season in the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>, allowing Newcastle United 
and Barnsley to gain ground.

Holding a four-point advantage at the top of the Championship going into the 
game atBrighton on Tuesday night, the Terriers saw their unbeaten record ended 
when the goalkeeper Danny Ward could not keep out Anthony Knockaert’s 
80th-minute effort as Chris Hughton’s side did his former employers a favour 
with a 1-0 victory. It means David Wagner’s side are now just one point clear.

Newcastle flying high as Jonjo Shelvey scores twice in mauling of QPR
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/qpr-newcastle-championship-match-report>
Barnsley maintained their early promotion challenge with a remarkable 4-0 win 
atWolverhampton Wanderers with the goals all arriving inside the last 17 
minutes, Conor Hourihane, Adam Hammill, Saidy Janko and Tom Bradshaw doing the 
damage. They are now just one point behind Huddersfield, along withNewcastle 
who won6-0 at Queens Park Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/qpr-newcastle-championship-match-report>
.

Jacob Murphy ensured Norwich City remain hot on the heels of the pacesetters 
after firing the Canaries into a 2-0 lead againstWigan Athletic inside 11 
minutes at Carrow Road. But Jordi Gómez pulled one back for the visitors with 
18 minutes remaining and the goalkeeper Michael McGovern had to make a late 
save from Will Grigg to deny the visitors a point.

Fulham needed an injury-time equaliser from Ryan Sessegnon to snatch a point 
from their home match withBurton Albion after Jackson Irvine had put the 
visitors ahead six minutes into the second half.

There was even greater drama at Hillsborough, where both Sheffield Wednesday 
andBristol City finished a five-goal thriller with 10 men. The on-loan Chelsea 
striker Tammy Abraham headed the visitors into a 2-0 half-time lead and 
although Steven Fletcher pulled a goal back seven minutes after the restart, 
Wednesday’s hopes were swiftly dealt a blow when Sam Hutchinson was dismissed 
for a foul inside the box.

However, Lee Tomlin’s penalty hit the post and after Gary O’Neil had departed 
courtesy of the game’s second red card, Barry Bannan levelled with 15 minutes 
remaining to set the stage for Kieran Lee to win it in stoppage time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fnewcastle-united-huddersfield-town-championship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0406a919f8f0a26bfa8f51257628747e71bf6e8%2F267_175_2213_1327%2F2213.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leaders%20Huddersfield%20slip%20up%20at%20Brighton%20as%20Barnsley%20put%20four%20past%20Wolves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fnewcastle-united-huddersfield-town-championship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leaders%20Huddersfield%20slip%20up%20at%20Brighton%20as%20Barnsley%20put%20four%20past%20Wolves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fnewcastle-united-huddersfield-town-championship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0406a919f8f0a26bfa8f51257628747e71bf6e8%2F267_175_2213_1327%2F2213.jpg>
 Sheffield Wednesday players celebrate Kieran Lee’s last-gasp winner. 
Photograph: McNulty/JMP/Rex/Shutterstock 
Derby County failed to score once again as the former Ram Luke Varney’s lone 
strike handedIpswich Town victory at the iPro Stadium, while Reading and 
Birmingham City played out a stalemate at the Madejski Stadium.

At the foot of the table, Preston North End eased themselves out of the drop 
zone as goals from Tom Clarke, Callum Robinson and Jordan Hugill secured a 3-0 
home win againstCardiff City, but Blackburn Rovers remain rooted at the bottom 
of the pile following a 2-1 defeat atLeeds United, who won it through Kyle 
Bartley’s 86th-minute header after Marvin Emnes had cancelled out Chris Wood’s 
opener.
 