
Bournemouth

How's it going? An inconsistent season not untypical of transitional sides. So 
many departures early in the season meant we had a very slow start … and every 
time we build up a head of steam we suffer a silly defeat. As I write, we have 
gone from beating Huddersfield on their patch to losing in a hapless display 
againstSheffield United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> 
on ours. Frustration is growing with Lee Bradbury, but is hardly justified. He 
has bought well (albeit with more money than any manager since Harry Redknapp) 
but is let down by the fact that the side's best performances are away from 
Dean Court. His habit of playing 4-5-1 at home – where we cannot buy a win – 
haven't helped his case with a fan base that will not tolerate anything but 
expansive passing football. But he is putting together an excellent squad who 
will go one better than his predecessor's did. With a division as close as this 
we could be in with a shout of the play-offs until the end of the season, but 
if we don't manage it I believe it's only a matter of time before we finally 
return to the second tier.

Who's been the star? Wes Thomas – thanks to his goals he just shades it from a 
resurgent Marc Pugh.

Biggest disappointment? Throwing away a comfortable FA Cup tie against 
Gillingham. We seem to be cursed in the Cup.

Grade C+

Stuart Bramley, Court Offside

Brentford

How's it going? This season the target for the Bees is to make a serious bid 
for a play-off place and it's so far, so good as we currently sit in sixth. Uwe 
Rösler has made a solid start to life asBrentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> boss, making good on his 
promise to get the team playing a decent brand of passing football. Yet there 
is still plenty of room for improvement – consistency has been an issue and the 
German is yet to find a solution to our perennial struggles in front of goal.

Who's been the star? Sam Saunders. Sidelined under former boss Andy Scott, the 
skilful midfielder (and free-kick specialist) has been given a run in the side 
and proved his worth, chipping in with five goals so far.

Biggest disappointment? Our home form. While Brentford have been brilliant on 
the road, we've dropped a number of vital points at Griffin Park.

Grade B

Will Gore, Brentford fan (@WillGore <http://www.twitter.com/WillGore>)

Bury

How's it going? 21 down, 25 games to go and we sit 12th. High points – the 
wins over Walsall and Preston; and the lows – losses at Sheffield United and
Colchester <https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester>. Considering we 
lost our talisman Ryan Lowe and Daniem Mozika just before deadline day we have 
not only steadied the ship but exceeded all fans' expectations. A couple of 
shrewd loan signings have helped too (David Amoo and Shane Byrne) and we 
eagerly look forward to consolidating our mid-table position.

Who's been the star? We have seen the real Andy Bishop for the first time in 
three years and he works tirelessly to help the team.

Biggest disappointment? Playing 4-5-1 (our new formation) is great away from 
home where we do better even at this level, but when we play teams of similar 
stature to ourselves it can be too defensive, especially at home.

Grade A-. Fantastic start and if we had converted a couple of draws into wins 
would be an A*. Roll on the new year.

Anthony Wearing, Bury fan (@wazzabomb <http://twitter.com/#!/wazzabomb>)

Carlisle United

How's it going? Pretty well. We looked in decent shape at this point last year 
but I felt the optimism at the time was false and that we had a soft 
underbelly. My instinct this year is that we're made of stiffer stuff – the 
summer signings have added experience and nous to last year's talent and spark. 
We have the potential to beat anyLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> team on any given day 
– with a couple of decent January additions we'll be in and around the play-off 
mix. I fear we'll edge just short but that'll mark strong progress for the 
season.

Who's been the star? Lee Miller – Greg Abbott's best signing (and he's made 
some good ones). Scores goals, links up play and has the heart of a lion – if 
he gets injured disregard the answer above.

Biggest disappointment? Jim Rosenthal's velvet bag and its iniquitous 
contents. Charlton away? Thanks very much. Out of all cup competitions by 
Christmas and missing a potential windfall for the January sales.

Grade B

John McGee, Bring Me the Head of Keith Mincher 
<http://www.keithmincher.blogspot.com> (@epouvantail 
<http://twitter.com/#!/epouvantail>)

Charlton Athletic

How's it going? After years of decline things are finally looking up at The 
Valley. We've got a real team playing with passion, hunger and togetherness. 
Michael Morrison and Matthew Taylor are the rocks in defence; Danny Hollands, 
Danny Green and Johnnie Jackson a beautifully balanced combination in midfield; 
with Yann Kermorgant and Bradley Wright-Phillips an irresistible combination up 
front. There were hopes that this could be a good season, with promotion a 
distinct possibility. Now automatic promotion as champions looks to be a real 
prospect. Things could scarcely be better at The Valley and the club could be 
on the verge of "doing a Brighton".

Who's been the star? It's been a real team effort so there are several 
contenders, but it is hard to ignore the goals of Wright-Phillips.

Biggest disappointment? The injuries to Mikel Alonso and Dale Stephens, but 
the duo should be available to help the promotion drive in the second half of 
the season.

Grade? It has to be A+.

Ketts, Doctor Kish <http://www.doctorkish.com> 

Chesterfield

How's it going? One word can describe our season so far – awful. Following on 
from last season's glorious championship-winning campaign in League Two, we 
have crashed back down to earth with defeat after defeat leaving us wondering 
where the next point will come from. With only three league wins from the 21 
games, there's been little for the loyal and newly recruited Spireite fans to 
cheer. What was supposed to be a season of consolidation in the higher league 
is turning out to be a fight for survival. We can only hope that John Sheridan 
spends wisely in January with the money he has been promised by owner Dave 
Allen.

Who's been the star? Struggling with this one for obvious reasons, but the 
promise and improvement shown by young striker Jordan Bowery gets him the vote.

Biggest disappointment? The lack of investment during the summer. It was 
obvious that the loss of top scorer Craig Davies and utility man Deane Smalley 
was going to weaken the side and the lack of replacements has been our downfall.

Grade? Y – I know you were expecting a Z, but we haven't had the rub of the 
green and it's our first season in a higher division.

Dean Mansell, Away End <http://www.awayend.co.uk/> 

Colchester United

How's it going? Inconsistent is a word to describe our season so far. 
Following our embarrassing 5-1 home defeat toMK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons>, the fans were calling for John 
Ward's departure, but after two wins on the bounce, things could be on the up. 
Inevitably, we crashed out of the League Cup, FA Cup and Johnstone Paints 
Trophy in the early rounds, with two of those defeats against sides in the 
league below us. While I don't expect us to get into the play-offs, you never 
know.

Who's been the star? Anthony Wordsworth. The academy product has netted vital 
goals and shown that he is more than a set-piece specialist.

Biggest disappointment? John Ward's failure to sign a goalscoring striker. An 
over-reliance on goals from the midfield could prove to be our downfall and the 
difference between a promotion push and staying in League One.

Grade C

Daniel Jolly, Sky Sports Fanzone 
<http://www.skysports.com/fanzone/blogs/0,24024,11702,00.html> 

Exeter City

How's it going? It's tough, but we knew that in the summer when the spine of 
last season's play-off chasing squad left on free transfers. Since we fans own
Exeter City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/exetercityfc> you'd better 
have the financial update too: playing Liverpool on Sky in the Carling Cup was 
useful, but gates aren't great and we're out of all the cups. Chuck in a 
complicated ground redevelopment plan and it's a fair old struggle on and off 
the pitch.

Who's been the star? There's some quality in our squad and it's been good to 
see our youth products getting their chance, but I can't think of anyone whose 
season hasn't been hampered by injury or inconsistency.

Biggest disappointment? Having a clearly-over-the line early "goal" not 
awarded at Charlton was a bit of a blow, but to see the "scorer" get a straight 
red for protesting a couple of minutes later was miserable. Could Fifa at least 
agree, while the goalline technology debate rumbles on, that as an interim 
measure players should be allowed to call the referee's assistant whatever they 
like without fear of dismissal?

Grade C, for Come on City.

Alan Crockford, Exeter Exiles <http://www.exeterexiles.co.uk/> 

Hartlepool United

Will be added shortly

Huddersfield Town

How's it going? After being installed as pre-season favourites, anything less 
than first place would be a disappointment, however I am happy we are in touch 
with the leaders. The unbeaten run has been the main focus this season, and at 
times it overshadowed our league ambitions – rather than playing to win we were 
playing to avoid defeat. However, now that the run has broken we can focus 
entirely on winning, competing with our rivals and being in contention come May.

Who's been the star? Jordan Rhodes. Although he's been a regular goal-getter 
since he arrived from Ipswich, this season he has found a new level and is 
lethal. It is nice to have a player who is the envy of every team in the 
league, and a fair few in the leagues above.

Biggest disappointment? Despite investing huge amounts of money in our squad, 
we still haven't cured our inability to hold on to a lead. For as long as I can 
remember we've looked fragile even with a two-goal cushion and it has cost us 
points. In a league as tight as this, that is something we can ill-afford to do.

Charlie Johnson, FootballCharlie <http://footballcharlie.footballunited.com/>  
(@FootballCharlie <http://twitter.com/#!/footballcharlie>)

Leyton Orient

How's it going? I had feared that the faultless pre-season the Os enjoyed 
would simply be the precursor to a disaster of a season, but I could never have 
envisaged being quite so accurate. A horrendous opening run of seven defeats 
and two draws in the league left us rooted to the bottom, but thankfully a 
recovery since then has left us snugly in lower mid-table. We've lost Charlie 
Daniels, but gained Kevin Lisbie, and manager Russell Slade has signed a new 
contract, so we'll probably call this one a transitional season unless 
something drastic happens between now and April.

Who's been the star? Lisbie arrived in September and immediately looked a 
class act; he's scored six goals and signed a longer-term contract, great news.

Biggest disappointment? He's had problems with injuries but we all had high 
hopes for Jamie Cureton, a man who's scored goals wherever he's gone. Apart 
from Brisbane Road, it seems, as he is yet to the break the duck.

Grade C

Dave Fawbert, Leyton Orient fan (@DaveFawbert 
<http://twitter.com/#!/DaveFawbert>)

MK Dons

How's it going? Milton Keynes Dons supporters had been well pleased with the 
runup to Christmas, with seven straight wins and an average of three goals a 
game, leaving the team well placed in the play-off positions. But we have been 
quickly been brought back to earth with the visit ofPreston North End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/preston> last Saturday, losing the game – 
and our unbeaten home record this season – by a single goal, following a 
lacklustre performance.

Heading into the new year, there is some uncertainty about renewing the loans 
of Angelo Balanta from QPR and Mark Beevers fromSheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday>. Karl Robinson – who 
has signed a new three-year deal – is keen to hold on to the two players for 
the remainder of the season, but has said he will not rush into the January 
transfer window if he is unable to extend the loans. One consolation is that 
despite a small squad, there is good cover in all positions and the club 
academy continues to contain a wealth of promising young talent.

Ideally, supporters want automatic promotion but will happily settle for a 
play-off finish.

Gordon Rockett, Milton Keynes Dons Supporters' Association 
<http://www.mkdsa.co.uk/> 

Notts County

How's it going? Better than anyone could have expected. Our league form has 
turned a bit of late, but the early-season performances were a joy to watch. 
The squad has had some great experiences through games at Nottingham Forest and 
Juventus and look to have become stronger as a unit for it. All eyes on the 
January window – Martin Allen and the board need to decide whether to stick and 
consolidate, or twist and push for the play-offs. It's not a position we'd have 
dared envisage back in the summer.

Who's been the star? Bringing in Gavin Mahon has proved quite the 
masterstroke. The level of composure in the players around him increases 
tenfold when he's on the field – we're a different, more inconsistent team 
without his influence.

Biggest disappointment? The loss of loanee Cristian Montaño hit hard. West Ham 
recalled him as cover – and loaned him out to Swindon almost immediately, and 
Dagenham & Redbridge after them. The guy is a great talent and some of our 
matches have been crying out for him in recent weeks.

Grade B

Stuart Brothers, The Notts Blog <http://www.thenottsblog.co.uk> (@StuTNB 
<http://www.twitter.com/StuTNB>)

Oldham Athletic

How's it going? Pretty damn good. Slow start, but Paul Dickov's made some 
smart additions – none more so than deadline day signing Shefki Kuqi, the 
decent, proven striker most lower league strugglers perpetually cry out for. 
We're into the regional final of the Johnstone's Paint Trophy (against a team 
we beat 5-2 in the league) and have an FA Cup tie at Anfield to look forward 
to. A bit of cup glory to lessen the losses, woo back some missing fans and 
reward the diehards is long overdue. In a season under Dave Penney we failed to 
score three goals or more once – we've done that six times this season.

Who's been the star? Nearly everyone's chipped in. Robbie Simpson has added 
class, James Wesolowski's become an important player. But Kuqi's been the star 
– sides at this level seem to do that bit more when they know there's someone 
capable of finishing off their hard work.

Biggest disappointment? Crowds are still low – City as well as United doing 
well doesn't do us any favours. Owner Simon Corney is still losing money and 
deserves more from the town.

Grade B+

Neil Tague, Oldham fan (@NeilTague <http://twitter.com/#!/NeilTague>)

Preston North End

How's it going? The season started brightly, with seven wins and a draw in the 
opening nine fixtures, and North End second in the league. Two months on, we 
find ourselves without a manager and in 10th, holding on to hopes of a play-off 
spot. Injuries had their part to play, with our frontline of Iain Hume, Neil 
Mellor, and Jamie Proctor sidelined for a while, giving Phil Brown few options 
up top, yet the defensive shambles was there for all to see. We must look 
onwards and upwards and bring the pride back.

Who's been the star? Paul Coutts has been the shining light. His winding runs, 
skipping past defenders at ease, as well as the ability to pick out a pass or 
get a shot away, puts him among the best players in the league.

Biggest disappointment? Where do we begin? After the great start, the fans 
feel let down by the owner (for not backing the manager), the ex-chairman (for 
not being fully honest), and the ex-manager Phil Brown (for getting tactics 
horribly wrong). The players need to stand up and be counted, and give us 
something to shout about again.

Grade D-

Nick Fish, PNE Online Community Blog <http://pnefc-online.co.uk/> 

Rochdale

How's it going? There's no doubting things haven't gone to plan at Rochdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale>, as we've won only four league 
games. However, perhaps the departure of manager Steve Eyre and assistant 
Frankie Bunn will be our turning point. The dismissals came as welcome news to 
the majority of fans, who have been calling for Eyre to leave for the past 
couple of months. The youth-team manager, Chris Beech, has taken over 
temporarily. If we go down it would be a real shame given how hard we've worked 
to be in League One. But I'm an optimist and we're only halfway through; if we 
get a few wins under our belt we could pull away from the relegation zone.

Who's been the star? There isn't one, which sounds very negative and I think 
we need to invest in January to fill in those missing links, but Jean-Louis 
Akpa Akpro stands out most games. He has an eye for the goal and isn't afraid 
to have a shot, and when on form he causes plenty of problems.

Biggest disappointment? The season so far I guess (minus the win at Bury), 
mainly because of how well we did last season compared with the poor 
performances this; it's a big difference to what we'd been used to under Keith 
Hill. Oh, and also the away end and the pies at Bramall Lane, sorry Sheffield 
United fans.

Grade What's the lowest? I'm going with "E" unfortunately, a glance at the 
league table will tell you why, but I have a bit of hope somewhere inside me 
that we could turn this around, especially now we're in the market for a new 
management team.

Sarah Lomas, GirlOnATerrace <http://girlonaterrace.blogspot.com/> (
@GirlOnATerrace <http://twitter.com/#!/GirlOnATerrace>)

Scunthorpe United

How's it going ? The season has been massively disappointing. We're one point 
above the bottom four, a position we never expected to be in. I don't think we 
expected to be top, but the performances have lacked effort and passion. Fans 
will forgive mistakes but not a lack of effort. Injuries to key players (most 
notably Jimmy Ryan) have hurt us massively.

Who's been the star? It has to be on-loan Everton defender Shane Duffy. He 
looks like a future Premier League and international star, a rock solid 
centre-half who takes no prisoners at the back.

Biggest disappointment? The lack of passion shown by some players. Many people 
are blaming the manager, Alan Knill, for the poor performances but he can only 
do so much, if players don't give it 100% they are letting themselves and 
everyone else down.

Grade D. Must try harder. Never expected to be flying high but more than a few 
players have failed to turn up in more than one game.

Carl Gac, Iron In Our Blood <http://ironinourblood.blogspot.com/> (@carlgac 
<http://twitter.com/#!/carlgac>)

Sheffield United

How's it going? Pretty well. We've had the odd blip – various individual 
errors cost us points in some key games in September and October – but on the 
whole I've been impressed with the team, and with Danny Wilson. We haven't set 
the division alight, but have quietly gone about our business, and are playing 
as well now as we have all season. The defence is looking solid, a huge 
contrast to last year. Up front, Ched Evans is at last looking like the striker 
we'd hoped he'd be – if we're serious about challenging the top two, he must be 
kept.

Who's been the star? Neill Collins. Appalling last season, he's been excellent 
so far and at the heart of our increasingly solid defence.

Biggest disappointment? We threw away the Sheffield derby in the dying 
minutes, handing a draw to what looked like a really poor Wednesday side. 
Hopefully we'll right that wrong in the return match in February.

Grade B+

Joseph Clift, One Foot In The Game <http://onefootinthegame.com/> (@1FITG 
<http://twitter.com/#!/1FITG>)

Sheffield Wednesday

How's it going? The promotion race promises to be one of the best in a while. 
Two points ahead of Sheffield United and four points ahead of Jordan Rhodes FC, 
the added incentive of getting one over your neighbours is driving the Owls. 
Highlights are scintillating performances from the on-loan winger Ben Marshall 
and Stephen Bywater keeping seven clean sheets in 12 appearances. José Semedo 
binding the team together with his strong work-rate, grit and determination, 
topped off with the imminent return of Gary Madine, the goal machine, means 
things are looking good. Wednesday need to stay on track, though, with tricky 
fixtures against Preston, Charlton and a visit to MK Dons coming up; January is 
set to be pivotal for our promotion chase.

Who's been the star? There have been many stars on the pitch, but the real 
stars have been the fans. Four thousand away fans at Oldham and 1,614 making 
the 500-mile round trip toBournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> is amazing dedication for a 
League One team.

Biggest disappointment? The fortress Hillsborough has kept us undefeated at 
home, with eight wins and two draws, but our away form is bound to come under 
scrutiny. The two away defeats in August to Bournemouth and Bury and the 5-1 
thumping at the hands ofStevenage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage> were real tests, but we've 
bounced back and we're undefeated on the road since October. This has to 
continue to keep us in the promotion race and within distance of Charlton.

Grade B+ for the Ginger Mourinho.

James Edwards, Sheffield Wednesday fan

Stevenage

How's it going? Before the season, a local journalist said Stevenage had "no 
money, no experience [and] no chance". But, heading into Christmas, Boro are a 
point off the play-offs – you can't put a price on hard work and team spirit. 
Having started 2011 in League Two's bottom seven, there's a possibility Boro 
will end the year in League One's top seven. If you think Graham Westley's men 
have been much stronger in the second half of the season, what odds a shot at 
the Championship? Of course, it'll be our toughest challenge. But if we have 
"no chance", we have nothing to lose.

Who's been the star? Stevenage's success is built on a strong team ethic; 
naming one player above the rest is virtually impossible. However, Chris 
Beardsley – deemed surplus to requirements by Kettering in 2009 – is enjoying 
one of his best goal returns this year.

Biggest disappointment?

Apparently Stevenage are "big, strong and physical", or words to that effect. 
Either there's a collective lack of imagination in League One, or 
managers/journalists aren't watching us enough …

Grade A-

Pete Hayman, Boro Guide <http://www.boroguide.co.uk/index.php> (@boroguide 
<http://twitter.com/#!/boroguide>)

Tranmere Rovers

How's it going? After a promising start where we found ourselves in the top 
six, our form has taken an alarming dip since mid-October. We've suffered with 
injuries, which hasn't helped, but we just need a win to lift morale and 
confidence. We have some good players, but unfortunately they are not 
performing to the kind of levels they are capable of at the moment. If we can 
get back to the form of the start of the season, we should be looking at a 
mid-table finish or slightly better, but things have to get better soon.

Who's been the star? Lucas Akins. He has been playing at a good and consistent 
level with an impressive work-rate, but he needs to improve his final ball and 
finishing, which would make him even better.

Biggest disappointment? A couple of defeats where we deserved a lot more. Away 
toNotts County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty>, where we 
somehow ended up with nine men (ask the referee why) and lost to a penalty 
awarded in the final seconds, and away to Preston, where we performed well but 
conceded two poor goals to lose 2-1.

Grade C

Paul Harper, Totally Tranmere Podcast <http://totally-tranmere.podomatic.com/> 
(@paulharper82 <http://twitter.com/#!/paulharper82>)

Walsall

How's it going? Unfortunately we're heading towards another relegation 
dogfight. We're 21st, although we do have a slightly better goal difference 
than the teams around us. Some recent performances, notably draws withCharlton 
Athletic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/charltonathletic> and 
Huddersfield Town, have shown what the squad are capable of. However, losses to 
Exeter City, Tranmere Rovers and Preston North End have sent us tumbling down 
the table. The squad are showing great togetherness but performances simply 
haven't been good enough.

Who's been the star? Jamie Paterson has burst on to the scene this season; his 
desire and ability are something to behold. He has recently signed a new 
contract, which is great news. Jamie is the future ofWalsall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall> Football Club.

Biggest disappointment? The failure to learn the lessons from last season. We 
are not good enough and in our current form there is no doubt we'll be plying 
our trade in League Two next season.

Grade U. Underperforming

Bescot Banter <http://www.bescotbanter.net/> (@BescotBanter 
<http://twitter.com/#!/bescotbanter>)

Wycombe Wanderers

How's it going? Manager Gary Waddock would perhaps be the first to admit that 
his new signings have failed to deliver, with goalscoring the major issue. A 
bright start saw Wanderers hit the dizzy heights of seventh after three games. 
However, reality set in when a home defeat to Bury began a run of 16 League 
games that returned two victories and a fall to second-bottom in the table. A 
stoppage-time victory over bottom clubChesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield>, including goals from 
loanees Anthony McNamee and Marcello Trotta, give a glimmer of hope but it will 
take a remarkable turnaround in fortunes to prevent Wanderers making an 
immediate return to the basement division.

Who's been the star? It was schoolboy striker Jordan Ibe, signed this week by 
Liverpool. He became the youngest scorer for Wanderers when he netted aged 15 
years and 325 days against Sheffield Wednesday.

Biggest disappointment? Bowing out of the FA Cup at Fleetwood despite playing 
for more than half the game against 10 men.

Grade? C

Paul Lewis, Chairboys.co.uk <http://www.chairboys.ndirect.co.uk/>

Yeovil Town

How's it going? After another sticky start, and our dismal FA Cup exit aside, 
Yeovil's form has been pleasantly promising in recent weeks. As predicted, 
Terry Skiverton has pulled off some shrewd loan signings, including that of 
Chelsea playmaker Conor Clifford, who appears a real prospect. Summer transfer 
Kieran Agard has been decent, but should have at least double the four goals he 
has to his name so far. A multitude of comings and goings in goal, plus nonstop 
injuries to the back four, have not helped defensively, but the Glovers now 
have the luxury of a certain amount of consistency in selection, so I'm 
confident they will once more avoid the drop.

Who's been the star? Blockbusting, sharp-shooting, all-action midfielder Ed 
Upson has really impressed and has weighed in with some terrific, not to 
mention important, long-range efforts.

Biggest disappointment? The second-round FA Cup replay defeat at home to 
Fleetwood Town – the fourth time in six seasons we have lost to a non-league 
side in the competition that made Yeovil famous. If our giant-killing acts in 
the Cup seem distant memories, it's because they are.

Grade C

Jon Lewis, Yeovil fan (@JonLewis <http://twitter.com/#!/JonLewis_>)
 