
Stability in the basement division is a rare and cherished thing, with summer 
turnover of players and managers frequently giddying, all of which makes 
tipping winners and losers a tricky business. Eight clubs go into the new 
season effectively under new management if you include the three who made new 
appointments in the closing weeks of 2014-15, while bookmakers’ odds often 
reflect little other than the relative support bases of clubs. This is one of 
the reasonsPortsmouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> are 
odds-on for promotion.

Yet there are other grounds for believing that Pompey might be on the way up 
after two underwhelming mid-table finishes since their relegation and supporter 
takeover in 2013. One is the new man at the helm, Paul Cook, who won this 
division with Chesterfield two seasons ago and led them to the League One 
play-off semi-final in May. He has signed nine new players since arriving, and 
though the departure of the recently installed captain Paul Robinson has come 
as surprise, the new arrivals should have enough about them to fashion a 
promotion challenge, even if the manager cautions that his team will need time 
to gel.

Among his recruits are the midfielder Michael Doyle from Sheffield United, the 
wingers Gareth Evans from Fleetwood and Ben Tollitt from Skelmersdale, and the 
striker Adam McGurk from Burton, while Kyle Bennett, arriving from Doncaster, 
and Gary Roberts, who followed Cook from Chesterfield, could be key creative 
outlets.
 Paul Cook brings an impressive League Two track record to his new role as 
Portsmouth manager. Photograph: Paul Burrows/Action Images 
Luton Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lutontown> fell away badly 
last season, missing out on a play-off slot by one place and three points, but 
are fancied again this time. Their manager, John Still, has plenty of 
experience at this level but they will have to adjust to the loss of last 
season’s top scorer Mark Cullen, who has joined Blackpool for £180,000. The 
signings of the former Derby defender Mark O’Brien, the ex-Celtic winger Paddy 
McCourt and the forward Josh McQuoid from Bournemouth could underpin a more 
sustained challenge in 2015-16.

The mood is upbeat, too, at Oxford United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/oxford-united>, who look better placed to 
challenge than at any time since their return to the League in 2010. Michael 
Appleton has recruited well, bringing in the midfielders Kemar Roofe from West 
Brom and George Baldock from MK Dons, both of whom had successful loan spells 
with the U’s last term.

Leyton Orient’s relegation was one of last season’s biggest shocks, as a squad 
that had reached the League One play-off final in 2014 and had then been 
bolstered by a string of lavish signings following a takeover descended into a 
shambles on and off the pitch as the stability that had powered the club’s 
steady improvement was ripped apart.

The O’s went through four managers in 2014-15 while in June the club’s owner, 
the Italian energy magnate Francesco Becchetti, found himself facingan arrest 
warrant from the Albanian authorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/09/leyton-orient-francesco-becchetti-wanted>
 for alleged money-laundering and fraud. On the field there is a more measured 
optimism afoot with the new manager, Ian Hendon, having made a string of more 
carefully calibrated League Two signings and the team performing impressively 
in pre-season friendlies.

Another demoted club who have endured their share of turbulence in recent 
seasons are Notts County. They, too, are under relatively new management in the 
Dutchman Ricardo Moniz, appointed in April. Expect some aesthetically pleasing 
football from a cosmopolitan side that includes the Slovenian attacker Filip 
Valencic, who has seven caps at under-21 level, two Dutch players and a Belgian.

Yeovil Town’s relegation, a year on from playing in the Championship, was also 
a surprise but there are signs that a short sharp decline may be arrested this 
season. Thenew manager Paul Sturrock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/28/paul-sturrock-yeovil-town> 
knows both the south-west and this division well, having taken Plymouth Argyle 
up as champions in 2002. He has won promotion five times as a manager overall 
and has wasted no time since arriving at Huish Park, making 15 summer signings, 
mostly from other fourth-tier clubs. Sturrock has enthused about his new winger 
Iffy Allen’s “pace and guile” which he hopes will serve his two big strikers 
Mark Beck, signed from Carlisle United, and Ryan Bird, who has joined from 
Cambridge United – expect width, crosses and headers.

Cambridge have also been busy and are fifth favourites at 14-1. Richard Money 
has recruited 10 new faces after a sizeable exodus at the end of the last 
campaign including the departures of Luke Chadwick and Tom Elliott. Summer 
acquisitions include the midfielder Luke Berry from Barnsley, Elliot Omozusi 
from Orient and Barry Corr, whose goals and promotion-winning experience with 
Southend United should stand Cambridge in good stead. With ambitious ground 
redevelopment plans in the pipeline there is a hopeful mood at the Abbey 
Stadium.

Plymouth came up short in the play-offs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/14/wycombe-wanderers-plymouth-argyle-league-two-play-off-semi-final>
 last season and are nowunder new management 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/11/plymouth-argyle-appoint-derek-adams-manager>
 – the former Ross County coach Derek Adams succeeded John Sheridan in June – 
but can benefit from the stability and quality within the squad. Lewis 
Alessandra and Anthony O’Connor have been the most significant departures while 
Reuben Reid can prove a handful up front again provided he remains fit. Adams 
has recruited strongly from Scotland while the midfielder Josh Simpson, from 
Crawley, could shape up to be a useful signing.

Teddy Sheringham’s arrival as manager will boost the profile of Stevenage, who 
alsolost in the play-off semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/14/southend-stevenage-league-two-play-off-match-report>
 in May, and transform their style of play, which was noticeably direct under 
his predecessor Graham Westley. Injuries have hampered pre-season preparations, 
however, and they might do well to repeat the previous campaign’s top-six 
finish.

Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> Town will also 
fancy their chances, and the signing of the talented wide player Nicky Adams 
from League One Bury was something of a coup for the manager Chris Wilder, who 
has also worked to strengthen a defence that was a little too leaky last time 
with the former Stoke trainee Rod McDonald, as well as Josh Lelan and Dave 
Buchanan, who last season was at Preston, joining.

The sides returning to the league should both survive. Barnet may have lost 
key creative outlets in Luisma Villa and Lee Cook but they have retained last 
season’s top scorer John Akinde, who struck 31 times last term. Valuable 
Football League nous has arrived in the form of Kevin Lisbie fromLeyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient>, Bira Dembélé from 
Stevenage, and Cambridge’s Tom Champion and Michael Nelson, though a second 
successive promotion challenge is unlikely.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fleague-two-2015-16-preview-portsmouth-promotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438442197301%2Fda1b1801-d19b-4df2-9c06-994048fa5251-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=League%20Two%202015-16%20season%20preview%20%7C%20Tom%20Davies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fleague-two-2015-16-preview-portsmouth-promotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=League%20Two%202015-16%20season%20preview%20%7C%20Tom%20Davies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2015%2Faug%2F04%2Fleague-two-2015-16-preview-portsmouth-promotion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F1%2F1438442197301%2Fda1b1801-d19b-4df2-9c06-994048fa5251-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Bristol Rovers celebrate their promotion back to League Two in May. Can they 
build on Wembley success? Photograph: Matt Lewis - The FA/The FA via Getty 
Images 
Bristol Rovers reversed a decade of decline when they won promotion at the 
first attempt in May,beating Grimsby Town on penalties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/17/bristol-rovers-grimsby-town-vanarama-play-off-final-match-report>
 in the Conference play-off final. Darrell Clarke has proven to be an astute 
manager and securing a permanent deal for the influential midfielder Chris 
Lines, who was on loan from Port Vale for last season’s run-in, will boost 
optimism, even if the off-field picture is murkier. Rovers are more than £6m in 
debt and last monthlost a court case against Sainsbury’s 
<http://www.westerndailypress.co.uk/Bristol-Rovers-lose-Sainsbury-s-stadium-legal/story-26891237-detail/story.html>
, which wants to pull out of the £30m scheme to sell the Memorial Ground and 
build a new stadium.

Wycombe Wanderers’ recovery from their last-day relegation escape in 2014 to 
play-off finalists was one of the more positive stories of the last season. How 
the fan-run club recover from the pain oflosing at Wembley on penalties to 
Southend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/23/southend-wycombe-league-two-play-off-final-match-report>
, frequently a psychological hindrance, will do much to determine their fate. 
The manager, Gareth Ainsworth, will be working on one of the tightest budgets 
in the division. Their experienced attacking pairing of Paul Hayes and Garry 
Thompson, partners in a successful Scunthorpe United side eight years ago, will 
offer a threat, though.

Wanderers are one of four fan-owned clubs in the division. Another, AFC 
Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon>, have struggled 
to reach beyond mid-table in their four seasons back in the league but the side 
have been improving steadily since their brush with relegation two years ago. 
Neal Ardley has been building year on year and a top-half finish is a 
reasonable expectation. Andy Barcham and Tom Elliott could be the pick of the 
summer arrivals.

Life has been somewhat tougher for supporters of trust-run Exeter in recent 
seasons, and a season of struggle may ensue this time round. But they do have 
stability on their side – Paul Tisdale has been at the club since 2006 – and 
managed a top-half finish last term.

At the bottom end Hartlepool’s magnificent charge to safety last time out 
should help them avoid the drop again. Ronnie Moore has rebuilt impressively 
since arriving last December and much will depend on how the strike pairing of 
Rakish Bingham and Billy Paynter clicks.

Another former England international taking charge of a League Two club is 
Terry Butcher atNewport County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newport-county>, where a tough season 
might be anticipated. Finances will be tight after the departure of the former 
chairman Les Scadding, with the supporters trust seeking to raise funds for a 
takeover. Butcher has made more than 10 signings since arriving in April but 
will be working with one of the division’s smaller squads.

Accrington Stanley’s sparse attendances – their 1,484 average last season was 
the lowest in the league – frequently make them favourites for the drop, as 
they are again this time, but they avoided relegation by 15 points in 2014-15 
and have survived at this level for nine seasons. Having an experienced 
manager, John Coleman, who knows both club and division inside out, will help 
them and strong pre-season form – including a run of six straight wins – has 
lifted spirits.

Mansfield Town are also tipped for a season of toil, though they have 
performed well in pre-season, whileCrawley Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crawley-town> may struggle to recover 
from last season’s relegation. They, too, are under new management, the former 
Cheltenham Town manager Mark Yates taking over in May, and the likely departure 
of last season’s top scorer Izale McLeod could further weaken them.

Uncertainty over Carlisle’s ownership – there is talk of a possible takeover 
but nothing more at present – also clouds the outlook in Cumbria, where the 
manager Keith Curle is seeking to trim a squad he regards as “top-heavy” and 
that has already lost the goalscoring midfielders Kyle Dempsey and Brad Potts, 
to Huddersfield and Blackpool respectively.

Dagenham & Redbridge could also face another long hard season; relatively few 
signings have been made, though the experienced defender Nyron Nosworthy and 
the former Wycombe forward Matt McLure could prove useful additions, while 
Morecambe are 4-1 for the drop despite finishing in the top half last term. 
They look short of firepower after the departure of Jack Redshaw to Blackpool. 
Avoiding relegation will also be a first priority for York City in what isset 
to be their final full season at Bootham Crescent 
<http://www.yorkcityfootballclub.co.uk//news/article/club-statement-york-community-stadium-2542836.aspx>
, though Scott Flinders and James Berrett could be key new arrivals.

However, League Two <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> 
is frequently the most volatile of the professional divisions – the points gap 
between top and bottom was the smallest of all four divisions last season – and 
an inspired run here, an unforeseen crisis there, could derail the most 
informed of predictions. An attempt to offer one here would put Portsmouth, 
Plymouth and Yeovil in the top three, Oxford sneaking up through the play-offs 
and Newport and Crawley in the relegation spots. But almost anything could 
happen.
 