
Favourites

Sheffield United improved radically in the wake of Nigel Clough’s installation 
as manager last October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/23/sheffield-united-nigel-clough-manager>
. They reached the FA Cup semi-finals and start the new campaign as title 
favourites. However, they must adjust to the centre-back Harry Maguire’s
defection to Hull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/29/harry-maguire-hull-city-sheffield-united-transfer>
.

Time to put one of English football’s most pronounced geographical imbalances 
right. Bristol is too big a city to not have a Championship team and, in his 
first full season at Ashton Gate,Bristol City’s Steve Cotterill should correct 
that.

“I’m sick of the sight of other teams celebrating success,” says the Preston 
North End manager Simon Grayson, making it plain he is targeting automatic 
promotion. Formerly of Leeds and Huddersfield, Grayson is a good manager and 
Preston a club acutely conscious they are beneath their station. The 
Championship could be beckoning.

Dark horses

During his first stint in charge of Barnsley, Danny Wilson steered his sweet 
passing team into the Premier League against a soundtrack of “it’s just like 
watching Brazil”.Wilson returned too late to avoid relegation from the 
Championship last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/17/barnsley-new-manager-danny-wilson-david-flitcroft>
 but is on a mission to get Barnsley back there at the first attempt.

Can Russell Slade’s Leyton Orient overcome the disappointment of that play-off 
stumble in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/25/leyton-orient-rotherham-united-league-one-play-off-report>
 after standing on the brink of the Championship for so long? Can they keep 
their outstanding midfielder Romain Vincelot?

Sir Alex may be retired but Darren Ferguson continues to fly the family’s 
managerial flag atPeterborough. He and his squad should be strong enough to 
make the play-offs. Much hinges on whether he can keep hold of his leading 
scorer Britt Assombalonga.

Bolstered by the addition of Benik Afobe, the young striker signed on a 
year-long loan from Arsenal, Karl Robinson’sMK Dons can make this the season 
when they finally reach the Championship before Milton Keynes falls fully in 
love with football. Well maybe. Still only 33, Robinson is a managerial bright 
spark with ambitions to coach his beloved Liverpool. Promotion would be a 
stepping stone.

An attempted takeover by the One Direction singer Louis Tomlinson and the 
former Rovers chairman John Ryan may have failed atDoncaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/18/one-direction-louis-tomlinson-misled-doncaster-takeover-john-ryan>
 but Terry Bramall, Doncaster’s owner, has pledged to back Paul Dickov’s 
attempts to steer the newly relegated side back into the Championship at the 
first attempt.

Strugglers



Rochdale, Crewe, Colchester <https://www.theguardian.com/football/colchester>, 
Notts County

New managers 

Unusually, there are no new League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> managers this season.

Players to watch

Sam Baldock (Bristol City)

The former MK Dons and West Ham striker was League One’s top scorer last 
season, registering 24 goals forBristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity>. He is so integral to Steve 
Cotterill’s plans that the manager has persuaded his board not to sell the 
25-year-old to Brighton for a healthy profit.

Joe Garner (Preston)

The former England youth striker scored a technically brilliant, world-class 
25-yard volley in Preston’s play-off semi-final against Rotherham in May and 
contributed 19 goals throughout last season’s campaign. If Simon Grayson’s side 
win promotion, Garner is likely to make a big contribution.

Romain Vincelot (Leyton Orient)

Russell Slade’s key midfielder is the man who joins the dots for Leyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient>. When Vincelot plays well, 
the team flows. Much admired by a queue of Championship clubs, the 28-year-old 
Frenchman blessed with the happy knack of interrupting opposition attacks 
before initiating Orient advances has not yet shown signs of leaving. The 
club’s best player as they fell at the final play-off hurdle last season.

Kevin Davies (Preston)

At the grand old age of 37 the former Southampton, Blackburn and Bolton 
centre-forward is still worrying defenders. Promotion with Simon Grayson’s side 
would serve as the perfect swansong to a fine career.

Benik Afobe (MK Dons)

The 21-year-old striker has joined Karl Robinson’s side on a season-long loan 
from Arsenal as he aims to fulfil the potential first displayed when he was 
part of the 2010 England Under-17 European Championship winning squad.
 