
Swindon Town maintained their five-point gap at the top of npower League Two 
with a slender 1-0 victory overMorecambe.

The striker Paul Benson scored his 11th goal of the season less than 60 
seconds into the second half as Paolo Di Canio's side move closer towards 
securing promotion toLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>. With only six games 
remaining, Swindon are now 10 points clear of fourth place, now occupied by
Crawley Town after Shrewsbury Town won 3-1 at Macclesfield Town in the late 
game to move into the automatic promotion places.

James Collins book-ended the scoring, Mark Wright netting the second before 
Arnaud Mendy briefly cut the deficit to one goal.

Crawley fell back after being held 1-1 by Crewe Alexandra at the Broadfield 
Stadium. The result could have been worse for Paul Evans' side but Gary 
Alexander equalised with an 88th-minute penalty following Byron Moore's 
first-half effort.

Torquay United kept a firm grasp on second spot thanks to a second-half Rene 
Howe goal againstAccrington Stanley.

Mid-table Stanley made Torquay work for their victory, although the win could 
have been more comfortable had the defender Mark Ellis not hit the bar when 
well placed.

Southend United failed to close the gap on the automatic promotion places as 
they slipped to a 2-0 defeat atBradford City. The loss was compounded with two 
red cards forSouthend <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend>, who 
remain fifth in the table.

James Hanson's 38th-minute header opened the scoring for Bradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> before Sean Clohessy was 
dismissed for fouling Nahki Wells, Craig Fagan dispatching the resulting 
penalty. Things went from bad to worse for Paul Sturrock's side when the 
substitute Elliot Benyon was sent off for an off-the-ball altercation.

The bottom club Hereford United battled back from a goal down to earn a point 
from a 1-1 draw against their fellow relegation battlersPlymouth Argyle.

The Plymouth striker Warren Feeney missed a golden chance to open the scoring 
but was later on hand to pressure the Hereford defender Stefan Stam into 
scoring an own-goal. Simon Walton then missed a penalty before Tom Barkhuizen 
equalised forHereford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hereford> early in 
the second half.

Two goals in the last 15 minutes kept Cheltenham Town safely in the play-offs 
as they saw offBarnet 2-0. Barnet <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> 
are fighting for League Two survival and held out until the 75th minute against 
Mark Yates' promotion-chasing side.

Kaid Mohamed broke the deadlock before the substitute James Spencer guaranteed 
the three points with two minutes remaining.

Oxford United remain in the final play-off spot despite suffering last-gasp 
defeat atNorthampton Town. Christian Monta√±o cancelled out Luke Guttridge's 
early opener but Adam Chapman's penalty miss proved pivotal as the substitute 
Brett Williams hit a stoppage-time winner for the hosts.

There was also late drama at the Memorial Stadium as Gillingham scored a 
last-minute goal to draw 2-2 withBristol Rovers. Chris Whelpdale opened the 
scoring for Gillingham but the hosts hit back through Eliot Richards and looked 
to have won the match through Mustapha Carayol's 80th-minute goal. But there 
was still time forGillingham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> 
to secure a point when the substitute Dennis Oli levelled in the last minute.

Rotherham United struck late to secure a win at AFC Wimbledon with Sam 
Hoskins' 83rd-minute goal enough for a 2-1 win. The midfielder Ben Pringle 
opened the scoring for the visitors before Luke Moore drew Wimbledon level.

Hoskins' winner means Rotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham> retain an outside chance of 
reaching the play-offs.

There was yet more late drama as an 88th-minute effort from Dagenham & 
Redbridgestriker Brian Woodall earned his side a point at home to Burton Albion
, who had taken the lead through Jacques Maghoma.
 