
Bristol Rovers were relegated from the Football League for the first time in 
94 years after losing 1-0 at home toMansfield Town.

Rovers only need a point from the game but the defeat combined with wins for 
Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> and Wycombe 
condemned them to the drop.

Rovers started brightly with Chris Beardsley and David Clarkson going close 
but neither could test Lewis Price in theMansfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield> Town goal.

Mansfield's Colin Daniel volleyed in off the post after 36 minutes to give the 
visitors the lead. Rovers almost pulled level through the head of Mark 
McChrystal but the crossbar denied the Rovers captain.

McChrystal met Mohamed's delivery from a corner powerfully but his header 
clipped the bar and went out for a goal-kick. Later, McChrystal hammered a 
volley off the bar again, but it was not to be for Rovers. The final whistle 
was met with a chorus of boos from the Rovers fans, some of whom invaded the 
pitch to express their fury at having to play in the Conference Premier next 
season.

Rovers had gone into the game with their fate in their own hands but Wycombe 
produced a stunning 3-0 win atTorquay to survive.

Sam Wood opened the scoring on six minutes from close range, and was on hand 
to clear Krystian Pearce's head off the line four minutes later.

Steven Craig made it two from the penalty spot three minutes before the 
interval after Matt McClure was brought down by Anthony O'Connor, who was 
booked, and then sent off after receiving a second yellow card in the second 
half.

McClure was on hand to dink in the third just after the hour to spark 
celebrations among theWycombe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe> 
fans

The other result which went against Bristol Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> was Northampton Town's 3-1 
win againstOxford United.

Town went behind to Ryan Willams's opener after six minutes but he was soon 
sent off for kicking Ricky Ravenhill. John Marquis's cool finish and an Ivan 
Toney header put Northampton ahead and Mathias Kouo-Doumbe headed in after the 
break to complete the comeback.

At the other end of the table Chesterfield clinched the title with a 2-1 
victory overFleetwood.
 