
Favourites

“I don’t just want to win this league – I want to smash it and get 100 
points.” The 24-year-oldWigan Athletic chairman David Sharpe, grandson of Dave 
Whelan, may not win many prizes for modesty. Or restraint. Or humility. But 
it’s quite clear which trophy he is after.

No pressure then, Gary Caldwell. The 33-year-old Latics manager, appointed in 
April after the dismal Malky Mackay era came to an end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/07/wigan-appoint-gary-caldwell-manager-malky-mackay>
, has to deliver and he certainly has some useful tools at his disposal. Will 
Grigg, freshly arrived from Brentford, scored 22 in helping Milton Keynes Dons 
to promotion from this level last season while on loan, and was a key part of 
the Brentford side that reached the Championship in 2013-14. Another new 
signing, Craig Davies from Bolton, has not been as prolific as Grigg at this 
level but should provide a useful foil.

League Two 2015-16 season preview | Tom Davies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2015/aug/04/league-two-2015-16-preview-portsmouth-promotion>
Michael Jacobs (signed from Wolves), Don Cowie, Chris McCann, Max Power 
(Tranmere) and David Perkins (Blackpool) provide decent options in midfield. 
The signing of Craig Morgan from Rotherham represents a real coup and will 
strengthen the centre of defence, while several clubs were chasing the 
goalkeeper Richard O’Donnell, who has ended up at the DW Stadium after leaving
Walsall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/walsall>. James McClean, Scott 
Carson, Callum McManaman and James Perch are among those to depart.

With such a turnover of players – it is by no means beyond the realms of 
possibility for Caldwell to name 10 debutants for their opening fixture on 
Saturday – how they tessellate into a functioning side will be crucial and is 
far from guaranteed: a disappointing set of results in pre-season is indicative 
of a side that has not yet gelled. Still, they’ll have the opportunity to 
strengthen further – their budget is “five times more than anyone else in 
League One” according to the ever-understated Sharpe – and should be in the mix 
come May.

The division’s other undoubted big beast is Sheffield United, who begin a 
fifth season at this level with a fourth new manager.Nigel Adkins has been 
charged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/02/sheffield-united-nigel-adkins-manager>
 with succeeding where Danny Wilson, David Weir and Nigel Clough have all 
failed and he knows the territory – three promotions from League One as a 
manager (with Scunthorpe in 2006-07 and 2008-09, and with Southampton in 
2011-12) attest to that.

Optimists at Bramall Lane will look to the post-Clough months at Derby, when a 
side assembled by Clough thrived under the tutelage of a different manager. 
Defensive fragility – particularly at set-pieces – and an overly-cautious 
approach stymied their promotion push last season. Adkins’ signings – two 
strikers in the shape of Conor Sammon and Billy Sharp (back for a third spell 
at the club) have been the only arrivals thus far – suggest that he will 
address the latter but the former remains a concern, even if Neill Collins has 
returned to the fold after being frozen out under Clough.

Dark horses
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fleague-one-2015-16-season-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438760562976%2Fbc7376b5-eada-4149-a344-d8df59a8eb9d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=League%20One%202015-16%20season%20preview%20%7C%20John%20Ashdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fleague-one-2015-16-season-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=League%20One%202015-16%20season%20preview%20%7C%20John%20Ashdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fleague-one-2015-16-season-preview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438760562976%2Fbc7376b5-eada-4149-a344-d8df59a8eb9d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Swindon Town, whose defender Nathan Thompson is seen here challenging 
Liverpool’s Christian Benteke in a friendly, should be among the contenders 
this season. Photograph: Jason Dawson/Rex Shutterstock 
What to make of Swindon Town? Mark Cooper’s side were freewheeling 
entertainers last season and in the end that was their downfall – the five 
goals conceded in the second leg of their play-off semi-final against Sheffield 
United were not decisive butthe four they shipped against Preston in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/24/preston-north-end-swindon-town-league-one-play-off-final-match-report>
 certainly were. Cooper’s 2015-16 side will be very different to that which 
made it all the way to Wembley – of the 14 who played against North End, nine 
left the club in the aftermath of defeat, and although Jordan Turnbull is back 
again on loan from Southampton, the gaps left by the departures of Jack 
Stephens, Massimo Luongo and Ben Gladwin will be tough to fill. More temporary 
deals – this time for the Liverpool pair of Kevin Stewart and Jordan Williams – 
suggest the Robins will again look to play the loan market better than their 
rivals.

Also looking to play the loan game are Barnsley, with the midfielders Joe 
Rothwell and Ben Pearson coming in from Manchester United for six-month spells 
and, intriguingly, the 17-year-old Daniel Crowley joining from Arsenal despite 
rumoured Championship interest. A couple of smart permanent deals – most 
notably for Alfie Mawson, the star of Wycombe’s run to the League Two play-off 
final last year – could see the Tykes in the play-off mix under Lee Johnson.

They should be joined in the upper echelons by their Yorkshire neighbours 
Bradford City. Bradford, who finished seventh last season, have had a 
particularly busy summer – Paul Anderson became their seventh summer signing 
last week and the former Ipswich winger, along with the striker Steven Davies, 
who comes in from Blackpool, should add much-needed penetration in attack even 
though the loss of Filipe Morais for a big chunk, if not all, of the season is 
a blow. The 55 goals City scored last season was four fewer than Leyton Orient, 
who were relegated. How Phil Parkinson’s side cope with the pressure of playing 
in front of more than 18,000 season ticket holders will be interesting to watch 
and the noise from the stands is not the only potentially pivotal physical 
factor at Valley Parade – the pitch wasnothing short of abysmal last season 
<http://www.thetelegraphandargus.co.uk/sport/sport_opinion/sportparker/11777097.Turf_war__Debate_reaches_fever_pitch_after_Parkinson___s_post_match_rant/>
.

Millwall went down battling from the Championship under Neil Harris and will 
start the season buoyed by the signing of Steve Morison, who enjoyed perhaps 
the best spell of his career with the Lions between 2009 and 2011, scoring 20 
times in their promotion season from this level in 2009-10. There’s enough 
quality in the squad to see them challenging at the right end of the table this 
time around.

Three teams who found themselves in the upper-mid-table logjam and perhaps did 
not get the credit they deserved for exceeding expectations last season –
Rochdale, Fleetwood Town and Gillingham – will be hoping to kick on. Keith 
Hill, who seems to share a symbiotic relationship with the Dale similar to that 
of Eddie Howe and Bournemouth, steered the club to eighth last season, the 
highest finish in their history and there’s little reason to think that the 
club won’t do something similar this year. The signing of Lewis Alessandra from 
Plymouth is a smart one, while the club has thus far managed to keep hold of 
Ian Henderson, the striker who turned 30 in January and had never scored more 
than 12 goals in a single campaign but found the form of his life to score 22 
times last season.

Fleetwood finished level on points but two places behind Hill’s side in 
2014-15 and despite seeing their club captain Mark Roberts depart for Cambridge 
they have had a productive summer. The signing of the winger Jimmy Ryan from
Chesterfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> was 
particularly eye-catching, the Scotland Under-21 international Declan McManus 
enjoyed a prolific season with Greenock Morton last year and David Ball 
returning to the club after being released at the end of the season should 
prove a late bonus.

The Gills, meanwhile, proved tough to beat following the appointment of Justin 
Edinburgh in February and, like the Cod Army, have kept together a squad that 
was always more than the sum of its parts in any case.

And no rundown of the League One contenders would be complete without the 
obligatory mention forPeterborough United. Their manager, Dave Robertson, has 
one of the more interesting CVs in the Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/03/peterborough-united-dave-robertson-promotion>
 and there are high hopes that Lee Angol, scorer of 30 goals while on loan at 
Boreham Wood from Luton last season, can join the list of previously unheralded 
strikers to thrive at London Road – Britt Assombalonga, Dwight Gayle, Craig 
Mackail-Smith and Aaron McLean all translated goals further down the football 
food chain into prolific spells at Posh. The signing of Jack Collison from 
Ipswich Town raised a few eyebrows, though his appointment as the manager of 
the club’s Under-21 side at the ripe old age of 26reflects the injury trouble 
that has plagued his career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/30/jack-collinson-west-ham-wales>
.

Outsiders
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fleague-one-2015-16-season-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438760675535%2F1a082a5f-861a-4fde-9183-855157d4e49b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=League%20One%202015-16%20season%20preview%20%7C%20John%20Ashdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fleague-one-2015-16-season-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=League%20One%202015-16%20season%20preview%20%7C%20John%20Ashdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fleague-one-2015-16-season-preview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438760675535%2F1a082a5f-861a-4fde-9183-855157d4e49b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink got Burton Albion promoted last season and there is 
optimism the club can build on that. Photograph: Plumb Images/Leicester City FC 
via Getty Images 
Doncaster Rovers may have finished top of the bottom half last season, but 
only four points covered the seven teams between seventh and 13th. The capture 
of Andy Williams fromSwindon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/swindon> 
should address their chronic lack of firepower and there’s a chance they can 
scramble to the other end of what is likely again to be a very tightly 
contested midtable. Addressing home form worse than that of relegated Crawley 
last season will be crucial.

One of the more intriguing moves in the index of summer transfer deals was 
“Timmy Thiele, Borussia Dortmund to Burton Albion, free”. The 24-year-old 
striker also lists Hertha Berlin, Werder Bremen and Schalke among his previous 
clubs but was described on his arrival by the Albion manager, Jimmy Floyd 
Hasselbaink, as not quite up to the standard of Stuart Beavon so the Brewers 
may not exactly have the next Marco Reus on their hands. Still, there is 
optimism they can build on their title-winning League Two campaign last season.

Bury also arrive from the fourth tier looking upwardly mobile – the striking 
signings of Leon Clarke from Wolves and Tom Pope fromPort Vale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portvale> smack of ambition. David 
Flitcroft’s Shakers will be confident of avoiding a relegation scrap.

The signings of Romain Vincelot and Sam Ricketts at Coventry City look smart 
pieces of business, though pre-season has not gone all that smoothly. “We have 
come away with plenty of problems we need to solve,” was Ricketts’ view after 
their final friendly against Oxford, hardly a ringing endorsement of their 
chances.

Oldham Athletic, Scunthorpe United and Walsall finished ensconced in mid-table 
last year and could well be destined for something similar this time around, 
even though each has made interesting additions. The former England 
international David Dunn has joined Oldham from Blackburn and the manager, 
Darren Kelly, is making all the right noises, but they ended last season in 
miserable form, winning only three of their final 17 fixtures and none of the 
last eight.Pre-season has done little to lift the mood 
<http://www.oldham-chronicle.co.uk/news-features/10/oldham-athletic-news/93274/hitormiss-latics-need-answers>
.Problems with the new North Stand 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/oldham-athletic-forced-delay-opening-9769764>
 have not helped either.

Scunthorpe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scunthorpe> have added the 
battering ram that is Darius Henderson, while Jason Demetriou, outstanding at 
this level with Leyton Orient earlier in his career, has returned to English 
football with Walsall. Neither side should be in too much trouble but it is 
hard to see a play-off push.

This season’s big fallers could be Chesterfield, who reached the play-off 
semi-finals last season on the back of a title-winning League Two campaign in 
2013-14 but have endured a difficult summer. The manager Paul Cook was the 
first to depart, the 48-year-old joining Portsmouth only days after the 
play-off defeat to Preston. Last week, with the first-team regulars Gary 
Roberts and Jimmy Ryan already having exited the club, the midfielder Sam 
Clucas joined Hull City for £1.3m and the full-back Tendayi Darikwa left for 
Burnley.

Cook’s replacement, Dean Saunders, was eager to put a positive spin on things 
– “I’ve been shopping in Lidl up to now, but now I’m going to be shopping at 
Marks & Spencer” – and the Spireites coped when they lost Eoin Doyle (scorer of 
21 goals in the first 26 games of the season) in January to Cardiff but the 
gaps left this summer are surely too big. Saunders’ recent record hardly 
inspires confidence either – relegations with Doncaster in 2012, Wolves in 2013 
and Crawley last year stand out on his CV.

Strugglers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fleague-one-2015-16-season-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438760894160%2F84f40cc2-4c2d-4649-8f67-503ce30a5c88-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=League%20One%202015-16%20season%20preview%20%7C%20John%20Ashdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fleague-one-2015-16-season-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=League%20One%202015-16%20season%20preview%20%7C%20John%20Ashdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fleague-one-2015-16-season-preview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438760894160%2F84f40cc2-4c2d-4649-8f67-503ce30a5c88-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Off-field problems at Blackpool mean the club, relegated to League One last 
season, may face another season of struggle. Photograph: BPI/Rex Shutterstock 
This year’s League One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>
 basket case is last year’s Championship basket case –Blackpool. The 
Tangerines, currently not so much in the middle of a slow-motion car crash as 
freeze-framing their way into the heart of collapsing sun, shed 23 players from 
their squad at the end of last season and the manager, Neil McDonald, is still 
scrambling to add to his squad before the new campaign kicks off. Given the 
well-documented off-field problems at the club it would be no surprise if they 
were to drop straight through the division.

Shrewsbury Town and Southend United could be set for seasons of struggle 
following promotion from League Two. The Shrews lasted two seasons on their 
last visit to this level before dropping back into the fourth tier but have 
bounced back at the first attempt. Micky Mellon’s 3-5-2 proved effective last 
season but it’s a riskier strategy at the higher level, even if Bristol City 
displayed just how effective it can be during their promotion campaign.

Phil Brown’s play-off winners Southend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> have added Noel Hunt from 
Ipswich and David Mooney, scorer of 19 goals for Leyton Orient at this level in 
2013-14, up front but the key bit of transfer business may be a departure. The 
goalkeeper Daniel Bentley remains at the club for now but the vultures are 
hovering – both QPR and Hull City have had offers in the region of £1m rejected.

Survival will again be the aim for Colchester United, Crewe Alexandra and Port 
Vale. Of the trio, perhaps the most at-risk are Vale, who have lost Tom Pope to 
Bury, Mark Marshall to Bradford and Ben Williamson toGillingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> – their three leading scorers 
last season all departing to other League One clubs. That sounds like a recipe 
for trouble.
 