
Rex Tillerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/13/who-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile>
, the businessman nominated by Donald Trump to be the next US secretary of 
state, was the long-time director of a US-Russian oil firm based in the tax 
haven of the Bahamas, leaked documents show.

Tillerson – the chief executive of ExxonMobil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/exxonmobil> – became a director of the 
oil company’s Russian subsidiary, Exxon Neftegas, in 1998. His name – RW 
Tillerson – appears next to other officers who are based at Houston, Texas; 
Moscow; and Sakhalin, in Russia’s far east.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20Donald%20Trump's%20secretary%20of%20state%20nominee%20Rex%20Tillerson%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20secretary%20of%20state%20nominee%20Rex%20Tillerson%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fwho-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile&media=>
Who is Donald Trump’s secretary of state nominee Rex Tillerson? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/13/who-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile>
The leaked 2001 document comes from the corporate registry in the Bahamas. It 
was one of 1.3m files given to the Germany newspaperSüddeutsche Zeitung 
<http://www.sueddeutsche.de/> by an anonymous source. The registry is public 
but details of individual directors are typically incomplete or missing 
entirely.


Though there is nothing untoward about this directorship, it has not been 
reported before and is likely to raise fresh questions over Tillerson’s 
relationship withRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> ahead of a 
potentially stormy confirmation hearing by the US senate foreign relations 
committee. Exxon said on Sunday that Tillerson was no longer a director after 
becoming the company’s CEO in 2006.

ExxonMobil’s use of offshore regimes – while legal – may also jar with Trump’s 
avowal to put “America first”.

Tillerson’s critics say he is too close to the Russian president, Vladimir 
Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, and that his 
appointment could raise potential conflicts of interest.

ExxonMobil is the world’s largest oil company and has for a long time been 
eyeing Russia’s vast oil and gas deposits. Tillerson currently has Exxon stock 
worth more than $200m.








Since his nomination, Tillerson’s Russia ties have become a source of 
bipartisan concern.In 2013, Putin awarded him the Russian Order of Friendship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/13/who-is-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-video-profile>
. Tillerson is close to Igor Sechin, the head of Russian state oil company 
Rosneft and the de facto second most powerful figure inside the Kremlin. A 
hardliner, Sechin is ex-KGB.

Tillerson’s award followed a 2011 deal between ExxonMobil and Rosneft to 
explore the Kara Sea, in Russia’s Arctic 
<http://corporate.exxonmobil.com/en/current-issues/arctic/presence/our-arctic-presence>
.

It was put on hold in 2014 after the Obama administration imposed wide-ranging 
sanctions against Russia. The sanctions were punishment for Putin’s Crimea 
annexation that spring and Russia’s undercover invasion of eastern Ukraine.

Donald Trump faces Senate backlash over ‘cabinet of billionaires’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/donald-trump-senate-backlash-cabinet-of-billionaires>
The ban covers the US sharing of sophisticated offshore and shale oil 
technology. Exxon was supposed to halt its drilling with Rosneft. The firm 
successfully pleaded with the US Treasury department to delay the ban by a few 
weeks, with the Kremlin threatening to seize its rig. In this brief window 
Exxon discovered a major Arctic field with some 750m barrels of new oil.

Tillerson has criticised the US government’s policy on Russia. In 2014 he told 
Exxon’s annual meeting that “we do not support sanctions”. He added: “We always 
encourage the people who are making those decisions to consider the very broad 
collateral damage of who they are really harming.”

It is widely assumed by investors 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-09/ruble-drops-as-trump-lead-hits-emerging-markets-drives-down-oil>
 that the new Trump administration will drop sanctions. This would allow the 
Kara joint venture to resume, boosting Exxon’s share price and yielding 
potential profits in the tens of billions of dollars. According to company 
records, Tillersoncurrently owns $218m of stock 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/12/world/europe/rex-tillersons-company-exxon-has-billions-at-stake-over-russia-sanctions.html>
. His Exxon pension is worth about $70m.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fleak-rex-tillerson-director-bahamas-based-us-russian-oil-company%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58b2575c8c4edf335b85df844e1f06914f26b0c4%2F33_10_2893_1735%2F2893.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leak%20reveals%20Rex%20Tillerson%20was%20director%20of%20Bahamas-based%20US-Russian%20oil%20firm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fleak-rex-tillerson-director-bahamas-based-us-russian-oil-company%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leak%20reveals%20Rex%20Tillerson%20was%20director%20of%20Bahamas-based%20US-Russian%20oil%20firm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fleak-rex-tillerson-director-bahamas-based-us-russian-oil-company%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58b2575c8c4edf335b85df844e1f06914f26b0c4%2F33_10_2893_1735%2F2893.jpg>
 Vladimir Putin awarded Rex Tillerson the Russian Order of Friendship. 
Photograph: Alexei Nikolsky/Tass 
The Senate foreign relations committee is currently split 10 to 9 between 
Republicans and Democrats. But several heavyweight Republicans,including John 
McCain <http://edition.cnn.com/2016/12/13/politics/kfile-mccain-tillerson/>, 
have raised doubts about Tillerson’s nomination and his lack of experience to 
be America’s top diplomat after four decades spent exclusively in the oil 
industry.

Republican senator Marco Rubio – who sits on the committee – said on Tuesday 
that he had “serious concerns” about giving Tillerson the job. Rubio praised 
him as a “respected businessman” but said that the next secretary of state 
“must be someone who views the world with moral clarity [and who] has a clear 
sense of America’s interests”.

Tillerson is likely to get rid of his Exxon stock if the narrowly 
Republican-majority Senate confirms his appointment.

Controversy over his links with Russia comes at a time when the topic is 
politically red hot 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/13/us/politics/russia-hack-election-dnc.html>, 
after the CIA said earlier this month that Kremlin hackers had stolen emails 
from the Democratic National Committee and top Democrats in order to help 
Trump. The president-elect has dismissed the CIA’s assessment, calling it 
“ridiculous”. The Democratic presidential candidate, Hillary Clinton, saysPutin 
targeted her for reasons of personal revenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/clinton-putin-email-hack-revenge>
.

As well as on oil and gas, the Obama administration has imposed personal 
sanctions on Putin’s friends, including Sechin. Sechin has said thatone of his 
ambitions is to “ride the roads in the United States on motorcycles with 
Tillerson” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
. Currently, Sechin is forbidden from entering the country.

This new revelation about Tillerson’s directorship sheds light on the use by 
multinational companies of contrived offshore structures, now under scrutiny 
following April’smassive Panama Papers leak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>.

Exxon Neftegas’s most important oil and gas project is Sakhalin-1 
<http://corporate.exxonmobil.com/en/company/worldwide-operations/locations/russia>
. It is located in the sub-Arctic, off the frozen and difficult-to-access 
north-east coast of Russia’s Sakhalin island. This is 10,700km (6,650 miles) 
away from the subsidiary’s official business home in Nassau, the semi-tropical 
capital of the Bahamas. The Bahamas is notorious for secrecy and has a 
corporate tax rate of zero.

The documents from the Bahamas corporate registry were shared by Süddeutsche 
Zeitung with the Guardian and theInternational Consortium of Investigative 
Journalists <https://www.icij.org/> in Washington DC. They show that Exxon 
registered at least 67 companies in the secretive tax haven, covering 
operations in countries from Russia to Venezuela to Azerbaijan.


Gates: US ‘somewhat laid back’ over Russian election interference
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/robert-gates-russia-election-interference-donald-trump-hillary-clinton>
Exxon Neftegas features in about 25 leaked offshore documents. The oil firm 
was incorporated in 1998 by a law firm in Nassau, Higgs & Johnson. Another 
veteran law firm,Lobosky Management Ltd <http://www.hbslaw.com/>, subsequently 
took over as registered agent. The company secretary, Sophia Kishinevsky, 
signed the paperwork and made annual filings.

Exxon said it had no comment on whether Tillerson should now divest his Exxon 
holdings and resign from his positions with all Exxon entities. It said the oil 
firm had incorporated some of its affiliates in theBahamas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahamas> because of “simplicity and 
predictability”.

“It is not done to reduce tax in the country where the company operates,” 
Exxon said. “Incorporation of a company in the Bahamas does not decrease 
ExxonMobil’s tax liability in the country where the entity generates its 
income.”

The firm was one of the largest taxpayers in the world, with an effective 
global tax rate in 2015 of 34%, it said. Its effective tax rate over the past 
three years – 2013, 2014, 2015 – was 43%, it added. This compared favourably 
with other Fortune 100 companies, which “have substantially lower effective tax 
rates than ExxonMobil”.
 