
January has become a month of mass puritanism. You cut out meat and dairy if 
you’re doing Veganuary. You lay off the booze if you’re doing Dry January. We 
regret the platefuls of roast potatoes, the tubs of chocolates and the vats of 
Baileys that sustained us through December, and spend our cash on 
self-flagellating, hopeful quick-fixes that promise to make us better, more 
focused, less prone to bad habits.

This reaches fever pitch when it comes to food and fitness. A glance at the 
Amazon bestseller list takes the pulse of the nation and suggests that we’re 
flailing around for a solution: of the top 10 books across all genres, seven 
are about eating, and six of those are about getting thinner.

Although it’s still hugely popular, there has been a considerable and growing 
backlash against the most evangelical of food trends, “clean eating”, which, in 
its terror of bread and pasta, has built an industry around drinking kale juice 
and pretending that courgettes are the same as spaghetti. So now, food writers 
and fitness gurus have lopped off the “C” – it’s all about getting lean and 
staying lean.

Meet the Body Coach, the man with the million-dollar muscles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/18/joe-wicks-meet-body-coach-million-dollar-muscles>
Joe Wicks, a 31-year-old, puppyish former personal trainer who looks like Jon 
Snow would if he left Game of Thrones and spent the summer as an Ibiza club 
rep, has become the suddenly famous face of this move towards litheness. Known 
to hismillions of fans and followers as the Body Coach 
<https://www.thebodycoach.com/>, he’s the bouncy, excitable, ridiculously 
sculptedfigurehead of Lean in 15 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/19/lean-in-15-the-shape-plan-by-joe-wicks-digested-read>
: exercising quickly and cooking at home so you can balance the kind of food 
you’re eating with your activity levels.

His plan lent itself to three books in 2016, each of which went to No 1 in the 
same year, a feat no other non-fiction writer – not Jamie, not Delia, not 
Nigella – has managed to pull off. Right now they occupy the top three slots on 
Amazon. Wicks is on the cover of each, in skintight, bright-coloured lycra, 
showing off his lean physique, holding a burger, making a stir fry, and eating 
some – hang on, is that pasta?

“The whole clean-eating thing, I don’t even understand it! I’ve just had 
bangers and mash, don’t mean I’m dirty,” he shrugs, having just chomped down 
his sizable lunch. He’s in Newcastle today on the second date of a UK-wide tour 
to promote his new DVD, in which he wears more skintight, bright-coloured lycra 
and shows youhow to do some of his favourite HIIT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/18/joe-wicks-body-coach-20-minute-hiit-workout-plan>
 (High Intensity Interval Training, which basically means doing rapid bursts of 
full-on muscle-mashing exercise followed by short periods of rest) moves on a 
tropical beach. Fizzy on screen, he’s surprisingly serious in person, wearing 
round Hockney specs that suggest he means business.

In 2014, Wicks was a personal trainer with a decent-ish following on Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/thebodycoach/?hl=en>, earning, he says, “a grand a 
month”. Eighteen months on, he has got the books (the three so far are part of 
an eight-book deal, and have sold more than 1m copies), the DVD,a Channel 4 
series <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/joe-wicks-celebrity-body-coach>and 
an ever-extending network of social media platforms that he constantly updates 
with recipe clips, selfies and “graduate reports”, with before-and-after shots 
from followers of his subscription-based 90-Day SSS Plan. He has even 
cultivated his own language. Scales are “the sad step”. Broccoli is “midget 
trees”. His Instagram recipes are brief clips of him slopping ingredients into 
a pan with the kind of zingy enthusiasm that makes Jamie Oliver look like Gary 
Barlow. He talks of his success in evangelical terms, with a sprinkling of 
cosmic balance. “My aim is always just to get one person a day to exercise and 
cook healthy food. Of course, all that love and content I put out has come 
back, in the form of people buying the book. It comes round like that.”

Wicks was born in Epsom, Surrey, and grew up on a council estate. “If you had 
met me as a kid you would have never predicted me to be a success. I had a 
pretty ropey upbringing and you might have thought I’d have gone the other 
way,” he says. His parents split up when he was young; he stayed with his mum 
until he went to study sports science at university, when he moved in with his 
dad, a roofer. He says his mum “didn’t have a clue about nutrition” when he and 
his two brothers were kids. “Our cupboards were always full of chocolate, 
midget gems and Wagon Wheels. She’d only ever cook one thing, which was 
lasagne, because she never got educated in cooking. We’d have pasta in tomato 
sauce or she’d say: ‘Want a picnic?’ and we’d have sandwiches. So I pretty much 
lived off junk food until I was 16, 17.” He understands now why it was like 
that. “It’s a financial thing, isn’t it? We couldn’t afford steak and fish 
every night and my mum wouldn’t know how to cook it even if she got given it. 
So she kept it simple.”

Although it would be nice for the story to imagine schoolboy Wicks as an 
overweight, McDonald’s-addicted Mega-Drive lover who had some sort of epiphany 
that transformed him into abs and sinew, the truth is that he was always 
active, always sporty, always thin. “Like, really skinny,” he says. “My mum’s 
really slim. I never really had an overweight body.” He says he struggled 
academically at school. He says he was “a bit silly, a bit of a troublemaker” 
when he was younger. “I was quite hyperactive as a young kid, and then when I 
got to high school I was just the class clown. I didn’t have much of an 
attention span.” He found salvation in PE, so much so that he trained to be a 
PE teacher after his degree. But a short spell as a teaching assistant showed 
him that this was not the job for him. “I was at a rough school, and the kids 
were really hard work. I just thought, I don’t think I’ve got it in me. And I 
love kids and that, but they were quite young, and pulling my hair and kicking 
my shins.” Eventually, he decided to stick to what he loved, and became a 
personal trainer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Flean-in-15s-joe-wicks-i-dont-understand-the-clean-eating-thing-ive-just-had-bangers-and-mash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6c486bb96319b8a3ab132347d981ec35ba69504%2F0_299_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lean%20in%2015%E2%80%99s%20Joe%20Wicks%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20understand%20the%20clean-eating%20thing.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20just%20had%20bangers%20and%20mash%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Flean-in-15s-joe-wicks-i-dont-understand-the-clean-eating-thing-ive-just-had-bangers-and-mash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lean%20in%2015%E2%80%99s%20Joe%20Wicks%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20understand%20the%20clean-eating%20thing.%20I%E2%80%99ve%20just%20had%20bangers%20and%20mash%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Flean-in-15s-joe-wicks-i-dont-understand-the-clean-eating-thing-ive-just-had-bangers-and-mash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6c486bb96319b8a3ab132347d981ec35ba69504%2F0_299_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Brawn to be wild ... Joe Wicks. Photograph: Conor McDonnell 
There’s a kind of “never in my wildest dreams could I have imagined this” 
narrative to Wicks’ tale, one he is keen to emphasise. He says he only started 
the Instagram to get more customers, and he only started recipe and diet plans 
in the hope that if he sold 10 a month, he could do less training, and have an 
extra morning in bed. It’s true that there’s something unusual about the 
stratospheric success he has enjoyed. By his own admission, what he’s saying 
isn’t particularly new or revelatory. It’s all a spin on some basic truths. 
Don’t eat so many processed foods, do more exercise. If you’re more active, you 
can eat more than if you sit on your backside all day.

The fact that it’s Wicks who is topping the charts with this rather than any 
other one-time trainer suggests that he’s either very, very lucky, or some kind 
of machiavellian business genius. The truth is somewhere between the two –he’s 
saying the right thing, at the right time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/18/lunch-with-joe-wicks>. “I 
don’t see myself as an entrepreneur. I just had an idea,” he says. “The 
Instagram was an idea. You have to think back two years ago and I had 5,000 
followers or whatever. You’re not getting paid, there’s no money in it, you 
can’t monetise this right now. But the book deal came off the back of that. The 
reason I think it’s been so successful is that people do it, they love it and 
feel better about themselves. You’re not starving yourself. You can still eat 
burgers and make curries and have nice bagels and baguettes and things. If you 
do exercise, you can eat this food.”

There is also the matter of his looks, which have helped usher in a kind of 
fame that he’s particularly squeamish about. He’s starting to become a Daily 
Mail regular; there has been much speculation about who his new girlfriend 
might be. In November, Wicks appeared on Good Morning Britain, where he was
repeatedly asked whether he was single or not by Piers Morgan 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/tv/tv-news/piers-morgan-blasted-viewers-bullying-9268986>
. Wicks visibly squirmed. “He just grilled me, didn’t he? I wasn’t ready for 
it,” he says. “I like keeping my relationship private, really. It’s the one 
thing I don’t want on social media.” Last year he broke up with his long-term 
girlfriend, and even she had never appeared on his many public platforms. “It’s 
always been like that. I was with a girl for 11 years and you would have never 
known. She was never on my social media. I don’t wanna be like one of those 
celebrities in the papers having photoshoots and all that.” He might not have 
much choice. “But I’ll try for as long as I can.”

Wicks knows he’s good-looking, and that it helps. “But it’s a bit annoying 
when I turn up to photoshoots and they always want me to be topless,” he says. 
“I’m over that now, I feel like I’ve got credibility. I wanna wear a nice smart 
suit and do the front cover of GQ and Esquire mag and talk about my business 
and my mission.” In the early days, he says he would do anything he was asked. 
“Turn up with broccoli, hang out of a tree. There is that level of, you’re 
successful because you’re good-looking and that, but that’s not how my brain 
thinks. I always think, well, do I have to do it topless?”

Hang on, haven’t you got your top off in your new book? “Oh, in the third 
book, yeah,” he grins. “Me and my publisher talked about this. We’d never done 
it in the first two books and we were like, it’s the third one, it’s 
aspirational, let’s stick a little selfie in there.” He gets his abs out for 
the DVD, too, he admits sheepishly. “The last one I did topless because it’s 
the ‘winners’ workout’. So I rip the mic off and pull my top off and run in the 
sea. Hopefully people will think, I’ll do the last one so I can see him 
topless. Get ’em on their last workout!”

Wicks knows how to give ’em what they want; he has been canny enough to see 
that pushing his books and regimes as anti-diet has added to their appeal. 
“Don’t talk to me about the D word!” he yelps on his Channel 4 show, The Body 
Coach. “All diets are based on deprivation and dropping calories,” he says now, 
firmly. “People are so confused.” All he has done is clear it up: eat what you 
want so long as you’re doing the exercise to match it.

Joe Wicks: ‘People say I’m a cross between Jamie Oliver and Mr Motivator’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/18/lunch-with-joe-wicks> 
The thing is, it’s still a diet, isn’t it? Whether it’s the My Shape Plan 
diary at the front of his latest book, or the tailored 90-Day SSS Plan (a 
one-off payment of £147, to which Wicks says 135,000 people have subscribed), 
it’s following a regimented exercise and nutrition process that means you’re 
obsessed with and focusing on food. Wicks is adamant that no, it’s not a diet – 
it’s a way of rethinking your entire life. “A diet for me is cutting things 
out. We don’t cut anything out. All we’re saying is eat in moderation at the 
right time and you can eat a lot more. For me, 90 days is a good amount of time 
to change habits.”

Now, Wicks wants to change habits on a much bigger scale. “I want to get in 
with schools and the NHS. I don’t quite know in my head what that means yet. 
Something where I’m helping the population of this country, not just on social 
media, but, like whether it’s on TV, or within the government where I’m leading 
a campaign ...” His enthusiasm is infectious. “We’re getting more and more 
unhealthy, we’re getting more diabetes and we’re getting more obese, so I feel 
like I could be the person that really leads that, you know? It is just 
education, isn’t it? If you can teach a family what they should be eating and 
what they should cut out, and change those habits, then the whole family 
becomes healthier.”

In the face of the clean-eating horrors of juice cleanses, swapping tea for 
“infused water” and the scientific twaddle around detox, Wicks’s Lean in 15 
plan doesn’t seem like such a bad option, largely because it’s simple: it’s 
easy to grasp and nice to eat. So much so, in fact, that he almost starts to 
talk himself out of a job. “If you cut it all away, the plan, the books, 
everything, if you just do a workout in your living room and you cook your food 
at home, real food, that’s literally it,” he insists. But he’s only done three 
books, and he’s signed up for eight. Is that famous enthusiasm – there could 
not be a better advert for his plan’s supposed energy-boosting prospects – 
going to be sustainable? “I’m just buzzing for life. People are just drawn to 
that, aren’t they?” he says, ever the businessman. “If I change, people will 
think, nah, I don’t like him any more, I’ve gone off him.” Besides, he says, 
imagine if you were in his position. “My life’s completely changed. I own a 
house. I didn’t even think I’d have a mortgage. I come from a background 
where we didn’t have properties. None of my family went to university, we never 
had houses. Now I can do all these things I never thought possible. I’m having 
the best time ever!”
 