
The outlook from the high-rise flats behind Ashton Gate, once Nelson Mandela 
house in the sitcom Only Fools and Horses, has changed significantly in the 
past 18 months. The stadium is in the process of a £45m facelift – one it is 
hoped will help finally to put Bristol City firmly on the football map. Once 
completed, it will bea 27,000-capacity state-of-the-art facility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/sep/20/bristol-city-new-stadium> with a 
crèche and an oxygen tank.

The club are attempting to break new ground on the pitch too. Lee Johnson, the 
forward‑thinking head coach, is determined to take City into the Premier League 
after failing to do so as a player eight years ago.

Johnson is a student of the game and his face lights up when he is asked, in 
the canteen at the club’s training ground, where his will to keep learning has 
taken him. “I have been everywhere, all over the world, studying,” he says, 
citing trips to Barcelona, Real Madrid and the Latvian club Skonto Riga. But 
perhaps most intriguing are visits not to football clubs but to the SAS and the 
NHS.

“I went to the NHS to study pressure environments and leadership,” Johnson 
says. “I went into an A&E ward with the doctors and nurses there just to see 
pressure because it’s very difficult to replicate – on a matchday you’re a 
lunatic. For 90 minutes in that technical area – because you’re so emotional – 
everybody’s an idiot. There’s so much tension and pressure, so it’s how can you 
recreate that and be calm under pressure? It’s a way of trying to learn, using 
the little tricks of the trade to become better, and I enjoy that.”

Leeds manager Garry Monk: if you worry about the sack you’ll never take any job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/30/leeds-manager-garry-monk-interview>
Johnson’s approach is leaving no stone unturned and his forays into other 
walks of life are not finished yet. “I am trying to get into a top Michelin 
star kitchen just so I can study the chefs and the pressure of delivering 
quality. I’ll take Jamie Oliver, anyone who will do it, but it’s got to be 
Michelin star though.”

It was 2008, in the play-off final at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/may/25/championship.hullcity>, when 
the then Hull City striker Dean Windass abruptly ended Bristol City’s big 
dream. Johnson’s father, Gary, safely the club’s most popular manager since the 
turn of the millennium, was in charge that day and Lee played the second half. 
Since then, the club’s rivals from across the Severn bridge, Swansea City and 
Cardiff City, as well as the towns of Bournemouth, Burnley and Blackpool, have 
reached the Premier League. The city of Bristol – England’s eighth-biggest by 
population – has been starved of top-flight football for 36 years.

“It was a successful time while I was here [as a player] but I want to make 
sure I am the one to deliver Premier League football to the city,” says the 
35-year-old Johnson, who spent six years as a midfielder at the club. “I felt 
guilty that we did not get into the Premier League. I think you have got to 
earn that right to be there. I think you earn that right by doing things in the 
correct manner and holding yourself correctly as a club. But we can handle it: 
the city can handle it, the stadium can handle it and the board can handle it 
and we’re ready. Of course, you have to do it sustainably, but we’re ready.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Flee-johnson-bristol-city-championship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceac607950be1c6473da1a92cfcc74b957e2f85c%2F49_218_5055_3033%2F5055.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lee%20Johnson%20enlists%20help%20of%20NHS%20and%20SAS%20to%20drive%20Bristol%20City%20forward&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Flee-johnson-bristol-city-championship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lee%20Johnson%20enlists%20help%20of%20NHS%20and%20SAS%20to%20drive%20Bristol%20City%20forward&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Flee-johnson-bristol-city-championship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceac607950be1c6473da1a92cfcc74b957e2f85c%2F49_218_5055_3033%2F5055.jpg>
 Ashton Gate is in the process of a £45m rebuild, which will eventually see the 
capacity rise to 27,000. Photograph: Rogan Thomson/JMP/Rex/Shutterstock 
Johnson’s vision is somewhat mirrored on the club’s home shirt for the coming 
season. The hashtag #MakingBristolProud, a slogan used by the club’s commercial 
arm, Bristol Sport, adorns the right shoulder of the red strip. Bristol Sport, 
the group of sports companies owned by theBristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> owner, Steve Lansdown, has 
overseen the stadium’s redevelopment. Within the Bristol Sport banner are a 
number of affiliated clubs, including Bristol Rugby and various others from 
badminton to basketball. In fact, the only major team in the city in which 
Lansdown does not hold an interest are Bristol Rovers.

The drones above the club’s training ground and the rapidly expanding sports 
science department are indicators of the club’s development and attention to 
detail. Johnson, who also played for Yeovil Town and Kilmarnock, has been key 
to implementing performance psychology. “I used it a lot as a player myself and 
if we can allow our young players to be expressive, to be bold and not fear 
retribution for giving the ball away, that can be quite powerful if that’s over 
11 players,” he says.

Football League 2016-17 season: 16 things to watch out for
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/30/football-league-16-things-to-watch>
“We are always trying to future-proof football. We are not trying to reinvent 
the wheel because football is still the same. But there’s a lot of pressure 
now: there’s a lot of money at stake, there are a lot of supporters watching 
and there is instant anger or adulation now with social media. All of these 
things have to be managed to make sure the equilibrium of the team is correct.”

An hour in the company of Johnson is absorbing and it is easy to forget he is 
still only four years into management. The former Barnsley and Oldham manager 
is the fifth-youngest coach in England’s top four divisions and the youngest 
English coach in the top three.

“Eddie Howe is completely out there on his own at the moment in terms of that 
youthful breed,” says Johnson. “People like myself, Gary Rowett and Sean Dyche 
have to emulate people like him. I think there’s some really good coaches, some 
passionate people but I think emotional intelligence separates the men from the 
boys.

“There are millions of technically and tactically good coaches but the best 
ones that I’ve seen are the ones that can adjust and show that emotional 
intelligence to get the right blend. I also think people have to have the 
strength of character to hire young, English coaches. I am still forging parts 
of my leadership skills and philosophies. It’s something I’ve got to make sure 
I keep pushing.”

The hard work and persistence has continued behind the scenes in the transfer 
market too. Lee Tomlin, a box-office hit on loan last season, has signed 
permanently from Bournemouth and Adam Matthews has re-signed for the club on a 
season-long loan from Sunderland. The Iceland defender Hordur Magnusson and the 
goalkeeper Ivan Lucic have arrived from Juventus and Bayern Munich respectively 
and the Republic of Ireland midfielder Callum O’Dowda signed from Oxford United 
as one of the Football League’s brightest talents. Josh Brownhill has arrived 
after a year on loan at Barnsley and Gary O’Neil will add his priceless 
top-flight experience to a fairly youthful squad. Last season’s spine of Aden 
Flint, Korey Smith and Jonathan Kodjia, who scored 20 goals in his debut 
season, are likely to return improved.

One of the club’s biggest signings, though, has been Mark Ashton, formerly of 
Oxford United, who was appointed as the chief operating officer in January. He 
works in tandem with Johnson and the club’s longstanding owner, Lansdown, a 
billionaire from the city, whose son, Jon, became vice-chairman in 2013. 
Johnson’s predecessor, Steve Cotterill, who ensured the club returned to the
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> last year, was 
repeatedly frustrated in his attempts to bring in players – notably the 
strikers Andre Gray and Dwight Gayle – because of what he said was their 
“perception” of the club. That perception appears to have changed.

“It’s just a great city to live in, it’s a good football club with a good 
owner, who has got the right intentions,” says Johnson. “If we can work 
together – and Mark Ashton can be the glue in it all – and let me deal with 
developing the football side then the world is your oyster. I am here to do my 
very best. Will we achieve the promised land? Who knows, but we will certainly 
die in a ditch for that honour.”
 