
Leeds United have been criticised after it was revealed supporters will have 
to pay £42 for a ticket to watch their Championship fixture againstBristol City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> at Elland Road on 23 January.

Leeds, who “reluctantly” agreed to allow last month’s game against Derby County
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/29/leeds-united-massimo-cellino-sky-derby-televised>
 to be broadcast live on Sky after initially denying cameras entry to the 
ground, have ruled that the fixture against City to be a category A despite 
their opponents only being promoted from League One last season. That means 
that fans can buy a ticket in advance for £37 but that cost rises to £42 for 
tickets bought on the door.

The decision has been criticised in an article 
<http://www.fansnetwork.co.uk/football/leedsunited/news/41572/thats-inflation!-15-years-after-paying-%EF%BF%BD20-to-watch-barca-its-%EF%BF%BD42-for-bristol-city!>
 on fansnetwork.co.uk, in which an anonymous supporter reveals that the ticket 
will cost more than twice as much as he paid to watch the 1-1 draw against 
Barcelona in the Champions League in 2000.

Time for TV companies to be more considerate to common football fan | Daniel 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/02/tv-football-fans-leeds-united>
The article states: “In that Champions League season the Whites repaid the 
loyalty of their long-suffering fans by offering a package deal where for just 
£60 on the Kop we got to see the mighty Catalans, Beskitas and AC Milan to 
boot! What good value that was given our dramatic progression out of the first 
group stage when everyone, myself included, had written us off.

“I know times have changed but I can’t help but think Massimo [Cellino], or 
whoever makes these odd decisions has got it wrong charging this much to watch 
us take on Bristol City. It also strikes a hammer blow against the very valid 
argument that Sky rescheduling is killing our attendances, charging ridiculous 
prices for average, second-tier football might just be a contributory factor as 
to why attendances are plummeting this season.”

The article goes on to state that this will be the seventh time this season 
that Leeds have charged category A prices, including for the 1-0 win over 
Preston North End on 20 December.
 