
Leeds United fans plan to march in protest against the club owner Massimo 
Cellino <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/massimo-cellino> through the city 
centre streets before Saturday’s home Championship game against Reading.

The fans’ group Time To Go Massimo will join other supporters opposed to the 
Italian’s ownership of the club at Leeds City Square before embarking on a 
march to Elland Road.

“Time To Go Massimo will be marching with fellow fans in protest against the 
toxic regime that is currently occupying theLeeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited> that we hold so dearly to 
our hearts,” the group said in a statement.

“Our march route will take us from City Square and will cover 2.2 miles of 
ground through Leeds city centre and Holbeck, before we reach the East Stand of 
Elland Road to tell Mr Cellino to end the farce of his ownership.”

The group has placed an advertisement in the sports section of Saturday’s 
Yorkshire Evening Post to promote the march and said it has advertised 
extensively on social media.

“The protest march has the full support of West Yorkshire police, who will be 
there chaperoning the march in its entirety,” the group said.

“We’d also like to issue this statement to fellow fans tired of the state of 
Leeds United, asking them to join us in our peaceful protest on Saturday and to 
tell Massimo Cellino to sell the club to one of the infinitely more credible 
parties we know are waiting in the wings.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fleeds-fans-protest-massimo-cellino-reading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d17d553b819a73b5d2963f74c4a41cbe2a391c8%2F0_11_2608_1565%2F2608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leeds%20fans%20plan%20protest%20march%20against%20Massimo%20Cellino%20before%20Reading%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fleeds-fans-protest-massimo-cellino-reading%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leeds%20fans%20plan%20protest%20march%20against%20Massimo%20Cellino%20before%20Reading%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fleeds-fans-protest-massimo-cellino-reading%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d17d553b819a73b5d2963f74c4a41cbe2a391c8%2F0_11_2608_1565%2F2608.jpg>
 Massimo Cellino has alienated many Leeds fans. Photograph: Huw Evans/Rex 
Shutterstock 
Time To Go Massimo mounted a sustained campaign to oust Cellino from Elland 
Road in February and earlier this week called on the 59-year-old to “end this 
farce” after a former employee,Lucy Ward, won her claim for unfair dismissal 
and sexual discrimination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/leeds-gibbs-ward-unfair-dismissal-massimo-cellino>
 against the club.

The former academy welfare officer Ward, who is the partner of the former 
Leeds head coach Neil Redfearn, left the club last summer.

Cellino’s two-year reign in charge of Leeds has been littered with controversy 
and managerial sackings. The former Cagliari owner is currently on his sixth 
head coach while alsoappealing against a second Football League disqualification
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/19/leeds-massimo-cellino-disqualified-football-league>
for tax evasion.

Last week his son and Leeds director Edoardo was charged by the Football 
Association afterhe called a supporter a “spastic”  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/04/massimo-cellino-sons-leeds-united-supporters>
on social media.

Time To Go Massimo, funded by unhappy supporters, has carried out a number of 
protests including the staging of a mock funeral, a fly-over and the projection 
of several anti-Cellino messages on to the side of Elland Road.

The statement added: “Our last home game marked two years since Massimo took 
over at Elland Road – it might as well have been two minutes.

“This Saturday [the Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> 
manager] Brian McDermott will return to our club to discover that Leeds United 
very much remains the circus that he left behind. This cannot go on.”
 