
Massimo Cellino <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/massimo-cellino>, the owner 
of Leeds United, is contemplating an 18-month suspension from all 
football-related activities after the Football Association revealed that a 
disciplinary panel convened in September had found him guilty of breaching 
agent regulations.

The delay in announcing a sanction scheduled to take effect from 1 February 
was prompted by concerns that publicising Cellino’s punishment for his role in 
Ross McCormack’s transfer from Leeds to Fulham in 2014 for around £11m might 
prejudice the appeal the 60-year-old Italian is currently preparing.

Cellino – currently close to selling a 50% stake in Leeds to Andrea 
Radrizzani, an Italian businessmen and co-founder of a media-rights group, MP & 
Silva – denies breaking the FA’s rules by facilitating the payment of £185,000 
to an unlicensed adviser of McCormack but the two-day Wembley hearing chaired 
by Nicholas Stewart QC disagreed.

Should the appeal fail, the ever controversial Cellino – who has also been 
fined £250,000 – will be barred from playing any role at Elland Road until 1 
September 2018 and, in addition, must attend an FA education programme. 
Whatever the outcome, it is likely that the offloading of shares to Radrizzani, 
who says negotiations are already “advanced”, will be accelerated.

In a statement the governing body said: “Mr Cellino has been suspended for 18 
months from being a director or shadow director ofLeeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited> or any other football club 
or company whose activities include ownership of a football club. By 30 April 
2017 he is to attend and complete an FA education programme covering the duties 
and responsibilities of an owner and director of an English football club.”

It is the third time the former owner of Cagliari has been handed a suspension 
by England’s football authorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/19/leeds-massimo-cellino-disqualified-football-league>
 since taking over in west Yorkshire in April 2014. Typically the man whose 
company, Eleonora Sport – named after his daughter – assumed total control of 
the club in September responded by expressing “surprise” and claiming he was 
guilty only of “protecting Leeds United”.

How Massimo Cellino still controls Leeds United despite two bans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/26/massimo-cellino-leeds-united-two-bans>
The club, who also received a separate £250,000 fine for their part in the 
McCormack transfer and will also be appealing, declined to comment on Thursday 
but Cellino proved more forthcoming. “I am not guilty and I will take the right 
steps to defend myself through the tribunal,” he said. “I ask the players, 
manager and my staff to continue to work with loyalty and professionalism and 
to keep fighting for the club every day on and off the pitch.

“I am sure that the public in this country and the free press will take the 
time to look into this case and find the truth,” Cellino added.

Leeds, as a club, meanwhile, will contest the charge on the basis that, given 
financial penalties levied in similar cases, they feel it is disproportionately 
large. In 2015Arsenal were fined £60,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/26/arsenal-fined-warned-breaching-agent-rules-calum-chambers-fa>
 for a breach of regulations involving Calum Chambers’ transfer from 
Southampton and Brighton had to pay £90,000 after Dale Stephens’ move from 
Charlton Athletic.

There is also a certain bewilderment at Elland Road that the FA elected to 
make Cellino the subject of a personal misconduct charge as sanctions stemming 
from illegal payments are more commonly applicable solely to clubs as 
collectives rather than individuals.

Massimo Cellino: ‘Ross McCormack forced me to sell him to Fulham’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/08/fulham-sign-ross-mccormack-leeds>
Derek Day, the licensed agent working for McCormack, has received a £75,000 
fine and an 18-month ban, 11 months of which is suspended. Along with Cellino 
and Leeds, he was found culpable of ensuring that a payment reached Barry 
Hughes, an unlicensed adviser associated with McCormack.

No stranger to brushes with authority, Cellino took over Leeds only after 
winning an appeal concerning a tax issue.In 2014 the Football League imposed a 
six-month ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/01/massimo-cellino-leeds-football-league-disqualified>
 on him relating to a tax offence in Italy and earlier this year he had another 
suspension overturned.

Uncharacteristically, he has cut a subdued figure this season, deliberately 
staying in the background and keeping fairly quiet as under the management of 
Garry Monk – the seventh head coach appointment during his eventful 
two-and-a-half year tenure – Leeds are enjoying their best season since 2005-06 
and appear in strong contention for promotion to the Premier League.
 