
In 1962, Ipswich Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ipswichtown> won 
the league in their first season at the highest level. It was a remarkable 
achievement and they remain one of the three most surprising English champions 
since the second world war. In August 1962 they met the FA Cup winners 
Tottenham Hotspur in the Charity Shield, a game played at Portman Road, and 
lost 5-1. It was the beginning of a long deflation. Ipswich finished the season 
17th, by which point their manager Alf Ramsey had departed to take charge of 
England.

No one is necessarily anticipating a similar decline for Leicester City but 
history suggests surprise champions are surprising for a reason and that reason 
is there are a lot of teams better than them.Nottingham Forest’s 1977-78 side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2016/apr/28/leicester-premier-league-nottingham-forest-1978-parallels>
, the other member of the trinity of shock champions, did finish second in 
1978-79 but that example is highly unusual – and is explained partly by the 
genius of Brian Clough and partly be significant investment in players, 
including the signing of England’s first £1m player, Trevor Francis.

Premier League 2016-17 preview No8: Leicester City | Paul Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/04/premier-league-2016-17-preview-leicester-city-claudio-ranieri>
But that, of course, was a different time, before money had quite the 
influence it does now, and when the European Cup represented – at most – nine 
additional games across the season, many of which were likely to be against 
significantly inferior opposition. More recent surprise champions from across 
Europe have struggled the following season.

Blackburn Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackburn>, who won the 
Premier League in 1995, and Montpellier, who won the French league in 2013, 
found themselves in danger of being drawn into relegation battles by the 
December of the following season, although they recovered to seventh and ninth 
respectively. The three German surprises, Kaiserslautern (1998-99), Stuttgart 
(2007-08) and Wolfsburg (2009-10), came fifth, sixth and eighth.

The problems are manifold. Ipswich’s collapse came because sides worked out 
their tactic of withdrawing the left-winger, Jimmy Leadbetter, to operate in 
midfield. The parallel with Leicester is not exact – tactical ruses are exposed 
much more quickly in these days of blanket television coverage – but it did 
take a long time for opponents to cotton on to quite how devastating Leicester 
were on the break and, by the time they did so, Claudio Ranieri’s side were far 
enough ahead of the pack to keep playing as they had. Opponents will be wise to 
that now: no side in the opening weeks of the season will go to King Power and 
attack.

There is the issue of talent being lured away by bigger clubs and, in that 
regard, Leicester have done well to lose only N’Golo Kanté and the head of 
recruitment, Steve Walsh.

The Champions League – at least six games before Christmas – places a strain 
on the squad. As far as possible last season, Ranieri selected the same 
starting XI for every game. As he has said, he will have to tinker. Five new 
signings have added depth, but the danger is that they disrupt a dynamic that, 
last season, was unusually perfect.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fleicester-city-premier-league-champions-community-shield%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e7ca10469e3ff22a62a3bcd7c483dd915e5edda%2F146_116_2950_1771%2F2950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leicester%20City%E2%80%99s%20perfect%20Premier%20League%20storm%20to%20blow%20out%20after%20freak%20season%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Wilson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fleicester-city-premier-league-champions-community-shield%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leicester%20City%E2%80%99s%20perfect%20Premier%20League%20storm%20to%20blow%20out%20after%20freak%20season%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Wilson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fleicester-city-premier-league-champions-community-shield%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e7ca10469e3ff22a62a3bcd7c483dd915e5edda%2F146_116_2950_1771%2F2950.jpg>
 Andy King will likely need a stellar season to help offset the loss of N’Golo 
Kanté. Photograph: R Parker/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
And then there is the fact that last season was, to put it bluntly, a bit of a 
freak. Leicester performed creditably enough intheir 2-1 Community Shield 
defeat by Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/07/leicester-city-manchester-united-community-shield-match-report>
 but there were troubling signs, particularly in the goals they conceded. For 
the first, Jesse Lingard surged through the centre, evading a couple of 
reckless challenges. Last season there would have been no space to surge into, 
no chance for him to build up the pace that allowed him to jink by those 
tackles because Kanté would have been there. Maybe that is not entirely fair on 
Andy King, who took Kanté’s position. Maybe Kanté would have had an off day. 
But it seems significant the only goal Leicester conceded last season that 
featured a similar surge through the centre came from Salomón Rondónin the 2-2 
draw in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/01/leicester-city-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
 when Kanté was unavailable with a hamstring injury. King or Nampalys Mendy 
will have to have an exceptional season if the France international is not to 
be missed.

Riyad Mahrez agrees not to leave Leicester in current transfer window
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/10/riyad-mahrez-not-leave-leicester>
But that in a sense was expected. It was obvious there would have to be 
adjustments to cope with the loss of Kanté. More troubling was the second goal 
as Zlatan Ibrahimovic outjumped Wes Morgan, who had been one of those leaping 
in to challenges in the buildup to the first goal. Many defenders will be 
beaten in the air by Ibrahimovic this season. He is physically imposing and an 
extremely good header of the ball but last season Morgan won an impressive 93 
of 157 aerials attempted. Leicester’s system meant opponents were often reduced 
to whacking crosses into the box that he and Robert Huth cleared as a matter of 
routine.

To fail in that at such a key moment felt like a warning. Morgan played well 
above his ability last season and he was not the only one. Leicester had 
perhaps half a dozen players in the form of their lives simultaneously. That 
will not continue. There will be a regression to the mean.

Perhaps that mean is a little higher that would have been thought two seasons 
ago but the perfect storm of circumstance that carried Leicester to the title 
last year will blow itself out.
 