
Claudio Ranieri <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/claudio-ranieri> has been 
rewarded for leading Leicester to their unexpected Premier League triumph by 
being crowned manager of the year by the League Managers Association.

The 64-year-old becomes only the second non-British manager to win the 
prestigious accolade, after Arsène Wenger, who won in both 2002 and 2004.

Leicester City parade Premier League trophy through packed streets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/leicester-city-parade-premier-league-trophy-bus>
Ranieri had already picked up three manager of the month awards in the course 
of his side’s remarkable campaign, and was named Italian manager of the year in 
his homeland last month.

He succeeds Eddie Howe, who took the overall award last year after leading 
Bournemouth into the Premier League, pipping José Mourinho, who had to settle 
for the top-flight title.

Ranieri’s spectacular success in his first season with Leicester came despite 
widespread predictions he would struggle after replacing Nigel Pearson in the 
summer. Ranieri was also named as the Barclays Premier League manager of the 
year.

Brighton’s Chris Hughton took the Sky Bet Championship award, a little over an 
hour afterhis side’s 1-1 draw with Sheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/brighton-sheffield-wednesday-championship-play-off-second-leg>
 ended their promotion hopes with a 3-1 aggregate play-off loss.

The League One award went to Wigan’s Gary Caldwell, with Chris Wilder taking 
the League Two award after he guided Northampton to promotion. Wilder has since 
left Northampton for Sheffield United.

Howard Wilkinson, the chairman of the LMA, said: “Claudio Ranieri, in his 
first year as manager ofLeicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity>, has achieved the most 
astonishing of sporting triumphs and thoroughly deserves all the recognition 
and praise being bestowed upon him tonight.”

The LMA’s chief executive Richard Bevan added: “Leicester’s achievement has 
been made possible by the tactical and technical knowledge of Claudio and his 
coaching staff. His passion for football, humility and charisma has underpinned 
an incredible ability to manage a team at the very highest level. He is a 
worthy champion and a true gentleman of the sport.”
 