
In a duel between one of Germany’s most popular sides and arguably its most 
hated, Naby Keïta struck late as Leipzig stunnedBorussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> for their first 
Bundesliga win on Saturday.

The midfielder Oliver Burke set up his fellow substitute to grab the winner 
with one minute remaining, sparking wild celebrations among the home fans. 
Leipzig, unpopular among rival fans who see the club as a marketing tool for 
the energy-drink manufacturer Red Bull, matchedlast season’s runners-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/09/bayern-munich-schalke-bundesliga-match-report>
 for intensity, and suggested they are in the Bundesliga to stay. That’s the 
club’s stated objective for its first season of top-flight football, before 
Champions League qualification becomes the target.

Robert Lewandowski on target again as Bayern Munich steal late win at Schalke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/09/bayern-munich-schalke-bundesliga-match-report>
While Leipzig have enthusiastically embraced the concept – the city is the 
first in the former East Germany to have a top-flight club since Energie 
Cottbus were relegated in 2009 – opponents resent their commercial side and 
short history. The club was founded in 2009 when Red Bull rebranded the 
fifth-tier side SSV Markranstädt and financed their speedy promotion as a new 
entity through the lower leagues.

Some Dortmund fans refused to travel to Leipzig for the game, which was 
nevertheless sold out. Leipzig’s sporting director Ralf Rangnick said the club 
could have sold twice as many tickets.

Mario Götze looked lively in his second debut for Dortmund after returning 
from Bayern Munich, but it was his fellow Germany international Andre Schürrle 
who went closest in the first half, shooting just wide of the right post about 
half an hour in. Leipzig mostly frustrated Dortmund’s speedy forwards and 
threatened before the break through Marcel Sabitzer and captain Dominik Kaiser, 
who first played for the side in the fourth division.

Timo Werner was foiled by a good save from Dortmund goalkeeper Roman Bürki 
late on, and Schürrle struck the crossbar at the other end, but it was Keïta 
who was to secure Leipzig’s first win with his late intervention.
 