
The challenge of climate change is global and it demands action on an 
international scale, such asthe Paris Agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
. But a large part of the solution will be local, involving all of us in the 
way energy is produced and consumed.


The potential for citizen involvement in electricity production is 
considerable.A recent study 
<https://rescoop.eu/system/files/downloads/Prosumer%20Potential%20-%20Media%20briefing.pdf>
 showed that by 2050 half of all Europeans could produce their own electricity 
either at home, as part of a cooperative, or in their small business. Counting 
generation from wind and solar power alone, these small actors could meet 
almost half of Europe’s total electricity needs.

Even more people could support the energy transition, and share in the 
benefits, by storing power in batteries, electric vehicles and smart boilers. 
This enables the grid to draw power when it’s cheap and plentiful, and 
temporarily lighten the load if there’s a peak in demand.

Energy co-ops: why the UK has nothing on Germany and Denmark
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/oct/02/energy-cooperatives-uk-germany-denmark-community>
These projections may seem generous, but they must be considered in the 
context of the unprecedented fall in wind and solar prices. Since 2009, the 
price of solar panels has fallen by 80% and wind turbines by 40%. And it won’t 
stop there. Renewable energies are becoming competitive with fossil fuels and 
new nuclear, such asHinkley Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c>, where EDF will try to 
build the most expensive reactors in the world and provide electricity at an 
unprecedented cost.

Renewable energies and supporting technologies, like storage and demand 
response, are advancing in leaps and bounds. The old energy companies have been 
sluggish in catching up, so a regulatory framework that favours the status quo 
will slow the necessary change to clean energy. Conversely, the right policies 
can fulfil the great potential for citizen-owned energy.

Too often the debate around renewable energy focuses just on the technology. 
But the benefits of citizen-owned renewables are manifold. Encouraging ordinary 
people to invest in renewable energy taps a large source of reliable funding 
for projects. As local people profit from renewable energy projects, and have a 
say in their planning and running, opposition to developments is avoided in an 
equitable way.

This also builds more public support for renewable energy generally, with a 
positive knock-on effect for government policy. The returns on investment in 
these citizen-owned projects are likely to be spent in the local economies, 
supporting employment and businesses.

The European commission has at least paid lip-service to the important role 
ordinary people have to play in energy production,as they set out their plan 
for an EU energy system 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/TXT/?uri=COM%3A2015%3A80%3AFIN> 
“with citizens at its core” who “participate actively in the market”. As they 
and our national governments develop energy policy, we should be demanding that 
they allow citizens to become active participants, not just passive consumers.

UK cuts to renewable energy make a mockery of its pledge at Paris climate talks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2015/dec/17/uk-cuts-renewable-energy-make-a-mockery-of-its-pledge-paris-climate-talks>
What rules do we need in order to unlock this potential? There should be 
recognition that peoples’ active participation in the market doesn’t just mean 
the ability to switch supplier – it means producing, consuming and selling 
their own energy either individually or collectively through cooperatives.

These new entrants need to have fair access to the market, with rules designed 
for small, medium and large producers alike, without discrimination. For 
example,the impending tax hike 
<http://www.solarpowerportal.co.uk/news/business_rates_tax_increases_to_hit_commercial_solar_in_april_2017>
 in the UK for owners of commercial and public sector buildings that have 
installed solar panels is very problematic. We need to see fair prices for the 
electricity people put back into the grid as well as fair access to the 
distribution networks. We also need to see an end to punitive taxes, charges 
and administrative procedures that favour the bigger established players in the 
energy market.

That urgent climate action needs to be taken is no longer up for debate. But 
we must recognise that there are opportunities as well as challenges. Millions 
of people are ready to transform our energy system, if the right environment is 
created for them to do so. We are on the cusp of true energy democracy. It is a 
chance we cannot miss.

• Magnin joined the board of EDF in 2014 but stepped down in July 2016, 
criticising the plan to construct Hinkley Point C. For more than 25 years, he 
advocated for energy system changes as founder of theEnergy Cities network 
<http://energy-cities.eu/> and now runs a citizen-financed renewable energy 
cooperative.
 