
What’s going for it? There was terrible traffic on the M8, so we took a right 
and ended up in Paisley. All around us were the grandest of scenes: monuments 
fit for a king, columns, pediments, spires and turrets. But where were the 
people? At 4pm, downtown Paisley was tumbleweed town.

How times have changed. Paisley was crafted in the finest sandstone in its 
19th century boomtime by the Coats and Clark families, industrialists who made 
this town one of the most productive in the empire. Its citizens made crisps, 
carpets, cornflour, cotton thread, cars and things not starting with C – like 
marmalade and the world-famous shawls, with their teardrop pattern. But few 
places have had the rug pulled from under their feet as quickly and savagely as 
Paisley. As Ian Jackwrote last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/15/paisley-uk-third-city-culture>
: “In 1960, few other industrial towns in Scotland could have felt as secure.” 
Until it wasn’t.

It has a doughty new SNP MP, Mhairi Black, now, and is bidding to be the UK’s 
next city of culture. The very, very best of luck.

The case against It’s rare to see such architectural richness cheek by jowl 
with such social poverty. There’s a touch of Detroit about the place.

Well connected? Trains: 10 an hour to Glasgow (11-19 mins), half-hourly to Ayr 
(51 mins), hourly to Greenock (28 mins) and Wemyss Bay (36 mins). Driving: 
kissed by the M8 and the M77; half an hour into central Glasgow, 45 mins to the 
coast. Handy for Glasgow airport, too, on the outskirts of town.

Schools Primaries: several with “good” quality indicators, says Education 
Scotland, withGallowhill <https://blogs.glowscotland.org.uk/re/gallowhill/>, St 
Catherine’s <https://blogs.glowscotland.org.uk/re/stcatherines/>, Bushes 
<https://blogs.glowscotland.org.uk/re/bushes/> and West 
<https://blogs.glowscotland.org.uk/re/west/> “very good”. Secondaries: 
indicators atPaisley Grammar <http://www.paisleygrammar.com> and St Andrew’s 
Academy <http://www.standrewspaisley.com> are “good”, at Gleniffer High 
<http://www.glenifferhigh.renfrewshire.sch.uk> and Castlehead High 
<http://www.castleheadhigh.renfrewshire.sch.uk> “very good”.

Hang out at… The Grumpy Monkey Coffee House 
<https://www.facebook.com/GrumpyMonkeyCoffeeHouse/>.

Where to buy The centre has some fine stone tenements, and even patches of 
Georgiana. But this is mostly a Victorian city, its rich industrialists making 
their home in the suburbs of Castlehead, Thornly Park and Ralston. Hunt west 
off Glasgow Road to Barshaw Park, south between Stanely Road and Brediland 
Road, and around Neilston Road. Large detacheds and townhouses, 
£250,000-£500,000. Detacheds, £130,000-£250,000. Semis, £120,000-£330,000. 
Terraces and cottages, £110,000-£160,000. Flats, £40,000-£200,000. Rentals: a 
one-bed flat, £250-£450pcm; a three-bed house, £500-£650pcm.

Let’s move to Lynton and Lynmouth, north Devon: stout legs required
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/10/lets-move-to-lynton-and-lynmouth-devon>
Bargain of the week A six-bed Victorian villa with roomy grounds needing hefty 
restoration, £345,000 withgriffin-residential.co.uk 
<https://www.griffin-residential.co.uk/property/234/grahamston-road-paisley-pa2>
.

From the streets

Jackie Neil “Paisley buddies, as us residents are known, are renowned for 
their warmth. The newly restored Fountain Gardens are wonderful. Head to
Cardosi’s <http://www.cardosis.com/> Italian for the best food in town.”

Ainslie McCrone “Steeped in history – every old building has a story. Glasgow 
airport is a five-minute drive. Great schools.”

Live in Paisley? Join the debate below

• Do you live in Abingdon, Oxfordshire? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet 
hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> 
by Tuesday 28 June.
 