
What’s going for it? Don’t mention B*******: Worthing’s neighbour might have 
grabbed the headlines since Prince Regent chose it for his dirty weekends, plus 
it’s the Down From Londoner’s seaside of choice, but what use is that if no one 
can afford to live there? If we’re talking demi-monde, do you know who lived in 
Worthing? Oscar Wilde. For only one summer, true, to observe Worthing’s “scene” 
and write The Importance Of Being Earnest, but still. That tale of crystalline 
social class is Worthing to a T. You don’t come here for the high life, but for 
leafy avenues, a kitesurf, seaside terraces a bit cheaper than other seasides 
we might mention, and a decent if undemanding cultural life. Plus it has a 
secret weapon up its sleeve. You want bohemia? Guess which pop band came from 
here?The Ordinary Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jul/19/preston-ordinary-boys-chanelle>. 
Case closed.

The case against Much of it is Terry & June <http:> country. Not cheap (blame 
baby boomer retirees). Its elegance is patchy, thanks to maddening demolitions 
past. The centre is a bit chain-heavy. The A27 (you’ll soon find out why).

Well connected? Trains: Brighton, 22-26 minutes; Gatwick, 50-ish; London 
Victoria (75 to 83 minutes). Driving: you’re at the mercy of the A27; a 
half-hour or more to Brighton, the same to the M23.

Schools Primaries: among many good ones, Bramber 
<http://www.bramberprimary.com/website>, Broadwater CofE 
<http://www.broadwater.w-sussex.sch.uk>, Heene CofE 
<http://www.heeneprimary.co.uk/website> and Goring-by-Sea CofE 
<http://www.goring-by-sea.w-sussex.sch.uk> are “outstanding”. Secondaries: 
Davison CofE High for Girls <http://www.davison.w-sussex.sch.uk>, St Andrew’s 
CofE High for Boys <http://www.st-andrews-boys.org.uk>, Worthing High 
<http://www.worthinghigh.net>, Durrington High 
<http://www.durringtonhigh.w-sussex.sch.uk/wordpress/> and Chatsmore Catholic 
High <http://www.chathigh.co.uk> are all “good”.

Hang out at… Efes <http://efes-turkishcuisine.co.uk/> and Shafiques 
<http://shafiques.com/> are popular local restaurants. I like the Sea Lane Cafe 
<http://www.sealanecafe.co.uk>, too.

Where to buy The centre has remnants of the old fishing town (try West Street) 
and nice, dense streets of terraces and town houses east and west; look around 
York Road, and along the seafront. West of the station are fine avenues of 
Victorian town houses and semis around Victoria Park and off to Goring. For 
posh, head north and west: Offington, Salvington and Charmandean. Large 
detacheds and town houses, £500,000-£1.2m. Detacheds and smaller town houses, 
£300,000-£500,000. Semis, £240,000-£600,000. Terraces and cottages, 
£220,000-£300,000. Flats, £165,000-£500,000. Rentals: a one-bed flat, 
£550-£800pcm; a three-bed house, £925-£1,400pcm.

Bargain of the week Not a beauty, but at £212,500 this three-bed postwar 
terrace in Goring is good value, withmichaeljones.co.uk 
<http://www.michaeljones.co.uk/property/anson-road-goring-by-sea-west-sussex-bn12-6jb-GOR160111/>
.

Let’s move to Lowestoft, Suffolk: it’s faded – but what a beach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/19/lets-move-to-lowestoft-suffolk-tom-dyckhoff>
From the streets 




Patricia Sauer “We moved here after being priced out of London. We love 
Crabshack <http://www.crabshackworthing.co.uk> for its salt-and-pepper squid and
the Dome Cinema <http://www.domecinema.co.uk>, which is frozen in time but 
great value. There are three stations, but they’re all served by Southern Rail.”

John Palfrey “Anchored in Worthing <http://www.anchoredinworthing.co.uk/>: a 
micropub with a friendly, eccentric crowd.”

• Live in Worthing? Join the debate below.

Do you live in St Albans, Hertfordshire? Do you have a favourite haunt or pet 
hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> 
by Tuesday, 1 November.
 