
What’s going for it? The latest in our occasional series Ordinary (In A Good 
Way) Bits Of London That Are Still Slightly Even Vaguely Affordable. Plumstead 
defies the normal London rules, by which places on hills with commons are 
universally populated by Hooray Henries. Not this one. Plumstead is perfectly 
humdrum, its racks of terraced houses and parades of nail bars, launderettes 
and roofing suppliers high above London, unaware that the rest of the capital 
is under siege from artisancronut cafes 
<http://londonist.com/2016/04/man-who-invented-the-cronut-to-open-london-bakery>
 and House Price Chaos. Plumstead rises above such things. It’s magical. The 
high street may be in need of investment, but the common is on the up. There’s 
a strong Nepalese and Sikh community here. Plumstead’s position, moated by the 
Thames on half its flank, has turned it into a cul-de-sac where all sorts of 
flotsam and jetsam accumulate, such as an ancient windmill that’s turned into a 
pub, a parade of houses by Berthold Lubetkin and the ancient trees of Oxleas 
Wood.

The case against Deploy thighs of steel: the railway station is right at the 
bottom of the hill. Not a vast variety of housing types.

Well connected? Trains: five or six trains an hour to London Bridge (26/27 
mins) and London Cannon Street (30 mins), via Greenwich (16 mins), two to four 
to Dartford (20 mins). Crossrail will be coming to Woolwich and Abbey Wood. 
Driving: you can be on the M25 in 25 mins or so.

Schools Good. Primaries: many rated “good”, Ofsted says, with Bannockburn 
<http://www.bannockburnprimaryschool.com/>, Christ Church C of E 
<http://www.ccshprimary.org.uk> and Foxfield <http://www.foxfield.org.uk/> 
“outstanding”. Secondaries:Plumstead Manor <http://www.plumsteadmanor.com>, 
Shooters Hill Post-16 Campus <http://www.shootershill.ac.uk>, St Paul’s Academy 
<http://www.stpaulsacademy.org.uk> and nearby Welling 
<http://www.wellingschool-tkat.org> are all “good”. Woolwich Poly 
<http://www.woolwichpoly.co.uk/> for boys is “outstanding”.

Hang out at… The Plumstead Pantry <http://plumsteadpantry.tumblr.com/>, 
overlooking the common, orthe Star gastropub 
<http://www.thestar-plumstead.co.uk/>. The cafe 
<http://www.oxleaswood.com/the-oxlea-wood-cafe/> at Oxleas Wood does a great 
fry-up.

Where to buy You won’t want for Victorian and Edwardian terraces, mostly on 
the small side. Plus a few 20s/30s swooping along rolling hills. Larger homes 
around Eglinton Hill, Shrewsbury Lane and Occupation Lane. And a good rack of 
Victorians up the hill from the station. Semis, £400,000-£850,000. Terraces and 
cottages, £300,000-£600,000. Flats, £165,000-£350,000. Rentals: a one-bed flat, 
£850-£1,100pcm; a three-bed house, £1,300-£1,600pcm.

Bargain of the week Five-bed Victorian terrace, right on the common, in need 
of some TLC. £499,995, withGoodwin Ellis 
<http://www.rightmove.co.uk/property-for-sale/property-41413443.html> via 
rightmove.co.uk.

Let’s move to Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire: it’s enemy territory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/17/lets-move-to-henley-on-thames-oxfordshire>
From the streets 





Victoria Paige “My boyfriend and I have bought our first home; a three-storey 
Victorian. I can’t believe what you get for your money. So close to London but 
feels like I’m in the countryside when wandering through the common.”

Clare Griffin “Close to Charlton Lido 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/pictures/image/0,,-1050329476105,00.html> 
– amazing outdoor pool.”

• Live in Plumstead? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Lanark and Clydesdale? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet 
hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> 
by next Tuesday.
 