
What’s going for it? A fair few commuting executives schlepping to and from 
Glasgow each day have created their own little utopias on the banks of the 
Clyde, their thinking about the future of mankind rarely reaching higher than 
an electrically operated garage and a NutriBullet. Robert Owen got there first. 
He had bigger fish to fry, like the future of humanity. As a lesson to 
industrial Gradgrinds up and down the country, and in the wake of the French 
Revolution, this industrial magnate built his own utopia to pull us hoi polloi 
out of the slums. His “village of unity”, New Lanark, put the welfare of 
workers centre stage, with a day nursery (in 1798!), a children’s playground 
(in 1798!), an adult education centre (in 1798!), the slightly scary-sounding 
Institute for the Formation of Character, and a hot tub in each home. OK, so I 
made up the hot tub bit. But Owen’s vision was freakishly forward-thinking. So 
much so that we’re all still waiting for his promised land to materialise. In 
the meantime Old Lanark will have to suffice, its pretty centre the first spot 
outside Glasgow where you can escape the industrial smudge and breeeeaaaathe.

The case against… The usual small-town blues. At least the bright lights of 
Glasgow are nearby to quell the tedium.

Well connected? Trains: half-hourly to Glasgow (51-54 mins). Driving: the M74 
nips by, making central Glasgow a 45-minute journey, Edinburgh just over an 
hour.

Schools Primaries: Braidwood <http://www.braidwood-primary.org.uk/> and 
Underbank <http://www.underbank-pri.s-lanark.sch.uk/> are rated “very good”, and
Carstairs 
<http://www.educationscotland.gov.uk/parentzone/myschool/findaschool/schools/carstairsprimaryschoolsouthlanarkshire.asp>
 “excellent” or “very good”. Secondaries:Lanark Grammar 
<http://www.lanark.s-lanark.sch.uk/> is “good”, and nearby Carluke High 
<http://www.carluke-highschool.org.uk/> mostly “good”.

Hang out at… It’s hardly a food mecca: Indians, Italians, etc. You won’t do 
much better thanValerio’s <http://www.valeriosfishandchips.com/> Famous Fish & 
Chips.

Where to buy In town, west is best, off Westport, the Glasgow/Lanark Road and 
Hope Street for Victorians in sober ruddy-grey stone, and elegant avenues such 
as Waterloo Road. Otherwise stick close to the Clyde, or up in the hills for 
views. Lots of farms, or “farms” that have as much connection to agriculture as 
I do. Large detacheds and townhouses, £400,000-£700,000. Detacheds and smaller 
townhouses, £100,000-£400,000. Semis, £85,000-£350,000. Terraces and cottages, 
£60,000-£100,000. Rentals: little for rent; a three-bedroom house, £750pcm.

Let’s move to Monmouth and the lower Wye valley: where sightseeing began
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/29/lets-move-monmouth-and-lower-wye-valley-tom-dyckhoff>
Bargain of the week A handsome stone semi, slap-bang on Waterloo Road, needs 
updating. £165,000 withyour-move.co.uk 
<https://www.your-move.co.uk/property/semi-detached-house-for-sale-waterloo-road-lanark-ml11-id-528525332/search>
.

From the streets

Amanda Crane “Not a huge choice of eateries, but try La Vigna for lovely 
Italian food. New Lanark is a world heritage site, and a look round the mill, 
and walk round the falls, are a great day out.”

Lucy Smith “Perfect for those who want to live rurally but work in the city; 
Glasgow in particular is easily commutable. Lots of nice quirky shops.”


Do you live in Luton? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email
letsmove@theguardian.com <mailto:letsmove@theguardian.com> by Tuesday 16 August.
 