
What’s going for it? If a place still looks magical under glowering skies, 
a force nine gale and driving rain, it’s a keeper. Alnmouth Bay is a keeper. If 
a beach this stunning were 400 miles south, it’d be smeared in luxury apartment 
complexes, hooray Henrys and yachts and, thereby, ruined. Those 400 miles and 
glowering skies keep the beasties away, leaving the delights of Alnmouth, Amble 
and Warkworth for the rest of us. Those delights include a colony of puffins on 
the beautifully namedCoquet Island 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/seenature/reserves/guide/c/coquetisland/>
; powdery sand on a beach straight outta Bermuda via the North Sea, and not 
another soul to share it with; ancient fragments from the age of the Venerable 
Bede; craggy castles lorded over by the Percys of Northumberland; tight-knit 
towns of huddled stone cottages and Norman churches; and, best of all,
Spurelli’s ice-cream parlour 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Spurellis/178623722153090> in Amble. 
(I’m partial to an ice-cream in the driving rain – call me hardcore.)

The case against Could do with some economic zip.

Well connected? Trains: at least every hour or two from Alnmouth to Newcastle 
(30 minutes) and north to Edinburgh (65); every two or so hours to Berwick (20 
minutes). Driving: 10-20 minutes to Alnwick and the A1, 45 to Newcastle, an 
hour to Berwick andNorthumberland national park 
<http://www.northumberlandnationalpark.org.uk/>.

Schools Primaries: Warkworth CofE 
<http://www.warkworth.northumberland.sch.uk/website>, Broomhill 
<http://www.broomhill.northumberland.sch.uk/website>, Amble 
<http://www.amble.firstschool.org.uk>, Amble Links 
<http://www.amblelinks.northumberland.sch.uk/website> and Acklington CofE 
<http://www.acklington.northumberland.sch.uk/website> are all “good”, Ofsted 
says, withHipsburn <http://www.hipsburn.northumberland.sch.uk/website> and 
Shilbottle <http://www.shilbottle.northumberland.sch.uk/website> “outstanding”. 
Secondaries:James Calvert Spence College <http://www.jcsc.co.uk> “requires 
improvement”, but seems to be on the up; theDuchess’s Community High 
<http://www.dchs-alnwick.org> in nearby Alnwick is “good”.

Hang out at… The Old Boat House in Amble  
<http://boathousefoodgroup.co.uk/theoldboathouse-amble.html>or the Quayside Cafe
 
<http://www.visitnorthumberland.com/cafes-tearooms-coffee-shops/quayside-cafe&ssid=0>
 for chips.

Where to buy Alnmouth and Warkworth are the immediate go-tos; the former has 
sturdy stone terraces and Victorian villas overlooking the river estuary; the 
latter is my favourite for its pretty centre under the castle. Think sturdy 
stone buildings built to withstand border raids, barns, Edwardian villas. Amble 
is a working port, mostly Victorian, with a gritty edge and a fine waterfront. 
Large detacheds and town houses, £350,000-£650,000. Detacheds, 
£150,000-£350,000. Semis, £95,000-£325,000. Terraces and cottages, 
£80,000-£300,000. Flats, £100,000-£300,000. Rentals: a three-bed home, 
£450-£1,000pcm.

Bargain of the week Period stone, three-bed terrace in Amble, in need of 
modernisation, £85,000, withrookmatthewssayer.co.uk 
<http://rookmatthewssayer.co.uk/properties/greenfield-terrace-amble-offers-in-the-region-of-85000-ref-5463807/#propertycontent>
.

From the streets 


Fi Hirst “My favourite restaurant is the Old Boat House at Amble; it always 
has fresh fish, simply cooked. Lots of new development going on: the quayside, 
marina and new housing.”

Tracey Priest “The harbour village development 
<http://www.ambleharbourvillage.co.uk/> is one of the main reasons people are 
moving to Amble, for the new apartments and shops.”

• Live in Amble, Alnmouth and Warkworth? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Westerham, West Malling or the West Kent Downs? Do you have a 
favourite haunt or pet hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com 
<mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by Tuesday 3 May.
 