
What’s going for it? I’m not sure all the 
cupcake-yarn-bombing-vintage-craft-beer-artisan-cream-horn-emporia in the 
country could entirely resuscitate Lowestoft. This old seaside town is not 
going to do aMargate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/18/hottest-property-market-outside-london-margate-rightmove>
 any time soon. The shiny bollards and benches installed, I’d guess, sometime 
during the reign of Tony Blair have failed to spark any “urban renaissance”… 
ah, remember that? The dedicated spotter of regeneration schemes can I-Spy 
decades of attempts to put the fizz back in Lowestoft, decimated by the double 
whammy decline of its port and its seaside punters. The middle classes, who 
dominate the Suffolk coast to the south, have here fled inland to the comfort of
Oulton Broad 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/55154eade4b04783d0da003b/1454491>. 
This is strange. Because Lowestoft, for all its For Sale signs, shares the same 
bone structure: that easterly bleakness, municipal gardens, beach huts, dunes, 
Blue Flagged strands with sand as soft as talc, a pretty, pantiled high street 
the image of anything in Aldeburgh. Their loss.

The case against Extensively shabby, drab and deprived, with little cheer on 
the horizon. Schools are a mixed bag. Getting from here to anywhere else (even 
Great Yarmouth) can be a trial. Traffic can clog in the centre when the bridges 
are raised.

Well connected? Trains: hourly to Norwich (45-50 mins) or south on the slow 
line to Ipswich (90 mins). Driving: 50 mins to Norwich.

Schools Primaries: Poplars Community <http://www.poplars.suffolk.sch.uk>, 
Northfield St Nicholas <http://www.northfield-st-nicholas.suffolk.sch.uk>, 
Roman Hill <http://www.romanhill-pri.suffolk.sch.uk/?page_id=20>, St Mary’s RC 
<http://www.stmarysrcps.com> are “good”, Ofsted says, with Oulton Broad 
<http://www.oultonbroad.suffolk.sch.uk/follow-us-on-twitter-obprimary/> and 
Carlton Colville <http://www.carltoncolville.suffolk.sch.uk/page8.html> 
“outstanding”. Secondaries:Pakefield <http://www.pakefield.org.uk> is “good”.

Hang out at… I’ve a soft spot for Woodbine Cafe 
<http://www.lovelowestoft.co.uk/cafes/woodbine-cafe/> on Suffolk Road, for 
unironic nostalgia, though I hear good things about theJolly Sailors 
<http://www.moss-co.com/the-jolly-sailors/>.

Let’s move to Beccles, Suffolk: ‘It’s peacock-eats-peacock here’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/01/lets-move-to-beccles-suffolk> 
Where to buy Start in the faded old town, around the High Street, and the 
small Victorian terraces to the west. For period homes, look south to London 
Road South, Kirkley “Village” and the Victorian seafront around Marine Parade 
and Kirkley Cliff Road, or north to Gunton Cliff and Yarmouth Road. It’s 
poshest in Oulton and Oulton Broad, south past Cotmer Road to Carlton Colville 
and Pakefield. Large detacheds and town houses, £300,000-£800,000. Detacheds 
and smaller town houses, £150,000-£300,000. Semis, £130,000-£325,000. Terraces, 
flats and cottages, £70,000-£200,000. Rentals: one-bed flat, £370-£550pcm; 
three-bed house, £500-£700pcm.

Bargain of the week Six-bed, spacious Victorian terrace in south Lowestoft, 
needs modernisation, £134,995, withhowards.co.uk 
<http://www.howards.co.uk/for-sale/Lowestoft-NR33/Windsor-Road/6-bedroom-for-sale-in-lowestoft-nr33/1466730>
.




From the streets 




Susan Burrett “A great location with a fantastic sandy beach and easy access 
to the Broads. Good value. The town centre is a bit lacking; I’d head to
Southwold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/22/seaside-towns-southwold-lowestoft>
, 15 minutes away, for a nice dinner.”

Ian Hall “Lovely, relaxing pace of life. Check out the Wherry hotel 
<http://www.wherryhotel.com/> for sunset drinks overlooking the Broads.”

• Live in Lowestoft? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Lambeth, south London? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet 
hate? If so, please emaillets.move@theguardian.com <> by Tuesday 23 August.
 