
What’s going for it? I have deeply etched childhood memories of Rye. We came 
here often, Mum and Dad perhaps harbouring fantasies of moving to its medieval 
streets when we won the pools. Now I come here often, accompanied by much the 
same vain hopes. In the intervening four decades, little has altered, bar the 
arrival of boutique hotels, boutique cinemas and better coffee. Rye, after all, 
has been around the block and seen it all before, even unruly, egocentric 
demagogues striding across the globe. (This was once a command centre against 
Napoleon’s potential invasion.) You’d think Rye’s prettiness would be its 
undoing. But no. Even the annual deluge of summer tourists fails to dent its 
astonishing character. This is a town, though, best approached in winter, 
hunkered down, hatches battened against the maritime gusts, with the sun low 
over Camber Sands and a flaming log or two in the fireplace atthe George 
<http://thegeorgeinrye.com/>.

The case against Read the Mapp & Lucia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/27/my-highlight-mapp-and-lucia-tv-adaptation-ef-benson-nina-stibbe>
 novels. Occasional tweeness. A few too many gift shops. Preserved, but when a 
place looks this good…

Well connected? Trains: Hastings (18 mins), Ashford (22 mins), Eastbourne (44 
mins) and Brighton (1hr 25 mins); changing at Ashford, you can be at London St 
Pancras in 1hr 23 mins. Driving: tricky; the A259 coast road is twisty and 
busy; 30 mins to Hastings, or Ashford and the M20.

Schools Primaries: Rye Community <http://www.ryeprimary.e-sussex.sch.uk> and 
nearbySt Michael’s CofE <http://st-michaels-playden.e-sussex.sch.uk> are 
“good”, Ofsted says. Secondaries:Rye College <http://www.ryecollege.co.uk> is 
“good”.

Hang out at… The delightful new cinema, the Kino 
<http://www.kinodigital.co.uk/?venue=h>, followed by a snifter at the George or 
Ypres Castle <http://www.yprescastleinn.co.uk/>. Lots of choice for dinner, from
the Ambrette <http://theambrette.co.uk/> to the Landgate 
<http://www.landgatebistro.co.uk/tablet/index.html> to fish and chips.

Let’s go to … Rye, East Sussex
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/13/rye-east-sussex-weekend-break> 
Where to buy Anywhere you can. Caught between marshes and the Weald, Rye 
huddles tightly round its hilltop. Everywhere is lovely, though the A259 
circling the town can get cloggy, with consequences for the houses lining it. 
There are few opportunities for sprawling suburbans; a few around Military Road 
or Playden. Rye Harbour is worth a look, too. Large detacheds and town houses, 
£500,000-£1.4m. Detacheds and smaller town houses, £350,000-£500,000. Semis, 
£240,000-£450,000. Terraces and cottages, £200,000-£350,000. Rentals: a 
one-bedroom flat, £700pcm; a three-bedroom house, £1,100pcm.

Bargain of the week I’ll race you for this one. Listed, two-bedroom terrace 
house, needing modernisation, £265,000 with Phillips & Stubbs,
phillipsandstubbs.co.uk 
<http://www.phillipsandstubbs.co.uk/property-search/property/35458_100628005115/2-bedroom-terraced-house-for-sale-military-road-rye-east-sussex-tn31-7nx/sortby-pricedesc/pricemax-300000/soldandsaleagreed-includesoldandsaleagreed/propertyindex-7>
.

From the streets 

Phil Law “A welcoming haven for writers and creatives, but it’s impossible to 
buy anything useful as it’s all coffee shops and chintz.”


Timothy Gorman “The Standard Inn <http://www.thestandardinnrye.co.uk/>, 
renovated a couple of years ago: excellent food, log fires, local beers, lovely 
staff, beautiful accommodation.”

Neil Murphy “Lots of second-homers and tourists.”

• Do you live in Rye? Join the debate below.

Live in Streatham, south London? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? 
If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by 
Tuesday 6 December.
 