
What’s going for it? A ghostly Beatrix Potter is often to be seen of an 
evening wandering Bowness in her nightie, wailing “Look on my works, ye mighty, 
and despair!” Ms P lived by Near Sawrey, just across Lake Windermere, a safe 
distance from the coach parties. Prescient. For these days the universe she 
created has ballooned into an empire mightier than those ruled over by that 
other Potter, Harry, Thomas the Tank Engine and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 
combined. Bowness is its imperial heart. This time of the year, its lanes and 
alleys course with rabid pensioners hungry for a glimpse of Mrs Tiggy-Winkle. I 
quite like the brash, seasidey, kiss-me-quickness of the town. Under its cutesy 
tat, though, or off season, its real charm emerges – the lanes of whitewashed 
cottages, the coy glimpse of the lake over a stone barn, the sight of a bunny 
rabbit in a veg patch. It’s all still there, if you know where to look. Use 
your imagination.

The case against… 50% coach tours, 25% gift shops. Barely affordable. Holiday 
homed to the hilt.

Well connected? Trains: more or less hourly from Windermere to Kendal (14 
mins), and OxenholmeLake District <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lake-district>
 (20 mins), where you connect with the West Coast Mainline. Driving: Kendal 20 
minutes, the M6 30, Lancaster 50. Plenty of buses to Keswick, Kendal, 
Ambleside, Grasmere, etc. Ferry services across the lake, too.

Schools Primaries: the town’s Goodly Dale 
<http://www.goodlydaleprimaryschool.co.uk/>, St Martin & St Mary CofE 
<http://www.windermere.cumbria.sch.uk/> and St Cuthbert’s Catholic 
<http://www.st-cuthberts-windermere.cumbria.sch.uk/> are all “good”, says 
Ofsted. Secondaries:The Lakes School 
<http://thelakesschool.com/the-lakes-school-cumbria/>, alas, “requires 
improvement”, but is “taking effective action”.

Hang out at… Plenty of fancy options, like Holbeck Ghyll 
<http://www.holbeckghyll.com/>, Linthwaite House 
<http://www.linthwaitehouse.com/> or Jerichos in Windermere village 
<http://www.jerichos.co.uk/>. Plenty of homely ones, too; try the Hole in t’Wall
 <http://www.thegoodpubguide.co.uk/pub/view/Hole-in-t-Wall-LA23-3DH> or the 
Royal Oak <http://www.royaloak-windermere.co.uk/>.

Where to buy Bowness is the older of the two. Expect late 19th century and 
Edwardian, lots of “Lakeland” whitewash, mock tudor and stone. The centres have 
some fine cottages and terraces and a few town houses, but the big money heads 
up valley-side lanes off Kendal Road for views over the lake. There is high 
demand. Large detacheds and town houses, £700,000-£1m. Detacheds and smaller 
town houses, £300,000-£700,000. Semis, £400,000. Terraces and cottages, 
£320,000. Flats, £130,000-£400,000. Little for long-term rent.

Bargain of the week Little. This nice four-bed stone Victorian terrace for 
£235,000 is as close as we’ll get. Withhackney-leigh.co.uk 
<http://www.hackney-leigh.co.uk/properties/8055738/sales>.

Let’s move to Shrewsbury, Shropshire: ‘These days, it’s a bit left behind’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/03/lets-move-to-shrewsbury-shropshire>
From the streets

Mike Graham “I’m born and bred, and never get tired of the views. People are 
always stopping for a chat. We loveThe Lamplighter 
<http://www.lamplighterdiningrooms.com/> for a good meal.”

Daniel Barnes “Windermere has changed a lot in recent years, with trendy bars 
such asThe Pig <https://twitter.com/pigwindermere>, Fodder 
<https://twitter.com/wearefodder> and The Crafty Baa 
<https://twitter.com/thecraftybaa>. It’s a gateway to the mountains and yet 
only 15 minutes from the M6.”

 * Do you live in Canterbury? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If 
so, pleaselets.move@theguardian.com <> by Tuesday 13 September.
 