
What’s going for it? It sounds like an episode of The Vicar Of Dibley: a gang 
of savage peacocks terrorised the town of Beccles last month.“Peacock Blinders!”
 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3602731/Peacock-Blinders-Terrorising-quiet-market-town-Suffolk-brutal-gang-preening-offs-make-TV-s-Peaky-Blinders-look-tame.html>
 went the headline in the Daily Mail. See what they did there? “Melanie 
Goodwin, a retired librarian, said: ‘They are very big birds and they are 
naturally destructive. They trample over flowerbeds and I have seen them 
tearing up bedding plants.’” That’s how they roll in Beccles: it’s dog-eat-dog, 
peacock-eat peacock, peacock-eat-dog-bites-man – whatever. This is a town that, 
like most hugging the Broads, is used to nature, wild in tooth, claw and 
iridescent feather. The land is so low here, the sea so high, you have to make 
your peace with the elements. Land has long been a finite commodity, every foot 
above sea level fought over like a South Pacific island nation. For centuries 
Beccles has sat elegantly on its hummock, 18th-century Dutch gables peeking 
above the marsh and a beautifully restoredlido 
<http://homepages.phonecoop.coop/norgate/Beccles%20Lido/>. I do, though, fear 
for properties built, in our more reckless times, less loftily. Can peacocks 
swim?

The case against The usual Norfolk/Suffolk things (far from a motorway/fast 
trainline etc).

Well connected? Trains: hourly to Lowestoft (18 mins), Woodbridge (53 mins) 
and Ipswich (71 mins). Driving: 25 mins to Lowestoft or Southwold, 40 mins to 
Norwich.

Schools Primaries: Albert Pye Community <http://www.albertpye.suffolk.sch.uk>, 
Worlingham C of E <http://www.worlingham-pri.suffolk.sch.uk>, nearby Gillingham 
St Michael’s C of E <http://www.gillingham.norfolk.sch.uk> and Ringsfield C of E
 <http://www.ringsfield.suffolk.sch.uk/main.htm> are all “good”, says Ofsted, 
withRavensmere Infants <http://www.albertpye.suffolk.sch.uk/ravensmere/> 
“outstanding”. Secondaries:Sir John Leman High 
<http://www.school-portal.co.uk/Grouphomepage.asp?GroupId=259143> and Beccles 
Free <http://www.becclesfreeschool.org.uk> are “good”.

Hang out at… Think old inns, like the King’s Head or the White Horse. Or 
American pancakes at MA’s Airfield Diner.

Where to buy A delightful old heart. Northgate, with bricky Georgian town 
houses and stuccoed cottages; Ballygate for seconds. A wonderful line in 
pantiles and Dutch gables. Yum. Hungate, Blyburgate have more terraces and town 
houses. And a light dusting of Victorian terraces around Denmark Road. Large 
detacheds and town houses, £400,000-£900,000. Detacheds, £220,000-£400,000. 
Semis, £180,000-£350,000. Terraces and cottages, £135,000-£300,000. Rentals: a 
one-bed flat, £450pcm; a three-bed house, £650pcm.

Bargain of the week Some might think £825,000 hardly a bargain. But when you 
get a seven-bed architectural treasure house, it is. Withmuskermcintyre.co.uk 
<http://www.muskermcintyre.co.uk/property-full-details?profileID=100062007757>.

Let’s move to Leigh-on-Sea: ‘What a difference 15 years makes’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/20/lets-move-to-leigh-on-sea> 
From the streets 


Simon Bond “River Waveney is fantastic for canoeing, and half an hour’s walk 
from the town centre. You’ll see otters, kingfishers, marsh harriers, water 
voles, barn owls and more.”

Janette and Phil Smith “Close to the glorious Suffolk coast – Southwold, 
Dunwich, Aldeburgh, Thorpeness.”

• Live in Eccles? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Okehampton, Devon? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? 
If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by 
Tuesday 5 July.
 