
What’s going for it? It’s not often we get to use the word “isthmus” on Let’s 
move to, but today, folks, is the day. For Stranraer sits on one. Google it, if 
you’re scratching your head trying to remember first-year geography classes. 
Because Stranraer’s isthmus defines the place. Here Britain narrows to a pinch 
– the isthmus – before stretching out as the Rhinns, a “broad headland” or “fat 
nose” – both Gaelic origins of Stranraer’s name. People used to schlep here for 
the ferry port. The isthmus was a gateway to other lands. But now that’s moved 
up the coast to Cairnryan the isthmus seems like more of a wall, lending a 
feeling of isolation to the low hills beyond, suspended in the ocean, as close 
in spirit and history to Ireland as to the British Isles. On the plus side this 
is a fabulous place to escape to. Nobody would find you on the edge of the edge 
about to drop off the mainland, accompanied only by kittiwakes and hunkered 
down amid old-fashioned shops like Fraser’s butchers and Chinese takeaways 
preserved from 1974.

The case against Such isolation is not for everyone. It’s taken some hits 
since the ferry service moved. Regeneration is continuing, but it’ll be a long 
road. The glorious waterfront needs work. Stranraer can feel a tad drab.

Well connected? Far from the thick of it. Trains: to Ayr (one hour 25 minutes) 
and Kilmarnock (one hour 50) every couple of hours; a couple a day to Glasgow 
(two hours 35 minutes). Driving: 90 minutes to Dumfries, an hour and 20 to Ayr, 
two hours to the M6, a little more to Carlisle.

Schools Primaries: Sheuchan 
<http://www.dumgal.gov.uk/article/15524/Sheuchan-Primary-School> and Belmont 
<http://www.dumgal.gov.uk/article/15436/Belmont-Primary-School> “good” or “very 
good”, says Education Scotland, andCastle Kennedy 
<http://www.dumgal.gov.uk/article/15448/Castle-Kennedy-Primary-School> “very 
good”. Secondaries:Stranraer Academy 
<http://www.stranraeracademy.org.uk/index.html> is mostly “satisfactory”.

Hang out at… The Central Cafe <http://www.central-cafe.co.uk/about.html>. 
Nearby,Knockinaam Lodge <http://www.knockinaamlodge.com/> for posh.

Where to buy Stranraer is a sprawling low town of cottages and terraces. The 
centre has a few fragments of old town, but is mostly Victorian. The waterfront 
has nice stretches up to Agnew Crescent; beyond up to Leswalt for suburbans. On 
the Rhinns, Portpatrick is a delight, a Victorian holiday resort. Plenty of 
hamlets like Port Logan to get away from it all. Large detacheds and town 
houses, £250,000-£325,000. Detacheds and smaller town houses, 
£140,000-£250,000. Semis, £125,000-£250,000. Terraces, £75,000-£170,000.

Bargain of the week A stunning four-bedroom Edwardian house for £325,000 with 
ckdgalbraith.co.uk 
<http://www.ckdgalbraith.co.uk/property/cad100030-ardgour-stoneykirk-stranraer-dg9-9dl>
.

Let’s move to Perth, Perthshire: it’s a looker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/14/lets-move-to-perth-scotland> 
From the streets

Sheena Ramsay “It’s the best of all worlds: a rural location, right by the 
sea, and a friendly town. Try the seafood restaurant Henrys Bayhouse, which 
looks straight up Loch Ryan. My kids are at the great Stranraer Academy, and 
very happy.”


Marion Currie “Nearby Lochinch Castle is a lovely day out, five miles away.”

Live in Stranraer and the Rhinns, Dumfries and Galloway? Join the debate below

• Do you live in Dover? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, 
email lets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:email lets.move@theguardian.com> by 
next Tuesday.
 