
What’s going for it? A confession: I have a dark side. Most days, I love the 
hurly hullabaloo of life. Other days, though, I get all prim. I neaten 
skew-whiff coasters on the coffee table. I get enraged at litter-droppers. 
There’s a dictator lurking inside me. Someone likeTitus Salt 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Titus_Salt>. Titus had opinions about neatness. 
He ruled over the model village he built for his workers like a benevolent
Gradgrind <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gradgrind>, with one hand giving them 
the luxuries of backyards, loos and bathhouses (pimp my slum!), the other 
building tidy, grid-iron avenues in one, and only one, style of architecture, 
banning washing lines and enforcing a two-baths-a-week rule on his employees. 
My kind of man. I’m sure he had opinions about coasters, too. The result? More 
profit in his textile mill. More beauty in his streets. Slightly less smelly 
people.

The case against The rest of the world beyond: messy. Listed to the hilt and a 
world heritage site, so curb your grand designs, lest you offend Salt’s.

Well connected? Trains: half-hourly to Leeds (17 minutes) and Bradford Forster 
Square (12-14 minutes), four an hour the other way to Keighley (10 minutes) and 
Skipton (30). Driving: 15 minutes to downtown Bradford, 40 to Leeds and the M1, 
a half-hour drive to Skipton, a bit longer to get up into the Dales.

Schools Primaries: Saltaire <http://www.saltaireprimaryschool.co.uk/website>, 
St Walburga’s Catholic <http://www.stwalburgas.co.uk>, Wycliffe CofE 
<http://wycliffeprimary.org>, and nearby Glenaire 
<http://www.glenaireprimary.co.uk/#!about-us/c148n> are all “good”, says 
Ofsted. Secondaries:Titus Salt School <http://www.titussaltschool.co.uk/> is 
“good”.

Hang out at… I have a soft spot for Salt’s Diner 
<http://www.saltsmill.org.uk/#diner> in Salt’s Mill, surrounded by David 
Hockneys. TheCap & Collar 
<http://www.yorkshireeveningpost.co.uk/lifestyle/bars/pub-review-cap-and-collar-shipley-1-7246904>
 for “proper” beer.

Where to buy The village is an elegant affair of stone, Italianate terraces 
and town houses, amid civic monuments built by architectsHenry Lockwood 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Francis_Lockwood> and William Mawson 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Mawson>. The grid has modest terraces 
and grander affairs around Titus Street (all the streets are named after Salt, 
his family and, ahem, “favourite” maids). Swanky flats in the mills. Posh 
suburbans outside the Unesco site, across the Bingley Road around Nab Lane, Nab 
Wood and Moorhead Lane. Detacheds and town houses, £400,000-£700,000. Detacheds 
and smaller town houses, £200,000-£400,000. Semis, £130,000-£375,000. Terraces 
and cottages, £125,000-£315,000. Flats, £75,000-£230,000. Rentals: a one-bed, 
£400-£625pcm.

Bargain of the week Three-bedroom listed stone semi in the village proper, by 
the Aire and lovely Roberts Park, needs modernising, £230,000jiestates.co.uk 
<http://www.jiestates.co.uk/property/residential/for-sale/west-yorks/saltaire-shipley/albert-road/G01155>
.

Let’s move to the Marches: ‘A magical patch straight out of Tolkien’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/06/the-marches-property-tom-dyckhoff-lets-move-to>
From the streets 

Sophie Marfell “The Yorkshire Dales in its rugged beauty, yet 15 minutes by 
train to vibrant Leeds.”

Marjorie Ashdown “A World Heritage village where good houses can be bought for 
peanuts!”

Michael Hallewell “The Jolly Bean roastery <http://jollybeanroastery.co.uk/> 
roasts coffee to order and delivers it through your letterbox.”

Do you live in Aberaeron, west Wales? Do you have a favourite haunt or pet 
hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> 
by next Tuesday.
 