
What’s going for it? Traffic jams. That’s all I remember of childhood trips to 
Okehampton. The A30. Bumper to bumper. Hot Chocolate on the radio. Volvo 
hanging together by a thread. The promise of the summer holiday to come slowly 
dissolving amid exhaust fumes. I barely clocked the town around us as we inched 
through, its whitewashed terraces and glinting granite passing by in a ghostly 
smudge. Now – luxury! – the A30 whips by on a bypass (though the traffic jams, 
at summer’s height, are still chronic), meaning you have to actually go to 
Okehampton to go to it. And so I did. Equipped with a pasty fromEndacott’s 
<http://www.redlionyard.co.uk/Endacotts_Bakery/endacotts-bakery.html>, step 
outside the car and the whitewashed smudge transforms into rather a jolly 
place. Why, it has the last working water-powered forge in England! See what I 
missed! Okehampton’s centuries as an isolated garrison town defending 
Dartmoor’s edge give it a “restaurant at the end of the universe” feel. It 
knows how to have a good time. Friday night is a sight to behold, especially in
Ten Tors <http://www.tentors.org.uk/> season, when local hostelries are awash 
with brawny beefcakes supping soda water (before) or sinking 10 pints (after).

The case against There’s not much to the town, and not much around, so don’t 
come expecting the Left Bank.

Well connected? Trains: there are mutterings of an alternative to the Dawlish 
line coming through Okehampton, but don’t hold your breath. Until then, it’s 
the A30: half an hour to Exeter, slightly longer for the M5, 45 mins to the 
coast at Bude, 35 mins to the heart of Dartmoor. Hourly buses to Exeter (50 
mins), Bude (one hour).

Schools Primaries: there’s one, Okehampton 
<http://www.okehampton-pri.devon.sch.uk/>, but thankfully Ofsted’s rated it 
“good”. Secondaries: ditto,Okehampton College 
<http://www.okehamptoncollege.devon.sch.uk/> is “outstanding”.

Hang out at… I’d head down the A386 to the Dartmoor Inn 
<http://www.dartmoorinn.com/> at Lydford.

Let’s move to Monmouth and the lower Wye valley: where sightseeing began
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/29/lets-move-monmouth-and-lower-wye-valley-tom-dyckhoff>
Where to buy You’ll find pleasant period suburbans west, between Exeter and 
Crediton Roads, with fine stone Victorian and Edwardian semis and terraces. In 
the centre are lovely hugger-mugger terraces; start on and around North Street. 
Large detacheds and town houses, £280,000-£400,000. Detacheds, 
£200,000-£280,000. Semis, £160,000-£280,000. Terraces and cottages, 
£120,000-£250,000. Rentals: a one-bedroom flat, £425-£525pcm; a three-bedroom 
house, £650-£850pcm.

Bargain of the week “Quirky” four-bedroom Victorian terrace, £145,000, with 
gssproperty.com 
<http://gssproperty.com/details.php?property_id=GSOHT_295283&sale=1&max_price=150000&min_beds=4&list=1>
.

From the streets 

Nick Godfrey “It’s a friendly, non-touristy market town, accessible to 
everywhere: right on Dartmoor.”

Deborah Squire “Wetherspoons have opened a fantastic new pub/hotel, the old 
White Hart. But we’re surrounded by quaint villages with lovely pubs. Pet hate: 
traffic at school pick-up time.”

• Live in Okehampton? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Bowness, Cumbria? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? 
If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by 
Tuesday 9 August.
 