
What’s going for it? The football team might be Shrewsbury Town, but this 
place is all city to me. And what a city! Step out of the battlemented 
neo-gothic train station and you’re flung into a jumbled streetscape of 
jettied, black-and-white Tudor town houses tottering on to the pavement like a 
closing-time drunk, beside red-faced, fat-bellied brick Georgian town houses, 
spired churches, coaching inns and cobbled alleys. Shrewsbury was quite the 
place in the 18th century, when it boomed as a pitstop on the freeway to 
Dublin. These days it’s a bit left behind, now that canals, railways, motorways 
and Ryanair have replaced turnpikes, all alone on its hill, wrapped in a 
delicious curl of the river Severn. It seems a civilised, underrated place to 
live, with its riverside garden, flower festival, arts scene and elegant 
bridges, a cathedral city in all but cathedral. I’d move there in a heartbeat, 
if – sad face – it wasn’t so far from the sea.

The case against It does feel as if something’s missing. A cathedral (though 
it has countless churches and a Catholic cathedral)? A university?

Well connected? Trains: well-placed for trains to Telford (twice hourly, 20 
mins), Wrexham (hourly, 38 mins), Hereford (hourly, sometimes twice hourly, 50 
mins) Chester (56 mins, hourly), Birmingham (twice hourly, 56-68 mins). 
Driving: Telford is 25 mins, the M6 30 mins, central Birmingham just over an 
hour.

Schools Primaries: many rated “good” by Ofsted, with St Giles CofE 
<http://www.st-giles.shropshire.sch.uk> “outstanding”. Secondaries: Sundorne 
<http://sundorne.sat.coop> and Meole Brace 
<http://www.meolebrace.com/page/default.asp?title=Home&pid=1> are both “good”, 
withBelvidere <http://www.belvidere.shropshire.sch.uk> and The Priory 
<http://www.priory.shropshire.sch.uk> “outstanding”. There’s the illustrious, 
independent Shrewsbury and Shrewsbury High, too.

Hang out at… The Good Life Wholefood restaurant is old skool in a good way, 
and theArmoury <http://www.brunningandprice.co.uk/armoury/> pub has good beer 
and food gazing over the Severn.

Let’s move to Barnstaple: ‘It has potential'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/15/barnstaple-devon-property-lets-move-to>
Where to buy Start in the old heart, scurrying round the shuts (alleys) to 
find fine Tudor and Georgian homes: Belmont and Swan Hill especially. More 
period property on the other side of the river by the Abbey. Posh suburbans 
south-west in Kingsland and Frankwell. Large detacheds and town houses, 
£425,000-£1.2m. Detacheds, £200,000-£425,000. Semis, £130,000-£500,000. 
Terraces and cottages, £100,000-£300,000. Flats, £85,000-£200,000. Rentals: 
a one-bed flat, £350-£550pcm.

Bargain of the week Three-bed listed Georgian town house, currently in flats: 
£189,995 withhbshrop.co.uk <http://www.hbshrop.co.uk/component/property/3357>.

From the streets 


Natalie Davies “When the sun shines, the whole town comes out to walk, run and 
cycle alongside the river. The river bursts its banks regularly, but flood 
defences put in during the early 00s help.”

Catherine Wike “The vile shopping centres are a real minus – the Darwin and 
Riverside – they’re ugly, concrete eyesores and badly designed.”

• Live in Shrewsbury? Join the debate below

Do you live in Beccles, Suffolk? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? 
If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by 
Tuesday 7 June.
 