
What’s going for it? Funny how history of the most violent kind can, centuries 
later, become picturesque. This was border country 1,000 years ago, the river 
Wye as divisive as the Rio Grande, and Monmouth built by our Norman overlords 
with high walls and watchtowers to keep the Welsh from the region’s precious 
iron. Today we gaze on the ancient walls and fortified bridge with selfie 
sticks, and drift down the once-bloody wooded Wye on pleasure cruisers gawping 
at mistyTintern Abbey <http://www.castlewales.com/tintern.html>. The Shire Hall 
<http://shirehallmonmouth.org.uk/> may look all Downton Abbey-ish, but in its 
chilly hallsour Chartist comrades were sentenced to hanging, drawing and 
quartering <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shire_Hall%2C_Monmouth>. The Wye 
valley and Monmouth were where modern-day sightseeing began in the 18th 
century, so it’s perfectly pretty, the kind of place you or I might decide upon 
to escape the rat race, with its toytown streets and thriving culture. Just 
remember its bloody past when you skip down heritage streets en route for a 
slice of locally churned ewe’s milk cheese. In the words of Marxist theorist 
Henri Lefebvre: “Spaces sometime lie.”

The case against… Getting about is slow: narrow lanes, few river crossings and 
geography field trip coaches do not a happy driver make.

Well connected? Trains: you’ll have to drive to the nearest stations at 
Abergavenny (20 minutes) and Chepstow (half an hour). Driving: 30 minutes to 
the M4, 45 to Gloucester. Buses: hourly to Chepstow (50 minutes).

Schools Primaries: Many “good”, with St Briavels CofE 
<http://www.stbriavelsprimaryschool.co.uk/> and Whitchurch CofE 
<http://www.whitchurchschool.org.uk/> “outstanding”, says Estyn. Secondaries: 
Monmouth Comprehensive <http://monmouthcomprehensive.org.uk/> is “adequate”; 
Monmouth School <http://www.monmouthschool.org/> and Haberdashers’ Monmouth 
School for Girls <http://www.habs-monmouth.org/> are the independents.

Hang out at… Lots of fabulous country pubs. Foodie star The Whitebrook 
<http://thewhitebrook.co.uk/> is a few miles out of town.

Let’s move to Beccles, Suffolk: ‘It’s peacock-eats-peacock here’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/01/lets-move-to-beccles-suffolk> 
Where to buy Monmouth has historic homes from 18th-century cottages and 
Georgian town houses to Victorian semis. Most prized, though, are farms with 
paddocks, or barn conversions, snuggled down deep valleys and wooded lanes in 
the Wye valley itself: snoop round villages like Brockweir, Whitchurch, 
Trellech, Llandogo and Penallt. Large detacheds and town houses, 
£400,000-£1.5m. Detacheds and smaller town houses, £160,000-£400,000. Semis, 
£140,000-£320,000. Terraces and cottages, £130,000-£175,000. Flats, 
£70,000-£240,000. Rentals: one-bed flat, £450-£550pcm; three-bed house, 
£650-£950pcm.

Bargain of the week A two/three-bedroom cottage needing refurbishment on the 
Wye, with a quarter of an acre perfect for growing your organic radishes: 
£180,000 withparrys.com 
<http://www.parrys.com/FullDetails/EA_5751548/false/false/other-business-for-sale-stone-cottage-bishopswood-lydbrook-gloucestershire-gl17-9ny>
.

From the streets

Jackie Crossman “Beautiful country, great schools and fabulous independent 
shops likeGreen & Jenks ice cream parlour <http://www.greenandjenks.com/>. The 
Savoy Theatre <http://www.monmouth-savoy.co.uk/> is one of the oldest cinemas 
still in use in the country.”

Patrick Newbound “As an ex-Londoner, the only thing I miss is a wider 
selection of restaurants, although what we have here is pretty good.”

• Live in Monmouth and the lower Wye valley? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Saltaire, West Yorkshire? Do you have a favourite haunt or a 
pet hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com 
<mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by Tuesday 2 August.

• This article was amended on 3 August 2016. An earlier version said Usk 
railway station was a 20-minute drive away from Monmouth. Usk station closed in 
1955.
 