
What’s going for it? The one good thing about London self-destructing with 
property price madness and artisan Ovaltine cafes (the next big thing) on every 
corner is that everyone with a brain cell is leaving for other towns – such as 
Canterbury. In the 1990s, when I lived here, it was so uncosmopolitan that 
asking for cappuccino was like asking for emerald-dusted unicorn juice. It 
wasn’t always thus. Read Chaucer. In the 14th century, when Canterbury was 
Pilgrimopolis, it must have been livelier than the Wife of Bath’s nightie. Now 
it’s getting its mojo back, no longer sucked dry by its proximity to London; 
rather the opposite. The past few years have seen its cultural life and economy 
get a fillip. With its three universities, fruity history and fabulous 
streetscapes, nestled deep in the North Downs, 10 minutes from the sea, it’s 
always had the potential to out-boogie its parochial air. Now its modish coffee 
bars sell not just cappuccinos but single-estate, fully traceable 
frappeflappaflippafloppacinos. Beat that, London.

The case against It’s still a small city and, despite legions of tourists, not 
terrifically diverse.

Well connected? Trains: to Ashford (16 mins), Maidstone (55 mins), St Pancras 
(56 mins), Victoria (from 1hr 30) or Charing Cross (1hr 40). Driving: 30 mins 
to Ashford or Folkestone, 90 to London.

Schools Primaries: St Stephen’s <http://www.ststephensjuniorschool.co.uk>, 
Parkside <http://www.parksidecommunityprimaryschool.co.uk>, St Peter’s Methodist
 <http://www.st-peters-canterbury.kent.sch.uk/page/default.asp?title=Home&pid=1>
,the Canterbury <http://www.canterburyprimaryschool.co.uk>, Wincheap Foundation 
<http://www.wincheap.kent.sch.uk> are all “good”, Ofsted says, Blean 
<http://bleanprimary.org.uk/kent/primary/blean> and St Thomas of Canterbury 
Catholic <http://www.stthomasofcanterbury.thurrock.sch.uk> “outstanding”. 
Secondaries:the Archbishop’s <http://www.archbishops-school.co.uk> and Simon 
Langton Girls’ Grammar <http://www.langton.kent.sch.uk> are “good”, Barton 
Court Grammar <http://www.bartoncourt.org> and Simon Langton’s Boys’ Grammar 
<https://www.thelangton.org.uk> are “outstanding”.

Hang out at… The Goods Shed <https://thegoodsshed.co.uk/>, with its wonderful 
stalls and cafes.Water Lane Coffeehouse <http://waterlanecoffee.co.uk/> and 
Micro Roastery <http://www.microroastery.co.uk/> for the burgeoning coffee 
scene.

Where to buy Cathedral cities, with centuries of history, gather diverse 
homes, from a 15th-century cottage to a Georgian town house. Around the walls 
are huggermugger lanes such as the Friars; main roads out of town, including 
Wincheap, have cheaper cottages and town houses. For suburbans, around New and 
Old Dover Roads (such as the Victorians on Cromwell Road), Whitstable Road or 
St Stephen’s. Detacheds and town houses, £300,000-£1.2m. Semis, 
£250,000-£600,000. Terraces and cottages, £220,000-£425,000. Flats, 
£150,000-£400,000. Rentals: one-bed flat, £700-£1,100pcm; three-bed house, 
£900-£1,400pcm.

Bargain of the week It needs modernisation, but this three-bed postwar semi is 
a steal at £150,000, withmilesandbarr.co.uk 
<http://www.milesandbarr.co.uk/property/?propertyID=143541>.

Let’s move to Lowestoft, Suffolk: it’s faded – but what a beach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/19/lets-move-to-lowestoft-suffolk-tom-dyckhoff>
From the streets 


Chris Prior “HS1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/mar/28/hs1-passenger-forecasts-optimistic-nao>
 has been a gamechanger: 50 minutes to London, with new trains that run on 
time. A downside: the high proportion of students to locals creates tension.”

Charlotte Cornell “Only 15 minutes to the coast by bus or car to foodie 
Whitstable, or Herne Bay, which is beginning its Margate-style renaissance.”

• Live in Canterbury? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Stranraer, Dumfries and Galloway? Do you have a favourite haunt 
or a pet hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com 
<mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by Tuesday 11 October.
 