
What’s going for it? The Black Prince, eldest son of Edward III, ran the manor 
in the 14th century, and since then Risborough’s got quite used to lofty 
visitors. Xi Jinpingpopped in for a pint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/22/david-cameron-xi-jinping-village-pub-drink-pint>
 last year, and all manner of dignitaries pass through at some point in their 
lives, thanks to Chequers being just outside town. As a result, Princes 
Risborough has become something of a museum exhibit, with which prime ministers 
can demonstrate What Britain Is Like to celebrities whose only exposure to 
Blighty has hitherto been watching Harry Potter in their private cinemas. I’m 
not sure how representative a town can be when properties routinely hug £1m, 
but on the surface Princes Risborough does the job. It supplies all the 
signifiers of a certain kind of modest Englishness (cricket on the green, warm 
beer in pubs, half-timber, bit of thatch, gentle wooded hills) a short hop from 
the capital (and, for those slebs, the private jet at Northolt airfield).

The case against It’s not all that. I mean it’s nice, but is it £1m nice? 
Nimbys (even newly arrived nimbys) might moan about the 2,500 new homes and 
bypass planned for the town.

Well connected? Trains: hourly to Aylesbury (18 mins), Bicester (19 mins) and 
Banbury (40 mins); twice hourly to High Wycombe (10 mins), Beaconsfield (16/18 
mins) and London Marylebone (45/50 mins). Driving: 20 mins to Aylesbury, High 
Wycombe and the M40, half an hour to the M25, an hour to Oxford.

Schools Primaries: Monks Risborough C of E 
<http://www.monksrisboroughprimary.com/> and Longwick C of E 
<http://www.longwick.bucks.sch.uk/> are both “good”, says Ofsted, with nearby 
Great Kimble C of E <http://www.greatkimble.bucks.sch.uk/> “outstanding”. 
Secondaries:Princes Risborough <http://www.princesrisborough.bucks.sch.uk/> 
“requires improvement”;Misbourne <http://www.misbourne.bucks.sch.uk/> in Great 
Missenden is “good” but oversubscribed.

Let’s move to Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire: it’s enemy territory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/17/lets-move-to-henley-on-thames-oxfordshire>
Hang out at… The Plough at Cadsden <http://theplough.pub/>, waiting for the 
next head of state. The Three Horseshoes in nearby Radnage to escape the paps.

Where to buy There’s not exactly a dodgy end. The old heart near the church 
has pleasant cottages, but the prime spots are Monks Risborough, Askett and 
Whiteleaf. Large detacheds and town houses, £750,000-£1.5m. Detacheds, 
£450,000-£750,000. Semis, £320,000-£550,000. Terraces and cottages, 
£300,000-£500,000. Rentals: a one-bedroom flat, £750pcm; a three-bedroom house, 
£1,200-£1,500pcm.

Bargain of the week A three-bed semi 
<http://www.bb-estateagents.co.uk/property-for-sale/princes-risborough-mill-lane-monks-risborough/hp27-9lh/996502>
 a stroll from Monks Risborough station and a mile from Princes Risborough town 
centre, for £395,000.


From the streets 


Ros Brear “A few too many charity shops, not much for young people to do. But 
the fabulousChiltern hills <http://www.chilternsaonb.org/> surround the town, 
there are great walks and there’s a fab pub, thePink & Lily 
<http://pink-lily.com/>.”


Susie Kearley “I love the National Trust beauty spot at Pulpit Hill 
<http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/ridgeway/attractions/pulpit-hill-national-trust>
. My pet hate is nearly getting run over on the zebra crossing on the main 
road.”

• Live in Princes Risborough? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Monmouth and the Wye Valley? Do you have a favourite haunt or a 
pet hate? If so, email lets.move@theguardian.com by Tuesday 12 July.
 