
Thank you, Michael Billington, for your timely warning against “the filthiest 
panto” you’ve ever seen (Julian Clary unleashes a tsunami of smut in 
eye-popping gag-fest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/15/cinderella-review-julian-clary-paul-o-grady-nigel-havers-amanda-holden-london-palladium>
, 22 December). But what makes it a show for “highly sophisticated” grown-ups? 
What is sophisticated about “a tsunami of smut” being unable to get beyond 
crude lavatory “humour” and taking over that most quintessential of Christmas 
family entertainments to which we all used to be able to go with our children, 
parents and grandparents, knowing everyone would be able to enjoy it – the 
pantomime? I’m no prude, but I am sick to death of gimcrack TV “celebs” being 
allowed, even encouraged, irresponsibly to hijack our children’s airwaves, 
screens and stages. Why can’t we allow children to be children? I want my young 
grandchildren to enjoy with me the sheer fun of panto, the outrageous costumes, 
stock characters, dancing and singing, spectacular scenery, audience 
interaction, jokes – both scripted and visual – they can understand and 
paper-thin plots. The historic stylised cross-dressing of dames and principal 
boy is comedy: children of all genders dress up, cross-dress, enjoy it when 
adults do so too, and love and laugh at extravagant exaggeration.

Quality pantomime can be wonderful. But what you describe is something quite 
other and, I would suggest, even sinister in the way it has doused what used to 
be all-age family entertainment with ill-disguised ordure.
Anne Johns
Derby

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 