
What’s going for it? “Tradition has it”: three words to strike terror into the 
souls of the sane. Tradition has it that on 5 November the people of Ottery St 
Mary shall run through the streets of the town carrying flaming 30kg barrels of 
tar above their heads. Why? Why not? Tradition has it. The West Country is full 
of fire and light festivals as autumn tumbles towards winter. No stranger, 
after all, than throwing effigies of catholics/Donald Trump on a bonfire. Some 
say Ottery St Mary’s Guy Fawkes night tradition was to cleanse the streets of 
evil, or maybe rats. Whatevs. These days it’s all about prowess. Only Ottery 
families born and bred can take part in the dozens of barrel runs around the 
town’s old streets from pub to pub. In these days of banned bonfires and ’elf 
and safety gawn mad, we can only applaud this plucky town. Indeed, Ottery is 
fond of its quaint customs. The parish church peals out the Ottery Song three 
times a day, and just wait till you hear what the townsfolk get up to with the 
bellringers onPixie Day 
<http://www.pixieday.org/Contents/Text/Index.asp?SiteId=944&SiteExtra=4087085&TopNavId=515&NavSideId=13411>
.

The case against No butterfingers, please! There are hills in Ottery. A little 
Wicker Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-wicker-man> from this end of 
the A303.

Well connected? Trains: no, you’ll need to head to Exeter. Driving: half an 
hour to Exeter, 20 mins to the M5.

Schools Primaries: Ottery St Mary Primary <http://www.otteryprimary.co.uk/> 
“requires improvement”, but nearbyTipton St John CofE 
<http://www.tipton-stjohn.devon.sch.uk/> and Sidbury CofE 
<http://www.sidbury.devon.sch.uk/> are “good”, says Ofsted, with West Hill 
<http://www.west-hill-primary.devon.sch.uk/> and Feniton CofE 
<http://www.feniton.devon.sch.uk/> “outstanding”. Secondaries: The King’s School
 <http://www.thekings.devon.sch.uk/> is “outstanding”.

Hang out at… The Rusty Pig <http://www.rustypig.co.uk/> – locally sourced 
meat, veg and salads, and run like a supper club on Thursdays to Saturdays. 
Good breakfasts, too. Tickety-Boo coffee shop: cakes, play area.

Where to buy Ottery is a predictably pretty affair, with old streets of 
cottages and town houses huddling round the parish church, its twin transept 
towers echoing those of Exeter cathedral. There’s a nice line in two-bed, 
18th-century cottages. Explore the country lanes and neighbouring villages like 
Tipton St John. Large detacheds and town houses, £400,000-£750,000. Detacheds 
and smaller town houses, £220,000-£400,000. Semis, £140,000-£300,000. Terraces 
and cottages, £125,000-£240,000. Rentals: few, a three-bed house might be 
£950pcm.

Bargain of the week Pretty, double-fronted, two-bed detached house with a 
lovely little garden, £169,950, withhumberts.com 
<http://www.humberts.com/property-to-buy/devon-ottery-st-mary-cornhill-ex11/hps160341/>
.

Let’s move to Monmouth and the lower Wye valley: where sightseeing began
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/29/lets-move-monmouth-and-lower-wye-valley-tom-dyckhoff>
From the streets 


Rosina Northcott “I love that it’s a five-minute walk to the countryside yet 
still only 15-20 minutes to drive to Exeter. A bit of flooding happens every 
now and again.”


Ruud Jansen Venneboer “Lovely independent shops, cafes and restaurants. 
Traffic can get crazy. Not a huge amount for teenagers to do.”

• Live in Ottery St Mary? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Rye, East Sussex? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? 
If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by 
Tuesday 8 November.

 