
What’s going for it? It’s happening. It’s happened. Fancy-pantsy coffee cups 
lie discarded in the gutter. The word “artisan” has been spotted. It didn’t 
take long.Damien Hirst’s Newport Street Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/08/damien-hirst-newport-street-gallery-architecture-review-caruso-st-john>
 opened not a year ago, and already Lambeth has transformed. What was one of 
those quiet pockets strewn across Zone 1 south of the river, has been 
discovered. Don’t say I didn’t warn you. Let’s move to… last visited a decade 
ago, when Hirst’s plans were floated and one-bed flats started at £160,000. You 
need twice that today. I suspect, though, that Lambeth will remain much as it 
is. The Big Money is next door, busy turning Vauxhall andElephant and Castle 
into Hong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/25/london-developers-viability-planning-affordable-social-housing-regeneration-oliver-wainwright>
. Lambeth has enough estates to scare off Foxtons and, thanks to slum clearance 
and the Luftwaffe, too few period details to attract hardcore gentrifiers. Its 
change will be subtler, council flat by council flat, until, one day, the land 
of cockneys and theLambeth Walk <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lambeth_Walk> 
(oi) will exist only in history books and West End musicals.

The case against The slow creep of gentrification. Lambeth Walk, the old high 
street, is a shadow of its illustrious past, so the area lacks a focus.

Well connected? You’re in Zone 1 – you can walk. The Thames is five minutes 
away. Trains: Lambeth North is on the Bakerloo line (closed until spring).

Schools Good. Primaries: Walnut Tree Walk <http://www.wtwschool.co.uk>, 
Charlotte Sharman <http://www.charlottesharman.southwark.sch.uk>, Henry Fawcett 
<http://henryfawcett.org.uk>, St Anne’s Catholic 
<http://www.st-annes.lambeth.sch.uk> and St Mark’s CofE 
<http://www.stmarkscofeprimarylambeth.co.uk> are all “good”, says Ofsted, with 
Vauxhall <http://www.vauxhallprimary.org.uk> and Archbishop Sumner CofE 
<http://www.archbishop-sumners-primary.lambeth.sch.uk> “outstanding”. 
Secondaries:Oasis Academy <http://www.oasisacademysouthbank.org> and Lilian 
Baylis <http://www.lilianbaylis.com> are both “outstanding”.

Hang out at… Gentrifier? Newport Street Gallery’s Pharmacy 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/01/pharmacy-2-london-se11-restaurant-review-marina-oloughlin>
. Gentrifier with a conscience?The Ragged Canteen 
<http://beaconsfield.ltd.uk/cafe/>. Everybody else: the Kennington Tandoori 
<http://www.kenningtontandoori.com/> and Gandhi’s <http://www.gandhis.co.uk/> 
forpolitician-spotting 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/politics/1437393/david-cameron-treats-no10-staff-to-a-takeaway-curry-in-emotional-farewell/>
.

Let’s move to Plumstead, south-east London: it’s magical
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/15/lets-move-to-plumstead-south-east-london>
Where to buy Avoid the river, unless you are a tech millionaire from Shenzhen, 
in which case look at luxury towers likethe Corniche 
<http://www.berkeleygroup.co.uk/new-homes/london/albert-embankment/the-corniche>
. A street behind, Lambeth assumes its typical character: fragments of 
pre-second world war terraces and Georgian town houses (Walcot Square, Denny 
Street), splattered with council estates, lock-ups and viaducts. Prices lurch 
between millions and “bargain” hundred-thousands. Town houses, £1m-£2m. 
Terraces and cottages, £900,000-£1.2m. Flats: three beds, £600,000-£6m; two 
beds, £450,000-£3m; one bed, £340,000-£1.2m. Rentals: one-bed flat, 
£1,300-£2,000pcm; three-bed home, £1,800-£7,000pcm.

Bargain of the week This passes for a bargain in London. A listed four-bed 
period terraced house on Walcot Square; needs modernising. £1.195m, with
winkworth.co.uk 
<http://www.winkworth.co.uk/properties/9633992/sales/walcot-square-kennington-se11/KEN150547>
. Tom Dyckhoff

From the streets 










Christopher Smith “Brockwell Park Community Greenhouses 
<http://www.brockwellgreenhouses.org.uk/> grows food and flowers.”

Charlotte House “Kids’ stuff is ace: parks like Myatt’s Fields, Archbishops and
Kennington <http://www.kenningtonpark.org/> are beautiful and have excellent 
free activities.”

Ruby Lescott “The Kennington Coffee Shop serves good coffee, homemade bread 
and soup.”

• Live in Lambeth? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Worthing? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, 
emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by Tuesday 27 
September.
 