
What’s going for it? We are deep in enemy territory here, chaps, I thought, as 
I eyeballed the single, dusty, tumbleweed-strewn copy of the Guardian in the 
newsagents. “We normally have five,” said the man on the cash till, “or so.” 
George Orwell might have grown up little Eric Blair in Shiplake, a few leafy 
streets down, but this is mostly a land where Boris Johnson is default. And 
everyone wears Fat Face, when not in regatta blazers. Back in 2011,Britain’s 
most expensive home 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/property/news/8699258/Park-Place-Britains-most-expensive-home-sold-for-record-140m.html>
 was sold here. Yes, even more expensive than anything in Londongrad. And owned 
by a fugitive Russian banker. You can see how a certain view of the world is 
confirmed by one’s surroundings. It certainly is lovely here, exceedingly 
pretty, all wisteria-clad 18th-century tiles and freshly painted as if the 
Queen is about to pop by. Which she probably is. Poverty appears to have been 
eradicated, or at least shifted out of sight. Which is not to say you can’t 
find the odd, vaguely affordable patch in paradise. You could hole up there, a 
spy, like Orwell. Come on, we could start the revolution!

The case against Edge-less. You will be outnumbered, outspent and 
out-chino-ed. One can have too much wisteria.

Well connected? Trains: two, sometimes one an hour to Twyford, where you can 
change on to the mainline, making Reading 25-32mins and London just over an 
hour. Buses to Oxford and London. Driving: Reading is 25 mins, the M4, 15 mins, 
Heathrow in half an hour, Oxford in 50 mins.

Schools Primaries: Trinity CofE <http://www.trinityprimaryschool.org>, 
Badgemore <http://www.badgemore.oxon.sch.uk>, Valley Road 
<http://www.valley-road.oxon.sch.uk> and nearby Shiplake CofE 
<http://shiplakeprimary.org.uk> are “good”, says Ofsted. Secondaries: Gillotts 
<http://gillotts.oxon.sch.uk> is “good”.

Hang out at… Warm ale in spruced-up pubs such as the Angel 
<http://www.theangelhenley.com/>; posh nosh at the (I assume) ironically named 
Orwells <http://orwellsatshiplake.co.uk/>, in Shiplake.

Where to buy The old centre is delightful, a wonderful mix of ages, from 
half-timbered cottages to Edwardian semis. Snoop around Friday Street and New 
Street: you won’t be able to afford it, mind. It’s nice, too, west to Friar 
Park, and around Fairmile and Lambridge Wood Road. Large detacheds and town 
houses, £800,000-£4m. Detacheds and smaller town houses, £600,000-£800,000. 
Semis, £450,000-£1.25m. Terraces and cottages, £400,000-£600,000. Flats, 
£325,000-£600,000. Rentals: a one-bed flat, £875-£975pcm; a three-bed house, 
£1,250-£1,750pcm.

Let’s move to Steyning, West Sussex
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/18/lets-move-to-steyning-west-sussex-tom-dyckhoff>
Bargain of the week By London standards. Think postwar. Like a 50s two-bedroom 
semi for £375,000. Withdavistate.com 
<http://www.davistate.com/search/henley-on-thames/2-bedroom-terraced-for-sale-in-henley-on-thames/full_details_agents/88403>
.

From the streets 


Lucy Roy “A friendly town nestling in the Chilterns. Good mix of shops 
including my favourite, Adventures In Living, an interior design shop and, of 
course, a Waitrose!”

Emma Leatham “The perfect combination of beautiful countryside and lively town 
life. But traffic over Henley Bridge can be a nightmare.”

Live in Henley-on-Thames? Join the debate below

• Do you live in Plumstead, south-east London? Do you have a favourite haunt 
or a pet hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com 
<mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by Tuesday 21 June.
 