
What’s going for it? It’s not quite time for my carriage clock. A cake with 
candles, perhaps. For you, dear reader, have been watching me tapping away at 
my computer on these pages since 2001. When I began Let’s Move To… George Bush 
was in his first year as president, S Club 7 and Destiny’s Child were riding 
high in the charts.Leigh-on-Sea, our first visit, was the Next Big Thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2001/apr/28/weekend.tomdyckhoff>, or 
so I thought. What a difference 15 years makes. Leigh was almost the Next Big 
Thing. It has an artisan gelato house nowadays, and if someone had told us in 
2001 that there would be a £1.2m penthouse for sale on Broadway in 2016 I’d 
have choked on my Starbucks (still exotic back then). Leigh has an authentic 
Ealing Comedy feel, all stripy awnings and butchers that look like 
Terry-Thomas. And, I noted in 2001, it might usefully serve as an escape from 
the Smoke, because “London house prices are criminal”. Some things never change.

The case against One can tire of the racks of 1920s semis. The old town is 
sweet as a cockle, but marred by the train line.

Well connected? Trains: six to nine trains an hour; 48 mins to London 
Fenchurch Street via Barking and West Ham, and 10 the other way to Southend. 
Driving: 10 mins to Southend, just over half an hour to the M25 or to 
Chelmsford, an hour to Stansted Airport. The roads in and out can clog.

Schools Primaries: Chalkwell Hall <http://www.chalkwellhall.co.uk>, Our Lady 
of Lourdes Catholic <http://www.olol.co.uk/site/>, Darlinghurst 
<http://www.darlinghurst.uk>, Blenheim <http://www.blenheimprimary.co.uk>, 
Eastwood <http://www.eastwoodprimaryschool.co.uk>, Edwards Hall 
<http://edwardshallprimary.co.uk> and Fairways 
<http://www.fairways.southend.sch.uk> are all “good”, says Ofsted, with Leigh 
North Street <http://www.leighnorthstreetprimaryschool.co.uk/site/> and West 
Leigh Junior <http://www.westleighjunior.co.uk> “outstanding”. Secondaries: 
Belfairs Academy <http://www.belfairsacademy.org.uk/school-information> and St 
Thomas More High <http://www.st-thomasmore.southend.sch.uk> are all “good”.

Hang out at… Cockle Row, munching on bivalves, looking across mud flats, 
followed by strawberry and black pepper ice-cream atPoco Gelato 
<http://www.pocogelato.co.uk/>.

Where to buy The river-front High Street with its cottages, cobbles and 
boatsheds is just the right side of twee. Up the cliff, the new town is mostly 
a late Victorian to 1950s affair. Between here and London Road, millions of 
terraces and semis. Bigger homes east to Chalkwell. Large detacheds and town 
houses, £800,000-£1.2m. Detacheds, £450,000-£800,000. Semis, £350,000-£1m. 
Terraces and cottages, £240,000-£500,000. Flats, £140,000-£375,000. Rentals: a 
one-bed flat, £550-£750pcm; a three-bed house, £1,000-£1,600pcm.

Let’s move to Barnstaple: ‘It has potential'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/15/barnstaple-devon-property-lets-move-to>
Bargain of the week Two-bed art deco flat; could do with an update. £189,500, 
withhairandson.co.uk 
<http://www.hairandson.co.uk/property/view/sales/2656?search%5Btown%5D%5B%5D=leigh-on-sea&search%5Btype%5D=&search%5Bbedrooms-min%5D=2&search%5Bbedrooms-max%5D=&search%5Bprice-min%5D=&search%5Bprice-max%5D=201000&search%5Bstatus%5D=2&filter=Start+search>
.


From the streets 

Katie Cohen “We moved from London in 2013, looking for something bigger and 
more affordable. It was the best choice. I walk everywhere: beach, bars, coffee 
shops or galleries. It’s easy to bump into friends.”


Dom Green “Retains its small-town feel even with the influx from London.”

• Live in Leigh-on-Sea? Join the debate below

Do you live in Henley-on-Thames? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? 
If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by 
Tuesday 24 May.

Let’s move to Ripley, Derbyshire: the most English town in Eng-er-land
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/22/lets-move-ripley-derbyshire-most-english-town> 