
What’s going for it? On a family holiday in Lynton and Lynmouth in the 1970s, 
the brakes went on the car. As anyone who has visited Lynton and Lynmouth will 
know this is not the best spot on planet Earth for one’s brakes to go. It is 
jolly hilly, dangling off a cleft in the Exmoor cliffs. Images of the family 
clinging on to the banger are gouged deep in my memory. I should probably see a 
counsellor. Still, it’s in keeping with the place. This is a dramatic 
landscape, all vertiginous drops and corniche drives along cliff tops. That’s 
why the Georgians and Victorians made this one of their favourite resorts, 
scattering villas and periwinkles picturesquely across the valley to get their 
hearts racing; Shelley came here for his honeymoon. Drama tipped over into
disaster in 1952 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lynmouth_Flood>, when a 
thunderstorm broke over the area, destroying buildings, bridges and killing 34 
people – though living life on the edge has bred a certain stout resolve and 
self-reliance in Lynton and Lynmouth. It’s a rollercoaster ride, but the 
thrills are worth it.

The case against Stout legs required. And keep the brake fluid topped up. The 
hills do loom when the sun behind you is low in the southern sky. Bit of a 
tourist honeypot. Still relatively isolated.

Well connected? Trains: the nearest is in Barnstaple, a half-hour drive away, 
with hourly trains on the Tarka line to Exeter (66-82 mins). Driving: 
Ilfracombe is the nearest big town, half an hour away. The M5 is an hour and a 
quarter away on a good day.

Schools Primaries: both Lynton C of E 
<http://www.westexmoorfederation.org.uk/our-schools/lynton> and nearby 
Parracombe C of E 
<http://www.westexmoorfederation.org.uk/our-schools/parracombe> require 
“improvement”, says Ofsted, though they are “taking effective action”. 
Secondaries: ditto the nearest secondary,Ilfracombe Academy 
<http://www.ilfracombeacademy.org.uk/>, also “taking effective action”, though 
Pilton Community College <http://www.piltoncollege.org.uk/> and Park Community 
<http://www.parkcommunity.devon.sch.uk/parkweb/> in Barnstaple are both “good”.

Hang out at… The Rising Sun <http://risingsunlynmouth.co.uk/> in Lynmouth is 
your archetypical thatched, whitewashed Exmoor pub.

Where to buy Stone-fronted or rendered, balconied Victorian gothic terraces, 
semis and detached villas. Plus the odd Exmoor farmhouse and whitewashed 
fishermen’s cottage. Large detacheds and town houses, £350,000-£800,000. 
Detacheds, £200,000-£350,000. Semis, £200,000-£400,000. Terraces and cottages, 
£175,000-£275,000. Flats, £110,000-£225,000. Rentals: few; a two-bed house, 
£450-£650 pcm.

Let’s move to the Marches: ‘A magical patch straight out of Tolkien’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/06/the-marches-property-tom-dyckhoff-lets-move-to>
Bargain of the week Want a challenge? Ten-bedroom Victorian detached villa in 
Lynton, £695,000. Withstags.co.uk 
<http://www.stags.co.uk/properties/8137165/sales>.

From the streets 


Jeanette Moorcroft “Scary cliffside car ride around Woody Bay and the Woody 
Bay train line, which kids love.”

Lois Phelps “Some amazing sandy beaches a short drive from Lynmouth. 
Putsborough beach and Croyde are a surfers’ paradise or head for Braunton 
Burrows, huge sand dunes.”

Live in Lynton and Lynmouth? Join the debate below.

• Do you live in Princes Risborough, Buckinghamshire? Do you have a favourite 
haunt or a pet hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com 
<mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by Tuesday 14 June.
 