
What’s going for it? Luton, these days, can come with a sneer. We can blame 
Campari, of course, whoseairport-related 1970s ad with Lorraine Chase 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2jeGLrvy5i8> made it OK to smirk knowingly at 
anyone non-U enough to pass through for Benidorm. Luton has since been a byword 
for non-aspiration, the kind of place George, rather than Mildred, would be 
content to end his days. A decade before, though, Luton was living the dream. 
The town still has remnants of its heyday, pleasant parks and avenues in the 
north, good schools, civic spirit in its carnival arts centre, though it can be 
buried under headlines aboutcreative estate agents 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2959887/Luxury-block-500-000-flats-advertised-one-cosmopolitan-areas-London-LUTON.html>
 marketing flats as being in London, easyJet and Islamic radicalisation.

The case against It is not the most aesthetically beautiful of spots (though 
there is beauty next door, thanks to the Chiltern Hills). Social and economic 
problems persist in chunks of the town.

Well connected? Very. Trains: on the Thameslink to Sutton or Brighton, via St 
Albans (15 minutes; six an hour), West Hampstead (28-39 mins; four an hour), 
London St Pancras (23-49 mins; six an hour) and London Blackfriars (46-62 mins; 
six an hour) and many services north. Driving: beside the M1; 20 mins to St 
Albans and the M25, 30 mins to Milton Keynes, 45 to Northampton and 60 to 
central London. And your very own airport.

Schools Primaries: many “good” (Ofsted), Hillborough 
<http://www.hillborough.org> is “outstanding”. Secondaries: Cardinal Newman 
Catholic <http://www.cardinalnewmanschool.net/page/default.asp?title=Home&pid=1>
 ,Lea Manor High <http://www.leamanorhighschool.org.uk>, Lealands High 
<http://www.lealands.luton.sch.uk/page/default.asp?title=Home&pid=1>, Icknield 
High <http://www.icknield.beds.sch.uk>, Stopsley High 
<http://www.stopsleyhighschool.co.uk>, Putteridge High 
<http://www.putteridgehigh.org>, Ashcroft High <http://ashcrofthighschool.co.uk>
 andStockwood Park Academy <http://stockwoodpark.thesharedlearningtrust.org.uk> 
are all “good”;Denbigh High <http://www.denbighhigh.luton.sch.uk> and Challney 
High for Boys <http://www.challneyboys.co.uk> “outstanding”.

Hang out at… The Alankar <http://www.alankarrestaurant.com/> – well known as a 
great Asian restaurant. But this isn’t a culinary hotspot.

Where to buy Memorise these words: “Just off Old Bedford Road”. Or, indeed, 
just on it. Or the New Bedford Road. NorthLuton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/luton> is leafier, hugging pleasant parks like 
Wardown. Lots from the 1920s, 1930s heyday, especially semis. Challney is a bit 
cheaper, or Puttridge, Barton Hills and Bushmead. Large detacheds and 
townhouses, £480,000-£1.5m. Detacheds and smaller townhouses, 
£290,000-£480,000. Semis, £190,000-£480,000. Terraces and cottages, 
£150,000-£300,000. Flats, £100,000-£250,000. Rentals: a one-bedroom flat, 
£450-£750pcm; three-bedroom house, £850-£1,500pcm.

Bargain of the week What about a three-bedroom semi, needing an update, for 
£259,000 withcountry-properties.co.uk 
<http://www.country-properties.co.uk/property-details/4174572/bedfordshire/sundon-park/sundon-park?country=UK&bid%5B0%5D=989&property_type=Barn+Conversion%2CCottage%2CDetached%2CFarm%2CLand%2CMaisonette%2CSemi-Detached%2CTerraced%2CTown+House%2CVilla&bedrooms=3&minprice=&maxprice=300000&showstc=on&instruction_type=Sale&page=1>
.

Let’s move to Saltaire: Titus Salt’s grand and immaculate West Yorkshire haven
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/02/lets-move-to-saltaire-west-yorkshire>
From the streets 





Philip Runeckles “Unpretentious, multicultural, with beautiful surrounding 
countryside. Good transport connections. Stockwood Park Discovery Centre is 
great for children.”

Peter Marshall “It’s just awful. All the worst social problems of 
post-industrial England with the added joy of London prices.”

• Live in Luton? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Perth? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email
lets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by next Tuesday.
 