
What’s going for it? Beautiful Aberaeron is dolled up like an ad for Dulux 
(other paint brands are available). As is the fashion these days for pretty 
former fishing towns reliant on tourists, every house is painted a jaunty hue 
so that, viewed from the hills above, Aberaeron resembles a three-dimensional 
swatch card, or a 1970s fruit salad. There’s Berry Smoothie and Cranberry 
Crunch, Lemon Punch and Ginger Glow 4, Sea Blue, of course, and I’m sure I spot 
a Bermuda Cocktail. Some (the posh ones) have opted for Farrow & Ball, though 
in this chromatic battle, Elephant’s Breath is no match for Kiwi Burst. A 
doughty few, however, turn a blind eye. Their cottages are slathered in 
whitewash, or grey pebbledash. Porridge Plop, perhaps. Dour, but authentic. 
Fishing towns like Aberaeron, back when they actually fished, were serious 
places, soaked in heartache and hard work. No time or money for home decor. 
Porridge Plop was as good as it got.

The case against… Schools could be better. Far, far away, but then, that’s the 
point.

Well connected? Very much not. Trains: the nearest station is Aberystwyth, a 
25-minute drive away, from which Shrewsbury (hourly) is an hour and 50 minutes 
and Birmingham (every two hours) three hours. Driving: Cardigan’s about 40 
minutes, Carmarthen 50.

Schools Primaries: the latest report for Ysgol Gynradd Aberaeron 
<http://www.ysgolgynraddaberaeron.cymru/> says that it’s “adequate”. 
Secondaries: the town’sYsgol Gyfun Aberaeron 
<http://ygaberaeron.org.uk/?lang=en> is, alas, “unsatisfactory”, says Estyn.

Hang out at… The big culinary cheese in town is the Harbourmaster 
<http://www.harbour-master.com/>. Though I can heartily recommend the cod, 
chips and mushy peas atNew Celtic <http://www.newceltic.co.uk/>, and the gin 
menu atHive <http://www.thehiveaberaeron.com/>.

Where to buy The heart, huddled round the harbour north of North Road, was 
built in the 1830s. It’s gorgeously preserved, with double-fronted late 
Georgian houses on gridded streets. Unmodernised properties are rare. The town 
gets Victorian and later the further out you go. Harbour and sea views have a 
premium. You’ll find similar, cheaper properties once you leave town; try 
Aberarth. Large detacheds and town houses, £400,000-£700,000. Detacheds, 
smaller town houses and large terraces, £200,000-£400,000. Terraces and 
cottages, £150,000-£200,000. No great rental market.

Bargain of the week Four-bed unmodernised (un-brightly-coloured) period semi 
just outside Aberaeron, in Aberarth, £192,000 withmorgananddavies.co.uk 
<http://www.morgananddavies.co.uk/property/laura-house-aberarth-aberaeron-ceredigion/>
.

• Live in Aberaeron? Join the debate below

From the streets 


Dylan Davies “It’s the jewel in the crown of Cardigan Bay; picturesque, with 
quirky independent shops. The only frustration is not having more affordable 
homes.”

Nigel Davies (no relation): “We’re on the extreme edge of Wales, but well 
connected: 16 miles to Aberystwyth, and a four-hour drive to London.”

• Do you live in Hotwells, Bristol? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet 
hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> 
by Tuesday 4 October.
 