
What's going for it? Port Sunlight is paradise on Earth, with persistent rain 
showers. Imagine being a slum-dweller in 1880s Salford and getting a job 
boiling up vats of soap in the Lever Brothers' factory, swapping your 
overcrowded hovel for… what would you like? Tudorbethan cottage? Renaissance 
Dutch semi? Or would Palladian revival do? Anyone lucky enough to get a golden 
ticket to reside in this workers' playground must have thought they'd died and 
gone to heaven. Each of the 900 homes is unique in style and set on blossoming 
boulevards amid every possible convenience, as useful today as they were 130 
years ago – swimming pool, art gallery, night school, cottage hospital, even, 
goodness, apub (a rare sight in Victorian philanthropic utopias). It remains a 
lovely, if slightly odd place. There was a price for entry: strict rules on 
gambling, naughtiness and the correct height of dado rails, and woe betide you 
if the Levers' random house inspections found a poker out of place. Don't think 
they've stopped, either. Crack teams of enforcement officers/Hyacinth Buckets 
are regularly deployed from the museum tea rooms to monitor your rag rolling.

The case against A little odd, being, effectively, an architectural theme 
park. A tad too perfect: you might hanker after litter and graffiti. Quiet, 
even on a suburban scale. You'll struggle to find large houses.

Well connected? Trains to Liverpool Central every 10 minutes (20 minutes), 
Chester every 15 (25 ). Driving: 10 minutes to the M53, 15 to central 
Liverpool, 20 to the seaside at Hoylake and 25 to Chester.

Schools Primaries: Church Drive <http://www.churchdriveps.eschools.co.uk/site> 
andSt Andrew's CofE <http://www.st-andrews.eschools.co.uk/site> are "good" says 
Ofsted. SecondariesSt John Plessington Catholic College 
<http://www.stjohnplessington.com/page/default.asp?title=Home&pid=1> and Wirral 
Grammar Schools for Girls <http://www.wirralgirls.co.uk> and for Boys 
<http://www.wirralgrammarboys.com> are "outstanding".

Hang out at… There is, thank you Lord Lever, a pub – the Bridge 
<http://www.goodnightinns.co.uk/hotel-booking/bridge-inn/> – but debauchery was 
and is rather thin on the ground. Pick from theLady Lever Art Gallery tea rooms 
<http://www.visitwirral.com/food-and-drink/lady-lever-cafe-p7551> or the Port 
Sunlight Museum tea rooms 
<http://www.portsunlightvillage.com/page.asp?pageid=TEA>.

Where to buy The estate has mostly roomy cottages and terraces with some 
semis; few detacheds – these were built for the workers, not the 
middle-classes. Every variety of late-Victorian style is there. Interiors were 
mostly plain, though you might find one with original fireplaces and built-in 
mod-cons.

Market values Semis, £180,000-£250,000. Terraces and cottages, 
£100,000-£230,000. Rentals: three-bed cottage, £625 pcm.

Bargain of the week Roomy two-bed Jacobean revival cottage 
<http://www.clivewatkin.com/property/12594.aspx>, £135,000, with 
clivewatkin.com.

From the streets

John Norton "The Port Sunlight Garden Centre cafe 
<http://www.portsunlightgardens.co.uk/sun-lounge-cafe/> does wonderful English 
breakfasts."

Tom Kelly "There are two fantastic butchers: Griffiths for chicken and ham 
pies, and Edge & Son for rare-breed, free-range meat."

Jane Marshall "Wirral Bicycle Belles 
<http://wirralbicyclebelles.blogspot.co.uk/> lead great women's cycle rides 
(plus coffee stop), come rain or shine."

• Live in Port Sunlight? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Newcastle, County Down? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet 
hate? If so, please email, by Tuesday 15 July, tolets.move@theguardian.com 
<mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com>.
 