
What’s going for it? There’s no point moving to Oxford. It’s full. Full, full, 
full. Not a square inch left. If you want that spire schtick in your life, 
you’re going to have to scour its hinterland these days. Abingdon, for 
instance, might lack medieval colleges, posh drinking societies and legions of 
tourists, but it does have a spire, rowers on the Thames and perhaps enough 
honey-butter-coloured stone buildings to convince you that you live a few miles 
to the north. The poshAbingdon school <http://www.abingdon.org.uk/> could, on a 
foggy day, double for the little-known St Nobb’s College. The town even has its 
own ridiculous/picturesque tradition: bun throwing. Don’t ask.

The case against The curse of Fat Face <http://www.fatface.com/>: all a bit 
chinos and posh-chains in the centre. Ditch the blandness, Abingdon. Commuting 
to Oxford, just a few miles away, is not without its challenges.

Well connected? Annoyingly trainless; the nearest station is two miles away in 
Radley – hourly slow trains to Oxford and Didcot (11 minutes), and Reading 
(44); the better connected Oxford and Didcot are seven or eight miles away. 
Driving: the A34 gets you to the M40 in 30 minutes, the M4 in 45; Oxford is 
near, but traffic can be bad.

Schools Primaries: Long Furlong <http://longfurlongprimaryschool.org.uk>, 
Dunmore <http://www.dunmore.oxon.sch.uk>, St Nicolas CofE 
<http://www.stnicolasprimary.co.uk>, Carswell Community 
<http://www.carswell.oxon.sch.uk>, Caldecott <http://www.caldecott.oxon.sch.uk> 
andThameside <http://www.thameside.oxon.sch.uk> are all “good”, says Ofsted, 
withRush Common <http://rushcommonschool.org> and Thomas Reade 
<http://thomasreadeschool.org> “outstanding”. Secondaries: John Mason 
<http://www.johnmason.oxon.sch.uk> and Larkmead <http://www.larkmead-school.com>
 are both “good”. Lots of independents.

Hang out at The Nag’s Head <http://www.thenagsheadonthethames.co.uk/>, perched 
on an island on the Thames, provides welcome relief from all the chains.

Where to buy Abingdon has one of those lovely historic centres containing an 
encyclopedia of architectural styles. Hunt for town houses and cottages on East 
St Helen Street, Lombard Street, and, to a lesser extent, Bath Street. North of 
the centre is plummest for Victorian semis and so on; start around Park 
Crescent, Park Road, Spring Road and the Albert Park conservation area. Or off 
and between Oxford Road and Radley Road, such as Norman Avenue. Large detacheds 
and town houses, £550,000-£1.6m. Detacheds, £320,000-£550,000. Semis, 
£250,000-£600,000. Terraces and cottages, £245,000-£400,000. Flats, 
£170,000-£350,000. Rentals: a one-bedroom flat, £675-£900pcm; a three-bedroom 
house, £1,000-£1,500pcm.

Bargain of the week Period terrace close to the centre. £350,000 with 
hodsons.co.uk 
<http://www.hodsons.co.uk/search-results?minbeds=0&minprice=&maxprice=300000&districts=,7407,7408,7409>
.

From the streets

Helen Mugnaioni “Patisserie Pascal <https://twitter.com/patisseriepasca>, 
French bakery – best bread ever. Not to mention delicious breakfast goodies and 
cakes. Absolutely brilliant.”

Mary Buxton “Lots of opportunities for sports, music and church-centred 
activities, all with a truly cosmopolitan mix of people. Best hidden secret is 
the spiritual centre,St Ethelwold’s House <http://ethelwoldhouse.com/>.”

• Do you live in Lowestoft, Suffolk? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet 
hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com <> by next Tuesday.

Let’s move to Lynton and Lynmouth, north Devon: stout legs required
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/10/lets-move-to-lynton-and-lynmouth-devon> 