
The destination of the 2016 Formula One world championship has already been 
decided in the uncompromising mind ofLewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton>. The final, title-deciding 
race of the season here on Sunday, which has brought an international media 
circus to this gaudy oasis in the desert of the United Arab Emirates, is but a 
backdrop to his remarkable self-belief.

Whatever happens here – and Rosberg, with a 12-point lead, has only to finish 
in the top three to secure his first world crown – Hamilton will still be 
champion in his own unfaltering eyes. “Maybe I should keep this private to 
myself, but I feel a certain way in my heart,” he said here. “How I have 
performed. And if he is labelled the world champion it doesn’t necessarily mean 
that is the way it is in my heart.”

Lewis Hamilton holds fire on Mercedes’ decision to swap mechanics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/leiws-hamilton-mercedes-mechanics-nico-rosberg-abu-dhabi-grand-prix>
Hamilton is so gifted, so innately talented, that people forget about the 
ferocity of his will, the indomitability of his competitive spirit.

It is a measure of Rosberg’s achievement this season that he has done so well 
against not only the quickest driver of his generation but also a Mercedes 
team-mate who is every bit as zealously combative as he is.

Hamilton added: “When you look at world champions you generally hope that they 
are the best in all areas, all year long. But in my heart I will feel a certain 
way, in terms of how I have performed, my pace and my ability. That wouldn’t 
take anything away from what he would have achieved.

“But for me, personally, it will be a lot easier to move forward. Just like in 
2007, when in my heart I felt like I actually won that world championship, even 
though it doesn’t show that on paper.” The rookie Hamilton deserved the title 
that yearbut was denied by Kimi Raikkonen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/oct/21/motorsports.formulaone20072> – 
the British driver won the first of his three championshipsthe following year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/nov/02/lewishamilton-formulaone>.

An edge of enmity has sharpened the relationship between these once close 
friends, Hamilton and Rosberg, so that theirs can now be counted among the 
great rivalries ofFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>, 
alongside Nigel Mansell and Nelson Piquet, Niki Lauda and James Hunt and, above 
all others, Alain Prost and Ayrton Senna.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-friendship-rivalries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd21c1f0e3c82c8671b8887eb0ad7704b38c0768c%2F0_164_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lewis%20Hamilton%20v%20Nico%20Rosberg%3A%20how%20friendship%20turned%20to%20fiercest%20of%20rivalries%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-friendship-rivalries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lewis%20Hamilton%20v%20Nico%20Rosberg%3A%20how%20friendship%20turned%20to%20fiercest%20of%20rivalries%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-friendship-rivalries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd21c1f0e3c82c8671b8887eb0ad7704b38c0768c%2F0_164_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Nico Rosberg and Lewis Hamilton pull up next to each other after their heated 
contest at the Monaco Grand Prix in 2014. Photograph: Mark Thompson/Getty Images
So it is difficult now to remember them as the carefree, cavorting pals they 
once were. Can those old pictures of them riding unicycles and sharing ice 
creams, playing football, table tennis and computer games be real?

When they first competed against each other they talked about how cool it 
would be if they ended up as team-mates in Formula One. Well, it’s so cool now 
you can see a glisten on the frost.

They would even have races to eat pizza, always eating two at a time

These two 31-year-olds were first team-mates in 2000, when they were in 
karting. They raced for MBM (Mercedes‑Benz/McLaren) and Hamilton became 
European champion, with Rosberg close behind.

“They would even have races to eat pizza, always eating two at a time,” 
recalls Robert Kubica, who raced with them then before joining them in F1.

Their old karting boss Dino Chiesa said: “Many times I was called by reception 
about some problem in the room. It might be noise or they might have broken 
something. They would never sleep, so they were always tired the next morning.

“Both liked ice cream so much, particularly vanilla. During the night, they 
wanted to eat ice cream always, so I had to go out everywhere and find some to 
keep them happy. They were just kids.”

They were unlikely friends – Rosberg, an only child, born in Germany but 
brought up in Monaco, the son of the wealthy former F1 champion Keke, and 
Hamilton, born on a council estate in Stevenage – but friends nevertheless. 
Hamilton would mischievously persuade the rich young Rosberg to buy him sweets.

Hamilton, said Chiesa, wanted to play more and fight more in those days. And 
he was the faster driver, even then. Rosberg, who once told me that “everything 
relates to physics and maths”, had a serious side even then. Now he speaks five 
languages and reads the business pages; Hamilton does not.

The pair were friends when they moved up to Formula Three, and friends still 
when they made it to F1 (Rosberg in 2006, Hamilton the following year). They 
even got on famously when Hamilton joined Rosberg at Mercedes in 2013, but that 
was the beginning of the big freeze.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-friendship-rivalries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b174afdfb0f75d607eb558238b140ee307895f3%2F98_0_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lewis%20Hamilton%20v%20Nico%20Rosberg%3A%20how%20friendship%20turned%20to%20fiercest%20of%20rivalries%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-friendship-rivalries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lewis%20Hamilton%20v%20Nico%20Rosberg%3A%20how%20friendship%20turned%20to%20fiercest%20of%20rivalries%20%7C%20Paul%20Weaver&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-friendship-rivalries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b174afdfb0f75d607eb558238b140ee307895f3%2F98_0_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg after the British driver had secured the world 
title in Austin last year, another race that soured the mood between the pair. 
Photograph: Youtube 
The relationship started to become seriously sour at Monaco in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/24/nico-rosberg-monaco-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1>
, when Rosberg appeared to deliberately get in the way of Hamilton as the 
latter attempted to claim pole.

Later that year, at Spa, the two crashed into each other 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/24/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-deliberate-crash-spa-f1-belgian-grand-prix>
. Mercedes later blamed Rosberg for the incident, which appeared to have a 
profoundly negative effect on his season.

F1’s age of chivalry, when drivers gave up cars for others, is a distant dream 
| Richard Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/25/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-formula-one>
There was more ill-feeling last year, in Shanghai, where Rosberg accused 
Hamilton of compromising his race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/12/nico-rosberg-lewis-hamilton-selfish-chinese-gp>
, and again in Austin, where Hamiltonwon his third title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-world-title-third-time-us-grand-prix>
 but annoyed Rosberg by aggressively forcing him wide at turn one to take the 
lead; that was followed by the infamous, pre-podium cap‑throwing incident.

The two were “playing” once more here earlier this week, sparring with each 
other in a special press conference, with the two men of the moment alongside 
each other. Hamilton was easily the more comfortable.

Afterwards Hamilton, who topped both practice runs on Friday, said he had been 
amused by Rosberg’s remark that he would continue to take one race at a time, 
“because that’s worked for me until now”. Hamilton said: “Yeh, and some of my 
engine problems.”

Hamilton is a little obsessed with his engine difficulties and in truth he has 
had more bad luck than Rosberg this year. But he also had those flat weekendsin 
Baku 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/19/nico-rosberg-wins-european-grand-prix-in-baku-to-extend-championship-lead>
 andSingapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/nico-rosberg-singapore-grand-prix-formula-one>
. He has made five bad starts, which have cost him dear. They have won nine 
races apiece, with Hamilton leading the pole race 11-8.

“If I was to win [the championship] it would by far be the greatest 
achievement of my career, for sure,” he says. And it would. But then in 
Hamilton’s eyes he already has done.
 