
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> has more 
personas than the Man of a Thousand Faces, as the old stage and film actor Lon 
Chaney was known. We have the rock star, the rapper, the playboy, the motorbike 
designer, the cosmetics salesman, the social media junkie, the fashionista and 
a collector of tattoos that Ray Bradbury’s Illustrated Man might envy.

At times he appears younger than his 31 years, someone still striving to 
discover his true self. Happily, roughly every fortnight, he finds it, 
abandoning his multiple incognitos to reveal himself, and it is one of the most 
exciting, glamorous identities anyone could possibly hope for, as the 
outstandingFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> driver of 
his time.

Here on Sunday he will attempt to become the first driver to win a hat-trick 
of Silverstone grands prix. Jim Clark, the shy, quietly spoken genius from Fife 
with a farming background, the Lotus man with his Pioneer goggles and checkered 
handkerchief around his nose and mouth and someone who never seemed to have an 
identity problem, had a hat-trick of successes in theBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> between 1962-64, but 
they were at three different circuits, Aintree, Silverstone and Brands Hatch. 
Then he made it four in a row at Silverstone in 1965.

Lewis Hamilton boo-boys may bring out the beast in British GP fans again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/08/lewis-hamilton-british-gp-fans-nico-rosberg-f1>
Jim Clark was always “Jim Clark.” Or “Jimmy” to his friends. Hamilton 
occasionally refers to him as “James Clark” which no one else has ever done, 
though this says more about the absence of a sense of history than any lack of 
respect.

Hamilton, who also won here, heroically, in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jul/06/lewishamilton.formulaone>, is 
looking for his fourth success in his home grand prix, which would put him 
level with another great local hero, Nigel Mansell, though the first of his 
victories, in 1986, was at Brands Hatch. “I’m massively proud, and to be up 
alongside the great Nigel would be an incredible honour,” he says.

Hamilton has won three world championships and 46 races, so only Michael 
Schumacher (91) and Alain Prost (51) stand ahead of him.

In the essentially conservative world of Formula One many F1 fans, and indeed 
the sport itself, does not know quite what to make of the man in their midst, 
his myriad excesses, his insatiable desire for self-promotion.

Perhaps, a little shocked by the latest headline, or the most recent Instagram 
image, we forget to be sufficiently grateful to the man who, almost 
single-handed, flies the flag for his rigidly controlled and introverted sport.

The latest headlines were about TV comments made by Mercedes’ non-executive 
chairman Niki Lauda, who said that Hamilton had trashed his room after crashing 
out of qualifying and also “lied” about his relationship with team-mate and 
arch rival Nico Rosberg. Lauda later backed away from his incendiary remarks.

Hamilton said here on Friday: “I was sitting on the beach and was soaking up 
the sun enjoying my day, thinking: ‘I’ve just won the [Austrian] Grand Prix,’ 
and felt amazing and then saw what had come out and I was like wtf … A friend 
sent ‘wtf …’

“I read about it and didn’t fully understand what was going on. I sent it to 
Niki and said: ‘What’s this because I didn’t understand where it had come 
from,’ and he and the team did a great job to address it. Unfortunately, the 
damage was already done, it was on my social media, Twitter and Facebook and 
people have read that stuff.

“People see that and they think it’s true. Having come off the win it turns a 
whole positive into a negative. People say: ‘Don’t worry it’s what racing 
drivers do,’ but ultimately it was a little bit damaging. As I said I am 
grateful that what he said was not the case. It’s not true.”

Talking about his relationship with Rosberg, he added: “Honestly, up until the 
last race, even with Barcelona, it is the best place I have been with Nico 
because we talk about things. We get in a room and, even if we don’t like it, 
we say what our issue is and we deal with it.

“We’ve never had that before. Before, he wanted to kill me and I wanted to 
kill him. So that’s why I say we are in the best place. It’s not that we are 
best friends. We will have our ups and downs. That was definitely a down, the 
last race. We have plans to talk and discuss it. But I don’t feel I have much 
to say. We will move forward and it’s just important as men we take 
responsibilities for our actions.”

Hamilton has a habit of embracing each F1 circuit as if it is his favourite in 
the world on that particular weekend. At Silverstone, however, the feelings are 
obviously special.

“I remember being here when I wasn’t even in Formula One and dreaming of 
driving Formula One, so it’s crazy to think I’ve had those wins here and I hope 
I can continue to raise the flag proudly,” he said.

“Honestly, I draw a lot of energy from the fans. When I come to Silverstone 
the energy is in abundance. It’s amazing to absorb that people have saved up 
their money to come here and put all their energy towards getting you across 
the finish line first. It’s pretty much impossible to describe how amazing that 
feels.”

As if Hamilton and Rosberg didn’t already have enough on their busy minds they 
must now take on board Mercedes’ latest strictures, their Rules of Engagement 
to discourage more self-harming crashes between the two.

Will Hamilton, now just 11 points behind his great rival and able to take the 
lead here for the first time, be thinking about the new sanctions?

“Nope,” he said. “I’ll be giving it everything I’ve got but that’s how I race 
anyway. As Ayrton Senna said: ‘If you are no longer going for a gap you are no 
longer a racing driver.’ I live by that.”
 