
Lewis Hamilton was in an almost monarchial mood as he held court at 
Mercedes-Benz World at Brooklands in the buildup to theBritish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix> at Silverstone.

Before him an exhibition of exotic cars gleamed and preened on their stands, 
evoking the history of the motorcar. The double Formula One world champion, in 
expansive mood in the Hamilton Suite, was in an altogether more personal 
nostalgic reverie as he recalled his greatestSilverstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> moments, including his two wins.

F1 planning group must get it right for 2017, says Christian Horner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/30/f1-strategy-group-christian-horner-red-bull>
Hamilton goes into Sunday’s race as favourite, with four wins out of eight 
this season and a 10-point lead in the world championship – but nothing will 
eclipsehis victory in his second season, in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jul/06/lewishamilton.formulaone>.

He said: “My favourite British Grand Prix is still that win in the rain. I 
qualified fourth but then the heavens opened and I knew that it was my day. I 
got a great start and I just followed the lines that I took from my experience 
of Formula Renault days. It was a great race and everybody was standing every 
single time I went through Abbey, in the pouring rain with umbrellas up. That 
was a really special time. I won by 68 seconds.

“It is difficult to say which is the greatest one because they are all so 
different but definitely wet races are the trickiest and that was a seriously 
tricky race. There was the aquaplaning and it was so difficult to keep 
temperature in the tyres. It was definitely one I thoroughly enjoyed.”

Hamilton’s stock has never been higher. He won his second British Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/06/lewis-hamilton-british-grand-prix>
, andanother world title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/23/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-title-nico-rosberg>
, last year and wasvoted BBC Sports Personality of the Year for 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/15/lewis-hamilton-rory-mcilroy-bbc--sports-personality-award>
. At a time when the sport is being talked down by so many people, he remains 
its solitary superstar, helped by a certain absence of shyness away from the 
track.

The Spoty award clearly moved him. “I was shocked at how many fans called in. 
I really didn’t think I had that kind of support. I knew I had a lot of fans 
but I thought Rory McIlroy was going to win, so I was really shocked.”

Silverstone holds an immense appeal, for Hamilton and the reception he 
receives there evokes the Nigel Mansell mania from the halcyon days of Ayrton 
Senna and Alain Prost.

Speaking at a Petronas event, Hamilton said: “Silverstone is where you have 
the biggest turnout of support. For me and Jenson Button [who has never won a 
podium place there] it is particularly special. You have all of the British 
flags there and all the people who have literally only just turned up to 
support you.

“It’s the biggest buzz, definitely. I felt it for the first time when I got 
pole position in 2007. I was like: ‘Wow.’ I could see everyone but I couldn’t 
hear them. Then, watching the replay, I was really surprised.”

For Hamilton, however, Silverstone means more than the race itself. “It is 
just the whole week really,” he says, “knowing that you are going to be seeing 
the fans, seeing the messages on social media, so you know that it is going to 
be a big turnout during the weekend.

“I remember my first time there. It was a British Go-Kart GP when I was about 
eight or nine. It was a straw bale track many years ago. Then I did Formula 
Renault there. Then I remember standing at the back of the garage atMcLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> thinking: ‘One day I want to be in 
one of those. I want one of those driver’s seats.’

“Now to go there, even though I have been going there for a long time, I still 
particularly remember that day, standing at the back of McLaren.”

Mansell’s name still fires Hamilton’s imagination. “I remember watching Nigel 
holding the union flag in the car. It was like the Olympics, like a gold medal, 
having the flag in the car after winning the grand prix. It is the closest 
thing I can imagine to having a gold medal.”

Hamilton says he is surprised by the increase in the support he receives at 
Silverstone each time he returns. “It is huge. I hope that I can go there and 
make people proud.”

He just wishes trophies, like the cars, could receive upgrades. “Last year 
they gave me this plastic thing and I’m like: ‘This is not the trophy. It’s 
like a GP2 trophy not theFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> trophy.’ It would be great if 
each country had a real trophy with character that grew over the years because 
of the history. The last one in Austria was wooden. The whole thing was wooden. 
The base was like lead, I mean, what? It was supposed to be silver!”

With the title race looking tight again, however, Hamilton would probably 
settle for another “plastic thing” on Sunday.
 