
Lewis Hamilton’s strutting domination of the 2015 Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> season continued when he won his 
seventh pole position in eight attempts, despite spinning off the track. The 
two-times world champion has failed to win three of the seven races to date but 
another victory was thrown away in Monaco, where he bestrode the weekend only 
to be denied at the end by his team’s poor decision-making.

The Mercedes driver will start Sunday’s Austrian Grand Prix ahead of his 
relentless and solitary rival, his team-mateNico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg>. Hamilton is now also level 
with Sebastian Vettel on 45 pole wins and they are joint third in the all-time 
list, behind Michael Schumacher (68) and Ayrton Senna (65). Records could 
topple like dominoes in the years ahead, given a fair wind.

Kimi Raikkonen fumes at Ferrari team for qualifying blunder at Austrian GP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/20/kimi-raikkonen-f1-ferrari-austrian-gp>
Another fastest time for Hamilton means Mercedes have not been knocked off 
pole position since this race a year ago, when Williams locked out the front 
row. But this was not the most straightforward of qualifying sessions for 
Hamilton. The serenity of the Red Bull Ring’s setting disguised the fact that 
the drivers had to work hard in challenging conditions after rain had swept in 
from the cloud-shrouded Styrian mountains.

Qualifying got under way on a damp track and matters only improved towards the 
end. Even then Hamilton spun off in his final effort in Q3 and might have lost 
pole to Rosberg. But the German, who was on a flyer, repeated Hamilton’s error 
just before the end of his last lap.

Hamilton had some difficulty in getting out of Q1, finishing 13th after going 
off at Turn 2 and abandoning a lap. “It was quite difficult qualifying with the 
track conditions,” he said. “I was grateful I got my third lap in on the first 
run in Q3. I was pushing that bit extra on the next run and just locked the 
rears.

“I wasn’t too concerned about losing pole at that time because I was trying to 
get the car going, but afterwards I was thinking: ‘I probably lost it there.’

“I just didn’t have the confidence in the balance I had early on, and the 
temperatures of the tyres and the brakes.”

Hamilton added: “Ferrari have really showed some great pace so tomorrow’s 
going to be a tough race. Every little bit of time will count tomorrow.”

Asked about drawing level with Vettel on total poles, he said: “I’m very 
fortunate that I’ve had a great car for the last two years and been able to get 
poles and raise my total. I’d much rather have Sebastian’s world championships 
[four] than his pole positions, so I’m working towards that.”

Rosberg said: “I’m definitely gutted, but Lewis was 0.2secs up on the previous 
lap and I was 0.2secs exactly up at that point so I knew I had to go for it. 
I’m not sure what happened. I went on the AstroTurf out of the second-to-last 
corner and maybe that was still a bit wet or something. I just overdid it after 
that. I’m not sure. I just lost it there, into the last corner.”

Vettel, whose Ferrari will be third on the grid, said: “I thought we could 
probably have a bit of a word today but unfortunately they were a bit too 
quick. We tried everything. Q1 was a bit tricky for all of us but I think we 
settled into the groove nicely.”

Behind the Mercedes pair and Vettel will be the 2014 pole sitter Felipe Massa 
(Williams), Nico Hülkenberg (Force India) and Valtteri Bottas (Williams). The 
shock casualty in Q1 was Ferrari’s Kimi Raikkonen, who was 17th. “How the fuck 
is that possible?” was the radio message broadcast from the world champion of 
2007. The four other drivers who did not make it to Q2 were the Manor pair, 
Will Stevens and Roberto Merhi, plusJenson Button 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jenson-button> and Sergio Pérez.

Jenson Button and Fernando Alonso land 25-place Austrian F1 grid penalties
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/20/jenson-button-25-place-grid-penalty-f1-austrian-gp-fernando-alonso>
In Q2 McLaren, predictably, lost their second representative, Fernando Alonso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso>, for whom disappointments 
keep coming thick and fast. It was the seventh time in seven race weekends – he 
missed Australia recovering from a head injury – this season that the Spaniard 
had failed to make it to Q3, the same number that covered his five-year Ferrari 
career.

This is the double world champion’s worst season since 2001, his first year in 
Formula One. The Spaniard and Button will start at the back of the grid after 
being hit with a 25-place grid penalty for having new components fitted to 
their cars.

The others to go out were Daniel Ricciardo – whose poor weekend at Red Bull’s 
home grand prix was compounded as he could only go 14th, with a 10-place grid 
penalty also to be applied – Carlos Sainz Jr (Toro Rosso), Marcus Ericsson 
(Sauber) and Pastor Maldonado (Lotus).

Qualifying times

1 Lewis Hamilton (GB) Mercedes 1min 08.455sec; 2 Nico Rosberg (Ger) Mercedes 
1:08.655;3 Sebastian Vettel (Ger) Ferrari 1:08.810; 4 Felipe Massa (Br) 
Williams 1:09.192;5 Nico Hülkenberg (Ger) Force India 1:09.278; 6 Valtteri 
Bottas (Fin) Williams 1:09.319; 7 Max Verstappen (Neth) Toro Rosso 1:09.612; 8 
Daniil Kvyat (Rus) Red Bull 1:09.694; 9 Felipe Nasr (Br) Sauber 1:09.713; 10 
Romain Grosjean (Fr) Lotus no time; 11 Pastor Maldonado (Ven) Lotus 1:10.374; 
12 Marcus Ericsson (Swe) Sauber 1:10.426; 13 Carlos Sainz Jr (Sp) Toro Rosso 
1:10.465;14 Daniel Ricciardo (Aus) Red Bull 1:10.482; 15 Fernando Alonso (Sp) 
McLaren 1:10.736;16 Sergio Pérez (Mex) Force India 1:12.522; 17 Jenson Button 
(GB)McLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> 1:12.632; 18 Kimi 
Raikkonen (Fin) Ferrari 1:12.867; 19 Roberto Merhi (Sp) Marussia 1:14.071; 20 
Will Stevens (GB) Marussia 1:15.368

Ricciardo and Kvyat drop 10 grid places for using a fifth engine. Button drops 
25 for using a sixth turbocharger, a sixth MGU-H, a fifth engine and a fifth 
MGU-K. Alonso drops 25 for a fifth engine, a fifth turbocharger and a fifth 
MGU-H.
 