
There was a time, when Lewis Hamilton won pole position, that you would place 
money on him to scarper away in the direction of the chequered flag with all 
others trailing in his wake;but not this season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/30/nico-rosberg-lewis-hamilton-formula-one>
. SoHamilton’s 57th pole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/lewis-hamilton-malaysian-gp-f1-pole-nico-rosberg>
, for Sunday’s Malaysian Grand Prix – which means he is now within a season’s 
striking distance of Michael Schumacher’s record of 68 – was not quite as 
reassuring as it once was.

Hamilton bettered his Mercedes team-mate and title rival, Nico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg>, by four-tenths of a second to 
secure his eighth pole of the season; but on only three of the previous seven 
occasions has he gone on to win.

Poor starts, particularly in Australia, Bahrain, Canada and Italy, have 
damaged Hamilton’s season, but he clearly came to the Sepang International 
Circuit in the mood to make a statement and the margin of his superiority will 
see him go into the race rich in confidence.

In the final practice session of the weekend Hamilton was six-tenths of a 
second faster than Rosberg. It was tight in Q1 – though Hamilton won it – but 
in Q2 and Q3 the Briton was dominant, winning the penultimate run by more than 
half a second before putting in one of the fastest laps seen here, a 1min 
32.850sec, that always looked likely to be beyond the German’s reach.

Rosberg, who leads the world champion by eight points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/nico-rosberg-singapore-grand-prix-formula-one>
 with six races remaining, did respond with his best effort of the afternoon, 
but was still well off Hamilton’s scintillating best and only just managed to 
edge out Max Verstappen by 0.156 seconds to qualify for the front row.

Rosberg has won the past three races and is well aware that no driver has won 
eight in a season – as he has – and not won the championship. Although Hamilton 
was in a class of his own Rosberg reminded him: “Second place doesn’t mean 
victory is not possible, we have seen that many times. I am still optimistic 
for tomorrow. I would have come close, but made a mistake at the last corner. I 
couldn’t get the settings right at that last corner.”

Hamilton won pole for last year’s race here but was ultimately beaten by the 
Ferrari of Sebastian Vettel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/29/sebastian-vettel-wins-malaysia-f1-lewis-hamilton-second>
. Rosberg said: “As we saw last year qualifying is not decisive and there are 
going to be a lot of opportunities tomorrow. The start, definitely, and after 
that with race pace and strategy.”

Rosberg came here on the back of a resounding performance in Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/nico-rosberg-singapore-grand-prix-formula-one>
, including a qualifying lap that was described by the Merecedes motorsport 
director, Toto Wolff, asthe best he had ever driven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/nico-rosberg-pole-position-singapore-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1>
 for the team. That victory was his third in a row following the summer break, 
but Hamilton has responded as only he is capable of. He said: “This has been a 
night and day difference to the weekend I had in Singapore. In Singapore, say 
you have 10 laps in a practice session – and I finished two of them. The 
mechanics have been great leading up to Malaysia, as they have been all season, 
and the car felt fantastic. I’ve worked hard to rectify all areas on my part 
and the car’s part.

“I’ve been here since Saturday. For sure there has been nothing else to do 
than focus on this weekend, which is definitely a good thing. We had work on 
Tuesday and Wednesday and, like the other things I do, I don’t feel like it’s a 
distraction. I don’t feel anything is going to stop us.

“As a team we have great pace and if you look at the last race, we had pretty 
good starts and we continuously work on that. That’s not something I’m going to 
let in my mind. I’m thinking of getting a launch off the grid and the car feels 
really good on the long runs.”

Wolff, whose team can win the constructors’ championship here, said: “Lewis 
has been in a league of his own over the weekend. So the gap he had was 
expected – no surprises.”

After this race, there is the Japanese Grand Prix, followed by the US, Mexico, 
Brazil and finally Abu Dhabi. Hamilton will find the run-in encouraging. He has 
won three times at Suzuka, where Rosberg has yet to break his duck. The same 
record applies in Austin. Rosberg does enjoy a 2-0 lead in Brazil and a 1-0 
advantage in Mexico, where last year’s race was the first since 1992. Finally, 
in Abu Dhabi, Hamilton leads 2-1. If it does go to the wire Hamilton’s record 
of having won three championships will ease the pressure on him considerably.

Nico Rosberg showing signs of having the measure of Lewis Hamilton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/30/nico-rosberg-lewis-hamilton-formula-one>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ff1-malaysian-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-sepang-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%20Malaysian%20GP%20guide%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20Sepang%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ff1-malaysian-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-sepang-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%20Malaysian%20GP%20guide%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20Sepang%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ff1-malaysian-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-sepang-video&media=>
F1 Malaysian GP guide: everything you need to know about Sepang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/sep/30/f1-malaysian-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-sepang-video>
.  