
Lewis Hamilton will talk to his Mercedes team on Tuesday in an attempt to 
understand what went wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/lewis-hamilton-mercedes-f1-italian-grand-prix>
 with his start at the Italian Grand Prix.

Poor starts blighted Hamilton earlier in the season – specifically in 
Melbourne, Bahrainand Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-canadian-grand-prix-close-gap-nico-rosberg>
 – and helped his team-mate Nico Rosberg win the first four races to build up a 
43-point lead.

Hamilton qualified on pole at Monza but five cars streaked past him, including 
Rosberg, who went on to win and slash the British driver’s lead at the top of 
the championship to two points. The British driver and Mercedes were anxious 
not to blame each other but Sunday’s race represented the end of the European 
campaign and with only seven races remaining, the sharp end of the season is 
approaching.

Lewis Hamilton refuses to apportion blame after start costs him Italian GP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/lewis-hamilton-mercedes-f1-italian-grand-prix>
“I can assure you we’ll be talking about it at the factory,” Hamilton said. 
“We’ll try to get as much information, and learn as much as we can, to try and 
make sure in the remaining seven races we’re not struggling getting off the 
line from pole positions. They’ll be working very hard – it’s not a quick fix 
so it’s not something we can change for the next race.”

F1 is preparing to confront the challenges posed by the mosquito-borne Zika 
virus in the next two races in Singapore (18 September) and Malaysia (2 
October). There are also concerns over other venues – Texas, Mexico and Brazil. 
The other remaining races of the 2016 calendar are in Japan and Abu Dhabi.

Eric Boullier, the racing director at McLaren, told Reuters: “We are supplying 
anti-mosquito products and long-sleeved outfits and we have sent a brief to 
everybody about how to take care and all the why, what and how about it.”

Dave Ryan said his Manor team were taking the normal precautions. “We’ve 
briefed all the guys, we’re offering them the option of wearing long-sleeved 
garments and obviously supplying them with the right protection … and just 
making them as informed as they possibly can be. And it’s fine. We’re 
comfortable with it.”

According to reports, up to 1 September, 151 people had contracted the Zika 
virus in Singapore. The grand prix at the Marina Bay street circuit there is 
held in the evening in extreme heat.

“I’ll need to keep the overalls on, then,” said the Williams driver Valtteri 
Bottas. “I’m still going, that’s for sure.”
 