
Lewis Hamilton’s bizarre weekend in Japan ended with him appearing to overrule 
a decision by his Mercedes team that could have resulted in thereigning world 
champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-world-title-third-time-us-grand-prix>
 being promoted to second place in Sunday’sJapanese Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/09/f1-japanese-grand-prix-live>
.

Hamilton's troubles continue as Rosberg wins Japanese F1 Grand Prix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/hamiltons-troubles-continue-as-rosberg-wins-japanese-f1-grand-prix>
The race was won by Hamilton’s team-mate, Nico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/hamiltons-troubles-continue-as-rosberg-wins-japanese-f1-grand-prix>
, who is now clear favourite to secure his first Formula One title, with a lead 
of 33 points and only four races to go. Mercedes lodged an official appeal to 
the FIA, the sport’s governing body, in protest against Max Verstappen’s 
driving in the closing stages of the Suzuka race, when the Red Bull driver 
fought off Hamilton’s attempt to pass him.

Mercedes claimed Verstappen had been “erratic” and “dangerous” and alleged 
that their own driver had been forced to take “evasive action”.

Because neither Hamilton nor Verstappen was still at the track the FIA decided 
to refer the decision to the stewards at the next race, the US Grand Prix in 
Austin, Texas, on 23 October.

Hamilton, travelling home on Mercedes’ non-executive chairman Niki Lauda’s 
private jet, along with the team’s motorsport head, Toto Wolff, then tweeted: 
“There is no protest from either myself or Mercedes,” despite the team and the 
FIA confirming an appeal had been put forward. “One idiot said we have but it’s 
not true,” Hamilton added. “Max drove well, end of. We move on.”

That tweet was swiftly deleted and the identity of the “one idiot” remained 
unclear. A little later, however, the FIA confirmed that Mercedes had withdrawn 
their protest.

Then Hamilton tweeted: “There is no protest from myself 
<https://twitter.com/LewisHamilton/status/785072506289827840>. Just heard the 
team had but I told them it is not what we do. We are champions, we move on. 
End of!” Meanwhile Mercedes said it was their decision to withdraw the protest.
Lewis Hamilton (@LewisHamilton) 
There is no protest from myself. Just heard the team had but I told them it is 
not what we do. We are champions, we move on. End of!
 <https://twitter.com/LewisHamilton/status/785072506289827840> October 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/LewisHamilton/status/785072506289827840> 
The incident capped another weekend in which Hamilton dominated the agenda but 
not the driving as his chances of retaining his crown receded further.

Hamilton, who has not won a race since July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/31/lewis-hamilton-wins-german-grand-prix-f1-championship-lead-nico-rosberg>
, started the buildup in Suzuka controversially, when he used his smartphone 
and the imaging service Snapchat toplace bunny ears on other drivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/06/lewis-hamilton-snapchat-during-formula-one-press-conference-video>
 during the FIA’s official press conference.

Then, when he was strongly criticised for making a farce of the proceedings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/lewis-hamilton-f1-under-fire-snapchat-bunny-app>
, he protested bywalking out of another press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/lewis-hamilton-walks-out-japan-gp-press-conference>
 on Saturday evening without answering any questions. His failure once again to 
beat Rosberg means he is unlikely to lift the title for a fourth time.

Hamilton started second in Japan but lost six places at the start with yet 
another poor getaway. He said: “I made a mistake and then just working my way 
up from there was tricky. I did the best I could. I’ll give it everything I’ve 
got as I did in the race and we’ll see what happens.”

As rivals streaked past Hamilton at the start of the race, he said: “Sorry, 
guys.” His race engineer, Peter Bonnington, replied: “No stress, Lewis.”

However, Rosberg refused to claim the trophy was now virtually in his hands. 
“Lewis is always going to be fighting and tough to beat,” he said. “There are 
still many races to go but I am happy to win the Suzuka race. I am continuing 
to push myself and optimise everything.

“And I don’t have jet lag now. Lewis should be the master. If you need advice 
on that you should ask him. He is the genius. I never see him struggle with 
that.”
 