
Pre-season preparations took a back seat on Tuesday to Formula One’s 
equivalent of the transfer market as Mercedes announced thelong‑expected 
departure of their technical director, Paddy Lowe, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/f1-paddy-lowe-williams-mercedes-formula-one>
 who is predicted to re-emerge at Williams in a management role. The loss will 
be felt – Lowe has been ever-present as a key part of the Mercedes team during 
their three dominant years in F1 – but not as keenly as might be expected.

More intriguingly, however, it may be a factor in creating a scenario that 
will present a career-defining challenge for Lewis Hamilton: the chance to 
forge Mercedes around him with the unqualified mantle of team leader.

Lowe will be missed. The 54-year‑old has been integral from factory to pitwall 
in the team’s success and having a single technical director is crucial for 
steering the ship, however dominant. But a strong nucleus remains. The head of 
motorsport, Toto Wolff, in effect the team principal, is still in place and in 
the short term – until the team can bring in the likely replacement, the former 
Ferrari technical director James Allison – they are looking to a strong 
collective mentality.

Lowe’s role will be fulfilled by, among others, Aldo Costa, the hugely 
experienced engineering director who designed the all-conquering Mercedes 
hybrid that has won 51 of 59 races since 2014, as well as Geoff Willis, the 
technology director behind the cars. Fortunately, such was the team’s advantage 
and the absence of the need to aggressively develop last year’s car, work on 
the 2017 model will have begun early last season.

Yet, as stable a situation as this appears, Lowe’s departure has coincided with
that of Nico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/nico-rosberg-shock-retirement-f1-formula-one>
, whose retirement afterwinning last season’s world championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/nico-rosberg-seals-first-f1-world-title-at-abu-dhabi-grand-prix>
 came as a shock to the team. It is a combination of transitions that gives 
Hamilton a particularly strong hand.

Whoever replaces Rosberg – and it is highly likely to be Williams’s Valtteri 
Bottas – will be joining a team in which the British driver is strongly 
established, not least with two world championships with the team under his 
belt. Likewise, when it comes to any other potential candidate with the 
exception of Fernando Alonso, who has insisted he is remaining at McLaren, 
Hamilton will have the greater experience – both at winning on the track and, 
crucially, with the crew from Brackley.

Wolff has said that any new driver will share status and equal opportunities 
within Mercedes – “We owe it to the fans. You can’t have a pecking order” – but 
Hamilton will be the de facto No1 driver. He threatened to leave, so 
disheartened was he by the team’s reaction to Rosberg moving over into himat 
the Spanish Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-crash-out-f1-spanish-gp>
, which ultimately put both drivers out. But at the time Mercedes had no 
expectation Rosberg would retire. Now they have no such luxury to fall back on.

The tone has unsurprisingly been highly conciliatory since Rosberg left and is 
indicative of the position Hamilton now holds. Any censure of his backing-up 
tacticsat the last round in Abu Dhabi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/lewis-hamilton-disciplinary-action-mercedes-abu-dhabi-f1-grand-prix>
 was swiftly dropped and not long afterwards Wolff made a point of emphasising 
his importance, noting: “He has been a great pillar in the team’s success … 
When he came, everything changed, so he has played a role. It’s very important 
to keep him in a good place.”
 Paddy Lowe stood down from Mercedes on Tuesday, leaving the team with an 
ostensibly group-based leadership strategy. Photograph: Peter J Fox/Getty Images
Hamilton followed this by posting Instagram videos of a cosy chat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/lewis-hamilton-f1-mercedes-toto-wolff-williams-valtteri-bottas>
 he and Wolff shared in the latter’s kitchen, emphasising that the pair had 
enjoyed an “amazing meeting” and that “we’re going to be the strongest 
partnership next year”. It was a spirit of solidarity endorsed by the head of 
motorsport. “We spent a good couple of hours together, we had a really 
fantastic meeting. We’ll be coming back so strong in 2017,” said Wolff.

Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> teams always try to 
present a united front, even when turmoil seethes behind the scenes, but this 
feels like a dynamic shift in Hamilton’s favour and he knows it. Taking 
advantage will be crucial. He has enjoyed real seniority over a team-mate only 
once in his career – as the rising star at McLaren, over Heikki Kovalainen at 
McLaren in 2008 and 2009 – but he will have it now, as well as a team fully 
aware he is their best shot at the world championship. The vacuum and 
group-based strategy created by Lowe’s departure leaves him with even more room 
to flex his muscles.

Martin Brundle has noted that Ayrton Senna won over a team with his speed, 
emotion and sheer ability, while Michael Schumacher took attention to detail 
and absolute commitment to building the team around him at Ferrari. Hamilton is 
more than capable of something similar and has the chance to impose his will 
and prove his real maturity as a man who can lead in every facet of Formula 
One, not just on track. The great drivers all did that and with both Alonso and 
Sebastian Vettel’s contracts concluding at the end of this season, and thus 
becoming potentially available to Mercedes, this is by far best the chance to 
do so.

Related: Nico Rosberg drew the best from himself before bowing out as a F1 
champion | Paul Weaver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/nico-rosberg-diligent-f1-champion>

That a coherent and singular vision at the forefront of a team is absolutely 
necessary was further pounded home with the announcement on Wednesday that 
Frederic Vasseur, the Renault team principal, who has been in the role since 
the middle of last season, was to step down. Vasseur worked in a collegiate 
fashion last year with Renault’s racing president, Jérôme Stoll, and managing 
director, Cyril Abiteboul, during the difficult transition from cash-strapped 
Lotus into the marque’s work team, which will take full effect in 2017. The 
inability of the nature of this type of leadership to work had been crucial in 
his decision, Vasseur said.

“The reason is that there was too much different vision in the management of 
the team, so at this stage I think it makes sense for me to leave,” Vasseur 
told Motorsport.com.”For the Renault team also, if you want to perform in F1, 
you need to have one leader in the team and one single way. If you have two 
different visions then the result is that the work inside the team is slow.”

Slow progress is the last thing the team require at this point and while 
Mercedes and Hamilton consider how to most accurately focus their already 
successful and established vision, Renault must move fast to find their own.
 