
Formula One’s ruling body, the FIA, and its dominant team, Mercedes, were both 
left red-faced here on Thursday when the world champion,Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton>, made a mockery of the 
official drivers’ press conference before Sunday’s Japanese Grand Prix.

Hamilton had star billing at the event, in the middle of the front row, 
flanked by two other world champions in Fernando Alonso and Kimi Raikkonen, but 
he appeared more interested in playing with his smartphone and using the 
image-messaging service Snapchat’s “bunny rabbit filter” to put ears on the 
Toro Rosso driver Carlos Sainz.

Alonso looked embarrassed as Hamilton shared the joke images with his former 
McLaren team-mate. He also showed Sainz the picture he had made of him.

Lewis Hamilton vows to put Malaysia Grand Prix engine failure behind him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/05/lewis-hamilton-vows-malaysian-grand-prix-engine-failure-behind-him>
Almost crying with laughter, Hamilton was asked what he had found so funny. 
“It’s quite funny, just some snaps of drivers,” he said. “We’ve been doing this 
[press conference] a long, long time and it’s the same. Just got to keep adding 
new things to it.” He captioned his phone pictures: “This stuff is killing me.”

Both the FIA and Mercedes looked uneasy when asked how they would respond. 
Whether there will be any official reaction is doubtful but Hamilton is likely 
to be spoken to next time he appears at the official launch of a grand prix 
weekend.

It is understood that some sponsors and officials are already unhappy about 
Hamilton’s casual approach to the pre-race drivers’ parade, when he is a 
detached figure listening to music on headphones instead of mixing with his 
rivals.

Hamilton later issued a statement on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/LewisHamilton/status/783992904192753664>, saying: “Today 
was meant to be fun, not at all disrespectful. Some people take themselves to 
[sic] seriously. I had a blast, highlight of my day!”

In a second tweet <https://twitter.com/LewisHamilton/status/783993912557989888>
, he wrote: “Re press conference, it’s been the same for 10 years. It’s not the 
media or mediator, it’s the format. Fans should be asking the questions!!”

Hamilton had already caused some embarrassment by posting messages on Facebook 
and Instagram in which the driver heaped praise on his Mercedes team – who 
might have felt upset after the Malaysian Grand Prix last Sunday. Then, after 
his engine had blown up 15 laps away from a straightforward victory, Hamilton 
fuelled conspiracy theories by saying: “Someone doesn’t want me to win this 
year.”

He added: “We have so many engines made for drivers but mine are the only ones 
failing this year. Someone needs to give me some answers because this is not 
acceptable. I just can’t believe that there’s eight Mercedes cars and only my 
engines are the ones that have gone this way. Something just doesn’t feel 
right. It was a brand-new engine. It’s just odd. Only mine have gone.”

Later that evening Hamilton backed away from accusing Mercedes of anything 
underhand and since then he has attempted to make amends by heaping praise on 
the team. In one message, Hamilton wrote: “In the garage there are around 50 
guys, and they work 18 hours a day to put my car together. Not only that, they 
have to be ready to do the pitstops in under three seconds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Flewis-hamilton-f1-under-fire-snapchat-bunny-app%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8ceb42084d38a721220c65d6fa1ca0d22d88e23%2F0_155_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lewis%20Hamilton%20under%20fire%20after%20fiddling%20on%20Snapchat%20in%20F1%20press%20conference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Flewis-hamilton-f1-under-fire-snapchat-bunny-app%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lewis%20Hamilton%20under%20fire%20after%20fiddling%20on%20Snapchat%20in%20F1%20press%20conference&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Flewis-hamilton-f1-under-fire-snapchat-bunny-app%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8ceb42084d38a721220c65d6fa1ca0d22d88e23%2F0_155_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Lewis Hamilton shows the Snapchat images to Fernando Alonso during the press 
conference. 
“There are too many different skill sets and specialists to mention all 
departments in the garage [car crews, engines, gearboxes, hyds, bodywork, 
spares, aero, composites, the list goes on], but I can’t tell you how much I 
appreciate the time and effort everyone puts in. Away from their families so 
many weeks of the year, this end of the season is tough on them.

“It’s hot and humid with no air-con in the garages, and to add to that, the 
jet lag and pressure of competition within F1 – this time of year can feel a 
long way from home. All I can do to repay their efforts is to push to the limit 
on the track.”

Hamilton is 23 points behind his teammate, Nico Rosberg, with five races to 
go, as a result of last Sunday, when victory would have taken him above the 
German, who came third. When Hamilton did manage to speak on Thursday he 
dismissed the idea that Malaysia had been preying on his mind. “I haven’t been 
thinking about the last race,” he said. “Even when I leave the racetrack I 
think about other things. I have a lot of other stuff going on. I was in Tokyo, 
enjoying that, love being in Tokyo, one of my favourite cities, top three 
cities in the world.”

Lewis Hamilton believes ‘faith and hope’ can fire him to F1 world title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/lewis-hamilton-faith-hope-f1-world-title>
When asked if he had a message for his supporters, he said: “They can just go 
on my Instagram, I put all my feelings on there so they have the right to their 
own opinion but as you’ve seen from my posts, you’ve seen how passionate I am 
about this team.”

Mercedes, meanwhile, have identified the cause of Hamilton’s engine failure, 
on Sunday, which so damaged his chances of a fourth world title. “Our analysis 
has shown that Lewis’s engine suffered a big-end bearing failure,” they said. 
“This happened without warning after 618 kilometres [384 miles] and was 
preceded by a loss of pressure in turn 15. We will introduce revised engine 
parameters for all Mercedes engines this weekend.”
 