
Even before Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> 
hitched a lift to Japan on Niki Lauda’s private plane early on Monday morning, 
his bitter frustrations over events in Malaysia had eased.

Hamilton had shown swaggering dominance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/lewis-hamilton-malaysian-gp-f1-pole-nico-rosberg>
 over all his rivals – his Mercedes team-mate Nico Rosberg included – over the 
race weekend in Kuala Lumpur,only to see his engine blow up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/daniel-ricciardo-wins-malaysian-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1>
 15 laps from what would have been a thoroughly deserved race win.

He had appeared to be accusing Mercedes of sabotage when he said after the 
race “something or someone doesn’t want me to win this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/lewis-hamilton-f1-mercedes-engines-malaysian-grand-prix>
”.

Lewis Hamilton blames ‘higher power’ not Mercedes for F1 engine failures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/lewis-hamilton-f1-mercedes-engines-malaysian-grand-prix>
His anger was understandable. Victory would have seen him re-establish a lead 
over Rosberg in the world championship; instead Rosberg came third and moved 23 
points ahead, edging closer to his first title.

But later on Sunday evening, and after a few deep breaths, Hamilton sounded a 
little more pragmatic. Could he pick himself up for next Sunday’s Japanese 
Grand Prix?

“You forget I am world champion so I should be all right,” he smiled. “I will 
find strength from within to come to these next races. If I perform like I did 
this weekend then, providing the car holds together, good things can come. I 
have been through a lot of these experiences and I am pretty strong already. We 
will learn. The guys will take the engine back and understand why.”

The situation reminds him of the start of the season, when Rosberg won the 
first four races 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/01/nico-rosberg-wins-f1-russian-gp-lewis-hamilton-second>
 on his way to building up a 43-point lead, which Hamiltonwiped out with six 
wins in seven races 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/24/lewis-hamilton-wins-hungarian-grand-prix-nico-rosberg>
.

“We had the problems in the first part of the season and we had the feeling 
that it was slipping through our fingers and there was nothing we could do 
about it. Then we had a splurge of good results,” he said. “And then a bunch of 
difficult results and this similar kind of feeling that I hadback in Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-crash-out-f1-spanish-gp>
. I have no idea what is going to happen in these next five races. All I can do 
is what I have done this weekend. Come correct, be as focussed as I can 
possibly be, put in the performances that I have this weekend and pray that the 
car still holds together. I still have faith and hope and that is a powerful 
thing.”

He added: “All I can do is focus on tomorrow and focus on my preparation and 
still take it one race at a time. There is still no substitution for hard work. 
It is not my lowest point – I have had lower points for sure – but I did feel 
helpless.”

Sport picture of the day: Lewis Hamilton's Malaysian Grand Prix goes up in 
flames
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/oct/02/sport-picture-of-the-day-lewis-hamiltons-f1-championship-fight-goes-up-in-flames>
After Sunday’s race social media was soon full of lurid suggestions that 
Mercedes were “fixing things”. That, of course, is preposterous. What about
Rosberg’s gearbox problems at Silverstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/11/f1-british-grand-prix-silverstone-lewis-hamilton>
 in July and his difficulties in 2014?

Rosberg himself said: “I understand very well how Lewis feels now because I’ve 
been there in my career – I had two major failures when we were fighting for 
the championship at the end of 2014. It feels horrible and I’m sure he is 
extremely gutted, especially when you deserve to win a race.”

Mercedes have confirmed that Hamilton and Rosberg are now equal in terms of 
the availability of engines. The executive director, Paddy Lowe, told 
Motorsport.com on Monday: “Lewis is back to level terms with Nico, in effect. 
It’s put him back to a five-engine programme rather than six-engine programme 
for the year.”

Meanwhile, Mercedes have been accused of being “irresponsible” and “bullying” 
by Red Bull’s team principal, Christian Horner, for pushing for a pre-season 
test in Bahrain next year. Horner is against taking the planned test away from 
Barcelona, saying it would hit the smaller teams.

He said: “My personal preference is that we should stick in Europe,” he said. 
“We have got probably 65-75% of the grid that are struggling for budgets, 
struggling for finance. So to be more than an hour and a half away from the 
factory, at the point you are developing your car, and a new concept car as 
well, at a time of year when in Spain in late February, early March the 
temperature is warming up, seems irresponsible financially.

“Unless there is a huge subsidy which I don’t believe there is – unless 
Mercedes are going to pay for everybody’s freight to go to Bahrain – I think it 
is a bit irresponsible, to be honest with you, to be dictating and bullying 
teams into making that test. We are a team that can afford to go to Bahrain but 
I believe it is better that we should test in Barcelona.”
 