
Lewis Hamilton’s 50th Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> victory was also one of his most 
imperious as he beat his arch-rival Nico Rosberg into second place in Sunday’s 
US Grand Prix.

The fact it was also his first win for three months, since the German Grand 
Prix at the end of July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/31/lewis-hamilton-wins-german-grand-prix-f1-championship-lead-nico-rosberg>
, lent an extra zest to the podium champagne. The result cut Rosberg’s lead in 
the drivers’ world championship from 33 to 26 points with three races now 
remaining. It was Hamilton’s fourth victory in the five races that have been 
held here and his fifth in the US following his success in Indianapolis in 
2007. Overall only Michael Schumacher (91) and Alain Prost (51) have won more 
races.

It was here, of course, that Hamilton clinched his third world title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-world-title-third-time-us-grand-prix>
 a year ago, a race followed by cap-throwing scenes between the two Mercedes 
drivers. Since then, though, Rosberg had won 12 of the following 20 races, 
before this one, and he remains favourite to win his first world championship.

He only has to finish at least second in Mexico, Brazil and Abu Dhabi to take 
the title. That is why he did not look too disconsolate in defeat here. But he 
knows he is up against a team-mate who appears restored to his finest form 
following his bad eight daysin Malaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/daniel-ricciardo-wins-malaysian-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1>
 and Japan in which he suffered an engine failure, made a dreadful start and 
also fell out with the media after somestrange behaviour in a couple of press 
conferences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/lewis-hamilton-f1-under-fire-snapchat-bunny-app>
.

It was hardly a race worthy of the glitzy billing it received but no one 
seemed to mind much. After successive years of declining crowds since the first 
race here in 2012 the figures at the Circuit of the Americas have been up this 
weekend, boosted by the 100,000 turnout for the Taylor Swift concert on 
Saturday evening.

In brilliant sunshine the atmosphere and the entire afternoon contrasted 
happily with last year’s monsoon conditions. The future of the Austin race – 
the 10th venue for Formula One in the US – has often been cause for speculation 
but on this showing it looks assured and there was a beaming smile on the face 
of Chase Carey, representing the new owners, Liberty Media.

It was not a great afternoon for everybody, however. Nico Hülkenberg was soon 
out of the race after being hit from behind by Valtteri Bottas. And later there 
were high-profile retirements in Max Verstappen (gearbox) and Kimi Raikkonen, 
who was told to pull over following a mishap in the pits.

There were no such dramas at the head of the field. Hamilton completed his 
most difficult work of the afternoon within the opening seconds of the race; he 
got off to a fine start. Five times this season – in Australia, Bahrain, 
Canada, Italy and Japan – Hamilton has made poor starts and that has cost him 
more dearly than his various engine failures.

But here he climbed up the steep hill towards the first corner keeping Rosberg 
behind him. Rosberg did have a run on his team-mate, on the outside, and at one 
point made a small gain on him.

But his ambitions backfired when he found himself running wide into the 
opening bend, allowing Daniel Ricciardo, on faster, super-soft tyres, to pass 
him on the inside.

By the end of the opening lap Hamilton’s lead was already 0.8sec as he 
maintained his fine form of the previous, pole-winning day. After that he began 
to stretch away, while Rosberg struggled to get past Ricciardo.

The Australian managed to get eight laps out of his extra-soft rubber before 
coming for a set of softs.

He returned to the field in eighth place and finished third, missing out on 
the chance to beat Rosberg because of the deployment of the virtual safety car 
when Verstappen broke down.

Despite Hamilton’s serene progress up front there were signs of confusion on 
the Mercedes pitwall. They told Rosberg: “We are going for the long game, push 
hard now Nico” to which the championship leader replied: “Pushing hard is not 
the long game.” Precisely.

Mercedes were also going to bring Hamilton in for an early pit stop but 
changed their minds and brought Rosberg in instead, closely followed by 
Hamilton.

Nothing, however, could disrupt the composure of the world champion who 
produced one of his most commanding performances of the year at a time when 
knew he had to.

This was another showing of the summer form Hamilton displayed when he won six 
races out of seven. He made a second pit stop but at the end of the race his 
winning margin was 4.5sec.

It was a result that maintains interest in the destination of the world 
championship with three races to go, but to make it really compelling needs a 
non-finish by Rosberg.

F1: US Grand Prix – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/23/f1-us-grand-prix-live>  