
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> supporters 
concerned that his only serious rival, Nico Rosberg, has topped the podium on 
the past four occasions will not have their worries assuaged by the news that 
their concerns are shared by the three-times world champion himself.

When asked after his defeat by Rosberg at the Australian Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/nico-rosberg-edges-out-teammate-lewis-hamilton-to-take-melbourne-grand-prix>
 whether this season would be tougher than the previous two, both of which he 
ended with the world title, Hamilton replied: “I feel as though there will be a 
battle. There will be races where we are seconds ahead and finish up the road 
and then there will be races where we go wheel to wheel.”

Jenson Button: F1’s halo device would have helped Fernando Alonso
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/21/f1-halo-fernando-alonso-jenson-button>
Hamilton is used to addressing the challenge from his Mercedes team-mate, but 
it is the threat from a rejuvenatedFerrari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> team that could represent the 
biggest danger. He never really recovered from a poor start in Melbourne on 
Sunday, when he slipped back from pole position to sixth place, although his 
fightback to claim second behind Rosberg left him in an upbeat mood.

“The Ferraris were very strong,” he said. “They got a good start, so we have 
to find out how we can do better. The second part, where you release the clutch 
fully, I just had a bit of wheelspin and never recovered from it.”

In truth, Ferrari blew their chance at Albert Park, where they adopted a more 
aggressive policy after the race was red-flagged followingFernando Alonso’s 
crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/fernando-alonso-walks-away-unscathed-after-massive-formula-one-crash>
. They chose to fit an extra pair of supersofts, meaning they would have to 
stop again and give up leading the race – and leading in Melbourne is 
particularly important because it is difficult to pass.

The good news for neutrals is that Ferrari have shown enough form to make 
things spicy this season. Christian Horner, the Red Bull team principal, said: 
“Ferrari ran a lot closer to Mercedes. It was a good race for Formula One on 
Sunday. There were competitive fights going on throughout the field, some great 
racing. We put on a good show in front of a big crowd and hopefully a big 
audience. That wasFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> at 
its best and how it should be.”

Australian Grand Prix: five talking points from the opening race of the F1 
season | Paul Weaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/australian-grand-prix-five-talking-points-f1-season>
Maurizio Arrivabene, the Ferrari team principal, said on Monday: “On the wall 
we were confident [we could win] in all honesty. We were looking at the race 
and looking at the gap we were gaining and at that time our radio was to go 
with our strategy and keep going. I don’t want to make any excuses, but the 
last red flag was in 2009 if I’m not wrong. But it’s part of the race and you 
have to accept it and that’s it.

“At that stage of the race you have to be more aggressive. It could be right, 
it could be wrong, I think Sebastian was talking about that. If you want to 
look at the glass not half empty, we were better and this is the news. You 
can’t be happy after this, but this is racing.”

Jenson Button, who had another ultimately disappointing race with McLaren, 
finishing in 14th after an encouraging qualifying performance from the team, 
was also impressed by Ferrari. He said: “Ferrari are definitely closer, which 
is good. It’s great for the sport and we need that.”

While Hamilton and Button disappointed on Sunday there was a most heartening 
drive from the British driver Jolyon Palmer, who just missed out on the points 
in 11th place in his Renault.

Before making off to the Gold Coast for a holiday, he said about his Formula 
One debut: “It just went really smoothly of his Formula One debut. I was happy 
with it. The whole weekend. Went well. The race was pretty much perfect. To get 
to the finish with no dramas … the only thing is it would have been lovely to 
get a point out of the end of it.”
 