


Even before he had left Brazil Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> struck an early 
psychological blow against his rival and Mercedes team-mate Nico Rosberg.

After his third straight win on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-brazilian-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-rain>
 he has reduced Rosberg’s championship lead to 12 points. But that means 
Rosberg remains the clear favourite to take the title because he has only to 
finish in the top three in the final race of the season in Abu Dhabi on Sunday 
week.

Max Verstappen’s drive made Brazilian Grand Prix the greatest spectacle of 
2016 | Paul Weaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/14/max-verstappen-brazilian-grand-prix-felipe-massa>
But Hamilton has made it clear that he feels he is the better man. “I am happy 
that I beat everyone,” he said. “I am happy that in the same car I am beating 
Nico and he is driving at his best right now.”

Hamilton, who is now level with Rosberg on nine wins for the season, added: 
“Nico had nothing on me. He is doing all he has to do and that is finish every 
race. I am in an awkward position going into the last race.

“I have already lost so much earlier in the year. But I don’t give up because 
you don’t know what can happen. This was my 31st win with the team, which is 
crazy and I’m grateful these guys have given me a great opportunity.”

Hamilton’s first victory in Brazil was the 52nd of his career, taking him 
ahead of Alain Prost, with only Michael Schumacher ahead of him. He produced a 
masterclass of a drive in Brazil, showing that he is a level above Rosberg in 
wet conditions.

But what will haunt him as he prepares for the last round is the thought that 
the matter is out of his hands. He will be thinking about his indifferent 
drives in Baku, Singapore and Japan. Those poor performances – and his 
mechanical failures, where he has been much unluckier than Rosberg – are the 
reason he is on the brink of losing his crown.

Because of his dedication and diligent consistency Rosberg would make a worthy 
champion. But Hamilton would be most people’s favourite to come back even 
stronger next year.

Ross Brawn: if we don’t make F1 exciting, we haven’t got much of a sport
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/14/ross-brawn-formula-one-liberty-media-hamilton-schumacher>
Meanwhile, while many in Brazil are still celebrating a chaotic and very wet 
race on Sunday, Hamilton feels that it could have been better.

“I think the officials do a good job and safety is first because people were 
going off, but it is supposed to be extremeFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>,” he said. “And potentially we 
stopped too many times and there were way too many laps behind the safety car. 
I won, and that is the ultimate goal, but I just think we could have had a 
better race for the fans who stood out in the rain for so long.” Maybe Hamilton 
was so far ahead of everyone else that he missed all the action that was going 
on behind him.

The title conundrum

If Hamilton wins at the Yas Marina Circuit, Rosberg must finish third or 
better to seal his maiden championship.

If Hamilton crosses the line in second place, Rosberg needs to be sixth or 
better. If the German finishes seventh the two drivers would be tied on points, 
but Hamilton would clinch the title by virtue of having scored more third 
places. They have both won on nine occasions this season, and would have also 
scored the same number of second places (four).

If Hamilton finishes third, then eighth place or better for Rosberg will be 
enough to win the title.

If Hamilton is fourth in Abu Dhabi, Rosberg will require just one point (10th) 
to be crowned champion. If Rosberg fails to score they would be tied on points, 
but on this scenario he would win the title having finished second four times 
compared to Hamilton’s three.

Should Hamilton cross the line only in fifth, Rosberg will win the title 
regardless of where he finishes.
 