
Britain’s army of motor racing fans are noted for their fair-mindedness. Back 
in 2009 they swallowed their disappointment at seeingLewis Hamilton and Jenson 
Button beaten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jun/21/british-grand-prix-f1-sebastian-vettel-silverstone>
on home ground by the 21-year-old Sebastian Vettel and gave the German a 
standing ovation. “When I looked left and right in the last two laps the people 
were already standing up and cheering and clapping,” Vettel said after becoming 
the youngest driver ever to win the British Grand Prix. “Every single person in 
the grandstands I have to thank. This is what I was dreaming of when I saw the 
grands prix here in the era of Mansell and so on. I regret a little bit that I 
am not an Englishman as the fans are fantastic.”

Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg given ‘final warning’ by Mercedes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/07/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-not-subject-team-orders-mercedes>
That day Vettel was still a season and a half away from becoming the second 
German to win the world championship. The man who is desperate to be the third 
knows that, depending on events, he could receive a very different reception at 
Silverstone on Sundaytomorrow.

Nico Rosberg’s fans booed Lewis Hamilton in Austria last Sunday, a poorly 
judged response to alast-lap incident that handed the Englishman a win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/03/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-f1-austrian-grand-prix>
 and pushed the German down to fourth place, cutting his lead in the title 
standings. After colliding with each other inthe heat of battle at Spa in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-mercedes-niki-lauda>
 and twice already this season, and coming perilously close on several other 
occasions, the two Mercedes drivers have beengiven a stern warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/03/toto-wolff-mercedes-team-orders-lewis-hamilton>
 by their team management. But they have been warned before, to little effect.

If Rosberg wants to know about the sound of booing at the British Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-grand-prix>, he only has to ask his 
team’s non-executive chairman. Forty years ago this month, during an afternoon 
of high drama, Niki Lauda was a witness to an outbreak of audible dissent from 
grandstands almost wholly occupied by devotees of his rival, James Hunt. Mass 
jeering, slow handclapping and the hurling of beer cans brought Formula One the 
closest it has ever come to a football riot.

Lauda, then the reigning world champion, was engaged in a fierce battle for 
the title with Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/sep/06/rush-james-hunt-niki-lauda>
, the louche golden boy of British motor racing. The season was eight races old 
and the Austrian, with four wins to the Englishman’s two, held a commanding 
lead as the grand prix circus arrived to begin the second half of the campaign 
at Brands Hatch, where the British round was held that season.

Bad feeling between their respective sets of supporters had been inflamed six 
weeks earlier when Ferrari, Lauda’s team, protested against Hunt’s win in Spain 
on the grounds that his McLaren was 18mm wider than the regulations allowed. So 
it was, but after an initial disqualification the governing body restored his 
win. That somewhat mystifying decision kept the championship alive.

When the flag fell at Brands Hatch that day Lauda made a decent start from 
pole position as Hunt’s car, alongside him on the grid, lagged slightly. But 
Clay Regazzoni, in the second Ferrari, made a rocket-like getaway which allowed 
him to overtake the McLaren and cut across its bows in order to attack Lauda on 
the inside as the cars turned into the first corner, the fast, tricky, 
off-camber Paddock Bend. Seldom noted for his prudence, Regazzoni bounced off 
his team-mate and spun him round into Hunt’s path. The McLaren hit the Ferrari 
and reared into the air before crashing back to earth on its wheels.

As Lauda continued around the first lap and the rest of the field threaded its 
way between the stricken cars, the race was halted and the chaos began. The 
stewards ruled that only those cars which had completed the first lap would be 
able to take the restart, and that the drivers could not switch to their spare 
cars.

The race was due to start again in 20 minutes – insufficient time for the 
McLaren mechanics to replace Hunt’s damaged front suspension. It was decided, 
too, that because he had driven his crippled car back to the pits through a 
side gate, he had not completed the first lap and would anyway be ineligible to 
restart. When the fans heard the news, the booing began.

The minutes went by and as beer cans started landing on the track, it looked 
as though worse might follow.

After 40 minutes, during which Hunt’s car had been repaired, the decision to 
allow the victims of the incident to compete was announced and the crowd 
celebrated. They had more to cheer when, having tailed Lauda for 45 of the 76 
laps, the Englishman overtook his rival and eased away to the chequered flag.

Rush's soap washes away subtleties of James Hunt and Niki Lauda | Richard 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/sep/06/rush-james-hunt-niki-lauda> 
Amid scenes of general euphoria in the pit lane, Hunt had been out of the 
cockpit only a few seconds when a TV reporter asked what the win meant to him. 
“Nine points, 20,000 dollars and a lot of happiness,” he said. “Can I grab that 
cigarette off you?”

Ferrari, however, immediately lodged a protest against the decision to allow 
Hunt to start. Several months later, after Lauda had returned to action 
following hisnear-fatal crash at the Nürburgring 
<https://duckduckgo.com/?q=Nurburgring+lauda+crash+guardioan&ia=videos&iai=PYgjRTWhWi8>
, the governing body announced the decision to remove those nine points, once 
again putting the title race back into a balance that was settled in Hunt’s 
favour only on the final day of the season.

Nobody will be smoking a cigarette on the podium at Silverstone on Sunday, 
when Hamilton will be hoping to record his fourth win in his home race, and his 
third in a row. He goes into the weekend having established a moral advantage 
once the stewards in Austria correctly determined that Rosberg was to blame for 
their most recent altercation.

At a time when the sport’s reputation is at an all-time low, such personalised 
rivalry can only be good news at the box office. Silverstone will be packed 
this weekend, as usual, to witness the progress of this increasingly bitter 
internecine battle. But the television audience will also be boosted by those 
wanting to see what happens when the two drivers next find themselves disputing 
the lead as they point their Silver Arrows into a high-speed corner, and how 
the British spectators, who played a part in the equally intense battle between 
Hunt and Lauda 40 years ago, respond to the attempt by the fans in Austria to 
humiliate a man who, with three wins in the last four races, now has momentum 
firmly on his side.
 