
The Formula One paddock, normally quarantined off from the rest of the world, 
responded here on Thursday tothe election of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
, with Lewis Hamilton urging the future president of the US to prove the world 
wrong.

Sergio Pérez ditches sponsor Hawkers after tweet on Trump’s Mexico wall plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/10/sergio-perez-hawkers-mexicans-trump-f1>
“It was a surprise,” said the world champion, who added: “I watched the live 
feed from the plane. To be honest, I don’t think either candidate was 
particularly mega but maybe he will prove us all wrong. I hope he does. I hope 
he proves the world wrong and we get to see a different side to him.”

However, Sergio Pérez appears less happy with the outcome of the vote in the 
US – the Force India driver has dropped one of his sponsors because they 
published a tweet making fun of Mexicans following Trump’s election victory. 
The sunglasses company Hawkers referenced one of Trump’s campaign pledges in a 
tweet, stating: “Mexicans, put on these glasses so they can’t see your crying 
eyes tomorrow when building the wall.”

The tweet was quickly taken down and Hawkers insisted it was meant as a joke – 
but Pérez certainly was not laughing when he said: “When I read the comment I 
didn’t find it funny at all. I have decided to split with the brand because I 
am not in favour at all of the comment.

“They are very sorry and I am very sorry, too. I know the owners and they have 
done incredibly well and the relationship was going to be very successful. But 
my country and people come first and I want to support them and won’t let 
anyone make fun of my country.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ff1-brazilian-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-interlagos-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%20Brazilian%20GP%20guide%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20Interlagos%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ff1-brazilian-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-interlagos-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%20Brazilian%20GP%20guide%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20Interlagos%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ff1-brazilian-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-interlagos-video&media=>
F1 Brazilian GP guide: everything you need to know about Interlagos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/nov/11/f1-brazilian-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-interlagos-video>
Eventually, the drivers got round to talking about Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>. Sunday’s Brazilian Grand Prix 
is the penultimate race of the season and Nico Rosberg has a 19-point lead over 
his Mercedes team-mate Hamilton. Victory for Rosberg this weekend would secure 
his first title and he has won here on the past two occasions; Hamilton has yet 
to win at Interlagos.

Rosberg said: “I love the track. It’s a great track, it feels good and I’ve 
always gone well here, so I’m looking forward to the weekend. I’ve got great 
memories from those two wins. They were very special but at the same time, this 
year we all start from zero. Those past wins are not going to help me win here. 
It’s awesome to be fighting for the world championship with two races to go, so 
I am excited about the weekend and I am going to try and go for the win.”

Rosberg needs only a second and a third place from the final two rounds to 
win, assuming the British driver wins both races. That makes the German the 
clear favourite but the prospect of rain over the weekend could complicate his 
plans.

Hamilton said: “I don’t really know why I’ve not won here, so I don’t really 
have an answer for you. I try every year and I’ll try harder this year.”

Lewis Hamilton vows to keep fighting after winning Mexican Grand Prix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/31/lewis-hamilton-vows-to-keep-fighting-after-winning-mexican-grand-prix-formula-one-title-nico-rosberg>
Meanwhile, Jolyon Palmer looked a relieved figure in the paddock on Thursday 
after securing a second season with Renault. The British driver, who appeared 
to be on borrowed time until his form turned round recently, said: “There were 
times when it was not looking good. Monaco was not a good weekend, crashing out 
right at the start, but it was race six of a 21-race season.

“Since then I have turned a page and if you look at my season that was clearly 
a moment where I put it behind me. The rest of the season has been much 
stronger.”

Palmer, 25, will team up with the new signing Nico Hülkenberg, with Kevin 
Magnussen set to join Haas. Palmer was told he would be given a new deal while 
on holiday in Florida following the recent Mexican Grand Prix. He added: “The 
deciding factor has been my rate of progress, recent form, and working hard 
with the team and putting in a lot of hours at the factory.”
 