
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> has conceded 
that beating Nico Rosberg to claim a fourth world title will be difficult given 
the 26-point deficit between the two Mercedes drivers with three races to go, 
but he insisted before tomorrowSunday’s Mexican Grand Prix that he is enjoying 
rising to the challenge.

The pair go into the race with Hamilton knowing it is another must-win 
scenario if he is to keep his title hopes alive, but the British driver has 
welcomed the task.

“I don’t feel like I arrive at a grand prix, or any competition racing or not, 
and want it ever to be easy,” he said. “I love doing things that are difficult. 
If I go rock climbing I don’t go for the easiest wall to climb, I go to the 
hardest first. Sometimes I make it, sometimes don’t. I love the challenge.”

Mexican Grand Prix fans and passion lay foundations for long F1 future | Giles 
Richards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/mexican-grand-prix-fans-passion-foundation-f1-future>
Hamilton, 31, had the lead in the drivers’ standings six races ago but a 
series of wins for Rosberg and two poor starts and a mechanical failure for the 
Englishman has switched the advantage to his team-mate, a turnaround Hamilton 
regrets.

“Would I like to be in a different position right now? Of course,” he said. 
“But that is now where I am. All I know is that I have this challenge ahead of 
me and I am ready to go. I am ready to fight.”

He did what was necessary with a dominant win at the last round in Austin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-us-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-report>
 and confirmed at the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez that in some ways the 
situation had taken some pressure off. “I approach this race same as I approach 
every one, maybe slightly more relaxed than others. I’ve accepted that there 
are things out of my control, all I can do is control what’s in the car and 
what I do. So I’m putting all my energy towards that.”

Hamilton also noted he would not be taking any additional risks to keep the 
fight alive but still remains fully committed. “I’m going for it, that’s for 
sure. While my heart is still beating, I still have that drive to win, and 
there’s still an opportunity, even if it’s only 1%, I’m going to be going for 
it.

“If there’s any time for me to be the best I’ve ever been, it’s these last 
three races.”
 