
After the ecstatic Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> took the chequered flag on 
Sunday he performed donut spins for the cheering crowd while Daft Punk’s “One 
More Time” blared out from the Mercedes garage. As he crossed the line and had 
it confirmed that he had equalled his idol Ayrton Senna with his third F1 world 
title, the 30-year-old said over the car radio: “This is the greatest moment of 
my life.”

A little later tears mixed with sprayed champagne. Beside Hamilton and his 
beaten team-mate Nico Rosberg and Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel on the podium 
there was Sir Elton John. It is not often that he looks upstaged.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-wins-f1-world-title-third-time-us-grand-prix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae80f0ea6708768208814873be729fe9f6fc411b%2F0_119_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lewis%20Hamilton%20wins%20third%20F1%20world%20title%20with%20victory%20at%20US%20Grand%20Prix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-wins-f1-world-title-third-time-us-grand-prix%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lewis%20Hamilton%20wins%20third%20F1%20world%20title%20with%20victory%20at%20US%20Grand%20Prix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Flewis-hamilton-wins-f1-world-title-third-time-us-grand-prix%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae80f0ea6708768208814873be729fe9f6fc411b%2F0_119_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Lewis Hamilton interviewed by Elton John after winning the F1 world title. 
Photograph: Leanne Boon/ActionPlus/Corbis 
Lewis Hamilton ‘overwhelmed’ after winning third F1 world championship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/lewis-hamilton-overwhelmed-third-f1-world-championship>
This was a chaotic, compelling race. There were two safety cars, two virtual 
safety cars, crashes and enough all-round action to fill half-a-dozen grand 
prix weekends. How the Americans loved the show.

Hamilton needed to beat his closest challenger, Vettel, by nine points and 
Mercedes team-mate Rosberg by two, and he did just that – finishing the race 76 
points clear of his nearest rival, with 75 points still available. Rosberg was 
second and Vettel, who needed to be runner-up if Hamilton won to push the 
championship into next weekend’s race in Mexico, was third.

Even as he approached the winning line Hamilton could not be certain he had 
won the championship because Vettel continued to put Rosberg under intense 
pressure until the end. It was Hamilton’s third win in the four races in Austin 
as he secured the title with three races to spare.

When he had taken the chequered flag and was congratulated by his team the 
emotion of the moment finally got to him. “I’m feeling it now, guys, I’m 
feeling it,” he said. He jumped into a crowd of Mercedes mechanics. Then he was 
congratulated by the vanquished Rosberg and Vettel. But Rosberg looked less 
than amused when Hamilton threw a cap into the German’s lap. Rosberg flung it 
back, without the flicker of a smile.

The race appeared to belong to Rosberg with 15 laps to go. Hamilton was 
leading, but on old tyres, and Rosberg was closing on him with fresher rubber.

But then Red Bull’s Daniil Kvyat spun off. The safety car came out and 
Hamilton took his chance to make a second stop. He still had to catch Rosberg 
and that looked unlikely until the 48th of the 56 laps when the German made a 
mistake and came off the track, allowing Hamilton through.

The rain which had blighted much of the weekend in Texas finally relented. But 
its legacy was a damp and occasionally wet track which made this the busiest, 
most unpredictable of races. The rain had forced the cancellation of qualifying 
on Saturday and curtailed it on Sunday morning, with grid positions decided by 
Q2. All the cars started on intermediate tyres.

Lewis Hamilton’s 15-race drive to a third world title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/lewis-hamilton-formula-one-world-championship>
The only predictable thing was the start. Hamilton, who was second on the 
grid, went straight on the attack and was level with the pole-sitter Rosberg 
almost immediately. Then, as they went into turn one, Hamilton, on the inside, 
squeezed his team-mate wide. Rosberg would not yield and the two touched wheels 
but it was Hamilton’s racing line and the German was forced out, dropping to 
fourth behind Kvyat and Daniel Ricciardo.

It was yet another example of Rosberg’s inability to beat Hamilton in 
wheel-to-wheel racing. He knew he could not afford to finish second to Hamilton 
in this race but he could not do anything about it.

Vettel, who had started back in 14th place because of a 10-place grid penalty, 
refused to let himself drift out of the championship picture and steadily 
worked his way through the field.

But it was the action at the front of the field that was dominating attention. 
Hamilton is normally a strong front-runner but he showed signs that he was 
struggling with his rubber and he was passed by the charging Red Bull of 
Ricciardo.

Worse was to follow, for he then came under pressure from Rosberg who 
eventually went past him on the 19th lap. The world champion came in for fresh 
rubber, the first of the drivers to move on to dry-weather tyres.

Rosberg, recovering well from his setback at the start, now put the squeeze on 
Ricciardo before taking the lead on lap 23. He followed that by putting in the 
fastest lap as he attempted to build himself a gap at the front. The freshly 
shod Hamilton moved past Ricciardo and into second place.

There was bad news for Williams, with Felipe Massa and Valtteri Bottas 
dropping out of the race, the team’s first double retirement since the 
Brazilian Grand Prix of 2012. There were only a dozen finishers in this 
high-casualty race.

At the halfway stage the safety car was deployed for the first time because 
Marcus Ericsson’s Sauber had stopped on the track. When the safety car came in, 
the immediate winner was Vettel, who went past Kvyat to take fourth place.

Then he went past Ricciardo on the outside to take third. The three surviving 
challenges for the world championship were giving the American crowd a race to 
remember. And another thrilling drive from Max Verstappen, who came fourth for 
Toro Rosso, provided more entertainment.

It all climaxed over the last 10 laps with the safety car finally off the 
track. A nervous Mercedes garage warned Hamilton to “keep it clean”.

But Hamilton was not required to do anything dangerous. With a few laps 
remaining Rosberg made his mistake and let Hamilton in. At that stage, with 
Hamilton in front, followed by Rosberg and Vettel – who had overtaken 
Verstappen for third – Hamilton was world champion.

There was no change at the sharp end after that. The leading three cars kept 
their places. Verstappen was fourth, Force India’s Sergio Pérez fifth and 
Jenson Button sixth for McLaren. It had been some race.

The Englishman’s 10th win of the season put him alongside Sir Jackie Stewart 
with three titles but he is the first British driver to successfully defend his 
championship.

Lewis Hamilton’s third F1 title a breeze in face of Hurricane Patricia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/lewis-hamilton-third-f1-world-title>
Race result

1 Lewis Hamilton GB Mercedes 45pts

1hr 50min 52.703sec

2 Nico Rosberg Ger Mercedes 18

+2.850sec

3 Sebastian Vettel Ger Ferrari 15

+3.381sec

4 Max Verstappen Neth Toro Rosso 12

+22.359sec

5 Sergio Pérez Mex Force India 10

+24.413sec

6 Jenson Button GB McLaren 8

+28.058sec

7 Carlos Sainz Sp Toro Rosso 6

+30.619sec

8 Pastor Maldonado Ven Lotus 4

+32.273sec

9 Felipe Nasr Br Sauber 2

+40.257sec

10 Daniel Ricciardo Aus Red Bull 1

 +53.371sec

11 Fernando Alonso Sp McLaren +54.816sec

12 Alexander Rossi US Marussia +75.277sec

Not classified

Daniil Kvyat Rus Red Bull DNF

Nico Hülkenberg Ger Force Indie DNF

Marcus Ericsson Swe Sauber DNF

Kimi Raikkonen Fin Ferrari DNF

Felipe Massa Br Williams DNF

Romain Grosjean Fr Lotus DNF

Valtteri Bottas Fin Williams DNF

Will Stevens GB Marussia DNF

Drivers’ standings

1 Hamilton 327pts 2 Vettel 251 3 Rosberg 247 4 Raikkonen 123 5 Bottas 111 6 
Massa 1097 Kvyat 76 8 Ricciardo 74 9 Pérez 64 10 Verstappen 45 11 Grosjean 44 12
 Hülkenberg 3813 Nasr 27 14 Maldonado 26 16 Button 16

Mnufacturers’ standings 1 Mercedes 574pts 2 Ferrari 374 3 Williams 220 4 Red 
Bull 1505 Force India 102 6 Lotus 70 7 Toro Rosso 63 8 Sauber 36 9 McLaren 27

How Lewis Hamilton now ranks among other multiple world championship winners

7

Michael Schumacher Ger

5

Juan Manuel Fangio Arg

4

Alain Prost Fr

Sebastian Vettel Ger

3

Jack Brabham Aus 

Jackie Stewart GB

Niki Lauda Aut

Nelson Piquet Br

Ayrton Senna Br

Lewis Hamilton GB

2

Alberto Ascari It

Graham Hill GB

Jim Clark GB

Emerson Fittipaldi Br

Mika Häkkinen Fin

Fernando Alonso S

F1 US Grand Prix – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/oct/25/f1-us-grand-prix-live>  