
Nico Rosberg joked he could help Lewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> learn to speak German now he 
has retired, while Hamilton said he hoped to remain a Formula One driver for 
the next decade as the duo addressed Mercedes fans at the constructor’s 
end-of-season event in Stuttgart.

Related: Nico Rosberg drew the best from himself before bowing out as a F1 
champion | Paul Weaver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/nico-rosberg-diligent-f1-champion>

Rosberg, the newly crowned F1 champion, who clinched his maiden world title in 
Abu Dhabi on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/nico-rosberg-seals-first-f1-world-title-at-abu-dhabi-grand-prix>
, stunned the sporting world on Friday by retiring with immediate effect. The 
31-year-old German initially told only a handful of people – including his 
great rival Hamilton – before announcing his decision before the FIA’s annual 
prize-giving ceremony in Vienna.

On Saturday, Hamilton apologised to the onlooking crowd for his lack of German 
and asked: “I’m going to try a little bit of German… how do I say ‘I’m so happy 
to be here?’.” Once his request was translated, he added: “I have been with the 
Mercedes family since the age of 13 and I hope by the time it comes to my 
retirement that I can speak German to you.”

Rosberg, who had earlier started a rendition of Queen’s We are the Champions 
to the delight of his cheering audience, told Hamilton: “If you’re looking for 
a German teacher, call me up, as I’m looking for a job.” Hamilton was quick to 
reply, saying: “Nico’s the worst German teacher; he tells me all the wrong 
words.”

Hamilton, 31, was then asked how long he expected to continue driving an F1 
car: “I plan to be here for another 10 years at least.”

Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel, the four-time champion, and McLaren’s double world 
champion, Fernando Alonso, have been mooted as candidates, but both drivers are 
under contract with their teams next season. Pascal Wehrlein, a protege of the 
Mercedes junior driver programme, and Valtteri Bottas, of Williams, are also in 
the frame.

“We have to consider all options, but it will be very hard to replace him,” 
the Mercedes motorsport chief, Toto Wolff, said. “We will start to look at this 
on Monday.” 
 