
Lewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> snared pole 
for Sunday’s Abu Dhabi Grand Prix but there was still a glint of destiny in the 
eyes of Nico Rosberg. Hamilton’s celebrations were more subdued than normal. 
Rosberg is the overwhelming championship favourite – the German needs to finish 
in the top three to secure his first title, as he has a lead of 12 points going 
into the last race of the year.

Rain is unusual in these desert parts so the X factor that spiced up the last 
race in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-brazilian-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-rain>
 two weeks ago is unlikely to play a part. Instead, Hamilton, three times a 
world champion, must hope that his German rival has some of the bad luck that 
has largely sabotaged his own season. That , however, seems unlikely, too.

There is the possibility that Hamilton will heed the mischievous advice of Red 
Bull’s principal, Christian Horner, andback Rosberg in the direction of the 
cars behind him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-red-bull>
. There are risks attached to such a rascally strategy, most obviously that 
Hamilton might be overtaken himself. Rosberg must still contrive to finish 
behind three cars if he is to be denied.

The problem for the Briton is that no car out there can beat the Mercedes in a 
straight fight. Hamilton, a beneficiary of the Silver Arrows’ excellence in 
recent years, looks likely to come off second best on this occasion even if, as 
expected, he wins the race.

Will Lewis Hamilton play the game and back Nico Rosberg into Red Bulls? | 
Johnny Herbert
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-red-bull>
Both drivers have won nine races this season, so Hamilton could find himself 
with the unhappy record of winning 10 times without lifting the championship; 
no driver has won so often without claiming the most important glory.

Rosberg has been described as a journeyman, but journeymen are rarely this 
classy. Or so single-minded. He knows he is not as fast as Hamilton and that is 
why he has applied himself so assiduously. He will make a worthy champion, 
certainly a more deserving one than his father, Keke, who won one race in the 
year of his coronation, 1982.

There was a curious mixture of euphoria and resignation from Hamilton after 
qualifying. “I wouldn’t have had the 61 poles I have now if it wasn’t for 
everyone at the factory, so thanks to them,” he said on claiming his first pole 
in four years at this circuit.

He is now four pole wins behind his idol, Ayrton Senna, and seven behind the 
record holder, Michael Schumacher “In the first sector, I knew I had pace so I 
didn’t overcook into turn one and on the rest of the lap I had it under 
control. So far this weekend I have been solely focused in getting to this 
position,” he said. “I’ll sit down and work with my engineers and strategist to 
fully understand the scenario and what I’ve got to do.”

He told Red Bull’s Daniel Ricciardo, who will be third on the grid, that he 
wanted the Australian to finish behind him.

Rosberg did not look as nervous as Hamilton might have hoped. “I have come 
here to try and be on pole and try and win the race,” he said. “I am not 
ecstatic by today. Lewis was just that bit quicker but there are still 
opportunities tomorrow and I’ll go for the win.

“Adrenaline is always there in qualifying for sure. I was feeling good out 
there and had a good balance. As qualifying went on I was feeling better and 
better and got a good lap, but in the end not quite good enough.”

Lewis Hamilton v Nico Rosberg: how friendship turned to fiercest of rivalries 
| Paul Weaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/25/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-friendship-rivalries>
Rosberg, when told that he had qualified in the top two 27 times in a row, 
replied rather unsurprisingly: “I didn’t know that. But that’s one of the 
reasons why I am sitting here at the moment. I’m fighting for the championship 
at the last race. I’m sure this has been one of the key ingredients. I’m proud 
of the season I’ve been able to do until now. It’s been a great year, my best.”

Ricciardo, who will be a key player along with his Red Bull team-mate, Max 
Verstappen, qualified third on softer rubber, and said: “We’ve got to try 
something different [tyre strategy]. It seems to be a bit of a trend this year. 
If we’re in a position to qualify on a different tyre we’ll try and see if it 
gives us an opportunity.”

Toto Wolff, Mercedes’ head of motorsport, said: “We’re in a very privileged 
position because whoever wins will be a Mercedes driver.”

He still managed to look worried, despite his privileged position, adding: 
“Tomorrow is going to be particularly difficult. We will give them support when 
they need it, not interfere too much, not over-manage, but let them fight it 
out on track.

F1’s age of chivalry, when drivers gave up cars for others, is a distant dream 
| Richard Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/25/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-formula-one>
“We’ll give them a car which has the pace which today we were able to achieve 
and a strategy that works for both. That’s another tricky area. The Red Bulls 
have an offset strategy and the Ferraris have pace.

“Nico has his wife and daughter here. Lewis has his mum and friends. There is 
a lot at stake.”

Wolff was asked about the possible backing-up strategy from Hamilton. “The 
drivers are great sportsmen and they know that overstepping the line would 
cause a lot of controversy,” he said. “I trust that it is going to go well, for 
the benefit of the team and the effort that has been given. Winning the race is 
our No1 priority.”

But the Austrian still looked worried.
 