
Leyton Orient <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient> have 
appointed Fabio Liverani as their fourth manager of the season after the club 
confirmed that his fellow Italian Mauro Milanese would be returning to his role 
of sporting director after just six weeks in the dugout.

Unlike Milanese, the 38-year-old Liverani does have senior managerial 
experience but lasted just seven matches in charge of Genoa at the start of the 
2013-14 season before he was sacked after delivering just one win.

Liverani, who earned three Italy caps as a central midfielder, brings with him 
new members of the backroom staff with Marcello Donatelli and Maurizio 
Cantarelli also joining the club as assistant manager and fitness coach 
respectively.

Liverani said: “I’m excited about this challenge and cannot wait to get 
started at Leyton Orient. This is a long-term project and we will work together 
to make it a success.”

He has signed a two-and-a-half year deal with Orient and replaces Milanese, 
who joined the club as sporting director over the summer but was appointed in 
place of thethen interim, Kevin Nugent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/16/kevin-nugent-leyton-orient-interim-manager>
 in late October.

Under Milanese, Orient picked up four points from five league matches to sit 
19th in the table, with 19 points from 19 matches, and were also knocked out of 
the FA Cup in the first round by Oldham, while his last match in charge was 
Saturday’s 1-0 away defeat to Gillingham in the Johnstone’s Paint Trophy.

Russell Slade, who became Orient’s manager in 2010, resigned from the role in 
late September to take up the vacant position at Cardiff City just over two 
months after Barry Hearn sold the club to the Italian businessman Francesco 
Becchetti. Nugent took over on a temporary basis before making way for Milanese 
and now Liverani.
 