
The League Two club, Leyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient>, have played down an 
incident involving the club president, Francesco Becchetti, and the assistant 
manager, Andy Hessenthaler, after the Boxing Day victory over Portsmouth.

Television cameras captured an exchange between Becchetti, who had taken a 
seat behind the dugout at the Matchroom Stadium, and Hessenthaler, after which 
the Italian made his way on to the pitch and appeared to aim a kick at Ian 
Hendon’s number two. However, Orient issued a statement on behalf of the two 
men on Sunday in a bid to clarify the situation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D36__kq8Mnf4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D36__kq8Mnf4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D36__kq8Mnf4&media=>
 Francesco Becchetti appears to kick the Leyton Orient assistant manager Andy 
Hessenthaler 
It read: “Mr Becchetti and Mr Hessenthaler would like to clarify the reports 
in the media following the Boxing Day game.

“The event reported in the media was very much in good humour for both the 
president and assistant manager and part of an ongoing and good natured 
exchange between the two over the past few weeks.

“There was absolutely nothing untoward about the exchange and the two men get 
along very well professionally on the pitch and personally off the pitch.

“Mr Becchetti and Mr Hessenthaler were extremely pleased with the result of 
the game and were celebrating a very well deserved and exciting win.”

Hessenthaler also dismissed the incident, telling Sky Sports News: “It’s a 
little bit of banter – a bit of stuff that’s been going on for the last few 
weeks between us and probably looked worse than it was.

“He’s a passionate guy and we all are. We’re all desperate to win. It was a 
little bit of fun and games at the end. He was getting involved and we’ve got 
to concentrate on what we were doing. He’s a passionate guy and he wants Leyton 
Orient to do well.”

Becchetti ordered his players to stay in a nearby hotel for a week last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/19/leyton-orient-players-forced-to-stay-in-hotel>
 in an attempt to end a run of poor form.

On the pitch, the home side came from behind to secure a 3-2 win after a 
stormy encounter, in which Orient’s Mathieu Baudry and Portsmouth’s Adam 
Webster were sent off.

Football League: your thoughts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2015/dec/26/football-league-your-thoughts-derby-fulham> 