
Leyton Orient have parted company with their manager, Fabio Liverani, 
following the club’s relegation to League Two. The Italian became the club’s 
fourth manager of a turbulent season when he was appointed last December on a 
two‑and-a-half-year contract. But he was unable to lift the team away from the 
danger zone andOrient’s relegation was confirmed on the final Sunday of the 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/03/league-one-mk-dons-promoted-preston-yeovil-colchester-notts-county-crawley-leyton-orient>
 after they had failed to win any of their last seven matches. Astatement on 
the east London club’s website 
<http://www.leytonorient.com/news/article/club-statement-2455174.aspx> read: 
“We announce today that Fabio Liverani will be leaving his role as manager of 
the club by mutual consent. His assistants, Maurizio Cantarelli and Marcello 
Donatelli, will also be leaving the Club.

It continued: “The Club will now focus on rebuilding for next season, in the 
hope that we can make a swift return toLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>.”

Leyton Orient squad ordered in for training after season ends in relegation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/12/leyton-orient-squad-training-relegation>
Orient’s decline has been dramatic since last season, when they reached the 
League One play-off final, losing only on penalties to Rotherham United. 
Despite substantial outlay on players following the summer takeover by the 
Italian energy magnate Francesco Becchetti, the team have struggled. Russell 
Slade, the long-serving manager, left for Cardiff City in September and, after 
short spells for first Kevin Nugent and then Mauro Milanese, Liverani arrived 
in December but was unable to prevent Orient returning to the fourth tier, 
where they will play for the first time since 2005-06.

Liverani, who played three times for the Italian national side as well as for 
Lazio, Fiorentina and Palermo, had only limited previous managerial experience, 
having been in charge of Genoa for seven matches in 2013. 
 