
Laura Lees <http://laura-lees.com/>’ career started with a schoolgirl error. 
“I didn’t read my college prospectus properly so I applied for constructed 
textiles thinking it would be sculpture or something – it was actually 
knitting, weaving and tapestry.” Luckily the course at Dundee’s Duncan of 
Jordanstone College of Art and Design worked out. “Turns out tapestry and 
embroidery are my thing. The needle is my pen and it lets me tell my stories.”

After college, she moved from her home town of Corstorphine to London in 1997 
and ended up working behind the bar at the Bricklayer’s Arms in Hoxton. Back 
then it was the local for fashion folk such asGiles Deacon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/giles-deacon> and Katie Grand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/25/katie-grand-london-fashion-week>
. After she embroidered a shirt for Deacon to show him what she could do, her 
notoriety spread among London’s young designers.

The skull and cross bones, dart boards, booze bottles and graffiti slogans 
that became her motifs were in demand. Her cheeky, colourful embroidery and 
patches ended up in collections by Luella, Sibling and Topshop. She made guitar 
straps for the Strokes and embellished a dress for Courtney Love. “It was 
covered in lipstick and God knows what. It took me a day to clean the sewing 
machine. She is a dirty bird.”

She launched her own Laura Lees womenswear in 2000. “Though I always felt like 
an imposter in fashion. A square peg in a round hole, and a scruffbag at the 
parties,” she admits.

The label folded in 2008, a casualty of the recession, but Lees didn’t mourn 
for long. “I had this leftover collection of clothes that felt like it was 
weighing me down. But then I moved into a new studio with an upholsterer, 
Rachel Swainston, and I realised that this was it. Furniture was the next step. 
I cut up the collection and we used it to cover Victorian chairs and chaises 
longues. These sad, old clothes became a new product that ran out the door. We 
sold every last piece.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fembroidery-queen-laura-lees-from-fashion-to-furniture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98ff58a79cdefa35d33c3cd9f9b4365a2ec7ea91%2F0_1498_3013_1808%2F3013.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%E2%80%99s%20rich%20tapestry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fembroidery-queen-laura-lees-from-fashion-to-furniture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%E2%80%99s%20rich%20tapestry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fembroidery-queen-laura-lees-from-fashion-to-furniture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98ff58a79cdefa35d33c3cd9f9b4365a2ec7ea91%2F0_1498_3013_1808%2F3013.jpg>
 ‘It’s art, but primarily it’s furniture’: designer Laura Lees at her studio in 
London. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Observer 
A collaboration with furniture designer Bethan Wood 
<http://www.woodlondon.co.uk/> brought Lees’ vivid, colourful embroidery to the 
Milan Salone in 2014. Since then she has worked with bespoke furniture creators
Uncommon Projects <http://www.uncommonprojects.co.uk/> as well as developing 
her own style of bright, modernist crazy-paving patchwork to cover vintage 
stools, daybeds and sofas. (“It has to be modernist. It has always been 
modernist. When I was a kid everyone had posters of Wham! on the wall but I had 
a picture ofCharles Rennie Mackintosh’s Hill House 
<http://www.nts.org.uk/Property/The-Hill-House/>.”)

Lees’ two latest projects have a surprisingly corporate bent. She has always 
run embroidery workshops at her north London studio, but she has now started 
running them as bonding exercises for office workers. “A team of people 
embroidering a wall hanging together have to learn problem solving and 
co-operation. And there’s a piece of art for the office at the end of it.”

The other is an art project based on City architecture. “When I first moved to 
London I used to cycle to the City after I’d been clubbing, lie on the ground 
and look up at the buildings as the sun rose. I revisited those old stamping 
grounds with my friendJoris Luyendijk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/joris-luyendijk>, after I’d read his book 
Swimming with Sharks. It made me look at the area in a new way. The banking 
system was smoke and mirrors, and that’s what the City’s architecture is, too: 
reflections and illusions.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fembroidery-queen-laura-lees-from-fashion-to-furniture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57749e553675c9bd9014e6f1b33c1777be007351%2F0_273_3678_4597%2F3678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%E2%80%99s%20rich%20tapestry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fembroidery-queen-laura-lees-from-fashion-to-furniture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%E2%80%99s%20rich%20tapestry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fembroidery-queen-laura-lees-from-fashion-to-furniture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57749e553675c9bd9014e6f1b33c1777be007351%2F0_273_3678_4597%2F3678.jpg>
 Buttoned up: Lees’ cheeky, colourful embroidery and patches ended up in 
collections by Luella, Sibling and Topshop. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the 
Observer 
She took photos of the area and is currently turning those abstract images of 
mirrored windows and skylines into embroidery patterns to cover daybeds. Soon 
you’ll be able to buy and sit on the City.

Lees has no problem with the functional use that awaits her fine art 
furniture. “Yes it’s art, but primarily it’s furniture. Anyway, I don’t see why 
you can’t put your arse on fine art. Especially when it’s very durable.”

One thing is clear, Lees doesn’t miss fashion at all. “These are things that I 
could never translate into clothes. I was too clunky with fashion. With 
furniture I can finally give shape to my ideas.”

For more information, visit laura-lees.com <http://laura-lees.com/>
 