
Three years ago, Roger Ross Williams 
<http://thetalkhouse.com/growing-illegitimate-gay-religious-community-made-filmmaker/>
 was looking around for the subject of his next documentary. He had become the 
first African American filmmaker to win a directing Oscar, awarded for his 
short filmMusic By Prudence <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sCXr8pg59GE>, 
which was about a severely disabled Zimbabwean woman, Prudence Mabhena, who 
overcame prejudice to become a singer-songwriter. In the feature-lengthGod 
Loves Uganda <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ims7_3wud7A> he charted the 
campaign in that country to make homosexuality punishable by death. Then an old 
friend, the Pulitzer prize-winning journalistRon Suskind 
<http://ronsuskind.com/>, told him about the book 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/life-animated.html> he and his wife Cordelia 
were writing about their son, Owen, who developed autism at the age of two. 
Owen had only begun to make contact again through dialogue from his beloved 
Walt Disney films. “He’s using these movies to make sense of the world he’s 
living in,” explained Ron, whose first proper conversation with his son since 
the diagnosis was conducted using a toy of Iago, the parrot fromAladdin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=>, and speaking to him in that character’s 
gravelly voice.

Owen was now in his early 20s. He had founded his school’s Disney club, where 
he encouraged other students with developmental difficulties to watch, analyse 
and discuss those animated movies. “When I heard about Disney club it clicked,” 
the 43-year-old director tells me over mint tea in a London hotel bar. “I was, 
like, ‘This is it. This is my next film.’ God Loves Uganda was such an 
emotionally draining experience, being embedded in a community which wanted me, 
as a gay man, to die. Now I was determined to do something upbeat.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fowen-disney-autistic-life-animated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F039fb416f8a370bee34f9795344a15c779e1acc9%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%2C%20Animated's%20Roger%20Ross%20Williams%3A%20'I%20was%20a%20loner%20%E2%80%93%20in%20my%20own%20Land%20of%20Lost%20Sidekicks'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fowen-disney-autistic-life-animated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%2C%20Animated%27s%20Roger%20Ross%20Williams%3A%20%27I%20was%20a%20loner%20%E2%80%93%20in%20my%20own%20Land%20of%20Lost%20Sidekicks%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fowen-disney-autistic-life-animated%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F039fb416f8a370bee34f9795344a15c779e1acc9%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 ‘He’s using these movies to make sence of the world he’s living in” ... Owen 
Suskind with his father Ron in Life, Animated 
The result, Life, Animated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/29/life-animated-review-how-disney-films-helped-a-boy-with-autism>
, is unequivocally that. It follows a year in Owen’s life as he navigates his 
way through graduation, his relationship with his girlfriend, Emily, and the 
challenge of living on his own for the first time. Woven into that footage are 
interviews with his family, home movies that show him playing Peter Pan games 
before the autism struck and, most radically, animated scenes that bring to 
life the stories he has written and illustrated. As Owen grew up, he became a 
prolific drawer but his subjects were always the Disney sidekicks, never the 
heroes. In The Land of the Lost Sidekicks, he wrote about a young outcast and 
his fellow stooges who struggle to become heroes again.

Williams’s attempt to secure extracts from Disney films was a triumph over 
adversity in itself. “That took a year,” he says. The clincher was a 
presentation for the studio’s department heads at which he screened scenes 
alongside the Suskinds’ home movies. “When the lights came up there were 
sniffles. Ron refers to it as The Day I Made the Lawyers Cry.” He must have got 
used to the sound of sobbing in the 11 months since Life, Animated had its 
premiere at Sundance, where he won the directing award. “For hours after each 
screening, people would come up to me and be in tears and want to hug.” He 
grins. “I’m a hugger anyway, so it’s fine.”

What they are responding to is not only the compassionate filmmaking or the 
uplifting story, but the directness of Owen himself, who is a warmly magnetic 
screen presence. He paces around muttering in Disney dialogue and delivers 
grandiose statements in a matter-of-fact monotone. Describing the time he was 
bullied at school, he says he “fell into darkness and walked the halls of 
fear”; a domestic setback moves him to ask sullenly: “Why is life full of 
unfair pain and tragedy?” Though Disney films provide him with instruction and 
inspiration, he also has to negotiate the inevitable shortfall between movies 
and reality. Like any of us.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fowen-disney-autistic-life-animated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1bbde77021d63361ed483dec1e0cc3bd155959c%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%2C%20Animated's%20Roger%20Ross%20Williams%3A%20'I%20was%20a%20loner%20%E2%80%93%20in%20my%20own%20Land%20of%20Lost%20Sidekicks'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fowen-disney-autistic-life-animated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%2C%20Animated%27s%20Roger%20Ross%20Williams%3A%20%27I%20was%20a%20loner%20%E2%80%93%20in%20my%20own%20Land%20of%20Lost%20Sidekicks%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fowen-disney-autistic-life-animated%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1bbde77021d63361ed483dec1e0cc3bd155959c%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
 ‘I knew Owen was gold the first time I saw him’ ... Roger Ross Williams. 
Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
“I knew Owen was gold the first time I saw him slow-dancing with Emily at 
their Valentine’s Day ball,” recalls Williams. “He was everything you could ask 
for in a character – he’s adorable, he’s good-looking, he has personality. And 
he’s the perfect documentary subject because he never looks into the camera.” 
That brings its own problems. “He can’t tell a lie. I’d say, ‘Owen, we didn’t 
get that shot, can you walk through the door again?’ And he’d be, like, ‘I just 
walked through the door. Why would I do it again?’ He can’t fake it.” At least 
Williams knows that Owen’s enthusiasm for the movie is genuine. “He came 
running out afterwards and hugged me, which is very uncharacteristic of him, 
and he said: ‘I love it!’”

Like Williams’s previous work, Life, Animated is a kind of disguised 
autobiography. “I’m in every film, even though I’m not actually in them. And 
I’m always working something out.” In Music By Prudence, it was his feelings of 
alienation: Prudence was regarded as the product of witchcraft, while Williams 
was doubly spurned by the homophobic religious community in his hometown of 
Easton, Pennsylvania. Not only was he gay, he was also the result of an affair 
between his mother and the local deacon. (Everyone knew except Williams, who 
didn’t discover the truth until his teens.) God Loves Uganda saw him 
confronting the rejection he found at home by throwing himself into the jaws of 
his would-be oppressors. “It was a way for me to cleanse and deal with that 
hatred and pain and try to understand why people would feel that way about 
someone like me. The preachers who were fighting for the death penalty were 
telling me, ‘You can’t be gay because we really like you!’ And I was saying to 
them, ‘You can’t be this crazy murderer because you’re so nice!’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fowen-disney-autistic-life-animated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F440bec9b3c22e35e3ba833842cea6391f369112f%2F0_188_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Life%2C%20Animated's%20Roger%20Ross%20Williams%3A%20'I%20was%20a%20loner%20%E2%80%93%20in%20my%20own%20Land%20of%20Lost%20Sidekicks'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fowen-disney-autistic-life-animated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Life%2C%20Animated%27s%20Roger%20Ross%20Williams%3A%20%27I%20was%20a%20loner%20%E2%80%93%20in%20my%20own%20Land%20of%20Lost%20Sidekicks%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fowen-disney-autistic-life-animated%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F440bec9b3c22e35e3ba833842cea6391f369112f%2F0_188_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
 Singer-songwriter Prudence Mabhena in Williams’s Oscar-winning Music by 
Prudence 
Life, Animated is no less pertinent to Williams and not only because he 
belongs to two groups (gay and African American) who have commonly been seen as 
sidekicks or adjuncts. If, that is, they have been seen at all. “What I’m 
working out here is the classic theme of someone who was undervalued and 
overlooked. Like Owen, I was a loner who created a fantasy world. I had my own 
Land of Lost Sidekicks, where I pretended I lived in Paris with my best friend, 
a little cowboy based on aMarky Maypo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=La1LLDVQ1e8> doll. When I heard Owen’s story, 
it was a natural fit for me.”

Despite his success, Williams still has sidekick moments, days when he feels 
people look straight past him. Oscar winners are usually besieged by calls from 
agents and executives but Williams’s phone was silent in the weeks after he 
scooped his prize. “It wasOscars So White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/25/oscarssowhite-right-and-wrong-academy-awards-audience>
,” he says bluntly. “The establishment wants to connect with people who are 
like them and I wasn’t. I’m a black gay man from a poor working-class family. 
Most of the people who look like me are in prison.” In fact, that’s the subject 
of his next film, in which he returns to Easton to find out why most of his 
peers have ended up behind bars – a kind of Life, Incarcerated. “I escaped my 
destiny. The odds were that I would end up in prison but I didn’t.”

Life, Animated has helped Owen to escape his destiny too. In the hotel lobby, 
I run into Ron, who tells me his son is having the time of his life. He is more 
confident these days and he’s in his element conducting the Q&A sessions after 
screenings of the film, where audiences have been going wild for him. “Roger 
calls it ‘the Owen effect,’” Ron laughs. “Turns out that having thousands of 
people cheering your name can do wonders for your self-esteem.”

• Life, Animated is released in the UK on 9 December 
 