
Palermo’s celebration of their 1,000th Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> match was spoiled by 
Torino, who beat their hosts 4-1, and the floodlights at the Renzo Barbera 
stadium, which failed late in the game.

With the visitors winning comfortably, the referee decided that the match 
could be played out in near darkness as fans used the flashlights from their 
mobile phones to provide extra illumination.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxgbM1JwWHfo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxgbM1JwWHfo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxgbM1JwWHfo&media=>
After the Bulgaria midfielder Ivaylo Chochev put Palermo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> ahead early, Torino responded 
with two goals from Adem Ljajic and one each from Marco Benassi and Daniele 
Baselli.

Torino lay foundations for stab at Europe thanks to Joe Hart and the Rooster | 
Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/26/serie-a-torino-roma-joe-hart-andrea-belotti>
Torino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> climbed into the top four 
after the win, level on points with Napoli but ahead on goal difference. 
Palermo, who have lost all four home matches this season, remain third from the 
bottom.

Joe Hart continued in goal for Torino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/joe-hart-manchester-city-torino-england-goalkeeper-ambition>
 but could do nothing to prevent Palermo taking the lead five minutes in, as 
Chochev headed home Alessandro Diamanti’s cross.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fpalermo-torino-floodlights-fail-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F511a94c1f642467d31c820260f2c5ae0bf361a27%2F196_72_782_469%2F782.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lights%20out%20for%20Palermo%20as%20home%20defeat%20to%20Torino%20is%20played%20out%20in%20near%20darkness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fpalermo-torino-floodlights-fail-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lights%20out%20for%20Palermo%20as%20home%20defeat%20to%20Torino%20is%20played%20out%20in%20near%20darkness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fpalermo-torino-floodlights-fail-serie-a%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F511a94c1f642467d31c820260f2c5ae0bf361a27%2F196_72_782_469%2F782.jpg>
 TV pictures show the players in action with only half of the stadium’s 
floodlights working. Photograph: BT Sport 
Ljajic marked his return from an injury lay-off by scoring from outside the 
area, then doubled his tally with an angled shot after a mazy run inside the 
area.

Benassi made it 3-1 shortly before the break by finishing off a counter-attack 
and Baselli was set up by Ljajic for a volley shortly after half-time. Chochev 
hit the crossbar midway through the second half before darkness descended, as 
the game and Palermo’s party ended in farcical fashion.
 