
Five games into the new season Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> is already beginning to 
feel as though it has been split into two separate divisions. At the top is a 
two-team league contested by Roma and Juventus, each of whom maintained their 
perfect starts on Saturday. Below them is an 18-team second tier, the winner of 
which will be rewarded with a place in the Champions League’s play-off round.

Internazionale have been among the favourites to conquer this division within 
a division. They began this weekend with eight points from four games, as well 
as the best goal difference in Serie A. But then they lost 4-1 to last-placed 
Cagliari. Gazzetta dello Sport accused theNerazzurri of “Oscar-worthy 
arrogance”.

But if theirs was a performance worthy of a Razzie, then it helped to build 
the anticipation for Sunday night’s main feature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2014/sep/28/genoa-v-sampdoria-serie-a-live>
. TheDerby della Lanterna already had something of a Hollywood feel, with 
Sampdoria wearing a Sin City logo on their shirts thanks to a marketing deal 
struck by their film-producing owner. And now it had an extra layer of plot 
intrigue, as theBlucerchiati sought to move above Inter and up to third in the 
table.

Unbeaten going into the weekend, Samp had already been one of this season’s 
pleasant surprises. Despite shortcomings up front, they have out-muscled and 
out-hustled their opposition on the way to wins over Torino and Chievo, as well 
as draws away to Sassuolo and Palermo. Sinisa Mihajlovic transformed their 
outlook when he took charge last November – they were 18th when he arrived – 
and they are now playing more and more in his image.

Their neighbours, Genoa, however, have also started this season in encouraging 
form. Their one defeat was scarcely deserved, a 2-1 loss to Napoli that arrived 
courtesy of a 95th-minute Jonathan De Guzman goal.Genoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa> have beaten Lazio since then, and 
taken impressive points from tough away games against Fiorentina and Verona.

It all added up to an electric atmosphere at the Marassi on Saturday. In a 
stadium that is routinely described by Italian newspapers as the “most British” 
in the peninsula, Genoa’s supporters sang a spine-tingling rendition of You’ll 
Never Walk Alone while displaying an enormous St George’s Cross.

The flag forms part of their club crest, while the chant is an homage to the 
1992 side which won at Anfield – the first Italian team ever to do so. It was 
previously sung on a sporadic basis, but fans in theGradinata Nord decided at 
the start of this season to make the song into a regular pre-game tradition.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3CUyMjFJI0o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3CUyMjFJI0o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3CUyMjFJI0o&media=>
Sampdoria’s supporters played their part, too, despite officially being the 
‘away’ team. “Overwhelm the enemy,” read the banner hanging in theGradinata Sud
. “Make this battle your own.”

That message felt apt for a match that quickly descended into a form of 
unarmed combat. The tone was set as early as the fourth minute, when Stefano 
Okaka was bundled into an advertising hoarding by a Genoa defender, smacking 
his head in the process. Soon, theSampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> forward was squaring up to two 
opponents in midfield.

Both sets of players managed to keep their heads, but equally both trod a fine 
line with their robustly physical approach. Although no one was sent off, the 
two teams combined for 45 fouls and seven yellow cards by the end of the game.

It was not a match rich with goalmouth action. Genoa, more direct in their 
passing, fashioned more shots on goal but Sampdoria’s Emiliano Viviano still 
only had four saves to make. Possession was split precisely 50-50. As the game 
approached its final quarter hour, a goalless draw seemed only likely 
conclusion.

But then Sampdoria won a free-kick on the right. Angelo Palombo made a dummy 
run at the ball, before Manolo Gabbiadini swept an in-swinging cross towards 
the back post. It missed all of Sampdoria’s players in the middle but took the 
lightest of touches off the head of defender Sebastien De Maio before nestling 
in the corner of the net.

The goal should not have stood. Several Sampdoria players appeared to be in 
offside positions when the delivery was made, and although none got a touch on 
the ball, all were clearly active and interfering with play. “They jumped, they 
influenced [goalkeeper Mattia] Perin, they are not passive,” protested the 
Genoa manager Gian Piero Gasperini at full-time. “This uncertainty is a 
problem, there is total confusion on this rule.”

It was Sampdoria’s sixth goal this season, and five of those have come from 
set-pieces – a trend which suggests they might be learning more than just 
tactics from their manager. One of the all-time great free-kick takers, 
Mihajlovic has not been shy about offering practical demonstrations. At a 
certain point last season, Palombo and Enzo Maresca challenged him to a 
post-training competition – and each departed €50 poorer.

Mihajlovic gloated that evening, taunting his players for having the audacity 
to believe they could match him. But on Sunday he was in a more magnanimous 
mode. “Beyond the result,” he said, “I want to applaud all the fans [of both 
teams] because the spectacle given by the crowd was exceptional. To see those 
stands, those choreographies, is a joy for those of us down on the pitch.

“And I applaud all the players, too, for giving life to a man’s derby – hard, 
heart-felt, but not nasty. As I said before the game, this is the derby that 
the city of Genoa deserves.”

Talking points

• So, what exactly did happen to Inter at San Siro? For all that Zdenek 
Zeman’s teams have tended to score goals in bunches, Cagliari have not looked 
much like doing so in any game before Sunday. They were aided not only by Yuto 
Nagatomo’s 27th-minute sending off but also by some catastrophic defending from 
his team-mates. Nemanja Vidic, signed to bring leadership to Inter’s defence, 
has now been sent off in one game, given away a cheap goal in another, and then 
surrendered a penalty on Sunday. It speaks to how poorly Inter played that the 
spot-kick in question was saved, and yet they still lost 4-1. Nevertheless, 
hats off to Cagliari midfielder Albin Ekdal for an improbable hat-trick. In a 
single afternoon, the 25-year-old doubled his career scoring tally.

• After drawing away to Empoli on Tuesday, Milan did the same against another 
newly-promoted club, Cesena, at the weekend. Fernando Torres was subdued in his 
second game for theRossoneri, and Pippo Inzaghi acknowledged the difficulty of 
trying to make his team work with four forwards – the Spaniard, plus Jérémy 
Ménez, Keisuke Honda and Giacomo Bonaventura – all in it at the same time. “But 
I prefer to seek balance while trying to entertain the fans,” he said. And were 
it not fora blunder by goalkeeper Christian Abbiati 
<https://vine.co/v/OZtbAYzPqED>, his team might still have won this game.

• Francesco Totti celebrated his 38th birthday on Saturday (and you can read a 
piece from me about his career right here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/27/francesco-totti-eternal-quality-roma-manchester-city-champions-league>
), but it was his team-mate Mattia Destrowho served up a goal of the season 
contender <https://vine.co/v/OZHT9Qiq2FE> during Roma’s win over Verona, 
volleying home from 40 yards.

• Yet another clean sheet for Juventus this weekend – they have now gone 10 
games without conceding in all competitions – but positive signs at the other 
end of the pitch, too. Álvaro Morata opened his account for the club during a 
3-0 win over Atalanta, while Carlos Tevez grabbed the other two – giving him 
six goals now in five games this season.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSXZ0uWzp940&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSXZ0uWzp940>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSXZ0uWzp940&media=>
Is Buffon the greatest we’ve seen? | Serie A | Talking Points 
<http://youtu.be/SXZ0uWzp940> 
• Some relief, at last, for Rafael Benítez, as Napoli won 1-0 away to 
Sassuolo. It was, once again, not a wholly convincing performance from the
Partenopei, but at this stage they will be grateful just to have another three 
points under their belts.

• Brit-watch: Micah Richards made his first start for Fiorentina on Saturday, 
replacing Nenad Tomovic in the starting XI at right-back. He put in a solid 
game, getting up and down the pitch nicely even if he admitted afterwards that 
the adjustment continues to be a struggle. “Italian football is much more 
tactical than English football,” he said. “I am doing my best to learn as 
quickly as I can.” It may be tough for him to hold down the spot at right-back, 
as Tomovic has made a very bright start to this season, but certainly Richards 
did his cause no harm on Sunday, and his versatility is already being regarded 
as an asset in Florence.

Results: Atalanta 0-3 Juventus, Cesena 1-1 Milan, Chievo 1-1 Empoli, Genoa 0-1 
Sampdoria, Inter 1-4 Cagliari, Roma 2-0 Verona, Sassuolo 0-1 Napoli, Torino 1-1 
Fiorentina

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Juventus 5 10 15 
2 Roma 5 8 15 
3 Sampdoria 5 4 11 
4 Udinese 4 2 9 
5 Inter Milan 5 6 8 
6 AC Milan 5 2 8 
7 Verona 5 0 8 
8 Napoli 5 0 7 
9 Fiorentina 5 -1 6 
10 Genoa 5 -1 5 
11 Torino 5 -2 5 
12 Cesena 5 -5 5 
13 Atalanta 5 -5 4 
14 Cagliari 5 -1 4 
15 Chievo 5 -2 4 
16 Palermo 4 -1 3 
17 Lazio 4 -1 3 
18 Parma 4 -2 3 
19 Empoli 5 -3 3 
20 Sassuolo 5 -8 3  