
When Laurent Blanc confirmed the end of Lyon's hegemony by leading Bordeaux to 
the Ligue 1 title in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/jun/01/bordeaux-laurent-blanc-french-football>
, an era dawned in which France enjoyed the most open of all Europe's main 
leagues. Now Blanc must prove that brief era is over and that French football 
has entered a new age in which the top of the table is reserved for 
billionaires, meaning just two clubs – Paris Saint-Germain and the new rich 
kids on the block, Monaco. The past five seasons in Ligue 1 have produced five 
different winners but now and for the forseeable future there are only two 
contenders.

By chance the fixture list has ruled that the Ligue 1 season will kick off on 
Friday with a clash of the last two champions but PSG versus Montpellier is not 
a peer group meeting and, regardless of the result, it is nigh-on impossible to 
imagineMontpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> finishing 
above the club from the capital this term.

Granted, it was improbable in 2011-12 and Montpellier still won the league for 
the first time but the gap in resources has since grown from huge to humungous 
and whereas PSG have continued to strengthen,splurging £50m this summer to add 
Edinson Cavani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/16/edinson-cavani-paris-saint-germain-transfer>
 to a side already featuring Zlatan Ibrahimovich, Ezequiel Lavezzi and Lucas 
Moura, Montpellier have lost many of the people responsible for their 
surprising triumph two seasons ago. The club's new manager, the veteran Jean 
Fernandez, reckons the best they can achieve is a top-half finish.

Most other clubs have also had to revise their forecasts downwards owing to 
financial constraints made tighter by tax changes and commitments to build or 
refurbish stadiums before the 2016 European Championship that France is hosting.

Lyon and Marseille need to sell their main strikers, Bafétimbi Gomis and 
André-Pierre Gignac, and replace them with youngsters or cheap recruits, which 
is how Saint Etienne hope to fill the void left by Borussia Dortmund's purchase 
of the leader of their attack, Pierre Emerick Aubameyang. Meanwhile, PSG and
Monaco <https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> carry on buying.

PSG are favourites for the title because they have had a two-year headstart on 
Monaco, who only returned to the top flight this season after winning Ligue 2 
on the back of investment by their new Russian owner, Dmitry Rybolovlev. Their 
manager, Claudio Ranieri, has been treated to almost a whole new team since 
then and Radamel Falcao, James Rodríguez, João Moutinho et al can be expected 
to make a big impact but it will probably still take time for Ranieri to hone 
his side and, despite forking out around £150m this summer, Monaco still do not 
have a squad as deep as PSG's.

What is more, while PSG grumbled last season that they received harsh 
treatment from some referees owing to jealousy of their wealth, there is more 
obvious official hostility towards Monaco, whose status as a tax haven has been 
under attack by league authorities. Monaco have been to France's highest court 
in a bid to overturn a decision to effectively ban them fromLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> unless they subject 
themselves to the same fiscal regime as the other clubs but so far all they 
have achieved is clarification that that ruling will not take effect until next 
season.

A negotiated solution could be found before then but at the moment the 
different parties are way apart. Monaco's sense of persecution has been 
intensified by beginning this campaign with a two-point penalty because a 
referee was hit after some of their fans invaded their pitch on the final day 
of last season to celebrate promotion. Monaco's appeal against the penalty was 
due to be heard on Thursday afternoon.

PSG have the best squad but it remains to be seen whether they have the best 
manager or at least one capable of making sure they do not squander their 
massive advantage. Blanc's star has fallen since he made Bordeaux champions, 
largely because ofFrance's miserable contribution to Euro 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jun/24/laurent-blanc-france-euro-2012>
, where his team were too defensive on the pitch and too offensive off it. He 
was not high on PSG's wishlist for a new manager after Carlo Ancelotti defected 
to Real Madrid this summer,only getting the job after several others turned 
down the short-term contract on offer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/21/paris-st-germain-laurent-blanc-manager>
.

At Paris he will have to prove he can channel big egos, a task made all the 
more difficult by this summer's departure of Leonardo, the sporting director 
who signed most of the players and had been instrumental in keeping them 
devoted to the Parisian "project".

The fact that PSG are expected to dominate most matches and win with pizazz, 
while also challenging for the Champions League, also makes this a very 
different venture to the one he masterminded atBordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux>. He is smart enough to evolve 
but has to show that he has done so fast.
 