
Lille missed the chance to move into second place in Ligue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> by slipping to a 2-1 home 
defeat against Reims.

The right-winger, Odair Fortes, scored with a fortuitous deflected shot in the 
73rd minute and the midfielder Grzegorz Krychowiak made it 2-0 three minutes 
later when he headed in at the back post.Lille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lille> replied in the 89th when the 
centre-half Anthony Weber headed into his own net.

"They're third in the league for a reason, so we had to be strong," the Reims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reims> coach, Hubert Fournier, said. "In 
the second half we played a bit faster and we got the luck we needed to win the 
game. The players deserve all the credit because they gave so much out there."

Lille impressed when they drew 2-2 at Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> last month in the final 
match before the winter break but this time they failed to shine against a 
well-organised Reims team who climbed to seventh.

"We didn't make a good start and couldn't get into a rhythm," the Lille 
midfielder Rio Mavuba said. "They made the most of it, so congratulations to 
Reims."

Lille's defeat and Monaco's 1-1 draw at Montpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> on Friday 
night played into the hands of PSG, who now lead Monaco by five points and 
Lille by seven. PSG won 2-1 at Ajaccio on Saturday.

Saint-Etienne are in fourth place and Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> in fifth after winning 2-1 at 
Evian on Sunday, with André-Pierre Gignac scoring his sixth goal in five games.

"We're very happy because this win is good for us in terms of points and it's 
a good start to 2014 for us," the Marseille coach, José Anigo, said. "It's a 
good result. Did we play well or not? It's up to the fans or the media to 
judge. We came here for three points and we got them."

Pape Modou Sougou, who is on loan from Marseille this season, scored for Evian 
in the 15th minute with a looping header from Cedric Barbosa's corner.

But the lead was short-lived as the veteran midfielder Benoît Cheyrou 
equalised in the 22nd with a powerful shot and Gignac continued his recent good 
form to give Marseille the lead in the 38th with his ninth league goal of the 
season.

Earlier Ismael Bangoura scored as sixth-placed Nantes beat Lorient 1-0.

"That's what happens when you don't take your chances. Nantes gave everything 
in the last few minutes and got rewarded for it," the Lorient coach, Christian 
Gourcuff, said. "But in terms of how we played we're on the right track."
 