
Lille’s Sofiane Boufal is a transfer target for Arsenal, Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>, Tottenham and 
Manchester City, although the winger is unlikely to be allowed to leave in the 
January window.

The 22-year-old, who has scored five goals in Ligue 1 so far this season, has 
been heavily scouted by several clubs in England, Spain and Italy over the last 
few months after his impressive displays for the French side. However, withLille
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lille> currently struggling in 
mid-table, it is expected that they will resist any offers to sell their prized 
asset this month despite ongoing financial difficulties at the club.

Belgium striker Michy Batshuayi signs new contract with Marseille
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/06/michy-batshuayi-marseille-contract>
Boufal, who was signed from newly-promoted Angers last January for an 
undisclosed fee believed to be around €4m, is now valued at around €25m 
(£18.3m) by Lille. Although sources close to the player insists he is “99% 
certain” to stay in France this month, the club are understood to be willing to 
cash in at the end of the season.

The reigning French champions Paris Saint-Germain are also believed to have 
registered an interest in Boufal, who came through the youth system at Angers 
and has yet to represent either France or Morocco – for whom he qualifies 
through his parents – in a competitive match.

Tottenham are understood to have been the first Premier League club to have 
scouted the player who has been compared to former Lille forward Eden Hazard in 
the past, although scouts fromArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>, United and City have also been 
in attendance at recent matches. Boufal is said to be relaxed about his future, 
with his club having only appointed manager Frédéric Antonetti at the end of 
November.

Asked last month about the prospects of Boufal leaving in January, Antonetti 
warned him against making any rash decisions. “I see a lot of failures in 
departures,” he said. “Because sometimes they go a little too early. I am not 
afraid of losing Sofiane Boufal in January, because of all the discussions I 
had with him. He has many things to learn. In a club like Lille, he can move 
forward.”

Meanwhile, Angers have yet to receive any concrete bids for Boufal’s former 
team-mate Romain Thomas. The defender is wanted by both Crystal Palace and 
Stoke having impressed in his side’s rise to third place in Ligue 1 this season.
 