
My greatest regret of 2016 was a self-inflicted error of judgment. Everyone 
told me to listen to the soundtrack of the hit Broadway show Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> (even President Obama, who loves 
it so muchhe invited the cast over <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZPrAKuOBWzw>
), and I resisted. I wouldn’t listen to the soundtrack until I had seen the 
show. I was wrong. BlessLin-Manuel Miranda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/01/lin-manuel-miranda-ancestry-hamilton-mexico-texas>
, its composer, playwright and star. The man is a genius – and that’s not just 
my opinion. It’s a fact,says the MacArthur Foundation 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/arts/culture/la-et-cm-macarthur-genius-grants-2015-lin-manuel-miranda-20150928-story.html>
, which awarded himits $625,000 genius grant 
<https://www.macfound.org/fellows/class/2015/> last year.

I first saw Miranda, 36, on YouTube performing Fiddler On The Roof’s To Life 
with his extended family at his wedding 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KgZ4ZTTfKO8>. Miranda is a New Yorker, born to 
Puerto Rican parents, and a hip-hop head – not the usual ingredients that make 
up Broadway composers. At college, he began writing the multi-Tony winning (and 
Pulitzer-nominated) musicalIn The Heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/14/in-the-heights-review-utterly-huggable-musical-lights-up-london>
, the story of a Dominican immigrant in New York.

Why I love… Zendaya
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/28/why-i-love-zendaya-bim-adewunmi>
He has mined the immigrant experience again in Hamilton, an unlikely blend of 
the life of US founding father Alexander Hamiltonwith R&B and hip-hop 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2016/03/questlove-lin-manuel-miranda-the-hamilton-mixtape>
. Miranda’s references are legion. The music and lyrics are stupendous: rich 
with the detail of his own life, funny, moving and sharp, with call backs 
to all his influences. I have found myself crying on the subway, laughing out 
loud, and even executing a shuffle when listening to Guns And Ships 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dwydujSqMRA> as the C train pulls 
into Lafayette Ave station.

Miranda’s run as Hamilton ended this month, (he’s also in the new Mary Poppins 
film 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/disney-coup-landing-lin-manuel-905131>, 
and composed music forDisney’s Moana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/27/disney-depiction-of-obese-polynesian-god-in-film-moana-sparks-anger>
 and thenew Star Wars 
<http://www.vulture.com/2015/12/lin-manuel-miranda-star-wars-cantina-song.html#>
), but the showopens in London in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/10/hamilton-the-musical-transfer-west-end-london-lin-manuel-miranda-broadway-tonies>
. Don’t be like me: book tickets and listen to the soundtrack on a loop ASAP.
 