
On a hot day in late August, Lin-Manuel Miranda <http://www.linmanuel.com> 
sits in a lecture theatre at Columbia University in uptown Manhattan, fizzing 
with the kind of energy that only comes, one imagines, from the experience of 
creating a billion-dollar Broadway show. Two weeks earlier, Miranda took his 
last bow before leaving the cast ofHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/18/hamilton-review-founding-father-gets-a-hip-hop-makeover>
, the rap musical he wrote and starred in and for which the word“hit” seems, at 
this point, inadequate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/how-did-hamilton-become-broadway-breakout-hit>
.

Since its opening last year, not only has Hamilton sold $1bn worth of tickets, 
won a Pulitzer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/18/hamilton-pulizer-prize-drama-lin-manuel-miranda>
 and11 Tonys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/13/tony-awards-2016-winners-hamilton-the-humans-broadway>
 and become the most successful Broadway opening of all time, but Miranda has 
beencredited with everything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/03/hamilton-tony-awards-broadway-lin-manuel-miranda>
 from reinventing musical theatre to revolutionising the way Americans think 
about their own history. He has rapped with Barack Obama in the Rose Garden, 
been quoted by Hillary Clinton in her speech accepting the Democratic 
nomination for president, and seen his beard and ponytail combo become almost 
iconic. Such is the pitch of his fame that it is hard, today, not to encounter 
the 36-year-old, who is slight and boyish and unexpectedly clean shaven, and 
not simply burst into laughter. What does one do after a year like Miranda’s, I 
ask. He grins widely. “You cut your hair off,” he says.

The success of Hamilton, which tells the story of Alexander Hamilton, one of 
America’s lesser-known founding fathers 
<http://www.constitutionday.com/hamilton-alexander-ny.html>, from the American 
revolution to the drafting of the constitution, is down in large part to a 
brilliant cast, made up almost entirely of African-American and Hispanic 
performers, and told exclusively in rap. In that one act, Miranda 
simultaneously upended expectations of American history, made a point about 
inclusion, and also found the perfect idiom for the story at hand; after 
watching Hamilton, you find yourself wondering how the tale of a scrappy, 
post-revolutionary nation being born could ever have been told in a medium 
other than hip-hop.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Flin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e5cb0846a904fe8124908725e64bbf440bc0e18%2F0_110_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lin-Manuel%20Miranda%20on%20his%20Broadway%20smash%20Hamilton%3A%20'the%20world%20freaked%20out'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Flin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lin-Manuel%20Miranda%20on%20his%20Broadway%20smash%20Hamilton%3A%20%27the%20world%20freaked%20out%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Flin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e5cb0846a904fe8124908725e64bbf440bc0e18%2F0_110_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Miranda – minus the pony-tail. Photograph: Larry Busacca/Getty Images for Tony 
Awards Productions 
It is rare for a Broadway show to cross over and become cool with other genres 
of musician; at its height, even a hit such asThe Producers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/26/the-producers-musicals-we-love-nathan-lane-mel-brooks>
 had a limited appeal. On any given night at Hamilton, however, so many 
celebrities were present that Miranda and the cast would joke that “the 
internet came to see the show tonight”. A single example: “Busta Rhymes coming 
on the same night as Mandy Patinkin and Salman Rushdie. It was the dream dinner 
party every night.” (Or, almost every night; there was the one at which Dick 
Cheney sat chuckling away in the front row.)

Spamilton: Hamilton parody is a supplement, not a substitute
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/16/spamilton-hamilton-parody-triad-new-york-lin-manuel-miranda>
On the day I saw the show, mounted police patrolled the street, the queue 
stretched around the block and ticket holders looked with pity across the way 
at the poor sods queuing up for Finding Neverland. Compared with the drama 
outside, the show itself was, almost inevitably, anticlimactic; original, 
funny, shocking, but still, you know, aBroadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> show, rather than the announcement 
of the second coming.

It was, nonetheless, breathtaking, a combination of dazzling verbosity and 
polysyllabic brilliance, combined with the deep joy and bathos of rapping about 
dull subjects such asthe Federalist Papers 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Federalist_Papers> with the fever of a rap 
battle: “Thomas Jefferson, always hesitant with the President / Reticent – 
there isn’t a plan he doesn’t jettison / Madison, you’re mad as a hatter, son, 
take your medicine / Damn, you’re in worse shape than the national debt is in.” 
And so on. You get the idea.

As a result of the subject matter, Miranda’s first expectation for the show 
was simply that it would be popular with teachers. After its New York run, he 
envisaged it living on as a worthy staple of community theatre. “I thought, if 
they can get over our use of the F-word, this will be a good school group show.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdeApjIhhhC4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdeApjIhhhC4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdeApjIhhhC4&media=>
 Watch a video of scenes from Hamilton, starring Lin-Manuel Miranda 
This is only his second Broadway show – the first, In the Heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/14/in-the-heights-review-utterly-huggable-musical-lights-up-london>
, has just beenextended in London <https://www.intheheightslondon.com/> – and 
Miranda is still reminded daily of the fact that, 10 years ago, he was a supply 
teacher. In spite of the fact that his estimated royalties from the show total 
a mind-boggling$105,000 a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/08/hamilton-musical-creator-lin-manuel-miranda-royalties>
, he still flies commercial – “I don’t care about private jets” – and lives a 
stone’s throw from his old neighbourhood in Upper Manhattan; the reason we meet 
at Columbia is that it is around the corner from the apartment Miranda shares 
with his wife Vanessa and their 18-month-old son Sebastian, who was born two 
weeks before rehearsals for Hamilton started. (It strikes me that, were Miranda 
a woman, much more would have been made of this timing – the difficulty of 
having to be on stage every night with an infant at home. As it is, he says, it 
all worked out fine because, in spite of being “a very sleepless two years, my 
wife is a superhero. That’s the answer.”)

Clearly, Miranda works hard to keep himself grounded and surviving the 
experience has, he says, been a question of “staying on top of the emotions”. 
Nonetheless, so feverish has the acclaim forHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> been, I wonder if, as the frenzy 
around it grew, he ever thought; “God, what have I done?”

Lin-Manuel Miranda's ancestry is as multifaceted as Hamilton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/01/lin-manuel-miranda-ancestry-hamilton-mexico-texas>
He shout-laughs. “What have I done?! I have to give enormous credit to [the 
director] Tommy Kail, who’s great at keeping the temperature low inside the 
theatre, especially when we moved to Broadway and the yell became a roar. That 
never came into the studio where we were working.” Instead, he says, they 
carried on with business as usual, telling themselves: “We’re making our thing 
better and still have 10 things a day to fix.”

One of the current questions surrounding Hamilton, as preparations are made 
for it to be rolled out, Phantom of the Opera-style,across the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/10/hamilton-the-musical-transfer-west-end-london-lin-manuel-miranda-broadway-tonies>
, is how hard it will be for foreign audiences to love a show that rests, in 
large part, on knowledge of, and interest in, the American origin story. The 
life of Alexander Hamilton is a great tale, but the show’s real resonance comes 
from its interrogation of the American national character.

“I think that if we’ve done our job well and we articulate this individual’s 
life well, the themes inherent in that translate,” says Miranda. “It’s about 
legacy, about how much do we do with the time we’re given? And then there are 
themes that wrestle with the American character, but only in that Hamilton’s 
life is a rough-draft version of the arguments we still have as a country.” 
These too, he hopes, will travel. He tells the story of what happened when 
Fiddler on the Roof made its Japanese debut, after which a theatre-goer 
approached the producers and said: “They like it in America? But it’s so 
Japanese!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Flin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e2ac9dd2ecd7a446e0fd3b7f70bc71db2b54908%2F0_185_1733_1040%2F1733.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lin-Manuel%20Miranda%20on%20his%20Broadway%20smash%20Hamilton%3A%20'the%20world%20freaked%20out'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Flin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lin-Manuel%20Miranda%20on%20his%20Broadway%20smash%20Hamilton%3A%20%27the%20world%20freaked%20out%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Flin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e2ac9dd2ecd7a446e0fd3b7f70bc71db2b54908%2F0_185_1733_1040%2F1733.jpg>
 Miranda and other cast members of Hamilton at the Public Theater, New York. 
Photograph: Joan Marcus/AP 
Miranda sees the arguments started by the founding fathers as analogous to his 
fights with his sister. “The arguments a country has are its family arguments. 
I fight with my sister and it’s a version of the fight we had when she was 16 
and I was 10. I think that’s true of both countries and families. We’ll always 
argue about the size of government in our lives and the role we play in the 
affairs of other countries.”

That these dry-sounding debates should animate such an electric show is, of 
course, a reflection of the scale of Miranda’s talent and his success in 
answering the challenge set up in the opening line, rapped by Aaron Burr, 
nemesis to Hamilton and foil to his character: “How does a bastard, orphan, son 
of a whore / And a Scotsman, dropped in the middle of a forgotten spot / In the 
Caribbean by Providence, impoverished, in squalor / Grow up to be a hero and a 
scholar?”

Miranda says: “I think I threw the ball very high in the air with the opening 
line of the show. This big-ass run-on sentence, and we are going to purport to 
try to answer it. How does he get from here, to here?” In the first version of 
Hamilton, which was written for the Public Theater, off-Broadway, Miranda 
combined song and speech in a much more conventional-looking show. It didn’t 
work, “because the songs – especially our opening number – is really heightened 
speech, with melody in it. So when we went to regular speech, you could feel 
the audience pull out.” At some point, Miranda realised he was going to have to 
dispense with a script and simply “musicalise every second” of the show, a huge 
undertaking and one that saw him wandering around his neighbourhood muttering 
to himself every day, as he tried to fit lyrics to music.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Flin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6274d39ed1039c4304cde3c0025df684db81db64%2F0_396_4228_2536%2F4228.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lin-Manuel%20Miranda%20on%20his%20Broadway%20smash%20Hamilton%3A%20'the%20world%20freaked%20out'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Flin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lin-Manuel%20Miranda%20on%20his%20Broadway%20smash%20Hamilton%3A%20%27the%20world%20freaked%20out%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Flin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6274d39ed1039c4304cde3c0025df684db81db64%2F0_396_4228_2536%2F4228.jpg>
 The London cast of In the Heights, Miranda’s first foray on to the Broadway 
stage. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
He had never wanted to be a solo rap star, he says. “My ego is healthy, but it 
doesn’t extend in that direction.” Instead, from school age onwards, he had 
only ever wanted to be involved in the theatre. His parents had moved to New 
York from Puerto Rico before Miranda was born and landed in Upper Manhattan, 
where his mother was a psychologist and his father a political adviser to, 
among others, former New York mayor Ed Koch.

Miranda grew up in a household rich in intellect but not particularly wealthy 
and he was aware, at college, that sacrifices were being made in order to 
educate him. As a result, he was highly motivated and started writing In the 
Heights, a show about his Washington Heights neighbourhood, before he 
graduated, slogging away at it for the next six years while working as a supply 
teacher to pay the rent, until, in what he still regards as a miracle, it came 
to Broadway. Overnight, “I went from being a professional substitute teacher to 
a Broadway composer.” It was, he says, an even more “drastic life change” than 
the one brought about by the success of Hamilton.

In the Heights was a hit, winning four Tony awards, but the one disappointment 
was that it didn’t bring Miranda the interest or admiration of his heroes in 
the rap community. As an adolescent, did the part of him that loved hip-hop 
disparage the part that loved Broadway musicals? No, he says. “There are a few 
people who only like hip-hop music, and a few who only like theatre music, and 
the rest of us just like good shit. It doesn’t matter what form it comes in. I 
think we’re all a lot more eclectic than we give ourselves credit for. And I 
feel lucky to have grown up in the era when we made mix cassettes. I think it 
affected how I write scores. Because when you’re making a mix tape for your 
friends, it’s 90 minutes of music, in the order in which you curate it, so 
you’re creating the ebb and flow. That prepared me to write scores more than 
anything else. You want to surprise them, tell them how you feel about them, 
you want to express the wealth of your taste. How is that different from 
writing a Broadway score?”

Hamilton's original Broadway cast to be filmed before Lin-Manuel Miranda exits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/16/hamilton-broadway-film-lin-manuel-miranda-original-cast>
Can he remember any of his mix tapes from that era? “Yes. I still think of the 
mix tape my friend Antonia made me that had both Sam Cooke’s Bring it On Home 
to Me and D’yer Mak’er from Led Zeppelin, which were the first two songs on 
side B. When I grew up, one of my favourite artists wasWeird Al 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/30/weird-al-yankovic-interview>, 
who taught me that genre is just the clothes of the artist. Instrumentation can 
change, but we’re all dealing with the same 12 tones and a good melody is a 
good melody.”

For Miranda, one of the most gratifying aspects of Hamilton’s success has, 
therefore, been the fact that every high-profile rapper in the US has dropped 
backstage to tell him how much they love the show. “What hip-hop artists pick 
up on that your average theatre-goer doesn’t is that I’m using different flows 
for every character, the way a classical composer would use a different theme 
in, say,Peter and the Wolf <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MfM7Y9Pcdzw>. 
Everyone raps in a way that is consistent with their character and I’m 
modelling that after my favourite hip-hop artists. Hercules Mulligan is Busta 
Rhymes in my brain, and Hamilton is from the school of Eminem and Big Pun, 
where it’s how many syllables can I rhyme within a line, versus [George] 
Washington, which is much more straightforward and on the down beat. Because 
that’s who Washington is. Very regimented and a moral authority. To hear what 
Eminem, André 3000, or Chris Rock caught that I embedded in there – that is 
really fun.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Flin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc87ff3ec81ba0da802744ee50f32d1a4c339f6a%2F0_52_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lin-Manuel%20Miranda%20on%20his%20Broadway%20smash%20Hamilton%3A%20'the%20world%20freaked%20out'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Flin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lin-Manuel%20Miranda%20on%20his%20Broadway%20smash%20Hamilton%3A%20%27the%20world%20freaked%20out%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Flin-manuel-miranda-broadway-smash-hamilton-hip-hop-musical-school-of-eminem%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc87ff3ec81ba0da802744ee50f32d1a4c339f6a%2F0_52_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Song and dance man: an extract from Hamilton being performed at the Tony 
awards in June 2016. Photograph: Theo Wargo/Getty Images 
This, the period after his exit from the show, could have been an anticlimax 
for Miranda but, for now, he says, he is happy finishing up some back-burner 
projects – the score for the Disney animated movieMoana 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LKFuXETZUsI> and the filming of a Mary Poppins 
sequel 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/disney-announces-release-date-for-mary-poppins-sequel-1201785893/>
 opposite Emily Blunt. And while success this large gets you out of lots of 
things – “I don’t have to write a jingle to pay rent; I don’t have to do a 
corporate gig. That part of it is very freeing” – at the same time, “it doesn’t 
get you out of life. I still picked up my dog’s poop this morning and changed 
three diapers. I’m still ignoring a call from my dad because he wants me to do 
something I don’t want to do.” Meanwhile, his wife, who Miranda met when they 
were both at high school and is now a corporate attorney, finally gets some 
help from him in the evenings.

Miranda has no idea what his next show will be, only that the one fruitful way 
to find out is to maintain the right priorities. “I work in a world in which 
only one in five shows returns their investment. Failure is the norm. So you 
have to walk away from the years that you spent on something, thinking: ‘I did 
it for these reasons and I got that.’ Financial success cannot be your goal. 
But if your goal is, ‘I want to tell this story’, or ‘I want to learn from 
working with these people’, then things have a good chance of working out.”

It is also a question of understanding one’s own motivation, he says. “I think 
when you’re making something, you’re trying to fall in love with it; to express 
the best version of that idea. I think, naturally my subconscious tries to 
create the high I first felt when I was in Pirates of Penzance in the eighth 
grade.”

This was, he swears, all he was doing with Hamilton, staging it with no 
expectations, just to “see how the world responds”. Miranda smiles widely. “And 
the world freaked out.”
 