
“Have you got enough material for your article?” asks Lindsay Kemp, making an 
innocuous pleasantry sound somehow louche and debauched – one of his many 
skills. We have spent a long and relentlessly entertaining day together in his 
seaside apartment in Italy, and I think of the many asides he has sprinkled 
into our conversation that I want to return to: how he learned to draw alongside
David Hockney <http://www.175heroes.org.uk/david_hockney.html> at Bradford Art 
College; the time he was taken by Marcel Marceau to buy shirts at Turnbull & 
Asser and the legendary mime put half the shop on a tab that he never paid; 
when Federico Fellini wanted to cast him in his 1976 filmFellini’s Casanova, 
but Kemp disappeared and couldn’t be tracked down. “His casting director said I 
was the only actor that ever let Fellini down,” says the 77-year-old Kemp, in 
passing, before flitting on to another episode from his extraordinary, 
topsy-turvy life.

So, what have we talked about? Well, David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie>, obviously. Kemp and Bowie were 
lovers (briefly) and artistic collaborators (more enduringly) in the 1960s and 
70s. He is often hailed as the man who taught Bowie how to move and express 
himself – as well as Kate Bush, Peter Gabriel and Mia Farrow – and their work 
together onZiggy Stardust fundamentally reimagined the way rock music was 
performed live. Then there’s his improbable background: a child from a poor 
one-parent family in South Shields on Tyneside who went from doing kitsch turns 
in working men’s clubs to become an internationally feted classical dancer. And 
how this acclaim has often been more rapturous abroad than in Britain, and why 
that should be.

So, yes, plenty of material for the article then.

They didn’t really like arty types in England, certainly not when I was 
growing up in the 1950s
Lindsay Kemp 
If Kemp’s name isn’t familiar, there is a ready explanation. He hasn’t lived 
in Britain since the late 1970s and he hasn’t performed here for almost 15 
years. All of which makes his return next month something of an occasion. As 
artist in residence at Ace Hotel London in Shoreditch, Kemp’s polymathic 
talents are on display in some different contexts: on 10 May, he is doing a 
live drawing event and opening a new exhibition, calledThe London Drawings, of 
his Picasso-inspired scribbles; then, on 17 May, Kemp will appear in 
conversation with the singer Marc Almond, discussing Bowie. Excerpts from a 
forthcoming documentary,Lindsay Kemp’s Last Dance 
<http://www.lindsaykempslastdance.com/>, will also be screened. In addition, he 
has been asked to teach some dance classes at the drama school Rada – which 
rejected him as a student – while he is in town.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2ab95475059bae4afa339f901fa56ec203d83e2%2F0_0_1175_675%2F1175.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2ab95475059bae4afa339f901fa56ec203d83e2%2F0_0_1175_675%2F1175.jpg>
 With David Bowie in London, 1973: ‘Bowie had great talent as a mimic,’ says 
Kemp. ‘He would do this wonderful mimicry of Stan Laurel – it was very funny. 
He just got it, he transformed himself into Stanley. He would also do wonderful 
impressions of other singers that he knew; brilliant, the voice, the face, 
everything. He wasn’t a mime – he didn’t have talent as a mime – but he 
certainly had talent as a mimic.’ Photograph: Mick Rock 
“I always felt foreign in England, because I was always accused of being a 
foreigner,” says Kemp, his voice retaining a faint Geordie earthiness. “They 
didn’t really like arty types in England, certainly not when I was growing up 
in the 1950s. So I felt a bit of a loner. People used to come up to me and say, 
‘Are you a man or a woman?’ But I’m not effete and I don’t walk with a mince or 
anything. There was just something about my persona that people thought was 
rather alien.”

Kemp seems momentarily to be back in South Shields and Bradford – where he 
moved to as a teenager – and it is, it must be said, a mental stretch to 
picture him there. “Maybe it’s because I never walked,” he goes on. “I always 
danced. For me, dancing is so much more pleasurable than walking. When I say 
dance, I don’t mean I didchassés and grand jetés in the street. Although I did 
sometimes – but not usually when I was on my own, shopping. For me, dancing is 
the quickest way to happiness. Just as music is the most direct route to 
heaven, isn’t it?”

It probably hasn’t helped Kemp’s standing in Britain that it is not easy to 
define what he does. He is a dancer, but critics here have tended to be sniffy 
about his technique and athleticism, and he has never had an Arts Council 
subsidy or grant. He is our greatest exponent of mime, but the fact it’s 
difficult to name the second foremost mime artist in this country renders that 
compliment slightly hollow. Eminent film directors, including Ken Russell and 
Derek Jarman, have cast him in high-profile roles – he is the landlord, Britt 
Ekland’s father, in Robin Hardy’sThe Wicker Man – but Kemp is the first to 
admit that he’s not an actor.

Such flitting around, Kemp has found, seems to go down better in Italy. “I 
really am a national treasure here,” he says matter-of-factly, and he enjoys 
great acclaim, too, in Japan and Spain. He lived in Barcelona for a time, then 
relocated to Rome, moved on to Umbria – where his dance company was based in an 
abandoned hilltop monastery – and he now resides modestly in Livorno, a port 
city in Tuscany heavily shelled by the allies during the second world war. He 
remains in tip-top shape and still performs regularly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3972c74b53b28d602fbf9e290c182e115e7e4664%2F0_130_3857_2315%2F3857.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3972c74b53b28d602fbf9e290c182e115e7e4664%2F0_130_3857_2315%2F3857.jpg>
 Lindsay Kemp poses in front of Toronto Workshop Productions in 1978. 
Photograph: Graham Bezant/Toronto Star via Getty Images 
“No, I can’t do the gymnastics that I did a few years ago” says Kemp. “And I 
can’t jump very high, but that’s OK. Dancers like [Rudolf] Nureyev were judged 
on their interpretation of the classics at each and every performance. They 
remembered how high he used to jump out of the window inLe Spectre de la Rose, 
for example. And, of course, the poor man towards the end of his career was 
crawling out of the window practically on his hands and knees. I don’t have 
that problem, because my dances have always been about me and I invent the 
movement. Not too much moving, but with great intensity and, I hope, with 
beauty.”

And how long will Kemp keep going? “Well, till my legs drop off, I suppose.”

Livorno, hard as it is to believe on a spring afternoon, with a convivial warm 
breeze flapping thin curtains, reminds Kemp of where he grew up. Or at least 
the coming and going of boats he can watch from his windows evokes a distant 
personal history. He comes from a long line of seafarers and his father, 
Norman, was a junior officer in the merchant navy. When the second world war 
started, his ship, the Patroclus, was requisitioned by the Admiralty and sent 
out to defend the country. In November 1940, it was sunk by a German U-boat 
helmed by notorious “Silent” Otto Kretschmer, the Nazis’ most lethal submarine 
captain. Kemp’s mother, Marie, fainted when she read the telegram; he was just 
two years old. “Death has always been very much in my family,” says Kemp. 
“Coming from a family of sailors, they were always popping off.”

The Kemp household could have been a bleak place. Lindsay was preceded by a 
sister, Norma, who at a precocious age was already receiving glowing notices 
for her tap-dancing and physical comedy in theShields Gazette. Norma, however, 
aged just five, died of meningitis. “I was conceived somewhat as a replacement 
for her: the dancing daughter,” says Kemp. “And I inherited her tiny kimonos 
and fans, which my father had brought back from his trips to China and Japan.”

Kemp recalls going to his infant school in South Shields in a kimono, at least 
until the headmaster wrote to his mother and requested that he didn’t. The next 
day he was sent in wearing a sober blue raincoat; as soon as he was 
unsupervised, he turned it inside out to display the scarlet silk lining. This 
is a very typical Kemp anecdote, told with the elaborate hand gestures of a 
matador and a mischievous smile quivering on his lips. In similar vein, he 
reveals that the first time he performed on a stage, it was with the boy who 
lived down the street, the undertaker’s son. The boxes he was tap-dancing on, 
and paddling in like they were canoes, were coffins.

Kemp’s interest in dancing was confirmed when his mother took him, aged 10, to 
see the 1948 Powell and Pressburger film,The Red Shoes. “She said for quite a 
few years afterwards: ‘And God, I regretted it…’” By this time, he was 
attending a boys’ boarding school, which offered assisted places to the sons of 
merchant seamen. Here, he first engaged with a public: dancing Salome in his 
dormitory, naked except for reams of toilet paper that he shed teasingly under 
the flashlights of the boys in their bunks. At least until the housemaster came 
in and berated Kemp for wasting school resources. “Unlike a lot of kids, I knew 
exactly what I wanted and nothing was going to stop me,” he says. “I was 
destined for stardom!” A pause. “Still waiting for it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5b431bb19cb7db4c2a6f64e8c5a19b8aaccdc3c%2F0_0_2835_2081%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5b431bb19cb7db4c2a6f64e8c5a19b8aaccdc3c%2F0_0_2835_2081%2F2835.jpg>
 On the set of Kate Bush’s film The Line, the Cross & the Curve in 1993. 
‘Lindsay opened up my eyes to the meanings of movement,’ said Bush. ‘He makes 
you feel so good. If you’ve got two left feet it’s, “You dance like an angel, 
darling!” He fills people up: you’re an empty glass and glug, glug, glug, he’s 
filled you with champagne.’ Photograph: Guido Harari 
Such tales might sound apocryphal – though Kemp swears they are true – but 
what is inarguable is that from an early age he had to develop a capacity for 
winning over potentially hostile audiences. This would see him through school, 
early performances in working men’s clubs in places like West Hartlepool, and a 
stint in the RAF that ended abruptly when, on the advice of a friend, he began 
to wear eyeshadow and Indian bangles. (In no time, he was on a plane from the 
Isle of Man, where he was stationed, to Aylesbury to undergo a psychiatric 
evaluation.)

“You need to liberate an audience, put them under a spell – it makes the heart 
surgery less painful,” explains Kemp. “And that kind of mesmerism or hypnotism, 
I acquired at a very early age in order to stave off the bully’s blows or the 
mocking of the crowd. I made them laugh; I put them under my spell. There were 
times when I performed in very low cabaret clubs in the north of England 
wearing pink tights, pale makeup and a bowler hat. In order not to have beer 
cans thrown at one, one had to enchant those audiences – and I did.”

Kemp first went to London on the instruction of David Hockney. They were 
friends at art school and Kemp saw his first ballet with him: a Sadler’s Wells 
production ofA Rake’s Progress. “It was magic, I thought I would die,” recalls 
Kemp. “And Hockney said, ‘Look, you’ve got to go to London whether your mam 
forbids it or not. Or whether you’ve got money or you haven’t’.”

Eventually Kemp settled on Bateman Street, Soho, and it was here, in the 
summer of 1966 or thereabouts, that he met Bowie, who was then 19. Neither man 
was especially well established in his field yet, but Kemp liked Bowie’s music 
(not a universally held opinion at this time), and Bowie saw Kemp in a show; 
two days later, Bowie started taking Kemp’s classes at the Dance Centre in 
Covent Garden. Bowie had not long recorded the novelty singleThe Laughing Gnome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/13/david-bowie-comedy-extras-conan-obrien-zoolander>
 and was considering ditching music and joining a brotherhood of Tibetan monks 
in Scotland. Their relationship was short-lived but ardently felt, certainly on 
Kemp’s side, but Bowie seems to have fallen for him, too. “His day-to-day life 
was the most theatrical thing I had ever seen, ever,” Bowie reflected in 1972. 
“It was everything I thought bohemia probably was. I joined the circus.”

“Yes, he was one of my great loves,” says Kemp. “There haven’t been many. I 
counted up the other day and I think there were five. So I think it was a great 
love, though I think a great love would last a bit longer. I got over it!”

Kemp trails off; he and Bowie had written a show together, Pierrot in Turquoise
 <http://dangerousminds.net/comments/david_bowie_lindsay_kemp_pierrot_turquoise>
, and in 1967 began touring the country. He had become used to Bowie’s 
frequent, unexplained disappearances, but in Whitehaven, he woke up alone and 
heard noises through the wall. He went outside and found Bowie’s shoes and 
watch neatly piled up outside the bedroom of Natasha Korniloff,Turquoise’s 
costume designer. Kemp fled to his dressing room, guzzled a bottle of whisky 
and sliced his wrists with a razor blade. Mercifully, he didn’t cut too deep 
and he was found unconscious the next morning and taken to hospital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76ab629dbc0baf9a5c1def4f8519d6eccab238fb%2F79_0_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76ab629dbc0baf9a5c1def4f8519d6eccab238fb%2F79_0_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 David Bowie in Lindsay Kemp’s production of Pierrot in Turquoise. Photograph: 
Scottish Television 
Did Kemp really want to die? “Oh, I don’t think so,” he replies. “No, it 
wasn’t serious. If I’d been serious, the cuts would have been a bit deeper. 
They were scratches. The doctor put a bit of bandage round them and said, ‘You 
best get back to work. Don’t be so daft.’ But that night, what little blood 
there was soaked into the white Pierrot costume and it was very dramatic. Bowie 
was in tears and Natasha had taken a handful of pills and she was brought round 
by one of the firemen.”

It would be years before Bowie and Kemp (and Korniloff) would collaborate 
again, this time in a theatrical performance of Bowie’sZiggy Stardust album for 
two nights only in August 1972 at Finsbury Park’s Rainbow theatre. Kemp 
choreographed a fantastical two-hour routine with his troupe of mime artists 
that spun references toA Clockwork Orange and 1920s constructivism, Korniloff 
designed numerous outfit changes – including 10 white elastic bodysuits – and 
Bowie unleashed his most fully realised vision of Ziggy. Roxy Music was the 
support act; Mick Jagger, Rod Stewart and Alice Cooper were in the audience. 
Elton John famously denounced it as “too camp”, Lou Reed called it “the 
greatest thing I’ve ever seen”, and it was the start of Bowie being nailed to 
the top of the charts for two years.

“Ziggy Stardust put glam rock, gay rock, theatre rock on the map,” says Kemp. 
“It was the first time we saw this marriage between theatre and rock’n’roll, 
particularly my kind of avant-garde theatre. I was Starman coming down a 50ft 
ladder, I was Queen Bitch. And, of course, we know Ziggy Stardust was an 
immense influence on rock music. Groups like Genesis and [Pink] Floyd were very 
influenced by the theatricality.”

I spent my money on my productions. We never had subsidies: it went on 
costumes, scenery and cocaine
Lindsay Kemp 
Kemp himself was beginning a period that would bring him considerable fame, if 
not riches.Flowers, his adaptation of the debauched novel Our Lady of the 
Flowers by Jean Genet – the writer who in turn inspired Bowie’s Jean Genie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/18/david-bowie-jean-genie-lyrics-auctioned>
 – was a smash in the West End, though the critics mostly disliked it. The play 
transferred to Broadway in 1974, where Andy Warhol attended the opening night 
along with Jack Nicholson and Truman Capote, though again the reviews were not 
always kind. “Yes, when the notices came out, they stopped coming,” says Kemp.

At the start of the run in New York, Kemp was staying in an upmarket hotel; by 
the end, he was in B&Bs, going to parties with Bowie and filling a doggy bag to 
share later with his cast. “I earned a lot of money in the 1970s and the 1980s, 
but I thought it would last for ever,” sighs Kemp. “I spent it. But then again 
I spent most of it on my productions. Because we never had subsidies, it went 
on costumes, scenery and cocaine. That’s where most of it went.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ee855939b0b8ce045e06da2550000374f2834b4%2F0_0_2133_1376%2F2133.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ee855939b0b8ce045e06da2550000374f2834b4%2F0_0_2133_1376%2F2133.jpg>
 In Joan Miró’s studio in Palma de Majorca, 1978. ‘Mirò came to Flowers in 
Barcelona in December 1977,’ says Kemp. ‘And he sent a message the next day 
inviting me to lunch. He was gentle and twinkling. His home was simple but full 
of colour, stone, folk art… childlike and archaic. His wife, Pilar, served a 
simple lunch, and then he took us into his studio. It was crammed with hundreds 
of objects and sketches and paintings of all sizes. I did an impromptu dance, 
my fan painting shapes in the air. He promised to paint a dancing fan for me 
and it arrived in my dressing room next day. A miracle.’ Photograph: Courtesy 
Lindsay Kemp 
So – to adapt the old George Best quip – the money wasn’t wasted then? “Good 
Lord no,” scoffs Kemp, outraged. “Good Lord no!”

Kemp always believed in what he calls “hedonism to the hilt”. He explained the 
philosophy <http://www.bowiewonderworld.com/press/70/7409lkemp.htm> to the 
journalist Mick Brown in 1974: “I like to do everything fully. I drink until 
I’m drunk. I eat until I’m full, frequently until I’m sick. I don’t fancy 
people, I fall in love with them. Leave out hate – it doesn’t come into my work 
at all. I’m terribly into intoxication – that’s the only thing that counts…”

These were, to some degree, excesses that Kemp inherited from his father. “My 
mother always said, ‘God, you are just so like him’,” he says, as a tinny 
scooter buzzes by outside the window, a few floors below. “‘You’ve got his 
smile, you have his generosity. And you like a drink. He never put the bottle 
down till it was finished.’”

For a long time, Kemp felt that booze was an essential preparation for his 
performances on stage. “I drank originally – like many performers do… and 
hookers – to cope with nerves, with stage fright, with fear,” he says. “With 
fear! And then for years, I just couldn’t imagine me doing a performance 
without drinking. Because it loosened me up. It helped my craziness. My trance. 
And the pain. Not looking for excuses, but the early days of my success with
Flowers were extremely strenuous. We often played two shows a day and it was 
often boring as well; after three years of doingFlowers, one just needed 
something. Like the Russians do sometimes to get through performances and give 
them an extra bit of energy: a shot of vodka. But one shot became two, and then 
a bottle.”

On one occasion, Kemp was performing in Seville and he began spinning down the 
stage, a stroboscope giving his wild movements a calm suspension. The illusion 
was shattered as he disappeared headlong into the orchestra pit. A few moments 
passed, the light kept blinking into the darkness, until one bloodied hand 
appeared from the pit and then another. Finally, Kemp re-emerged on to the 
stage, his face streaked red. “Of course, the blood – the audience didn’t 
realise – was from capsules I had in my mouth in preparation for my last scene 
in the play when I…” Kemp makes the dramatic gurgle of the stage death. “Many 
of the audience in Seville came back the following night and were disappointed 
I didn’t do the same thing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c20b93a473c74cc4ca0daf4121e78679dbac253%2F0_0_5650_3546%2F5650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c20b93a473c74cc4ca0daf4121e78679dbac253%2F0_0_5650_3546%2F5650.jpg>
 With Marcel Marceau backstage at Sadler’s Wells in the 1980s. ‘He loved me, 
Marceau,’ says Kemp. ‘We often performed together, in the same cities, at the 
same festivals. He was a genius. There have been very few truly great mimes in 
history: Chaplin and Stan Laurel really. Marceau was blessed withduende – you 
know, that spirit. He totally transformed himself and became something else on 
the stage, through the trance. I learned that through him: no trance, no dance. 
One has to enter the trance so that one becomes that creature or element that 
one intends.’ Photograph: Courtesy Lindsay Kemp 
The story is again classic Kemp: a monologue delivered with masterful comic 
pauses, his expressive eyes gleaming when he reaches the punchline. But there’s 
a tinge of sadness, too; an essential discontent that Bowie seemed to detect as 
well. “Lindsay was tragic and dramatic and everything in his life was 
theatrical,” he once said. “There’s a lot of material from his life that would 
beat any script.”

Kemp doesn’t really do regrets, but he did find the resolve to stop drinking 
eventually. “It was the hangovers and also I’d fucked up a lot of shows,” he 
says. “I’d wake up during my drinking days and I wasn’t sure whether I’d done a 
show or not. I’d look in the mirror and think, ‘Thank God, I’ve got traces of 
makeup’. But that didn’t guarantee I’d actually made it on to the stage.”

How long has it been? “Twenty years,” he replies. “OK, 15 years – I’m given to 
exaggeration.” Does he miss anything about it? “I had a lot of friends. I had a 
lot of encounters. A lot of amorous encounters, which I haven’t had many of 
since, because one is courageous with alcohol. You know, you say: ‘Hey, you’re 
cute, what are you doing later?’ So I don’t have quite as many, but then I’m 
not as young as I used to be.”

We have been talking all afternoon now, with the occasional break for a pee. 
Kemp still clearly has considerable stamina. The phone rings – it’s David 
Haughton, an actor and long-standing member of Kemp’s dance company, the last 
of his “great loves” and the most enduring. Their relationship lasted for 
almost 25 years from the 1970s, when he studied with Kemp, and they remain firm 
friends and collaborators on myriad projects. “We’ve been yakking away for 
hours,” Kemp tells him. “I’m in the mood today – a talkative mood…”

Still, the mental and physical strains of performing clearly exact a 
considerable toll on Kemp. When he teaches dancing, he tells students that he 
will partly be instructing them in technique, but that they will mostly be 
required to untether their imagination. This was certainly the case with Bowie 
andKate Bush <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kate-bush>. “Well, they were 
very timid, especially Kate,” remembers Kemp. “I did help them to be 
themselves, to bring them out, to bring out their spirit, as well as to teach 
them to dance.” He giggles. “I led them up the path of craziness. Crazy paving! 
I mean, on the stage one needs to see the character really flirting with death 
and taking extreme risks that only mad people would do.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa105f975ffeed69e6c96bc23102a0d7ca7c51df5%2F0_5_2230_1337%2F2230.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lindsay%20Kemp%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20destined%20for%20stardom%20%E2%80%A6%20I%E2%80%99m%20still%20waiting%20for%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa105f975ffeed69e6c96bc23102a0d7ca7c51df5%2F0_5_2230_1337%2F2230.jpg>
 Lindsay Kemp in a scene from Dreamdances at the Peacock theatre in 2002. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Bush helped out with costumes when Kemp staged an all-male version of Salome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/jan/30/artsfeatures> – Kemp played 
the title role in drag, wearing sequined nipple pasties – at London’s 
Roundhouse in 1977.The Spectator described it 
<http://archive.spectator.co.uk/article/5th-march-1977/27/the-atre> as “flawed 
as drama… unforgettable as theatre”. Bush, in turn, dedicated the song Moving 
to Kemp and cast him in her 1993 short film,The Line, the Cross & the Curve, 
inspired byThe Red Shoes and co-starring Miranda Richardson. “I couldn’t 
believe how strongly Lindsay communicates with people without even opening his 
mouth,” Bushtold Woman’s Hour <http://gaffa.org/reaching/ir79_bb.html> on Radio 
4 in 1979. “It was incredible, I’d never seen anything like it, I really 
hadn’t. And I felt if it was possible to combine that strength of movement with 
the voice, then maybe it would work, and that’s what I’ve tried to do.”

That Bush performs live so infrequently – she played a series of dates in 1979 
and again in 2014, with little in between – is no surprise, Kemp thinks. “Yes, 
it’s exhausting,” he says. “Because one leaves this world: the known for the 
unknown. Music takes us somewhere else and we don’t know where it’s going to 
take us. We don’t know, but it certainly took me to almost a kind of real 
madness. A psychiatric kind of madness.”

Kemp believes he is a better performer since he has given up drinking: “It’s 
got to be a controlled madness… but one has to risk losing control.” He still 
has nerves, though, especially returning to Britain after such a long absence. 
He wonders who will come to see him, whether they’ll have any idea who he is or 
just be intrigued by the Bowie connection.

A couple of days before we meet, Kemp performed his one-man show in Bari, in 
the Italian south. He had been shocked to walk on stage to find that most of 
the audience were in their 20s. But even more surprising was the ovation he 
received before he even said a word. “It was surreal, I’d never heard applause 
like it,” he says, looking genuinely baffled. “And it went on and on, like in 
the movies. I started to feel that it must be a mistake. That it must be for 
somebody else behind me.”

Or perhaps the stardom Kemp always knew he was destined for has finally come.

For details of Lindsay Kemp’s event at Ace Hotel London in May, visit: 
acehotel.com/london <http://www.acehotel.com/london>. The documentary Lindsay 
Kemp’s Last Dance, directed by Nendie Pinto-Duschinsky, is out later this year
 