
In December 2010 the Hoffenheim sporting director, Ernst Tanner, travelled to 
the east coast ofBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> to check 
out a player at the second division side Figueirense. The reports had been 
promising but Tanner did not know what to expect as he turned up for training 
to watch the young Roberto Firmino Barbosa de Oliveira.

Afterwards, Tanner was not much the wiser. “It was strange because during some 
exercises he would just, without any apparent reason, just fold … but instead 
of making a big meal out of it and getting angry, he listened carefully to his 
coach and learned from what he had done wrong. That impressed me.”

It is perhaps not the most glowing reference ever heard from a scouting 
mission but Tanner convinced Hoffenheim that the 19-year-old, whose move to 
Liverpoolwas announced on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/24/liverpool-announce-roberto-firmino-signing-brazil-hoffenheim>
, was worth a gamble. In January 2011 the Bundesliga club signed the player for 
€4m without much fanfare. At the low-key unveiling Tanner explained the club’s 
plans for the unknown Brazilian.

“We are delighted to have been able to strengthen our squad with a top talent 
from Brazil, in which several international clubs were interested,” he said. 
“We will give him enough time to settle in here at our club. He has already 
shown his qualities with eight goals in 36 games and was recently voted the 
best player in the Brazilian second division.”

In hindsight, Firmino could hardly have chosen a better club to start his 
European adventure. Hoffenheim is a tiny town south of Frankfurt with only 
around 3,000 inhabitants. The young Brazilian was allowed to settle without the 
pressure of being at a big club, or even in a big city.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Foberto-firmino-video-score-no-look-basket-brazil-football&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435162056975%2FKP_324481_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20Brazilian%20footballer%20Roberto%20Firmino%20really%20score%20a%20'no-look'%20basket%20with%20his%20foot%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Foberto-firmino-video-score-no-look-basket-brazil-football>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20Brazilian%20footballer%20Roberto%20Firmino%20really%20score%20a%20%27no-look%27%20basket%20with%20his%20foot%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Foberto-firmino-video-score-no-look-basket-brazil-football&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435162056975%2FKP_324481_crop_640x360.jpg>
 New Liverpool striker Roberto Firmino appears to kick a football into a 
basketball hoop without looking 
Hoffenheim are only in the Bundesliga because of Dietmar Hopp’s huge financial 
support but they have also been extremely successful with their South American 
imports. In the month Firmino arrived at Hoffenheim, the club sold Luiz Gustavo 
to Bayern Munich for €17m. He had arrived from Corinthians Alagoano in 2008 for 
an even smaller fee than Firmino did three years later.

Firmino, in fact, was looking forward to moving to Europe so much that he got 
himself a tattoo in German before he boarded the flight. There was only one 
slight problem: he had used an internet translation tool, which did not use the 
umlaut on the ö in the phraseFamilie unaufhorlich Liebe, which roughly 
translates as “unremitting love for the family”.

Undeterred, the Brazilian made his Bundesliga debut a month after arriving in 
Germany and played in 11 league games that season, mainly as a substitute, 
scoring three goals; and this is the thing about Firmino, he is not an 
out-and-out goalscorer. He is a forward who averages roughly a goal every three 
games, and he has done that throughout his career.

Liverpool’s new signing Danny Ings prepares to play the numbers game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/22/liverpool-danny-ings-number-burnley-england>
What he does provide, though, is an unrelenting work ethic. In that respect, 
he is similar to Luis Suárez and Alexis Sánchez. He will harry and press the 
opponents until he drops. In one match report in Germany he was described as 
the “clever, first stealer of balls in Hoffenheim’s pressing system”.

Holger Stanislawski, his first manager at Hoffenheim, immediately described 
him as being “unbelievably good tactically”, which will be music to Brendan 
Rodgers’ ears after a season of having to teach Mario Balotelli, among other 
things, how to defend at corners.

In fact he has been showered with praise for most of his time in Germany, the 
papers describing him as one of few players “who stay focused for the entire 90 
minutes” and a “master of moving around without anyone noticing him, to provide 
goals or score them himself”.

There have been some disciplinary issues and he was once suspended briefly by 
Hoffenheim for turning up late for training but that was early on in his career 
and he has not done it since.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Froberto-firmino-liverpool-thiever-of-balls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435144421238%2F2a6ae22b-e2fd-4678-abce-f12a0ea3577d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liverpool%E2%80%99s%20Roberto%20Firmino%3A%20a%20thiever%20of%20balls%20who%20never%20stops%20running%20%7C%20Marcus%20Christenson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Froberto-firmino-liverpool-thiever-of-balls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liverpool%E2%80%99s%20Roberto%20Firmino%3A%20a%20thiever%20of%20balls%20who%20never%20stops%20running%20%7C%20Marcus%20Christenson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Froberto-firmino-liverpool-thiever-of-balls%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435144421238%2F2a6ae22b-e2fd-4678-abce-f12a0ea3577d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Roberto Firmino celebrates a Hoffenheim goal against Eintracht Frankfurt last 
season. Photograph: Action Press/Rex Shutterstock 
The 23-year-old was born in Maceió – as was Pepe and Mario Zagallo – which is 
one of Brazil’s most dangerous cities. His father sold water bottles to 
commuters waiting in the queues in and out of the city and he had to move to 
Figueirense on his own when he was 16. “It was not an easy time,” he has said, 
“I was completely on my own.” But that experience will have prepared him for 
moving to Germany, and now to England.

The 2013-14 season was arguably Firmino’s best to date with the manager Markus 
Gisdol getting the best out of him. Gisdol not only made him a better attacking 
player but also instilled the workrate ethic that was surely a big reason for
Liverpool paying as much as £29m for him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/24/liverpool-announce-roberto-firmino-signing-brazil-hoffenheim>
.

That season he scored 16 goals in 33 Bundesliga games, finishing third behind 
Marco Reus (30) and Robert Lewandowski (31) in the goalscoring charts. He also 
provided 12 assists in that campaign and is, in fact, the player who has 
created most chances in the Bundesliga (138) over the past two seasons. Firmino 
also had the joint-third most assists last season (10) with Thomas Müller. Not 
bad for someone playing for a mid-table club.

Liverpool announce signing of Joe Gomez from Charlton Athletic for £3.5m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/20/liverpool-joe-gomez-charlton-athletic>
Currently with Brazil at the Copa América, Firmino has coped well with the 
pressure of leading the line now that Neymar is suspended and he has already 
scored four goals in nine appearances for the national team. Dunga’s side play 
Paraguay in the quarter-finals on Saturday.

Behind the scenes, he is a bubbly, fun character but in front of the cameras 
he comes across as incredibly shy. On Tuesday, at a Copa press conference 
before his move was confirmed, he managed to answer 18 questions without saying 
anything of note. It got to a point where the Brazilian journalists could only 
smile.

Most importantly for Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>
, though, is that they seem to have learned from last summer’s travails in the 
transfer market. Then, a deal for Loïc Rémy collapsed in late July and the club 
were forced into what can only be described as a panic buy with Balotelli in 
August. This time they have already signed James Milner, Adam Bogdan, Danny 
Ings and now Firmino.

The fee is eye-watering considering it is almost as much as Chelsea paid for 
Diego Costa and more (with add-ons) than Arsenal paid for Sánchez. But there is 
no doubt that he is an extremely talented young player who is still improving. 
There will be few defences in the Premier League looking forward to an 
afternoon battling Philippe Coutinho, Firmino and Daniel Sturridge – if fit.

And while £29m does seem a lot, if Raheem Sterling joins Manchester City for a 
fee of around £45-50m then Liverpool will have got a more consistent performer 
and made a hefty profit in the process. They will settle for that, and if 
Sterling stays, then opposing defences will be in even more trouble next season.
 