
In the end everything turned out rather well for Exeter City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/exetercityfc>, even if this will be 
remembered as a night when a golden opportunity to eliminate Liverpool from the 
FA Cup and register one of the most famous victories in the League Two club’s 
history slipped through their fingers.

Brad Smith, a 21-year-old Australian who was making only his fifth appearance 
forLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>, equalised 17 
minutes from time to spare Jürgen Klopp the embarrassment of an upset that 
looked on the cards from the moment the teams were announced. The bad news for 
Liverpool’s manager is that another fixture has to be crowbarred into an 
already congested schedule and, with that in mind, it was tempting to wonder 
whether a draw was the worst possible scenario for Klopp.

Jürgen Klopp to pick callow Liverpool side again for Exeter Cup replay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-exeter-cup-replay>
With 12 Liverpool players missing through injury, the tie being played on a 
pudding of a pitch, live television cameras in town and Exeter right up for the 
occasion, all the ingredients were there for a famous upset and for a long 
period it looked as though Paul Tisdale’s side would deliver one of those famous
FA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> stories.

Smith, however, had not read the script and his close-range left-footed shot, 
after Jordan Moore-Taylor cleared off the line, means Exeter will travel to 
Anfield on Wednesday week for a replay and quite a payday. Early estimations 
are that a share of the gate receipts at Liverpool could be worth as much as 
£500,000 to Exeter.

That should soften the blow for Tisdale, whose disappointment afterwards 
reflected how close his impressive side had come to giving Klopp an unwelcome 
first taste of what the FA Cup is all about. Exeter’s manager had every right 
to feel proud of his players, who performed with courage and belief.

The home team sensed blood from the outset, took the lead through Tom Nichols’ 
10th goal of the season and, when Lee Holmes scored direct from a corner kick 
on the stroke of half-time, to restore their advantage after Jerome Sinclair 
had equalised in the 12th minute, Klopp’s face was a picture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fexeter-liverpool-fa-cup-third-round-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44d3b06bb3fac27dbfe0e55a1a071c1462550a65%2F178_0_2634_1582%2F2634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liverpool%E2%80%99s%20Brad%20Smith%20strikes%20to%20deny%20Exeter%20a%20memorable%20FA%20Cup%20scalp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fexeter-liverpool-fa-cup-third-round-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liverpool%E2%80%99s%20Brad%20Smith%20strikes%20to%20deny%20Exeter%20a%20memorable%20FA%20Cup%20scalp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fexeter-liverpool-fa-cup-third-round-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44d3b06bb3fac27dbfe0e55a1a071c1462550a65%2F178_0_2634_1582%2F2634.jpg>
 Tom Nichols slides the ball past Adam Bogdan to score Exeter’s first goal. 
Photograph: Andrew Powell/Liverpool FC via Getty Images 
It was not a moment that Adam Bogan, the Liverpool goalkeeper, will want to 
view again and added to the growing impression that this was going to be 
Exeter’s night. Bogdan was one of the few recognisable names in the Liverpool 
side, along with José Enrique, who was making his first appearance for the club 
in the best part of 12 months, and Christian Benteke.

Liverpool’s £32.5m signing played the full 90 minutes and it must have been a 
chastening experience for the Belgium international. He was unlucky to see his 
powerful header tipped over the bar by Bobby Olejnik early in the second half 
but he was a peripheral figure for much of the evening and could have been 
forgiven for wondering how his Liverpool career has got to the point where he 
has ended up playing in a team of virtual unknowns.

Klopp’s starting lineup showed 11 changes from the team that started against 
Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/05/stoke-city-liverpool-capital-one-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 in the Capital One Cup semi-final first leg on Tuesday night. In fact, take 
Benteke and Enrique out of that XI and the other nine players had only 18 
Liverpool appearances between them.

In that context Klopp could have been forgiven for fearing the worst when 
Exeter took the lead after nine minutes following a raid down Liverpool’s left 
flank. Jamie Reid was the creator, the forward showing a mixture of pace and 
strength to get away from Enrique before delivering a low inch-perfect cross 
that was expertly steered in by Nichols.

Liverpool, to their credit, quickly responded, albeit after some calamitous 
Exeter defending. Ryan Kent, who started brightly, looked to pass into the feet 
of Benteke in the area and, as the ball broke loose, two Exeter players seemed 
to get in one another’s way. Jordan Tillson ended up swinging a wild left boot 
at the ball and it fell kindly for Sinclair, who finished clinically from about 
10 yards on his first start for the club.

Liverpool struggle to find right wavelength after warm Exeter reception
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/08/exeter-liverpool-fa-cup-jurgen-klopp>
Exeter, however, looked the more dangerous of the two teams. David Noble might 
have done better when he lifted a shot over the bar and Christian Ribeiro, who 
was keen to get forward on the right at every opportunity, narrowly headed wide 
of the far upright with Bogdan beaten.

The Liverpool goalkeeper was not so fortunate four minutes later. Holmes stuck 
his left-footed corner kick with pace and precision, the ball arrowing over the 
head of Bogan, who ended up hanging on to the crossbar, and into the far corner 
of the net to put Exeter back in front.

Although Benteke saw his header saved, Exeter were growing in confidence in 
the second half and it was difficult to see where the Liverpool equaliser was 
going to come from. Yet Sheyi Ojo, who was one of five Liverpool debutants, 
made an instant impact when his break down the left, only two minutes after 
coming off the bench, led to Smith drilling home.

While “a tad disappointed” with the result, Tisdale could also see the silver 
lining. “A windfall like this is the sort of cash injection we don’t get,” he 
said. “We’re going to get a payday and it’s about keeping going what we have, 
not just signing new players but re-employing players, so it’s a big 
achievement for us tonight. We’re very frugal, careful with every penny, so I 
just can’t over-emphasise how important this will be for a club like Exeter.”
 