
The Liverpool Everyman theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/everyman-theatre> has named the actors who 
will perform in its first repertory company for 25 years.

During its golden age in the mid-1970s, the theatre’s repertory company 
launched the careers of actors such as Julie Walters, Jonathan Pryce, Pete 
Postlethwaite, Antony Sher and Bill Nighy.

As with many other theatres, the Everyman closed its resident company in the 
early 1990s because of a fall in public funding, but in April it announced 
plans toresuscitate the tradition of having in-house actors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/apr/27/liverpool-everyman-resident-actors-local-heroes-gemma-bodinetz>
.

The 14 actors, seven men and seven women, will perform in five shows – ranging 
from Romeo and Juliet and Fiddler on the Roof, to a new Toxteth-set drama – 
between February and July next year.

The group, described as a “mix of local voices, renowned performers and 
emerging talent”, includes Richard Bremmer, who played Voldemort in the first 
Harry Potter film, and Melanie La Barrie, who played Mrs Phelps in the West End 
hit musical Matilda.

The company also includes Emily Hughes, 23, who was recruited through an open 
audition, and Elliott Davis, 19, who has risen through the Everyman youth 
theatre.

The artistic director, Gemma Bodinetz, said the actors would have a “massive 
shadow hanging over them of the glorious, wonderful mid-70s. And you ask 
yourself, was that just the time, was that just a phenomenal flowering that 
could never happen again?

“By having a rep company we’re creating a family that can really respond to 
the city, who will create a conversation with our audiences and will together 
create vibrant, vital work.


The new Liverpool Everyman – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/mar/15/new-liverpool-everyman-haworth-tompkins-in-pictures>
“There’s such a rich mix of experience and new talent, of performers from this 
city and those new to it, all of whom are extraordinary in their own way and 
I’m so excited to see them come together next year.”

The associate director, Nick Bagnall, said: “Through an incredibly rigorous 
casting process I believe we have found a group of multi-skilled and agile 
performers who will tell these beautiful stories with joy and an open heart. I 
cannot wait to see how the city responds to them and the tales we are about to 
tell together.”

In July 2011, the theatre closed for a £27m rebuild under the architects 
Haworth Tompkins. It reopened in February 2014 and in October that year itwon 
the Stirling prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/16/stirling-prize-riba-everyman-theatre-haworth-tompkins>
 for best building of the year by the Royal Institute of British Architects.

The full list of actors in the new Everyman company is: Richard Bremmer, 
Patrick Brennan, George Caple, Pauline Daniels, Elliott Davis, Laura dos 
Santos, Emily Hughes, Tom Kanji, Melanie La Barrie, Asha Kingsley, Dean Nolan, 
Zelina Rebeiro, Keddy Sutton and Liam Tobin.
 