
Brendan Rodgers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brendan-rodgers> has 
claimed Liverpool are searching for their identity after a disappointing start 
to the season.

The manager has watched his side slump to desperate defeats in their past two 
matches, againstWest Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/29/liverpool-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
 andManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/12/manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
, but it is the manner of their losses which is worrying Rodgers.

The performances have attracted fierce criticism from supporters and Rodgers, 
before theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> Group B game in 
Bordeaux on Thursday, admits Liverpool have lost their way.

"You can lose games but it is how you lose them, and the last couple of games 
are not how you want to lose," Rodgers said. "I think it is good I have an 
identity as a coach and a way of working that is clear and I can see where any 
one making that comment would come from.

"I am confident we can get back to playing that way and it is something I 
along with the staff are working very hard to reinforce, the principles of how 
we have worked here."

Asked about the level of pressure, he said: "Same as it has ever been and 
probably what I've had for the last year or so. I don't think it has increased 
at all. It is the pressure which comes with managing a great club.

"It says everything that you lose a couple of games and that pressure comes, 
but I've always embraced and enjoyed that. Nothing has changed in that way. I 
just need to concentrate on getting the team right. Pressure is something which 
is part and parcel of being manager of this club."

Former professionals criticised, in particular, the performance at Old 
Trafford, which fell well below the standards expected in a match against their 
north-west rivals.

Many observers have remarked the current team are a pale imitation of a 
Rodgers' team at their best, dominating possession and having a quick passing 
game.

Rodgers has left behind the first-choice central-defensive pair Martin Skrtel 
and Dejan Lovren, right-back Nathaniel Clyne, midfielders Lucas Leiva and James 
Milner and striker Christian Benteke.

However, he denies he is taking a gamble. "My approach is what I did in this 
competition when I first came in: we played players who were needing games and 
it gives me a chance to look at some younger players and back then we finished 
top of the group," added Rodgers, who confirmed Mamadou Sakho will make his 
first appearance of the season and the Belgian striker Divock Origi his first 
start.

"We will pick a team to win the game. At this stage for me it is really about 
trying to get a performance level as consequently that will lead to us getting 
consistent results. Some players who I left behind will play [against Norwich 
on Sunday] but there will be players who play [on Thursday] who will play at 
the weekend and that opportunity is there."

Bordeaux's coach, Willy Sagnol, whose side have had a similar start to 
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> in their opening 
league games, is taking nothing for granted despite Liverpool's weakened squad. 
"There are a number of Liverpool's top-level players absent," he said. "We do 
not change: our Benteke is missing â€“ Cheick Diabate is injured [with a thigh 
strain].

"A good time to play Liverpool? When you are Bordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux>, I do not know if there is one."
 