
Jürgen Klopp has said he is close to deploying Daniel Sturridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/daniel-sturridge> for the first time in 
his Liverpool reign but has no dilemma over accommodating the strikers at his 
disposal.

Sturridge was an unused substitute in Liverpool’s mauling of Manchester City 
on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/21/manchester-city-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
, with Christian Benteke also starting on the bench as Klopp fielded Roberto 
Firmino at the centre of his three-pronged attack.

Jürgen Klopp: I wanted to be a doctor. I think I’ve still got ‘helper syndrome’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/25/jurgen-klopp-doctor-helper-syndrome-liverpool-borussia-dortmund>
The Liverpool manager, who had only Divock Origi available at the start of his 
Anfield tenure withDanny Ings also sidelined by injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/liverpool-burnley-danny-ings-valuations>
, has seen his striking options finally improve in the past week and may give 
Sturridge game-time against Bordeaux in the Europa League on Thursday. 
Liverpool will qualify for the knockout stage with a win or a goalless draw at 
Anfield.

Klopp’s priority, however, is the development of his team following the 4-1 
win at the Etihad Stadium. “What is most important is having 11 players who can 
work and who are together on the pitch,” he said. “Not having four strikers on 
the pitch in the hope of scoring more goals. It is about creating these moments 
to score.

“The best news at the moment is Daniel is getting closer and closer. He can 
train seven or eight times in a row which is the longest period since I’ve been 
here.”

The Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> manager, who 
could be without the ill Martin Skrtel and will be without Philippe Coutinho 
against Bordeaux, added: “Daniel’s had another three or four sessions since 
Saturday which is important. My decision [on the team] you will see tomorrow 
but the most important thing is he can train without problems. We will see in 
the game if we have a good feeling for him to have a few minutes or more.”

Klopp was asked by a French journalist for his thoughts on Willy Sagnol, the 
former Bayern Munich defender who took charge ofBordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> last year, his first coaching 
role at club level.

“I know he was one of the best full-backs I ever saw,” the Liverpool manager 
replied. “He played sometimes in a German style, whatever that is. But it 
doesn’t matter who is on the touchline, it is about the players on the pitch. 
He was a world class full back. I was a non-league full-back. We’ll see what 
works better.”
 