
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> have signed the 
Hoffenheim forward Roberto Firmino subject to a medical, the Premier League 
club have announced.

The 23-year-old Brazil international has agreed what Liverpool describe as “a 
long-term contract” and will undergo a medical once he completes his 
commitments at the Copa América. Firmino has scored 47 goals in 151 appearances 
during his four and a half years in Germany and has scored four times in nine 
international caps, includingSunday’s Copa América winner against Venezuela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/22/brazil-venezuela-copa-america-match-report>
.

Liverpool’s Roberto Firmino: a thiever of balls who never stops running | 
Marcus Christenson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jun/24/roberto-firmino-liverpool-thiever-of-balls>
Liverpool are likely to have to pay an initial £25m with further fees taking 
that total nearer £29m, which would make it the second largest transfer in 
their history – behind the £35m signing of Andy Carroll.

The club have taken steps to smooth the third-party ownership issues that 
would have prevented Firmino moving to England. While doubt continues to 
surroundRaheem Sterling’s future at Anfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/17/liverpool-reject-manchester-citys-40m-bid-for-raheem-sterling>
, Firmino’s arrival goes some way to demonstrate Fenway Sports Group’s 
ambitions for the campaign ahead.

The forward can lead the line as a lone striker but will more naturally 
operate as a No10, a creator as well as scorer. He has also demonstrated a 
willingness to track back and work in defensive areas which will appeal to 
Brendan Rodgers, after a season of frustration with last year’s £16m signing, 
Mario Balotelli.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Foberto-firmino-video-score-no-look-basket-brazil-football&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435162056975%2FKP_324481_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20Brazilian%20footballer%20Roberto%20Firmino%20really%20score%20a%20'no-look'%20basket%20with%20his%20foot%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Foberto-firmino-video-score-no-look-basket-brazil-football>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20Brazilian%20footballer%20Roberto%20Firmino%20really%20score%20a%20%27no-look%27%20basket%20with%20his%20foot%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Foberto-firmino-video-score-no-look-basket-brazil-football&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435162056975%2FKP_324481_crop_640x360.jpg>
 New Liverpool striker Roberto Firmino appears to kick a football into a 
basketball hoop without looking 
Firmino is Liverpool’s fifth signing in a busy start to the transfer window 
and joinsDanny Ings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/22/liverpool-danny-ings-number-burnley-england>
,Adam Bogdan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/12/liverpool-sign-bolton-goalkeeper-adam-bogdan>
,James Milner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/04/james-milner-liverpool-brendan-rodgers>
 andJoe Gomez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/20/liverpool-joe-gomez-charlton-athletic>
 in moving to the Merseyside club since the end of last season.
 