
Whatever was going through Christian Benteke’s mind when Liverpool met his 
£32.5m release clause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/19/liverpool-agree-deal-christian-benteke-aston-villa-transfer>
 from Aston Villa last summer, it was unlikely to be visions of warming the 
bench during important games against Arsenal and Manchester United then getting 
a run-out with the kids in the FA Cup.

Jürgen Klopp’s Liverpool kids kill off Exeter City’s FA Cup dream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/20/liverpool-exeter-city-fa-cup-replay-match-report>
That’s how the transfer has worked out, surprisingly since Benteke is 
Liverpool’s second biggest signing and the most expensive player at the club. 
Even when Brendan Rodgers bought him there was some confusion over the role he 
might play in a quick-breaking, passing side, and since Jürgen Klopp took over 
there seems to be still more. Not even the almost permanent absence of Daniel 
Sturridge has encouraged Klopp to use Benteke in meaningful matches and the 
suspicion the striker still needs to convince his new manager of his usefulness 
led to pointed questions at the most recent press conference and reassurances 
from Klopp thatthe player still has a future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-christian-benteke-future>
 at Anfield.

That being so, the future started here. Benteke may have privately felt he was 
on a hiding to nothing playing in an unfamiliar side against League Two 
opponents – normally the trial match comes before the multi-million pound 
transfer – but to begin at the beginning Benteke’s name drew warm applause from 
the home crowd when it was announced before kick-off.

Possibly because it was one of the very few supporters recognised, though in 
fairness it is likely to be a badge of honour amongLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> fans to be thoroughly familiar 
with all the club’s youth products.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fjurgen-klopp-liverpool-exeter-city-fa-cup-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F21%2F1453370339325%2FKP_1500472_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%20hails%20Liverpool%E2%80%99s%20young%20players%20after%20beating%20Exeter%20City%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fjurgen-klopp-liverpool-exeter-city-fa-cup-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%20hails%20Liverpool%E2%80%99s%20young%20players%20after%20beating%20Exeter%20City%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fjurgen-klopp-liverpool-exeter-city-fa-cup-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F21%2F1453370339325%2FKP_1500472_crop_640x360.jpg>
Jürgen Klopp hails Liverpool’s young players after beating Exeter City. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jan/21/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-exeter-city-fa-cup-video>
Once the game got under way Benteke’s first significant involvement was in 
attempting to meet a João Carlos Teixeira cross right in front of goal. On that 
occasion he was foiled by the goalkeeper reaching the ball first but a couple 
of minutes later he was back and this time with a killer pass instead of a 
bludgeoned finish. Liverpool’s opening goal owed a lot to Brad Smith’s 
sprightly run down the left but without the return ball that sent the full-back 
to the goalline the low cross Joe Allen tucked away may not have been so 
straightforward.

Benteke could have doubled the lead midway through the first half from another 
Teixeira cross, this time one that picked him out more accurately, though with 
a virtual free header from the six-yard line he put the ball over both 
goalkeeper and bar. When he skewed his next shot horribly wide the attempt drew 
derisive jeers from the Exeter fans and it appeared Benteke may be trying too 
hard, yet at least he kept trying and put a far-post header into the 
side-netting following a corner.

Jürgen Klopp: Christian Benteke has a long-term future at Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-christian-benteke-future>
Some attempted close-control trickery that went awry at the Anfield Road end 
predictably produced chants of “what a waste of money”, and when Benteke tried 
to prove otherwise on Liverpool’s last attack of the first half his low shot 
was on target but too easily blocked.

While the Exeter fans’s verdict might have been harsh, as the second half wore 
on an uncomfortable truth began to be revealed. Benteke does not really fit in 
with the way Liverpool’s second string play either. One might have thought a 
bunch of callow youths would be glad of an expensive striker in their midst, 
but could they find him? Rarely. Did they play to Benteke’s strengths? Hardly. 
Constantly making himself available but rarely getting the ball, the Belgian 
was as peripheral in this Cup side as he has been in the Liverpool first team. 
When Jordon Ibe set up Sheyi Ojo for his exquisite finish for the second goal, 
he overlooked Benteke standing right next to him.

Odd, isn’t it? Arsène Wenger says the English game is suffering for want of 
old fashioned centre-forwards, strikers with a physical presence who are good 
in the air. Aston Villa are definitely suffering without Benteke’s goals, for 
even playing for a side usually struggling at the wrong end of the table he 
proved himself effective enough to get noticed. Yet Liverpool have just such a 
player and they cannot find a way to use him. It is not just one manager’s 
judgment either, but two.

And nor is Benteke the only centre-forward to have this happen to him in 
recent times. Andy Carroll cost even more. Benteke does not resemble Carroll as 
a player, though his situation is rapidly becoming identical.

Which is to say, untenable. He is a good enough footballer to have a future; 
whether it is as Anfield becomes less clear every day. Could history be 
repeating itself? To paraphrase Lady Bracknell, to misplace one astronomically 
expensive centre-forward could be considered an accident. Two sounds careless.
 