
Jürgen Klopp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> refused to be 
drawn on Joe Allen’s future after Liverpool accepted an initial £13m bid for 
the Wales international from Stoke City. Allen could be joined on his way out 
of Anfield by Jon Flanagan, who is mulling over a proposed loan move to Burnley.

Daniel Agger: ‘Maybe my story will make other athletes take fewer pills’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/20/daniel-agger-liverpool-story-athletes-pills>
Mark Hughes leads the race to sign Allen after Stoke became the first club to 
meet Liverpool’s valuation of the 26-year-old. The midfielder has 12 months 
remaining on his Anfield contract and has struggled to secure a regular 
first-team role during his four seasons on Merseyside, despite the admiration 
of Klopp and his predecessor, Brendan Rodgers.

Swansea City have registered interest in a reunion with their former player, 
who is understood to favour a return to the Liberty Stadium, while Sevilla are 
also keen on a key component of Wales’sprogress to the European Championship 
semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
. Only Stoke have lodged a firm offer for Allen, however, and he has been left 
to consider his options while on holiday after the tournament in France.

“There is nothing about this and all the transfer rumours,” said the Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> manager, shortly before 
embarking on the club’s pre-season tour of the US. “I feel good [about Allen]. 
I like the guy and I really think he is a wonderful football player. I knew 
this before the European Championships, I saw it during the Euros and I know it 
now.

“I have said all I can say about this. It is all about respecting contracts, 
negotiating or not – whatever – and making a transfer or not. But it is nothing 
to discuss in public. I’ve not seen him since the middle of May in Basel.”

Klopp omitted Flanagan from Wednesday’s pre-season friendly against 
Huddersfield Town afternewly promoted Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/burnley-qpr-championship-match-report>
 offered the full-back a season-long loan. Liverpool’s manager views the 
23-year-old as part of his long-term plans but, after an injury-plagued 18 
months and amid greater competition for places at Anfield, may consider the 
prospect of regular Premier League football at Turf Moor of greater benefit to 
Flanagan. The versatile defender is considering the move only four months after
signing a new three-year contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/17/liverpool-jon-flanagan-new-contract>
 with his boyhood club.

Liverpool recorded their fourth consecutive win of pre-season at the John 
Smith’s Stadium, where goals from new arrival Marko Grujic and Alberto Moreno 
gave the visitors a 2-0 victory in The Shankly Trophy friendly.

Grujic, who impressed in central midfield with his stature and composure on 
the ball, scored his second goal of pre-season with a clinical first-half 
finish. TheHuddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> 
goalkeeper Joel Coleman saved a Philippe Coutinho penalty moments later, having 
been only booked for denying Sadio Mané a clear goalscoring opportunity, before 
Moreno sealed victory in the 88th minute with another penalty.

Liverpool ended the game with the 18-year-old academy goalkeeper Shamal George 
in attack having deployed all their outfield substitutes at half-time and lost 
Lucas Leiva with a hamstring injury. The Brazilian midfielder’s involvement in 
the tour of the US is in doubt as a consequence. The match was temporarily 
halted after a drone appeared above the pitch during the second half.

“The first half we should have scored more,” Klopp said. “We missed a penalty 
and had a few big chances and played some wonderful combinations, so it was 
really good. But I was not too happy with the concentration level in the first 
20 minutes.

“The second half we were lively but we were under pressure and then we had the 
unfortunate injury of Lucas. We played a strange formation, with Shamal as a 
striker but he did wonderfully. I was watching the game and organising the 
system with 10 and then they came and said ‘Come on, we have Shamal’ so we 
changed it. Even though it doesn’t look like it all the time these games are 
quite serious – we don’t want to make joke games. It is nice when the crowd 
calls it in but at 1-0 in no game in the world should you make a ‘funny’ 
decision. If it is 4-0 or 5-0 you can think about it but even then it is a lack 
of respect for the opponent. But everything is okay.”
 