
The Football Association and BBC have been accused of a blatant disregard for 
supporters after scheduling Liverpool’sFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> tie at Exeter for a Friday 
evening.

Fans face an overnight stay or 500-mile round trip for the third round clash 
after it was moved to 7.55pm on 8 January. The last train to leave the Devon 
city forLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> departs at 
6.25pm.

The Reds fans’ group Spirit of Shankly has attacked the plans saying it does 
not take into account the safety of thousands of people travelling or the 
general inconvenience it will cause.

Manchester United to be televised live for 48th FA Cup tie in succession
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/11/manchester-united-fa-cup-televised>
“It shows the contempt and lack of regard with which they hold football 
supporters,” a spokesman, Jay McKenna, said. “It is a physical manifestation of 
their greed. For theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> to schedule a 
match for a Friday night when the only way to get there is by car or coach 
[shows] they don’t care whether supporters can get there and back safely at a 
decent hour.

“We are relatively powerless but I think this will have a negative impact on a 
lot of Liverpool supporters who will not go – and that is not about the travel, 
it is the fact they will have to take Friday off work – and those that work 
Saturdays will have to take two days off.

“I will probably be watching at home and some of our committee members have 
already said they can’t justify taking two days off.”

McKenna also criticised the authorities and broadcaster for failing to consult 
adequately over their plans for the match, although he accepts fans’ views are 
rarely taken into consideration.

“We are not the first club to suffer from this – and we won’t be the last – as 
FC United had their match moved to a Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/28/fc-united-manchester-fa-cup-kick-off-tv>
 but what angers us is they don’t actually speak to supporters to ask what 
impact it will have,” he added.

“Both clubs but mainly the FA and BBC should be saying: ‘We realise it is 
going to impact on you and this is what we will do to help.’ The FA and BBC 
should be offering financial compensation with subsidised tickets and travel.”

The Football Association announced on Friday that Manchester United’s third 
round tie against Sheffield Unitedwill be shown by BT Sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/11/manchester-united-fa-cup-televised>
, making it the 48th successive FA Cup match featuring the 11-times winners to 
be televised live.
 