
Liverpool's managing director Ian Ayre has stressed that Luis Suárez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/luis-suarez> retains the club's full 
support and insists the striker will not be affected by his latest controversy.

The fall-out continues to rumble on from the Uruguay international's handball 
for the second goal inthe 2-1 FA Cup win at Mansfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jan/06/mansfield-liverpool-fa-cup-report>
. Even a Methodist minister from the Nottinghamshire town has joined the 
debate, criticising the "evil" of a lack of sportsmanship in football in 
general.

But Ayre, who dismissed claims by Mansfield's chairman John Radford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jan/07/luis-suarez-accused-embarrassing-liverpool>
 that he was embarrassed by Suárez's actions, said the striker had nothing to 
worry about.

"There have been plenty of decisions which have gone against Luis this 
season," he said. "These things seem to follow Luis around and it's 
unfortunate, but he has our full support.

"He's a fantastic player who makes a huge contribution to the club. Knowing 
Luis, it won't affect him as he's a very strong character."

On Radford's claims, Ayre told the Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> Echo: "I was surprised when I 
read his comments because Mansfield's manager and players showed a lot of 
dignity after the game. It's nonsense to say that I was embarrassed."

Suárez's handball prompted the Rev Bob Jones, a minister at three Methodist 
churches inMansfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield>, to 
question the values of the modern game.

"I have long thought that the game of football suffers from two evils, too 
much money and a lack of sportsmanship," he told the Nottingham Post.

"I watched the game on TV and both my wife and I were incensed. On this 
occasion the player I believe knew he had done wrong by his reactions following 
the incident, but felt he either did not want to do the decent thing or felt 
under too much pressure from what the team and manager's reaction might be.

"I accept the referee made the decision but the player could have been a real 
gentleman and owned up to it."
 