
Divock Origi has told Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> he wants to move to Anfield in 
January but accepts an early arrival in the Premier League can take place only 
with the consent of Lille.

The 19-year-old forward, who scored a fine goal for Belgium against Iceland on 
Wednesday,joined Liverpool from Lille in the summer for £9.8m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/29/liverpool-complete-divock-origi-deal>
 with the transfer dependent on him remaining with the French club on loan this 
season. Origi has stayed in regular contact with Brendan Rodgers and, with 
Liverpool struggling in front of goal, has raised the prospect of increasing 
the manager’s options in the next transfer window.

A premature move would suit both Origi and Liverpool, who are believed to be 
willing to pay extra to bring the transfer forward to January. However, the 
striker admitsLille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lille> need to agree 
to break the original deal and Liverpool have had no encouragement that could 
happen.

He said: “Maybe January, who knows? It is not me who makes the decisions but 
if the club choose to let me go in January I would go. I would like to join 
Liverpool then. I said that I would stay for the whole season and I wish to 
remain honourable in that, of course, but if there was a decision by the clubs, 
I would not say that I would not like to go to Liverpool in January.

“Brendan Rodgers is in contact regularly. That makes me feel very good and 
wanted. And although I agreed to stay with Lille until the end of this season, 
if there was a chance of joining Liverpool sooner I would take it.

“I would love to move to Liverpool sooner rather than later. I am here at 
Lille, it is fine, they are a good club and they have helped me. But it is also 
frustrating. It is French football. I can’t wait to be playing in the Premier 
League because I can now see that it will suit me better.”

Origi, who was preferred to Romelu Lukaku in Belgium’s final two games at the 
World Cup in Brazil, has kept a close eye on Liverpool’s problems without Luis 
Suárez and theinjured Daniel Sturridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/12/liverpool-striker-daniel-sturridge-training>
. He added: “They have a team with a lot of talent, with a lot of good players 
and a very good coach. But they have had a lot of injuries and this has not 
helped them.

“It is difficult when you do not have a player like Daniel Sturridge. I 
believe they just have to be more efficient but I also believe that it is only 
a matter of time before it comes.”

Sturridge has been sidelined since August with thigh and calf injuries but is 
expected to return for Liverpool’s next game after the international break at 
Crystal Palace on Sunday 23 November.
 