
The writing of American novelist Dennis Lehane is particularly well suited to 
screen adaptation. His propulsive narratives, bullet-hole plot points and a 
knack for capturing the fractious banter of blue-collar Boston all combine into 
that rarest of assets: authenticity. It’s for this that Lehane tends to attract 
big-ticket directors hoping for prestige projects: Clint Eastwood (Mystic River
, 2003 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/jun/04/dvdreviews.shopping>), Ben 
Affleck (Gone Baby Gone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jun/08/drama>, 
2007) and Martin Scorsese (Shutter Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/14/shutter-island-review-philip-french>
, 2010).

But that crucial authenticity is missing from this newest adaptation of a 
Lehane novel. For his latest outing as a director, Affleck returns to Lehane’s 
work, this time the 1920s Boston and Florida-set gangster novelLive By Night. 
But there’s something too sanitised and synthetic about this picture. It feels 
like a facsimile of prohibition America, a Vegas casino recreation rather than 
the real thing, lacking the grit and spit and sawdust of a country hurtling 
into the Great Depression. This filters through into the music choices: 
Cuban salsa works well to capture the free-spirited swing of Florida, but there 
is too much generic musical mulch that adds little to the film.
Watch the trailer for Live By Night 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CtFZcAuH-qI>. 
Affleck stars in the film as well as writes and directs. His performance, as 
Irish outlaw-turned-gangster Joe Coughlin is solid enough, but the standout 
turns are in cameo supporting roles.Brendan Gleeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/brendan-gleeson>, playing Joe’s police chief 
father, is tremendous in a few early scenes. Also impressive is Sienna Miller 
as chippy Irish moll Emma Gould, Joe’s near-fatal weakness. But the sparks of 
life that come with these scenes are soon lost in a bloated, overstuffed 
picture that relies too heavily on genre cliches.
 