
What should have been an easy warm up for Saturday's Old Firm derby was turned 
into something rather less comfortable for Rangers asLivingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> mounted a spirited 
second-half revival.

When the Livingston substitute Rolando Zarate scored his second goal with 
three minutes left to make the score 4-3 it made for an anxious finale for
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>.

Prior to that the match had been the ideal preparation for the Celtic game. It 
seemed all over when, with Rangers leading 4-2, Gary Bollan of Livingston was 
sent off after 74 minutes.

Things had gone so smoothly for Rangers for the first hour that their manager 
Alex McLeish was able to give Christian Nerlinger, Maurice Ross and Peter 
Lovenkrands, recent injury victims, runs outs.

Rangers might have been ahead after 15 seconds when, straight from the 
kick-off, Michael Mols sent Ronald de Boer through the middle with the 
visitors' defence posted missing but the Dutchman struck a poor effort straight 
at Javier Sanchez Broto. It mattered not. Rangers continued in the same vein 
and went ahead after six minutes through a fine Barry Ferguson free-kick to 
punish Oscar Rubio's foul on de Boer.

It was always going to be a difficult night for Livingston and any lingering 
doubts about that were removed three minutes later when Shota Arveladze headed 
home Neil McCann's cross with the aid of a slight deflection off Marvin Andrews.

It was a procession then and following a good save by Broto that denied Mols, 
Arveladze was first to a Fernando Ricksen corner in 17 minutes and once more 
headed past the goalkeeper.

Livingston's frustration showed when Bollan was booked for a foul on Arthur 
Numan after 24 minutes and although there was a brief lull before Mols danced 
through but fired over after turning Andrews inside out.

Mols was frustrated again when Bollan cleared his effort off the line, 
Arveladze went close twice more and Lorenzo Amoruso and Barry Ferguson sent 
free-kicks narrowly wide before the referee Dougie McDonald brought 
Livingston's first-half torment to an end.

A half-time appearance from Paul Gascoigne, who made Rangers' prize draw, 
added to the home fans' good humour as, indeed, did the fourth 60 seconds after 
the restart.

De Boer was the architect with a good cross from the right, Mols dummied and 
Arveladze swept the ball home to complete his hat-trick.

But three minutes later Livingston pulled a goal back, Zarate sending a 
30-yard free-kick hurtling past Stefan Klos following Ferguson's foul on Burton 
O'Brien.

Livingston managed to cut the deficit further in the 72nd minute later with 
another goal of rare quality as Wilson fired home a left-foot shot from 25 
yards. But three minutes later they were down to 10 men when Bollan was sent 
off for a second booking after a foul on Arveladze.

Â· Celtic maintained their slender one-point lead at the top of the table when 
a goal by the Bulgarian midfielder Stilian Petrov in the 76th minute gave the 
champions a 1-0 win at Hibernian. Celtic were without their Swedish striker 
Henrik Larsson, believed to be suffering from a throat infection, and Chris 
Sutton was out with a hip injury. Hearts suffered a surprise 6-1 defeat away to 
the bottom club Motherwell.

 Rangers (4-4-2): Klos; Muscat, Amoruso, Moore, Numan (Ross,70); Ricksen, 
Ferguson (Nerlinger, 63), de Boer (Lovenkrands, 63), Arveladze; Mols, McCann.

 Livingston (4-4-2): Broto; Brinquin, Rubio, Andrews, Bollan; Camacho (Wilson, 
h-t), Makel, Toure-Maman, O'Brien (Quino, 70); Bingham, Dadi (Zarate, h-t).

 Referee: D McDonald.
 