
The problem for most women in the acting profession is that they suffer a 
shortage of interesting roles in older age. But the career curve of Liz Smith,
who has died aged 95 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/26/the-royle-family-actress-liz-smith-has-died-aged-95-a-spokeswoman-for-her>
, was uniquely the reverse.

Unable to become a full-time actor until late middle age because she was a 
single mother bringing up two children, she rapidly became the go-to woman for 
ageing mothers and grandmothers. From 1983-84, she played characters identified 
only as Gran in four different TV series.

 She later perfected the role as Nana in Caroline Aherne and Craig Cash’s 
sitcomThe Royle Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/23/how-we-made-the-royle-family>
. The only reason her best movie role – as Mother in Alan Bennett’s 1984 
rationing comedyA Private Function <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vq3ohJV7cgk>
 – wasn’t also a granny was the elaborate contraceptive apparatus that Maggie 
Smith, as her daughter, and Michael Palin employ in that film.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fliz-smith-the-royle-family-tvs-favourite-dotty-granny-and-outspoken-nana%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e19f33206ab941b2b7d7268d1df6a2e34b03cd7%2F0_9_7332_4402%2F7332.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liz%20Smith%3A%20TV's%20favourite%20dotty%20Granny%20and%20outspoken%20Nana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fliz-smith-the-royle-family-tvs-favourite-dotty-granny-and-outspoken-nana%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liz%20Smith%3A%20TV%27s%20favourite%20dotty%20Granny%20and%20outspoken%20Nana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fliz-smith-the-royle-family-tvs-favourite-dotty-granny-and-outspoken-nana%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e19f33206ab941b2b7d7268d1df6a2e34b03cd7%2F0_9_7332_4402%2F7332.jpg>
 Smith with Sue Johnston (as Barbara Royle) in The Royle Family. Photograph: 
Granada/REX/Shutterstock 
Those two works gave Smith her most memorable scenes: drawing tears as she 
portrayed the final decline and death of the grand-matriarch in her last 
episode of The Royle Family, and triggering loud laughter in A Private 
Function, as she sat dourly church-hatted beside Smith while the daughter 
carried out her wartime duties as a cinema organist.

 Being an unknown actor on the verge of her 50th birthday ought to have been 
an insuperable obstacle to the ambitions for stardom Smith had held since 
childhood, but the directorMike Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mikeleigh> liked to cast performers who did 
not distract the audience with instant recognisability. Leigh also has a 
painter’s eye for distinctive, expressive faces and so Smith’s lack of fame and 
pinched but radiant looks led him to cast her in two early TV works: Bleak 
Moments (1971), as a character’s mother, and Hard Labour (1973), her 
breakthrough role, in which she played the working-class cleaner for a Salford 
snob.

Liz Smith – a life in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gallery/2016/dec/27/liz-smith-a-life-in-pictures>
Casting directors soon learned to check out the newcomers used by Leigh, and 
Smith was rapidly offered the major TV role of Mrs Brandon inPeter Tinniswood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jan/11/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
’s northern domestic sitcom,I Didn’t Know You Cared 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fF6iRc2Bfdw>. This demonstrated her range 
because, where Leigh’s work demanded hyperrealistic acting (as The Royle Family 
also later did), Tinniswood’s scripts had a heightened, surrealist streak.


From then on, if a character on television or film ever paid a visit to the 
oldest female member of their family, there was a strong chance it would be 
Smith sitting in the armchair. Some actors would have balked at becoming a 
granny specialist at around 60 but Smith had always had a talent for aging up: 
she recalled that, even as a nine-year-old in amateur dramatics, she was famed 
for taking old lady roles.


Smith was born in Lincolnshire, but she proved easily able to adapt her 
Scunthorpe vowels to become a natural with northern English dialogue from 
either side of the Pennines. Among the writers who provided her signature 
roles, Leigh,Aherne (who died earlier this year) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/02/caroline-aherne> and Cash 
grew up in Manchester, while Tinniswood had lived in Liverpool and worked in 
Yorkshire, where Bennett was born. All these characters drew on a particular 
northern tradition of older women who embraced eccentricity and delighted in 
speaking their mind.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fliz-smith-the-royle-family-tvs-favourite-dotty-granny-and-outspoken-nana%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42af1fa9f2ee3ec6c55c10a5ceb7e48f7d730fa4%2F0_0_2300_1539%2F2300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liz%20Smith%3A%20TV's%20favourite%20dotty%20Granny%20and%20outspoken%20Nana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fliz-smith-the-royle-family-tvs-favourite-dotty-granny-and-outspoken-nana%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liz%20Smith%3A%20TV%27s%20favourite%20dotty%20Granny%20and%20outspoken%20Nana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fliz-smith-the-royle-family-tvs-favourite-dotty-granny-and-outspoken-nana%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42af1fa9f2ee3ec6c55c10a5ceb7e48f7d730fa4%2F0_0_2300_1539%2F2300.jpg>
 Smith as ancient parishioner Mrs Cropley in The Vicar of Dibley. Photograph: 
Alamy 
One of her few major southern roles was as Mrs Cropley in The Vicar of Dibley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/30/the-10-best-screen-villages>, 
an ancient parishioner who sat knitting in parish council meetings and forced 
bizarre home cooking on everyone. Mrs Cropley was also rare among her 
characters in being happy and serene, albeit in a world of her own. What unites 
the writing of Leigh, Tinniswood, Bennett, Aherne and Cash is that the comedy 
has an underlay of darkness, and, although she would have wished it otherwise, 
Smith had easy access to melancholy.


Her mother had died when she was two, and her father subsequently abandoned 
the family. Being brought up by a widowed grandmother, Smith acknowledged, 
shaped her knack for playing grannies. A tough childhood was not evened out in 
adulthood, when her husband, who she met during the second world war, left her 
in the 50s to bring up their young son and daughter alone with little money. In 
a BBC television interview, Smith told me that her late professional success 
had failed to compensate for what had been, although she loved her children, 
long private pain. If the choice had been offered, she insisted, she would have 
been unknown but personally happy.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fliz-smith-royle-family-dies-95-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liz%20Smith%3A%20Royle%20Family%E2%80%99s%20Nana%20actor%20dies%20at%2095%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fliz-smith-royle-family-dies-95-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liz%20Smith%3A%20Royle%20Family%E2%80%99s%20Nana%20actor%20dies%20at%2095%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fliz-smith-royle-family-dies-95-video&media=>
Liz Smith: Royle Family’s Nana actor dies at 95 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/dec/27/liz-smith-royle-family-dies-95-video>
Yet, although sad about the circumstances that caused it, audiences will 
remain thankful for the late-starting career that turned the disadvantages of 
her life to such creative advantage. Most actors, however well known, find 
themselves competing against a small number of peers for the same prime parts. 
But, for several decades, Smith had sole ownership of a certain type of role.


In 2005, when the casting directors for Roman Polanski’s movie version of 
Oliver Twist <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/oct/07/2> were trying to 
fill a part identified only as a Dickensian “Old Woman”, it seems unlikely that 
they took long to come up with the perfect name.

 