
“Legacy,” said Sebastian Coe, the triumphant chair of the London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 2012 bid, when the UK capital won the 
right to host the Olympic games, “is probably nine-tenths of what this process 
is about – not just 16 days of Olympic sport.”

Four years on, his nebulous L word has become a tangible thing, a concept that 
rambles across 560 acres of east London’s Lower Lea Valley, in the form of 
housing, shopping malls and some rather large sheds. You can now live, work and 
play in the Olympic legacy, and shop and eat there too, while marvelling at the 
cranes busy summoning further chunks of legacy from the ground. That London has 
a lasting physical inheritance from its two-week £12bn jamboree is 
indisputable, but what kind of place is the promised Legacy-land turning out to 
be?

Athletic builds: the architecture of the London 2012 Olympics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/mar/05/london-2012-olympics-architecture>
So far, it’s an odd one. It is somewhere that feels more like an accidental 
suburban campus than a real piece of London – a place where the different 
functions that make up a city have been separated out, each built without much 
thought given to how they relate.

The sports venues are all enjoying healthy afterlives, some at more expense 
than others. The once flat-pack stadium has finally been made permanent,
retrofitted to host West Ham Football Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/west-ham-deal-century-olympic-stadium>
 at a cost that brings its total to more than £700m. Olympic chiefs now admit 
the demountable arena was a preposterous idea, but they simply couldn’t find a 
permanent tenant at the time. ThePringle-shaped velodrome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/may/20/olympic-park-rowan-moore-review>
 continues to delight, hovering above the wilder northern half of the park, 
while the awkwardness of finding the entrance toZaha Hadid’s Aquatics Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/feb/25/olympics-aquatics-centre-opens-london>
 is mainly forgiven once you’re paddling beneath its impressive whale-like roof.

Hawkins\Brown's Nu Rave Pompidou at Here East, Olympic Park 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BINOD9igDrI/>

A photo posted by Olly Wainwright (@ollywainwright) on Jul 23, 2016 at 7:00am 
PDT

Across the park, the gargantuan hangars of the media and press centres, which 
many feared would be the hardest to find a viable use for, have beenreborn as 
Here East <http://hereeast.com/>, a data centre and tech startup hub that 
styles itself as “the most ambitious technology innovation centre Europe has 
ever seen”. Dressed up in a new costume of dazzle camouflage decals and 
brightly coloured pipes, it looks like a nu rave Pompidou Centre, and it’s 
strangely in keeping with the landscape of industrial sheds scattered along the 
banks of the river Lea.

It may well be a warehouse of Nathan Barley cliches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/10/nathan-barley-charlie-brooker-east-london-comedy>
 – “It’s all about the authenticity, vibrancy and innovation of east London,” 
says CEO Gavin Poole – but Here East’s tenants already include branches of 
University College London and Loughborough University, BT Sport and Wayne 
McGregor’s dance studio, while artists’ spaces are coming soon.

The car crash of post-Olympic Stratford​ slams you in the face from most areas 
of the park
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Flondon-olympic-legacy-stratford-suburb-on-steroids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cce4402714ee7e6b39ab1e330f5f1369dde2f0d%2F0_612_4000_3388%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London's%20Olympic%20legacy%3A%20a%20suburb%20on%20steroids%2C%20a%20cacophony%20of%20luxury%20stumps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Flondon-olympic-legacy-stratford-suburb-on-steroids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%27s%20Olympic%20legacy%3A%20a%20suburb%20on%20steroids%2C%20a%20cacophony%20of%20luxury%20stumps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Flondon-olympic-legacy-stratford-suburb-on-steroids%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cce4402714ee7e6b39ab1e330f5f1369dde2f0d%2F0_612_4000_3388%2F4000.jpg>
 An artist’s impression of Stratford Waterfront, part of the planned Cultural 
and Education District. Photograph: Forbes Massie/Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park 
The park itself, which once felt like a manicured golf course airlifted here 
from Florida, is already wonderfully mature. Thepromised shagginess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/jul/26/olympic-park-wilderness-intention-landscape>
, so characteristic of the Lea, has been allowed to return (minus the heaps of 
car tyres and piles of fridges), while its sloping lawns and elaborate 
playscapes throng with local families every weekend. If this all sounds like an 
achievement, it is. At this stage in the process,most other host cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/26/buildup-rio-2016-olympic-games-chaotic-hosts>
 were still fighting over what to do with their Olympic remains. But things get 
less comfortable when you look more closely at what’s lurking beyond the 
shrubbery.

Into Orbit: my dizzying drop down the world's biggest slide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/23/carsten-holler-arcelormittal-orbit-slide-first-ride>
In fact, you don’t need to look hard. The car crash of post-Olympic Stratford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jul/21/london-2012-olympics-architecture-legacy>
 slams you in the face from most areas of the park. There is the cut-and-paste 
hulk of Westfield shopping mall and the marching eastern bloc slabs of the 
former athletes’ village, now joined by a cacophony of luxury stumps poking on 
to the horizon. There’sGlasshouse Gardens <http://ghgstratford.com/> (“the 
address that addresses it all”),Stratford Central 
<http://www.telfordhomes.london/microsites/stratford-central> (“redefining the 
London skyline”) and, pride of place on the edge of the park, the sloping 
monster wedge of aUnite student housing block 
<http://www.bdonline.co.uk/carbuncle-cup-unite-stratford-city-by-bdp/5069328.article>
, rightly shortlisted for the Carbuncle Cup, along with the woeful steel tangle 
of theArcelorMittal Orbit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/23/carsten-holler-arcelormittal-orbit-slide-first-ride>
 – so far costing £10,000 a week to maintain.

“The middle classes are swarming into our borough at a rate of knots,” says 
Robin Wales, the Labour mayor of Newham – one of four London boroughs straddled 
by the Olympic park – who seems alternately proud of and alarmed by the 
phenomenon, depending on his audience. Arguably, he should have been more wary 
of the speculative investors who flocked here to reap the spoils of the Olympic 
goldrush, their ambition now wrought on the skyline as a physical bar-chart of 
inflated land values.

Much of what has materialised so far dates from a pre-existing plan for a 
mixed-use commercial development around Stratford station, once known as 
Stratford City, which was conveniently hijacked and accelerated by the games. 
The muddled history is evident in the result: the gilded souks of Westfield lie 
on one side of the tracks (wildly successful, with a footfall of 42 million a 
year), while the athletes’ village stands on the other. Built at a cost of £1bn 
to the taxpayer, the 2,800 homes, since brandedEast Village 
<http://www.eastvillagelondon.co.uk/> to give them a metropolitan ring, were 
later sold to Qatar for around half that amount. On the plus side, half the 
units areavailable for affordable rent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/jul/08/whats-happened-to-affordable-housing-on-londons-olympic-park>
, which is a significantly higher proportion than what has come along since.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Flondon-olympic-legacy-stratford-suburb-on-steroids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3e2286c4ea76b6dd67c7b575308c13f5b95d51b%2F0_0_1024_682%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London's%20Olympic%20legacy%3A%20a%20suburb%20on%20steroids%2C%20a%20cacophony%20of%20luxury%20stumps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Flondon-olympic-legacy-stratford-suburb-on-steroids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%27s%20Olympic%20legacy%3A%20a%20suburb%20on%20steroids%2C%20a%20cacophony%20of%20luxury%20stumps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Flondon-olympic-legacy-stratford-suburb-on-steroids%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3e2286c4ea76b6dd67c7b575308c13f5b95d51b%2F0_0_1024_682%2F1024.jpg>
 ‘The sloping monster wedge’ ... Unite’s Carbuncle Cup shortlisted student 
housing close to the Olympic Park. Photograph: George Rex 
The next phase of Stratford City, known as the International Quarter 
<http://www.internationalquarter.london/>, is only now becoming apparent. 
Developed by Lendlease, the Australian giant behind the controversial 
regeneration of theHeygate estate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/25/london-developers-viability-planning-affordable-social-housing-regeneration-oliver-wainwright>
, this dense cluster of office buildings, designed by Rogers Stirk Harbour + 
Partners, will contain 4m sq ft of workspace, forming a glacial cliff-edge 
along the eastern edge of the park, opposite Zaha’s swooping pool. Jollied up 
with some of Rogers’ trademark red and yellow lift cores, these commercial 
slabs will at least block the view of Stratford’s tackier towers.

At 42 storeys, Manhattan Loft Gardens <http://manhattanloftgardens.co.uk/> is 
one shaft that refuses to be blocked out. Standing between Westfield and the 
East Village, it is the brainchild of Harry Handelsman, the maverick developer 
ofSt Pancras Chambers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2010/may/03/st-pancras-chambers-flats>
 and the Chiltern Firehouse, who insists it will be “the most exciting tower 
ever built”, its terraced gardens creating “a true vertical community”. A 
communitymarketed by Harrods 
<http://www.harrodsestates.com/manhattan-loft-gardens> might not be quite the 
legacy Olympic bods had in mind when they talked of the 12,000 new homes that 
would arrive here, at the nexus of four of London’s poorest boroughs. Yet the 
wider impact of the Olympic project has been to sprinkle a kind of steroidal 
fairy dust across surrounding sites, fertilising muscular slabs of ever more 
luxurious investment units – as if the athletes weren’t the only ones doping. 
On such developments around the edge the park, the legacy planning team has 
achieved an average of less than 19% affordable housing.

On developments around the edge the park, the legacy team has achieved an 
average of less than 19% affordable housing

Within the bounds of the park itself, the London Legacy Development Corporation
 <http://queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/our-story/the-legacy-corporation> 
(LLDC), the mayoral vehicle responsible for managing the legacy – a similar 
model to the London Docklands Development Corporation, responsible for the 
creation Canary Wharf – has been able to exert a bit more control. Alarmed by 
what was appearing the other side of the fence, they redrew the overarching 
plan, scaling back the number of homes to around 7,000. What was going to be a 
world of high-density blocks similar to the athletes’ village, became a 
low-rise cosy vision of more Londony things like terraces and squares, mansion 
blocks and mews houses.

The first phase, Chobham Manor <http://chobhammanor.co.uk/>, south of the 
majestic velodrome, is still mostly under construction but shaping up well. The 
launch saw people queuing up overnight to snap up some of the 850 units 
off-plan (two-bed mews houses for £695,000, five-bed townhouses for £1m), 
perhaps more a sign of London’s dysfunctional housing market than any indicator 
of the quality of the scheme. It is a perfectly fine arrangement of terraces 
and low-rise apartment blocks, in tune with the recent bricky London 
vernacular, but – built by volume house-builder Taylor Wimpey and designed by 
corporate architects PRP and Make – it is not exactly the most dazzling outcome 
such a unique opportunity could have delivered.
Olympic legacy map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/olympic_legacy-zip/giv-31075cp8N7UK0tt6v>
East Wick 
<http://queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/the-park/homes-and-living/east-wick> and
Sweetwater 
<http://queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/the-park/homes-and-living/sweetwater>, 
the next phases – across the canal from Hackney Wick and Fish Island along the 
western edge of the park – look set to follow a similar model, only built by 
Balfour Beatty and the marginally more interesting architecture practices of 
Sheppard Robson and Studio Egret West. “We’re trying to create a place that 
feels rooted in the London vernacular,” says Dan Burr, partner at Sheppard 
Robson. “It should have the richness and diversity of a typical Hackney 
neighbourhood that’s evolved over the years.”

These are encouraging words, and most of the plan looks good, but it is still 
a decidedly suburban model, with little thought for mixed use. A question mark 
looms at the eastern edge of the site, where the buildings could shoot up in 
scale in response to what has just been proposed next door. The word “landmark” 
has been whispered.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Flondon-olympic-legacy-stratford-suburb-on-steroids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e6f32968908b3138419c5fe2aaa6c2b6b3507f8%2F0_0_2500_1429%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London's%20Olympic%20legacy%3A%20a%20suburb%20on%20steroids%2C%20a%20cacophony%20of%20luxury%20stumps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Flondon-olympic-legacy-stratford-suburb-on-steroids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%27s%20Olympic%20legacy%3A%20a%20suburb%20on%20steroids%2C%20a%20cacophony%20of%20luxury%20stumps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Flondon-olympic-legacy-stratford-suburb-on-steroids%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e6f32968908b3138419c5fe2aaa6c2b6b3507f8%2F0_0_2500_1429%2F2500.jpg>
 Not the most dazzling outcome such a unique opportunity could have delivered … 
Chobham Manor 
It’s clear they want some stature to match what will now be a 47-storey 
gateway to the Olympic park, the pair of luxury apartment towers that will 
trumpet the jewel in the crown of the legacy vision. This is acultural mega-hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/27/latest-vision-olympic-park-olympicopolis-arts-quarter-east-london>
 where the V&A, Sadler’s Wells and London College of Fashion will huddle 
together, forming an island of civilisation at the foot of Rogers’ office 
blocks. Formerly known as Olympicopolis, now catchily rebranded as the 
Stratford Waterfront Cultural and Education District, this £850m complex is the 
work of Allies and Morrison, the safe-pair-of-hands architects in charge of 
much of the Olympic masterplan, and O’Donnell + Tuomey, Ireland’s unparalleled
magicians of bricks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/sep/24/riba-royal-gold-medal-odonnell-tuomey>
.

Latest vision revealed for Olympicopolis arts quarter in east London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/27/latest-vision-olympic-park-olympicopolis-arts-quarter-east-london>
A family of staggered boxy forms set on a stepped podium of sloping ramps and 
terraces, the proposals appear to have some ofthe best qualities of the 
Southbank Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/08/spirit-southbank-centre-lost-redesign>
, with overhanging levels to perch and people-watch, and plenty of sheltered 
spaces for outdoor performances and events. “We want the buildings to feel raw, 
robust and ready for work,” says Alex Wraight, partner at Allies and Morrison. 
“The place will have a wharf-like quality, in tune with the industrial heritage 
of the area.”

With such effusive, attention-grabbing neighbours, choosing not to shout so 
loud was wise, although there’s a danger it might all feel a bit dour. Given 
the dream brief, to combine three prestigious cultural institutions on a 
riverside site, many were hoping for something with a bit more pizzazz.

Even so, the life of the tenants should brighten it up. The V&A East 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/v/v-and-a-at-e20-a-new-cultural-and-education-quarter-for-the-queen-elizabeth-olympic-park/>
 promises to be an “entirely new kind of civic institution”, a platform for 
experimentation and making, while Sadler’s Wells’ outpost will incorporate a 
hip-hop academy for local youth alongside its 550-seat dance theatre. The 
presence of 6,500 fashion students won’t go amiss either, providing ready-made 
beautiful people to drape themselves stylishly across the terraces.


Given all the money spent, they really have made a disappointing job of it
Mark Brearley, Cass school  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Flondon-olympic-legacy-stratford-suburb-on-steroids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60ba796e7dae6fc9fd4861ea3915ed7783f4d0a6%2F0_0_4472_4153%2F4472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London's%20Olympic%20legacy%3A%20a%20suburb%20on%20steroids%2C%20a%20cacophony%20of%20luxury%20stumps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Flondon-olympic-legacy-stratford-suburb-on-steroids%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%27s%20Olympic%20legacy%3A%20a%20suburb%20on%20steroids%2C%20a%20cacophony%20of%20luxury%20stumps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Flondon-olympic-legacy-stratford-suburb-on-steroids%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60ba796e7dae6fc9fd4861ea3915ed7783f4d0a6%2F0_0_4472_4153%2F4472.jpg>
 The proposed V&A East, whose shifting form is ‘inspired by the drawers of a 
Japanese incense box in the museum’s collection’. Photograph: Forbes 
Massie/Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park 
The only elephant in the room, one that every architecture team wrestled with 
in the competition, is the presence of the two enormous towers at the northern 
end of the site, the supersized counterweight in the rickety see-saw of legacy 
financing. As LLDC development director Rosanna Lawes puts it: “These are the 
harsh realities of the need to fund this scheme.”

It is a recurring theme across the park, where the financial imperative to pay 
back the crushing Olympic debt looms large over every plot. It is the same 
reason the promise of setting aside sites forbrave experiments with community 
land trusts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davehillblog/2011/nov/01/olympic-park-may-contain-pilot-community-land-trust>
 and custom-build projects rapidly faded away when the accountants saw the 
sums, and why all the neighbourhoods planned so far only can only muster an 
average of 30% affordable housing.

“As a board, we have to pay back the money we’ve borrowed to do the work so 
far, using land sales to the private sector,” says LLDC chair David Edmonds. 
Pressed on why there isn’t a higher proportion of affordable rents across the 
park, he is frank: “We have yet to find an economic mechanism that provides 
that rent level.”

The trouble with the Olympic Games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/29/the-trouble-with-the-olympic-games>
They’re going to have to find a way, and fast. In one of his first moves as 
London mayor, Sadiq Khan has put pressure on the legacy team to up their game 
to providing 50% affordable housing. The next phases, atMarshgate Wharf 
<http://queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/the-park/homes-and-living/marshgate-wharf>
 andPudding Mill 
<http://queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/the-park/homes-and-living/pudding-mill> 
at the southern end of the park, are currently being revised to meet the new 
target. A significantly higher density to pay for it all is the likely outcome.

Overall, there remain many of the problems and awkwardness you might expect 
with trying to fit a new piece of city on an island site configured for a 
fleeting mass event. “I still wince at some of the infrastructure,” says Selina 
Mason, former design director in charge of post-Games transformation, who’s now 
heading up the masterplan fora new UCL campus <https://www.ucl.ac.uk/ucl-east/> 
at the southern end of the park. “The roads were designed to get athletes and 
officials around the site as quickly as possible, but I wish we’d focused much 
more on pedestrians.”

For all that’s been achieved in four years, critics of the plan still decry 
the project as a woefully missed opportunity. “Given all the money spent, and a 
can’t-fail general situation, they really have made a disappointing job of it,” 
says Mark Brearley, professor of cities at London Metropolitan’sCass school 
<http://www.londonmet.ac.uk/faculties/the-cass/cities/>, whose work has long 
focused on the Lea Valley. “The urban structure has been totally flunked. All 
that is being achieved is fairly incoherent steroided suburb, with a nice park.”

It’s not too late for bold thinking to return, for Sadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> to grasp the nettle and 
insist the role of city-shaping is taken more seriously. Given the unique 
position of the LLDC as the sole landowner, planning authority and 
budget-holder, this is a one-off chance to make this a progressive, inclusive, 
direction-setting place. Compared to the desolate wastes left by many other 
Olympics, it might be judged a roaring success, but as a new piece of London we 
can be proud of, it can still do so much better.
 