
At Central St Martins’ Platform theatre <https://csmevents.co.uk/>, two men – 
maybe brothers but possibly doppelgangers – run around the stage clucking like 
chickens and bounce on a trampoline, in the show Barons Perches. At theLilian 
Baylis Studio 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2017/compagnie-mossoux-bonte-whispers/>, 
Whispers finds a woman spewing red flowers from her mouth like a medium 
emitting ectoplasm during a seance. At the Peacock theatre, a polite afternoon 
tea party with added juggling turns sour and vicious inSmashed 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2017/gandini-juggling-smashed-special-edition/>
. Welcome to the world of theLondon international mime festival 
<http://mimelondon.com/> (LIMF), celebrating its 40th anniversary this year and 
showing not the slightest sign of middle age. In fact, the festival seems more 
sprightly and essential than ever, with wide-ranging, often quixotic 
performances fromhomegrown 
<http://shoreditchtownhall.com/theatre-performance/whats-on/event/theatre-re-the-nature-of-forgetting>
 and international companies.

The word “mime” in the title – which back in 1977 was an easy way of 
suggesting non-verbal theatre – may have at times seemed a burden because of 
its associations withMarcel Marceau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2007/sep/24/herestoyoumarcelmarceau>
 rather thanLindsay Kemp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/24/lindsay-kemp-destined-for-stardom-david-bowie-kate-bush>
, but one of the pleasures of the festival has always been its flagrant 
disregard for British theatre’s tendency to put art into boxes. It is a 
tendency that has only increased in recent years, as marketing departments use 
audience data to encourage people to see more shows that are exactly like the 
shows they have already bought tickets for, when what theatre and live 
performance would really benefit from ismore cross-artform disloyalty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jun/19/do-we-need-disloyalty-cards-for-theatre>
.
 Tea party turns sour … Gandini Juggling with Smashed 
The LIMF programme constantly tempts us out of our comfort zones. Joli Vyann’s 
Imbalance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/aug/18/roll-up-for-circus-at-the-edinburgh-festival>
, which is at the Lilian Baylis next week, melds acrobatics with dance. 
Whispers, by festival favouritesMossoux Bonte <http://mossoux-bonte.be/en>, 
which I saw last night (and runs until 14 January), is at the same venue. 
Lilian Baylis is perceived as a dance space, but the show goes beyond dance 
into object manipulation and live art, while employing complex visual imagery 
and sound.


In Whispers, a figure suddenly appears out of the darkness, caught in a shaft 
of light like aVermeer painting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/jan/28/tims-vermeer-fails>
. When her fingers brush against her shoulder there is a rasping sound. Eyes 
wiped with a cloth produce a squeak. A raised leg sounds like pebbles rubbing 
against each other. Suddenly, there is a growling angry sound. Is it just the 
woman’s stomach rumbling or is there an unseen beast in the room?

Alone on stage and yet apparently haunted by many versions of herself, Nicole 
Mossoux creates a strong sense of the uncanny even while demonstrating the 
manipulative tricks of the medium. Questions constantly arise. Who is in 
control? Who is haunting whom? Are we watching one woman through many 
centuries, or many women in the same crumbling room? Is this a manifestation of 
ghosts?
 Melds acrobatics with dance … Imbalance at the Lilian Baylis Studio. 
Photograph: Joli Vyann 
LIMF is not made for those who like absolute certainty. Images are often far 
more treacherous than words, and that is the case in Whispers and in Barons 
Perches, which is at Platform until 14 January. The latter show was made by
Mathurin Bolze <http://www.mpta.fr/index.php?page=2>, who in 2011 brought the 
astonishingDu Goudron et des Plumes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jan/27/du-goudron-et-plumes-review> to 
the Barbican.

Barons Perches is a surreal two-hander played out in a house without gravity, 
where the floor is a trampoline. There are excursions into the absurd (hence 
the chickens) in this meditation on freedom and being at one with yourself, and 
if the piece lacks the physical precision and emotional force of previous work, 
its refusal to easily give up its meaning adds interest rather than detracting 
from it.

It leaves room for us to interpret what we have seen and experienced, and if 
there is one thing LIMF has demonstrated over the years, it is that 
open-endedness is a bonus, not a deficiency. This way, the audience can 
question and decide what it is they have witnessed, when there are no words to 
tell them what to think.

 * London international mime festival <http://mimelondon.com/> is at venues 
around the city until 4 February.  