
I’ve long maintained a practice on long-haul flights of declining to chat with 
the people sitting next to me. Headphones on, face set in a frown: such is my 
fear of 10 airless hours trapped in conversation with a stranger. But now I’ve 
seen Passengers, that predicament seems like a breeze compared to the plight of 
Aurora Lane (Jennifer Lawrence): she’s trapped for 90years on board a spaceship 
with Jim Preston (Chris Pratt), and he’s the one who trapped her. Yes, it 
sounds like the elevator pitch for a horror film, but this is a Christmas 
blockbuster:Passengers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/passengers>, 
curiously, is couched as a story about love.

Passengers review – spaceship romcom scuppered by cosmic creep
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/15/passengers-review-spaceship-romcom-scuppered-chris-pratt-jennifer-lawrence>
In Hollywood, however, perhaps it’s not that surprising. A study published 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/03/rom-coms-women-stalker-myth-study>
 in the early part of this year indicated that women who watch films that 
portray aggressive, persistent male behavior – stalking, in other words – are 
more amenable to similar behavior in the real world. In other words, for the 
sake of dramatic tension, cinema sometimes normalizes abuse, recasting it as 
romantic. Passengers is intended to be a grand romance, but it’s also a story 
of a man manipulating a woman and depriving her of her agency.


The film opens with Jim’s awakening. He’s on a ship bound for a fresh new 
planet with 5,000 other pod-bound hibernating colonialists. They’re meant to 
sleep through the 120-year journey, but a malfunction has caused Jim to wake 
after only 30 years have elapsed. Like a fabulous sea cruiser, the ship 
provides all kinds of luxuries, but with everyone else fast asleep, it’s 
lonely. Jim has only the company of a kind android bartender and some space 
Roombas that suck up stray cereal. In time, isolation takes its toll. Jim 
starts to dress badly, and grows a beard like a Williamsburg hipster. In a 
state of vodka-soaked desperation, Jim happens upon Aurora’s pod, and then he 
begins to wonder: does he have to be so alone? Jim was a mechanical engineer 
back on earth and he’s read the instructions: he can wake her up.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fpassengers-trailer-for-jennifer-lawrence-and-chris-pratt-sci-fi-drama-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Passengers%3A%20trailer%20for%20Jennifer%20Lawrence%20and%20Chris%20Pratt%20sci-fi%20drama%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fpassengers-trailer-for-jennifer-lawrence-and-chris-pratt-sci-fi-drama-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Passengers%3A%20trailer%20for%20Jennifer%20Lawrence%20and%20Chris%20Pratt%20sci-fi%20drama%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fpassengers-trailer-for-jennifer-lawrence-and-chris-pratt-sci-fi-drama-video&media=>
Passengers: trailer for Jennifer Lawrence and Chris Pratt sci-fi drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/20/passengers-trailer-for-jennifer-lawrence-and-chris-pratt-sci-fi-drama-video>
This will ring true to anyone who’s tried online dating: Jim sees that 
Aurora’s beautiful, and then immerses himself in her available digital archive 
to learn more about her before they meet. Aurora is like everyone from Brooklyn 
on OKCupid: she’s a writer, she likes coffee, maybe she has some light daddy 
issues. It’s enough to make Jim believe he’s fallen in love. And after much 
equivocation over the bar with the android – he knows it’s not a very nice 
thing to wake her, but – Jim rouses Aurora to join him for the next 89 years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpassengers-film-men-creepy-love-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d38d199e2ae36aaf391f5f2f64506ca2e0007fb%2F1152_17_4378_2629%2F4378.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Look%20who's%20stalking%3A%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20creepy%20male%20film%20leads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpassengers-film-men-creepy-love-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Look%20who%27s%20stalking%3A%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20creepy%20male%20film%20leads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpassengers-film-men-creepy-love-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d38d199e2ae36aaf391f5f2f64506ca2e0007fb%2F1152_17_4378_2629%2F4378.jpg>
 Lost in space: Sandra Bullock stalker free in Gravity. Photograph: 
Moviestore/REX 
Sometimes what seems like the greatest love of all is really just the love of 
greatest proximity. Spoiler alert for anyone who’s never seen a blockbuster 
film about romance in space: Aurora and Jim fall in love, Aurora finds out that 
Jim has trapped her for life and is overcome with rage, Jim wins Aurora over 
again by proving his mettle when they face some peril.

Michael Sheen, Passengers and why Hollywood's hottest leads need a quirky Brit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/07/passengers-michael-sheen-chris-pratt-hollywood-british-actors>
The film-makers do their work in the movie’s first act to build our sympathy 
for Jim – yes, we’d be lonely, too. But it’s hard to ignore that he has created 
a condition from which Aurora cannot escape, and in which she must become 
dependent upon him. How fortunate she is that he is classically handsome and 
kind; how different the film would be if he was played by, say, Christopher 
Walken. The film seems to want us to believe that Aurora’s feelings are as 
uncomplicated as possible, but she’s showing signs of Stockholm syndrome, 
remarking in a voiceover about how they would have never gotten together if he 
wasn’t, you know, essentially the last man alive.

Then again, what else could motivate her? “I hope you meet someone,” says her 
best friend on Earth in an earnest farewell message – for what more could a 
young and beautiful woman wish for on an intergalactic adventure? Jim is a 
variety of the archetypal Nice Guy: he’ll do anything for Aurora, so should she 
really be so mad that he ruined her life by waking her early? “It’s a murder!” 
she bellows, but she’s silenced in time: Jim performs heroism and Aurora 
realizes that she shouldn’t have been so ungrateful. He is, it turns out, her 
everything; he’s made it so.


Years ago, after sobbing with fear through a screening of Gravity, I turned to 
my companion and asked: “Why doesn’t anyone ever make a movie where people go 
to space, have a nice time, and then get home safely?” The answer of course is 
that it would be a boring movie. I can forgive Passengers to some extent 
because no one wants to see a film about two people coming together on equal 
terms, demonstrating mutual kindness and respect and having a nice time. Aurora 
says she embarked on the space journey because she was seeking material for her 
writing. There are no good love stories without conflict. But outside the 
movies, love may sometimes be better without good stories.
 