
Louis van Gaal has indicated his reign as Manchester United’s manager has 
finished. The Dutchman said “it’s over” as he left the Manchester United hotel 
on Sunday morning following his side’s2-1 extra-time victory over Crystal 
Palace in the FA Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/crystal-palace-manchester-united-fa-cup-final-match-report>
 on Saturday.

Louis van Gaal: from Iron Tulip to muddled thinker at Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/22/louis-van-gaal-iron-tulip-muddled-thinker-manchester-united-jesse-lingard-fa-cup-final>
With intense speculation that he is to be replaced by the former Chelsea 
manager José Mourinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/jose-mourinho-to-be-appointed-manchester-united-manager-next-week>
, Van Gaal was asked by a Sky Sports reporter if he would stop to speak. He 
refused but said: “It’s over.”

Should Van Gaal leave the post he assumed following David Moyes’s sacking in 
2014, he will depart after two seasons in charge, with United finishing fourth 
in the league in his first campaign and fifth this season. Though he won the FA 
Cup on Saturday, his side went out in the group stage of the Champions League 
and were then eliminated by Liverpool in the Europa League.

Van Gaal turned up at the post-match press conference at Wembley with the FA 
Cup in his hands, and placed it on the table in front of him. “I show you the 
Cup, I don’t discuss my future with the media,” he said defiantly. “Some of you 
have had me sacked already.” However, on Sunday morning, he appeared to confirm 
he is to no longer to remain theManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> manager.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Flouis-van-gaal-defiant-manchester-united-fa-cup-win-jose-mourinho-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Louis%20van%20Gaal%20defiant%20after%20Manchester%20United's%20FA%20Cup%20win%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Flouis-van-gaal-defiant-manchester-united-fa-cup-win-jose-mourinho-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Louis%20van%20Gaal%20defiant%20after%20Manchester%20United%27s%20FA%20Cup%20win%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Flouis-van-gaal-defiant-manchester-united-fa-cup-win-jose-mourinho-video&media=>
Louis van Gaal defiant after Manchester United’s FA Cup win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/may/22/louis-van-gaal-defiant-manchester-united-fa-cup-win-jose-mourinho-video>
Louis van Gaal was doomed at Manchester United by refusal to adapt | Amy 
Lawrence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/21/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-sack>
Mourinho, who left Chelsea under a cloud in December last year, turned down an 
offer from Paris Saint-Germain in the hope that United would contact him – and 
negotiations took place in the last few days after United had missed out on 
fourth place in the Premier League and therefore a Champions League place. 
Mourinho has already agreed a salary and has discussed transfer targets with 
the club and is likely to be presented as the new manager once his agent, Jorge 
Mendes, has finalised the finer details of the contract.
 