
Louis van Gaal could become the first manager since Sir Alex Ferguson to win a 
trophy forManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> on Saturday, and while 
the Dutchman has always acknowledged Champions League qualification would have 
been more important to the club, he believes silverware is a reward his players 
deserve.

“Silverware is always important, because it is an exciting moment to be close 
to winning a trophy,” Van Gaal said. “A qualification is not a title but a Cup 
win would be. The players can look at the Cup and hold it – it would be an 
achievement – but at the moment we are only close and close is not enough. For 
Manchester United this would be a big title, I think, the first Cup win since 
2004, but we still have to beatCrystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> to win it and finals can 
never be predicted.”

Crystal Palace’s Glad All Over Again to revive FA Cup final musical tradition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/19/crystal-palace-glad-all-over-again-fa-cup-final-musical-tradition-manchester-united>
That may be the case, and Van Gaal referenced Sevilla’s comeback against 
Liverpool in Wednesday’s Europa League final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-sevilla-defeat-referee>
, though he believes he knows what to expect from Alan Pardew’s team. “It will 
not be so easy to beat them, they have a lot of quality,” he said. “They will 
defend against us and try to use their speed on the counterattack. They are 
also dangerous from set pieces. More than 50% of their goals this season have 
come from set plays, and that is a lot more than us.”

Partly for those reasons Van Gaal fears the final may not be an open, 
attacking spectacle. “You need two attacking sides for a fantastic match,” he 
said. “Our starting point will be to perform well and try to win. I understand 
the fans like finals to be exciting and full of goals, but as long as we win, 
one-zero would be enough for me.”

Van Gaal’s assertion that his side deserve to win the FA Cup is based on the 
observation that four of their six victories en route to the final have been 
away from home. This is just about true, though only if one counts the
semi-final victory against Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/23/everton-manchester-united-fa-cup-match-report>
, which would be an odd thing to do when all semi-finals these days are played 
at Wembley. And though United did book their place in that semi with an away 
win at West Ham, it happened to be a replay after the original tie ended in a 
draw at Old Trafford.

Although Van Gaal is perfectly entitled to stack up the stats to show his side 
in the best light, the fact is United were drawn away only twice, to Derby 
County and then Shrewsbury. Despite a patchy league season Palace posted more 
impressive away results in the Cup, winning at Southampton and then Tottenham, 
though at least Van Gaal accepts that. “Palace beat Spurs, they deserve to be 
in the final,” he said.

Marouane Fellaini is available again after serving a three-match suspension 
for elbowing Robert Huth, and Van Gaal almost certainly plans to use him, in 
part because his height and physical attributes are useful when defending 
free-kicks and corners. It would be a surprise were Van Gaal to leave him out, 
though the manager preferred to remain coy on the subject. “You will have to 
wait and see,” he said. “If I say something about that Alan Pardew might be 
able to guess my lineup.”
 