
Louis van Gaal has been charged by the Football Association with bringing the 
game into disrepute for comments the Dutchman madeafter Manchester United’s 
goalless draw at Cambridge United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/23/cambridge-united-manchester-united-fa-cup-match-report>
 on 23 January, with the manager accused of implying bias on the part of the 
match referee, Chris Foy.

If Van Gaal is found guilty – and he has yet to register a plea – it is 
understood that the manager would attract a warning or a fine, rather than a 
touchline ban, as this would be a first offence in English football since 
taking over United last summer.

Following a sluggish display from his side, Van Gaal said: “Every aspect of a 
match is against us. We have to come here, the pitch isn’t so good, that can 
influence that you can play in another style. The opponents always give a lot 
more than they normally give and defending is always easier than attacking. 
Then you have seen the referee – it’s always the same. Everywhere I have 
coached these games, and I have coached them with other clubs, it’s always the 
same.”

Richard Money, the Cambridge manager, defended his club following Van Gaal’s 
criticism. “We don’t have the money to spend on the pitch to make it as it is 
at Old Trafford or anywhere else,” he said. “The groundsman did a fantastic job 
to keep it in the condition it was. Yes it broke up a little bit, but it’s the 
same for both teams.”

The FA’s statement said: 
<http://www.thefa.com/news/governance/2015/feb/louis-van-gaal-charged#TTUTyKFSgmYiquj0.99>
 “Louis van Gaal has been charged by the FA for media comments he made after 
Manchester United’s FA Cup fourth round match against Cambridge United on 
Friday 23 January 2015.

“It is alleged that the Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> manager’s comments 
allege and/or imply bias on the part of the match referee and/or bring the game 
into disrepute.”

While Van Gaal did move to clarify his comments in the days following his 
outburst it seems this was not enough to prevent the charge. He has until 6pm 
on Monday 9 February to respond.
 