
Louis van Gaal has promised Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> will fight until the 
end to qualify for the Champions League despite it now being out of their hands.

On Sunday’s final day of the Premier League season United must beat Bournemouth
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> at Old Trafford and hope 
Manchester City are beaten at Swansea City to ensure a top-four finish.

United stand on 63 points, two behind their rivals, and Van Gaal admits 
frustration that Tuesday night’sdefeat at West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/10/west-ham-manchester-united-premier-league-report-upton-park>
 has ceded the initiative to City.

Manchester United will lose £30m if they miss next year’s Champions League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/13/manchester-united-earn-half-billion-pounds>
He said: “We fight until the end. We are dependent on Manchester City, that’s 
the difference. That’s also frustrating when you had the chance two matches 
before the end to keep that advantage. We were 2-1 ahead with 15 minutes to 
play and then we gave it away, that’s frustrating. Now we are dependent but 
still it is possible.”

Swansea’s manager, Francesco Guidolin, has said he will rest Ashley Williams, 
Neil Taylor and Gylfi Sigurdsson for City’s visit due to a combination of 
workload and their participation in the upcoming European Championship.

It may make City’s task easier and so give United less chance of overhauling 
them but Van Gaal refused to complain. “No, because I have also given players 
rest and I have won [games],” the Dutchman said. “That is also possible for 
Swansea. It’s the responsibility of the club and manager to do what he thinks 
is right for the team. I can’t judge that. My task is the same because we have 
to play against Bournemouth and I don’t play against Manchester City.”

Asked what lessons can be learned from the uneven campaign, Van Gaal said: 
“Still I have to remind you that we can qualify ourselves. I can say that we 
have to improve still. I don’t think we have to improve defensive organisation 
too much, now we have to score more in our attacking way. That is also what I 
have said before this season – we need creative, fast players in attack. We 
have to change that, and that is very important.

“I am always evaluating and always adapting to the situation where we stand 
for. It’s always the same, you have to evaluate yourself but also your staff 
and players, and then with that kind of people you have to communicate and 
listen to each other and that I’m doing. That shall be done also next season.

“The principles are always the same except when one of the members of my staff 
or players or board members can convince me of other arguments.”

Van Gaal pointed again to an inability to kill off opposing sides. “I have 
said that many times [about this]. We need to train and that is what we are 
doing,” he said. “Training in the situations we have. You have to make the 
pitch big and keep the ball better, then the opposition has to run more metres. 
You don’t always have to make goals, you have to keep the ball in possession. 
We shall do that better when we train more.”

Van Gaal would not reveal if Michael Carrick is to have his contract renewed. 
“It’s not a matter that I discuss with you,” he said.
 