
Louis van Gaal hailed a “committed” Manchester United performance as they 
swept aside Shrewsbury Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/22/shrewsbury-town-manchester-united-fa-cup-match-report>
 to set up an FA Cupquarter-final at home against West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/fa-cup-sixth-round-draw-quarter-final-chelsea-everton>
 and, in the process, enjoyed a timely confidence boost before Thursday’s 
crucial Europa League second-leg last-32 match against Midtjylland.

Chris Smalling scored United’s first and Juan Mata got the second with a 
contentious free-kick routine that Van Gaal claimed they had learned from 
watchingMidtjylland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/midtjylland>. Jesse 
Lingard, Ander Herrera and Anthony Martial all stood offside initially, behind 
the Shrewsbury wall, before running out as Mata approached the ball.

Manchester United find their swagger at last to blow Shrewsbury away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/22/shrewsbury-town-manchester-united-fa-cup-match-report>
Lingard got United’s other goal on an evening that could hardly have been more 
comfortable for Van Gaal’s team, as they dominated against aShrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> side who are 21st in League 
One and never looked like imposing themselves.

“I think the performance was very good,” said Van Gaal. “I said that already 
at half-time to my players. They were very committed, they performed our game 
plan very well and the consequences were we were ahead 2-0 at half-time – a 
lucky goal from Smalling I think but a very good free-kick from Mata.”

Asked specifically about Mata’s goal and the strange position that the three 
United players took up, Van Gaal said: “We have learned because we analysed 
Midtjylland and saw that they are doing that. We think it’s always offside, but 
we asked the referees at that time and they are saying not offside, you can do 
that. So we learned the taking of the free-kick from Midtjylland and today we 
scored. That’s good.”

Manchester United’s Louis van Gaal spared ignominy but still on precipice | 
Andy Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/22/manchester-united-shrewsbury-fa-cup-louis-van-gaal>
It was just the response that Van Gaal needed after his side’s abject 
performance in Denmark on Thursday,when United were beaten 2-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/18/midtjylland-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
 by Midtjylland. United’s win over Shrewsbury needs to be kept in perspective, 
however, given that Micky Mellon’s side have not won at home in the league for 
four months and are embroiled in a relegation battle.

“Everybody shall say it is easy against Shrewsbury Town and Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> has to win but we have 
seen very difficult results in the FA Cup, not always the top team is winning, 
so I think we have done it fantastically,” Van Gaal said. “I have congratulated 
my players, I was very pleased but now we have to beat Midtjylland because it’s 
also possible to beat them. But it is not easy because Midtjylland are very 
well organised, we have seen that in the away game. But still everything is 
possible, we’re still in three competitions, so we have to fight for a lot of 
chances I think.”

Sergio Romero continued in goal against Shrewsbury but Van Gaal suggested that 
David de Gea could be back for the Midtjylland match after scans showed the 
Spaniard had not suffered a serious problem with his knee. “It was not so heavy 
the injury, so it is possible Thursday but it is also possible against 
Arsenal,” the United manager said.

Van Gaal made no attempt to play down the significance of the Midtjylland tie, 
fully aware that it represents United’s best opportunity to play in Europe’s 
premier club competition next season.

“In my opinion it’s a big game because it’s a chance to qualify for the 
Champions League next season, but we have to win a lot of matches. Of course 
it’s easily spoken but done is different. But it is possible and then we’ll 
see. I think in March a lot of players are coming back and then we’ll have a 
full selection, and with our full selection we were first in the Premier 
League.”
 