
Louis van Gaal has admitted teams may no longer fear facing Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>, as he prepares to 
take his side to Shrewsbury Town for Monday’s FA Cup tie.

United should cut Louis van Gaal loose while José Mourinho is still free | 
Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/20/louis-van-gaal-jose-mourinho-midtjylland-manchester-united>
On Thursday United were beaten 2-1 at Midtjylland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/18/midtjylland-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
 in the Europa League, despite the Danish champions having last played 
competitively on 10 December. This followed United’s2-1 defeat at Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/13/sunderland-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 in the Premier League the previous Saturday.

The manager knows his players’ confidence is low and he faces a fight to 
ensure they bounce back and avoid defeat in the fifth round by the 
relegation-threatened League One club.

Van Gaal said: “When you see the last two games it’s maybe like that but maybe 
we have to make them fear again, because we lost the first match in the Premier 
League also, Swansea City when I came. But then still we had a very good home 
record last season and we can do that again, it’s a question of winning matches 
in a row.”

Immediately after the defeat to Midtjylland Van Gaal spoke to his squad about 
ensuring they are ready for the challenge from Micky Mellon’s side. “You cannot 
continue with losing games and the question is how we lift ourselves because
Shrewsbury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> Town will fight 
for the second balls and play direct and that kind of thing,” Van Gaal said. 
“You have to cope with that but you have to keep the ball better and not give 
unnecessary losses away. I think the first goal [against Midtjylland] was an 
unnecessary loss and the second goal we could have won that duel much more 
easier but that was the substitute who came in [and scored the winner].”

Shrewsbury’s Mat Sadler: ‘We all thought we were going to be big hitters back 
then’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/shrewsbury-mat-sadler-manchester-united-fa-cup>
Van Gaal would understand if Shrewsbury now thought their task was easier. 
“Maybe. I hope so. Because then it is a benefit for us,” he said. “It’s not a 
question of being the favourite for the Cup. It’s a question that you have to 
see every match as a match that you have to win. So OK we have lost 2-1 but we 
can overcome [in the second leg] and also Monday we have to win. And when we 
win we are in the next round and we are coming capable to win theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>. When you see Chelsea against 
Paris Saint-Germain it is 2-1 but still Chelsea has a chance to overcome so 
that’s football.”

David de Gea became the latest United player to be injured when he hurt a knee 
in the warm-up before the Midtjylland game. It made him the 14th squad member 
unavailable and Van Gaal believes none can return for Shrewsbury. “I don’t 
think so,” he said before praising the display of Sergio Romero, De Gea’s 
replacement, against the Danish side. “He’s a very good goalkeeper and he has 
proved that already in the beginning of the season, and it was not easy to do 
what he has done. So the first goal was deflected and I thought from the bench 
he has to also catch that ball but it was deflected so you can also say we were 
again unlucky.”

Chris Smalling wants United to start strongly against Shrewsbury. “The 
aggression that you start the game with is something you need to match with the 
other team, something I don’t think we have done recently,” the defender told 
MUTV. “We need to make sure we win our battles and our second balls and then 
when it starts to die down we can overcome them with our football.

“This competition is massive for us, particularly because we’re not fighting 
at the top of the league like we expected to be. The FA Cup is an opportunity 
to win some silverware and a competition we’ve done well in so far. We’ll go to 
Shrewsbury as favourites and we need to control that tie.”
 