
I promised myself I would not use the words “difficult second album”. Fail. 
But burden of expectation is a terrible thing, the reason so many people go to 
restaurants cursed with the full gamut of Michelin stars, or those lurking at 
the top of “world’s best” lists, only to come out thinking, “Is that it?”

This second outing <http://luca.restaurant> for the team behind the Clove Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jul/06/clove-club-london-restaurant-review>
, chef Isaac McHale with Johnny Smith and Daniel Willis front of house, was 
always going to be under the beadiest of scrutiny. The starred parent 
restaurant is something of a foodist cult (René Redzepi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/rene-redzepi> has slung tacos there) 
and I’m a fan, too: McHale is that rarest of chefs, a creative risk-taker who 
never loses sight of the need to nail that all-essential deliciousness. But 
haute cuisine, even in Clove Club’s semi-informal garb, is notoriously hard to 
monetise: why do you think Heston inflicts his seasonal bacon-and-banana trifle 
on us? So Luca is the diffusion line: a large, coolly glamorous and grown-up 
new gaff looking like it belongs off Milan’s gallerie in the 1950s rather than 
21st-century Clerkenwell. It’s a long way fromtheir edgy pop-up days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/oct/28/young-turks-10-bells-review>
.

Related: Restaurant: the Clove Club, London EC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jul/06/clove-club-london-restaurant-review>

The menu is also a departure: this time, they’ve come over all Italian. Well, 
ish. They call it “Britalian”, with produce mostly from around the British 
Isles; cured meats from Carmarthen or the Shoreditch mothership, rather than 
Calabria. (Or from the Mora Romagnola pig; this is no Little Britaly.) It’s an 
exciting, mongrel marriage: spaghettini with Morecambe Bay shrimp and mace 
butter brings delicate but al dente pasta and a sauce of the finest potted 
shrimps blitzed to giddy, bisquey, buttery oblivion, with added crunch from 
fried breadcrumbs. Veramente reet good. Or ridged garganelli with rough pork 
sausage and the salty sting of anchovy.

A secondo of Hereford rump steak is more Brit: crisp little kalettes (that 
delicious kale-sprout hybrid), salsify crunchy and rich with butter, barrels of 
ripely mineral meat hiding slivers of smoky pancetta slicked with a very 
un-Puritan kale sauce. Pudding is no tiramisù afterthought, but a luxurious 
pear and frangipane tart, crostata meets bakewell, groaning with the richness 
of ground almonds.
 Luca’s herb crusted queenie scallops. Photograph: Sophia Evans for the 
Guardian 
There’s real technical skill, too: thrashing out plateful after plateful of 
the most delicate pasta (slender spaghettini, ethereal angel’s hair) without it 
seizing up into clammy clumps is no mean feat. And in letting the delicacy of 
queenie scallops, languishing in shells on a bed of sheeny bladderwrack, shine 
through their herbed crust. Bread is gorgeous: poppy seed-crusted dark crust, 
airy crumb, served with olive oil so shamrock-green and frisky, it makes us 
catch our breath. The only plate that leaves me (stony) cold is described 
sensuously as “turnip tops, samphire, smoked cod’s roe and sweet butter”, but 
arrives as a damp bunker of bitter, fishy greens as inhospitable as a 
Morningside matron.

A few restaurant biz insiders have whispered to me about their disappointment 
with Luca, muttering “Why are these guys doing Italian?” But its approach 
reminds me of another favourite,Bocca di Lupo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/jan/24/bocca-di-lupo-review>, 
run by non-ItalianJacob Kenedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jacob-kenedy>, crossed with the purist 
rigour of McHale’s ex-mucker, James Lowe ofLyle’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/24/marina-oloughlin-top-50-uk-restaurants>
. It’s not perfect – yet. Several dishes seem unseasonal: who wants a main of 
romaine lettuce and pancetta in December? The kitchen needs more of the 
sybaritism of the best Italian cooking and less of the British hairshirt. (Yep, 
I’m still smarting over those greens.) Contrarily, they’re too generous with 
the saucing in a very un-Italian way: pasta should be dressed, not drenched. 
And it’s no trat price-wise, although they do try: the pal’s mortifying request 
for “a really cheap white” brings us a lovely Sardinian Cantina Mesa vermentino 
at £35.

But, like everything McHale touches, it is interesting and often revelatory: 
seemingly throwaway items such as “Parmesan fries” are the exquisite love child 
of a churro and a croqueta, lurid with cheese; I’d like a family bucket. The 
bar at the front, with its air of the first-class waiting room for the Pullman 
to Nirvana, is a destination in its own right; plus it serves my beloved 
salumi-draped gnocco fritto. I predict that the hidden courtyard will be 
summer’s most lusted after spot. And Luca will only get better. It is food that 
“breaks the rules a little”, they say; I’ll raise a crodino to that. This 
second album hasn’t just the makings of a hit, but of a classic.

• Luca <http://luca.restaurant> 88 St John Street, London EC1, 020-3859 3000. 
Open Mon-Sat, noon-10.30pm; Sun noon-5pm. About £60 a head plus drinks and 
service.

Food 7/10 
Atmosphere 8/10 
Value for money 7/10
 