
Luca Toni ended his Serie A career in style by scoring a Panenka penalty 
<https://vine.co/v/iQp99nP3M6w> for relegated Hellas Verona in their surprise 
2-1 home win over the champions,Juventus.

The striker, playing his 344th and last league match prior to retiring before 
his 39th birthday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/may/18/worldcup2006.sport2>, chipped 
in from 12 yards just before half-time and Federico Viviani doubled Verona’s 
lead over a much-changed Juve.

The visitors, who had already wrapped up the title and will face Milan in the 
Coppa Italia final on 21 May, had the midfielder Alex Sandro sent off for a 
second caution but scored a consolation penalty through Paulo Dybala.

In Sunday’s early kick-off the Belgian midfielder Radja Nainggolan set Roma on 
their way to beatingChievo 3-0. Antonio Rudiger doubled the home side’s lead 
six minutes before half-time and Miralem Pjanic added a third on 85 minutes.

Luciano Spalletti’s men were later dislodged from second place – guaranteeing 
direct entry into the Champions League group stage – whenNapoli won 2-1 at 
Torino in the other evening match.

Gonzalo Higuaín claimed his 33rd league goal of the season on 12 minutes 
before José Callejón added another.

Torino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> regrouped for the second 
half and pulled a goal back through Bruno Peres’s chip on 66 minutes but they 
could not find an equaliser and had the midfielder Giuseppe Vives sent off for 
a second booking in stoppage time.

With one game remaining, Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> have 88 points, Napoli 79, Roma 
77 and Internazionale 67.

Frosinone were relegated from Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> after only one season in 
the top flight after Matteo Politano’s late goal in a 1-0 victory forSassuolo.

Last year’s Serie B runners-up were four points adrift of safety heading into 
the game at Stadio Matusa and needed both Palermo and Carpi to lose ground to 
keep alive an unlikely survival bid.

Both their rivals dropped points but the substitute Politano’s 85th-minute 
strike ensured a return to the second tier for Roberto Stellone’s Frosinone 
side, whose maiden campaign at this level will end atNapoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> next weekend.

Palermo drew 0-0 at Fiorentina while Carpi went down 3-1 at home to Lazio, who 
finished with only nine men as Jerry Mbakogu missed two penalties for the 
relegation-battlers.
 