
Luis Suárez has been suspended for two Copa del Rey matches for insulting 
Barcelona’s city rivals Espanyol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/barcelona-luis-suarez-espanyol-tunnel>
.

The referee’s report for the heated cup match at Camp Nou that ended 4-1 for 
Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/06/barcelona-espanyol-copa-del-rey-match-report>
 on Wednesday said Suárez insulted Espanyol players in the tunnel after the 
match. Espanyol had two players sent off in the game.

Lionel Messi inspires Barcelona to win over Espanyol on Arda Turan’s debut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/06/barcelona-espanyol-copa-del-rey-match-report>
Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> said in a statement 
they would appeal against the ruling from the Spanish football federation, 
denying Suárez taunted his opponents. The sides play the return leg next week 
at Espanyol.

Espanyol <https://www.theguardian.com/football/espanyol> finished the tie with 
nine men after Hernán Pérez and Papakouli Diop were sent off, while there were 
accusations Pau López, the goalkeeper, stamped on Lionel Messi.

According to the referee, Juan Martínez Munuera: “At the end of the game, once 
in the tunnel, Barça’s No9 Suárez, while the Espanyol players were coming up 
the stairs, waited for them and shouted at them on various occasions. He said: 
‘I’m waiting for you, come here! You’re a waste of space’. It provoked a 
confrontation between players of both clubs and the security guards had to get 
involved, as did coaches of both teams.”

Asked about the incident, the Barça coach, Luis Enrique, dismissed the 
accusation as “Christmas carols”, presumably in reference to the fact the match 
was being played on Día de Los Reyes (Three Kings’ Day). “It isn’t down to the 
coaches or the players to keep the peace,” he added. “It’s down to the referees 
to ensure we play football and not American football. There was some tension. 
I’d like it if there were more football, fewer interruptions and no injuries. 
When someone oversteps the mark, it’s down to the referees to keep order. Of 
course there’s tension in these games. The players know each other, they’re two 
teams with a special rivalry but that rivalry has to remain positive.”

Diop insisted the Uruguayan striker should have been sent off as well. “We 
both insulted each other. He said swear words to me, and me to him, and I get 
sent off. The referee told me he didn’t hear us both, only me,” Diop told 
Carrusel Deportivo. “[The press] have spent all week saying we are violent and 
this has had its effect. [Barcelona’s players] are really good and if you 
cannot even touch them, they can do what they want. You cannot say we were 
violent. There wasn’t any blood – if we had wanted to, the Barça players would 
have gone off on stretchers.”

Espanyol received eight yellow cards and two reds during the match, although 
Andrés Iniesta dismissed suggestions things had gone over the top. “Violence is 
a very strong word, in games like this there’s a lot of rivalry and contact,” 
he said.

In further fallout between the two sides, the Spanish league said it would be 
sending a report denouncing racist and abusive language 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/08/spanish-league-report-government-espanyol-fan-chants-barcelona>
 by fans during Espanyol’shome La Liga match against Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/02/barcelona-espanyol-la-liga-match-report>
 last Saturday to the government’s anti-violence committee for sports.

The league said in a statement it will condemn racist slurs directed toward 
Barcelona’s Brazilian striker Neymar and abusive chants against the club. It 
said they broke the Spanish football federation’s disciplinary code, which 
prohibits chants that “incite violence, racism, xenophobia and intolerance in 
sports”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fluis-suarez-suspended-barcelona-espanyol-copa-del-rey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c201f049da37755d8e5aea07add2a8c73ad3743%2F0_19_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luis%20Su%C3%A1rez%20suspended%20for%20two%20Copa%20del%20Rey%20matches%20over%20Espanyol%20insults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fluis-suarez-suspended-barcelona-espanyol-copa-del-rey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luis%20Su%C3%A1rez%20suspended%20for%20two%20Copa%20del%20Rey%20matches%20over%20Espanyol%20insults&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fluis-suarez-suspended-barcelona-espanyol-copa-del-rey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c201f049da37755d8e5aea07add2a8c73ad3743%2F0_19_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
 Lionel Messi is surrounded during the game. Photograph: David Ramos/Getty 
Images  