
Luis Enrique has denied any knowledge of speculation linking Lionel Messi with 
Manchester City. Messi is expected to return to the Barcelona team for the 
Champions League match against Celtic in Glasgow on Wednesday, having missed the
weekend draw against Málaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/barcelona-malaga-la-liga-match-report>
 through illness.

Reports have suggested City are ready to move for Messi. “I don’t know. I have 
no idea,” theBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> manager 
said curtly. “Lionel is always ready to play and I’m sure he will be ready to 
face Celtic. He is 100% and eager to give the best version of himself.”

Lionel Messi scores hat-trick in Barcelona’s 7-0 thrashing of Celtic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/barcelona-celtic-champions-league-match-report>
Luis Enrique expects Gerard Piqué to recover from the foot problem which ruled 
him out of Málaga’s visit to the Camp Nou. He also dismissed any notion his 
players could repeat September’s victory, whenCeltic were swatted aside 7-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/barcelona-celtic-champions-league-match-report>
.

“It’s going to be a different game,” Luis Enrique said. “What happened in 
September is not a reference to what will happen in Glasgow.Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> have changed their style since 
then.

“We have to be ready for everything from Celtic – high pressure or low 
pressure. But it’s going to be a different story altogether from the last time.

“It’s always good to score early and Celtic need points, so they will come 
out, but I believe it won’t be anything like the last time.

“Celtic’s stadium is a great place. It is a stadium players want to play in. 
There is a great atmosphere, a great crowd, and I will tell my players to enjoy 
it and if they do then we will get to the next round.”

On the wider issue of a relatively low key start to the season, Luis Enrique 
was similarly dismissive. “We are 12 games in the league and five in Europe,” 
he said. “It is November. We are not yet at Christmas, so there is a long time 
to go.”
 