
Arsène Wenger could exhale at full-time. His confinement in the directors' 
box, as he served the first of a three-gameChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> touchline ban, was no 
fun, despite the more expansive views. He was powerless as his Arsenal side 
were given a thorough examination of their quality and composure in the second 
half by an exuberant Montpellier.

Yet Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> came through, to 
ignite their Group B campaign and maintain their early-season momentum. They 
played well in the first half and absorbed the early blow of Younès Belhanda's 
penalty to enter the interval with a deserved lead, courtesy of Lukas Podolski 
and Gervinho.

There were nervous moments in the second half, particularly when Rémy Cabella 
hit the woodwork with a sumptuous chip and Belhanda somehow failed to beat Vito 
Mannone from close-range in the 80th minute, but Arsenal got the job done. It 
was harsh onMontpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team>, who merited 
something on a pulsating night, but nobody in Arsenal colours was complaining.

Wenger has never lost in France to a French team, though they were beaten in 
the 2006 Champions League final in Paris by Barcelona. The manager could 
reflect that, at the beginning of his team's 15th consecutive appearance at the 
group phase of Europe's elite competition, drama comes as standard.

He was not the only Arsenal man to be pressed through the mill. "I'm not sure 
I enjoyed it, I've got a headache and a half," said Steve Bould, the assistant 
manager, who took the team in Wenger's absence, a matter of months after his 
promotion from the under-18s. "We looked a little bit tired in the second half 
but it's fabulous to get an early away win."

The tie cracked into life after the early goal which, from Arsenal's point of 
view, was a bad one to concede. Thomas Vermaelen was so sure he was going to 
beat Belhanda to a ball just inside the penalty area that he did not hold back, 
when there was the option for him to have stood off.

The collision between the pair was shuddering and Belhanda's fall felt 
theatrical. There were audible gasps from the crowd when, after a moment of 
hesitation, the referee, Carlos Velasco Carballo, awarded the penalty. 
Belhanda's chipped kick was a celebration of insouciant cool. Montpellier have 
started their Ligue 1 title defence with four points from 15 and they kicked 
off to talk of crisis. Their performance made a mockery of that.

Arsenal were not rattled and, with two goals in three minutes, the riposte was 
devastating. Olivier Giroud, back to face the club he left in June, was 
involved in both. The striker took a pass from Santi Cazorla and slid the ball 
through for Podolski, whose cute movement was matched by the finish and 
followed by the highest praise. "I've not seen many finishers as good as 
Podolski … ever," Bould said.

Arsenal's second was all about the quick feet and boldness of Gervinho. After 
his initial dart was halted, Giroud recycled the ball wide to Carl Jenkinson, 
whose driven low centre was mopped up from close-range by Gervinho.

The entertainment value was high with each of Arsenal's front four enjoying 
positive moments, particularly Gervinho, while Abou Diaby looked like a 
world-beater at times, although he undermined his performance with a few 
errors. Booked after 22 seconds, Diaby was robbed by Cabella early in the 
second half and spared only by the midfielder's wild finish.

Cabella was excellent. He drew a low save from Mannone in the first half and, 
after Anthony Mounier had snatched at a chance, Cabella's chip in the 55th 
minute beat the goalkeeper but rebounded off the crossbar. Mapou Yanga-Mbiwa 
also starred for the home team and the crowd revelled in his surges out of 
defence.

Cazorla forced Geoffrey Jourdren into his only serious save in the 57th 
minute, following good work from Diaby but Montpellier dominated the second 
half while Arsenal clung on grimly. The big chance fell to Belhanda, who jinked 
inside Per Mertesacker only to drill his shot straight at Mannone.

Diaby diced with disaster in injury time when he checked Cabella inside the 
area yet there was no second penalty. Montpellier, on their Champions League 
debut and arguably the biggest night in their history, deserved a draw. This 
competition, though, has no time for hard-luck stories.
 