
“When I first moved to London, I would have been wearing a domino print 
sweater, lots of necklaces made of ribbons and painted pasta shells, with 
bright blond hair.” Not the look you’d now expect from Luke Edward Hall – the 
27-year-old illustrator and interior designerdescribed by Vogue as a 
“wunderkind” 
<http://www.vogue.com/13381930/luke-edward-hall-interior-design-whimsical-house-tour-london-antiques/>
, who has made his name with portraits and patterns drawing heavily from the 
beautiful boys and glamorous lives of the 1920s and 30s.


His collaborations with fashion brand Burberry include naive, Picasso-like 
paintings ofMario Testino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/03/mario-testino-i-was-always-better-at-photographing-men>
 photographs, while hisYoung Hearts exhibition 
<http://www.christies.com/features/Notes-from-the-stylist-Luke-Edward-Hall-7646-3.aspx>
 at Christie’s later this month brings together a collection of works by 
contemporary artists and designers under 40. Whether it’s a more rarefied life 
than rollicking around Bethnal Green, east London, in a painted pasta necklace 
is hard to call, but art and fashion have long been in thrall to each other.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fluke-edward-hall-illustrator-designer-christies-burberry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F231316b8e0d23e7eb0421ef0934d9860a1191e5e%2F0_0_2405_3470%2F2405.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luke%20Edward%20Hall%3A%20'I%20like%20drawing%20beautiful%20things%2C%20beautiful%20people'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fluke-edward-hall-illustrator-designer-christies-burberry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luke%20Edward%20Hall%3A%20%27I%20like%20drawing%20beautiful%20things%2C%20beautiful%20people%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fluke-edward-hall-illustrator-designer-christies-burberry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F231316b8e0d23e7eb0421ef0934d9860a1191e5e%2F0_0_2405_3470%2F2405.jpg>
 ‘I suppose you could call it a queer aesthetic’ … Lido illustration. 
Photograph: courtesy of Luke Edward Hall 
These days, Hall’s illustration work is dominated by Greco-Roman heads, 
sketches of palm fronds and lolling boys, repeating animal prints, sailors, 
round spectacles and idealised scenes of European life. The style may be naive 
but the attention he’s garnered is well-established. What drew him to this 
interwar world of beautiful villas and floppy-haired men?

“I love the 20s and 30s because, during that period, artists would do a bit of 
everything from set design to ceramics, to photography,” Hall tells me, via a 
jagged Skype connection from his beautifully styled bedroom. Hall himself moved 
from being a menswear fashion design student at Central Saint Martins in London 
to working with the interior designerBen Pentreath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jun/15/on-my-radar-iestyn-davies-clean-bandit-gilded-birds>
, to ceramics, illustration and textiles. “I’ve obviously romanticised it a 
bit, but I love reading about the interwar years, when there was lots of light 
and fun,” says Hall. “People like Cecil Beaton, Rex Whistler, Oliver Messel. A 
lot of them were gay, so I suppose you could consider it a queer aesthetic.”

As an art student, Hall sold antiques online with his boyfriend Duncan 
Campbell and friend Haeni Kim under the name Fox & Flyte. After this, he moved 
into styling and interiors. Where did he learn about antiques? “Well, we didn’t 
really,” laughs Hall. “We would go to markets or buy things from eBay that we 
could post quite easily – ashtrays and cocktail shakers. We weren’t experts.”

This relaxed sense of accomplishment seems to be the secret of Hall’s success 
– not for him the anguished life of a penniless artist, more holidays in Italy 
and the south of France, picking up antiques and sketching. “I draw a lot of 
people; a lot of boys. Some are just from my head but I also draw from old 
photos,” says Hall. “I like drawing beautiful things, beautiful people, 
beautiful interiors.” On a recent holiday to Italy, Hall sketched people 
lolling on the heat-baked rocks below him – a scene that sounds more like 
something from a turn of the century grand tour than the digital-heavy art 
world of 2016.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fluke-edward-hall-illustrator-designer-christies-burberry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8b5948f4b706d0341e5801e296daedacaaab12e%2F0_122_2000_1743%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luke%20Edward%20Hall%3A%20'I%20like%20drawing%20beautiful%20things%2C%20beautiful%20people'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fluke-edward-hall-illustrator-designer-christies-burberry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luke%20Edward%20Hall%3A%20%27I%20like%20drawing%20beautiful%20things%2C%20beautiful%20people%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fluke-edward-hall-illustrator-designer-christies-burberry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8b5948f4b706d0341e5801e296daedacaaab12e%2F0_122_2000_1743%2F2000.jpg>
 On a plate ... Hall’s Ganymede design for David Gill. Photograph: Luke Edward 
Hall 
His teenage years were more prosaic. Hall grew up in “totally fine but pretty 
boring” Basingstoke. His father’s job is “something financey” and his mother 
looks after his younger siblings. Yet, as a young man already sure his future 
lay in London and the creative industries, he created a fanzine, Cake, full of 
photographs, articles and sketches by friends. It worked: Hall recently 
travelled to Korea for Burberry with some of his artworks and ceramics, to 
create a project similar to the sprucing he’d done of their Regent Street 
store. “I definitely felt very English over there,” he says, sitting against 
his green Farrow & Ball wall, in a pale blue shirt and pair of round glasses. 
No doubt he did.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fluke-edward-hall-illustrator-designer-christies-burberry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F056366b497eb1f2b154883c98eb16339ef774f61%2F0_0_1960_1960%2F1960.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luke%20Edward%20Hall%3A%20'I%20like%20drawing%20beautiful%20things%2C%20beautiful%20people'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fluke-edward-hall-illustrator-designer-christies-burberry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luke%20Edward%20Hall%3A%20%27I%20like%20drawing%20beautiful%20things%2C%20beautiful%20people%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fluke-edward-hall-illustrator-designer-christies-burberry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F056366b497eb1f2b154883c98eb16339ef774f61%2F0_0_1960_1960%2F1960.png>
 Greek Key Mint cushion.. Photograph: Courtesy of Luke Edward Hall 
Most of his faces, Hall says, start with the mouth – rather than the eyes, 
eyebrows, nose that others might sketch.. Later, he’ll decide if it belongs on 
a vase, as a repeated pattern on a fabric or within a portrait. “What I love is 
taking my drawings and seeing how I can apply them to products,” he says, 
sounding every bit the post-Warhol artist. Does he consider art democratic? 
Available and accessible to all? “I hope so,” he replies. “Someone might buy a 
drawing from me for a few hundred pounds or more, but I really like that I also 
make plates that are £30 or a cushion for £80.”

• Young Hearts 
<http://www.christies.com/features/Notes-from-the-stylist-Luke-Edward-Hall-7646-3.aspx>
 is at Christie’s South Kensington, London, 24-29 September.
 