
Driverless taxis could hit the streets in a matter of years after Lyft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/lyft> – a rival to private car-hailing 
appUber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> – announced plans to test 
them on US roads.

Detroit-based automotive firm General Motors and Lyft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/lyft> will road-test a fleet of 
autonomous Chevrolet Bolt electric taxis within a year, as the driverless car 
revolution gathers pace.

Uber, Google and others form self-driving car lobby to shape US policy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/26/uber-google-lyft-ford-volvo-self-driving-car-lobby>
The plan, unveiled just a few months after Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> announced a similar move, is 
expected to involve customers testing the new service in a US city that has yet 
to be chosen. Customers who use the app are expected to be offered a choice of 
whether they want to be part of the trials or would prefer a human driver.

Lyft’s prototype app for the service is understood to include options that 
allow the passenger to order their robot chauffeur to tell them when they have 
reached their destination.

The testing programme is not reliant on GM completing a $1bn (£700m) takeover 
onCruise Automation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/11/general-motors-cruise-automation-self-driving-cars>
, a San Francisco firm specialising in driverless technology, industry sources 
said. But if the deal goes ahead, it would give GM’s efforts to develop 
driverless vehicles a substantial boost.

Firms such as Lyft and Uber have latched on to the emerging driverless car 
technology, which would allow them to slash the cost of a journey by 
eliminating drivers altogether. The two firms have formed theSelf-Driving 
Coalition for Safer Streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/26/uber-google-lyft-ford-volvo-self-driving-car-lobby>
 with Ford, Google and Volvo, to lobby in the US for driverless technology, 
which they say can dramatically reduce the rate of road accidents. For firms 
such as GM, teaming up with Lyft opens up a ready-made market for vehicles 
suited to being part of a taxi fleet.

Uber is yet to announce plans to road-test driverless taxis but last year 
launched theUber Advanced Technologies Center in Pittsburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/03/are-driverless-cars-the-future-of-uber>
. The investment suggests that while Lyft is relying on a partnership with GM, 
Uber plans to develop in-house more of the technology used in driverless cars.

While firms such as Lyft and Uber could emerge as big winners from autonomous 
driving, industry figures recently warned thatmotor insurers could suffer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/03/driverless-cars-dent-motor-insurers-volvo>
, as a steep decline in accidents sends premiums tumbling.
 