
When playwright Lynn Nottage began work on Sweat, Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> was a little-known 
socialist senator, Donald Trump was a reality TV host and neither had a 
snowball in hell’s chance of reaching the White House.

But Sweat, currently playing at the Arena Stage in Washington 
<http://www.arenastage.org/shows-tickets/the-season/productions/sweat>, is a 
drama whose time has come. The play is based on Nottage’s interviews with 
residents of Reading, Pennsylvania,which in 2011 was ranked the poorest city in 
America 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/27/us/reading-pa-tops-list-poverty-list-census-shows.html?_r=0>
. It focuses on a group of friends whose jobs at the local steel mill are 
threatened by the decline of American manufacturing.

The 2016 presidential election has been dominated by alienation and anger 
towards the elites, with Sanders and Trump acting as lightning rods. “I would 
say that one of the things that America has gone through is that white 
middle-class men are losing a sense of identity and of their supremacy,” 
Nottage, 51, tells the Guardian. “I think that’s why Donald Trump is someone 
they gravitate towards because he speaks like a fascist andhe’s a nativist  
<http://www.salon.com/2015/09/20/the_time_has_come_to_silence_trumps_dangerous_anti_immigrant_rhetoric_partner/>
and all those things.”

The Republican frontrunner says he will “make America great again” 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/>. His strongest support is among a white working 
class coming to terms with both post-industrialisation and a more racially 
diverse America. Nottage, who is African American, continues: “It’s this fear 
that their power base is eroding and not wanting to move toward an America 
that’s more inclusive, and trying to hold on to something past.

“In the play one of the characters says, ‘Nostalgia is a disease’, and I do 
believe that it’s a disease that many white Americans have. They’re holding on 
this notion of what America was, even though we know it never wasthat. It’s 
this false notion of America. It was never great, at least from my point of 
view. It was always problematic. The ‘golden age’ was for like a handful of 
people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Flynn-nottage-sweat-donald-trump-bernie-sanders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fe2ff7c56d4ad131e4d52ac54c8c693bf6e9eb3%2F0_0_700_467%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lynn%20Nottage%3A%20'Nostalgia%20is%20a%20disease%20many%20white%20Americans%20have'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Flynn-nottage-sweat-donald-trump-bernie-sanders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lynn%20Nottage%3A%20%27Nostalgia%20is%20a%20disease%20many%20white%20Americans%20have%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Flynn-nottage-sweat-donald-trump-bernie-sanders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fe2ff7c56d4ad131e4d52ac54c8c693bf6e9eb3%2F0_0_700_467%2F700.jpg>
 At the end of their rope: Reza Salazar, Kimberly Scott, Tara Mallen and 
Johanna Day in Sweat. Photograph: Colin Hovde/C Stanley Photography 
Nottage won a Pulitzer prize for Ruined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/apr/23/ruined-michael-billington>, set 
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and examining the use of rape as a 
weapon of war, again based on journalist inquiry and interviews on the ground. 
Sweat came about after she received an email from a friend who had fallen on 
hard times, joined the Occupy Wall Street protests and reada New York Times 
article 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/27/us/reading-pa-tops-list-poverty-list-census-shows.html>
 about the plight of Reading.

She spent two years exploring the decaying steel and textile town from every 
angle. She found it highly segregated along racial lines, with Latinos now the 
majority, and noted the once-shiny malls that had closed down. “I describe 
myself as a light seeker, so I went there with the assumption that I would find 
these incredible pockets of resilience and optimism,” says Nottage,based at 
Columbia University <http://arts.columbia.edu/theatre/faculty/lynn-nottage> in 
New York. “Two years later I found that nothing had changed and that shocked me 
and surprised me and disappointed me.

“The other thing that surprised me and points to the rise of someone like 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is how easy it 
was to scapegoat Latinos for the economic woes in the city. I usually had to 
scratch the surface to get people to talk more candidly and freely, and people 
were blaming it on immigrants and blaming it on an influx of new folks who 
would take jobs and work for less, which is certainly not true.”

Nottage was particularly moved by the stories of steelworkers. Their 
experience had parallels with what she witnessed while staying in Mansfield in 
the UK duringthe 1984 miners strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/miners-strike-1984-85>. Now they make her 
think not of Trump but Sanders, the 74-year-old Vermont senator whois pushing 
Hillary Clinton hard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/12/jeremy-corbyn-no-senator-bernie-sanders-democrats>
for the Democratic nomination.

“It’s one of the things I remember distinctly, when I was sitting around with 
these steelworkers who were by and large middle-aged white folks who you 
associate with a certain level of politics. When we finished speaking I said, 
‘You guys sound like socialists’, so I think that Bernie Sanders is definitely 
articulating something that is in the air, that people feel as though 
corporations have too much control over the outcome of our lives, that the 
middle class has been diminished to the point where by and large we have no 
voice.”

Trump and Sanders share maverick outsider status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/23/donald-trump-bernie-sanders-lead-two-headed-insurgency-against-establishment>
 but little else. Trump has called for a ban on Muslims entering the country, 
building a wall to keep undocumented Mexican immigrants out and bringing 
manufacturing jobs back from China and elsewhere. Sanders has roundly condemned 
bigotry and promised to challenge Wall Street and reverse inequality in the 
economy, education and healthcare.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Flynn-nottage-sweat-donald-trump-bernie-sanders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66f8e5231c798ee3938d72dd0cef7f134927e15e%2F0_0_700_467%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lynn%20Nottage%3A%20'Nostalgia%20is%20a%20disease%20many%20white%20Americans%20have'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Flynn-nottage-sweat-donald-trump-bernie-sanders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lynn%20Nottage%3A%20%27Nostalgia%20is%20a%20disease%20many%20white%20Americans%20have%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Flynn-nottage-sweat-donald-trump-bernie-sanders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66f8e5231c798ee3938d72dd0cef7f134927e15e%2F0_0_700_467%2F700.jpg>
 Adrift in Trumpland: Kevin Kenerly and Tramell Tillman in Sweat. Photograph: 
Colin Hovde/C Stanley Photography 
Nottage adds: “I think it’s two extremes. People who feel marginalised are 
either grasping one side of the other; it appeals to people who are outside the 
political machine. But it’s two different philosophies: you have Donald Trump 
who’s a nativist and someone who wants to shut down the borders and Bernie 
Sanders is someone who’s really about community building and understands that 
inclusion can be our strength rather than our weakness.”

As for Barack Obama, the writer acknowledges that he inherited an economy on 
the brink of ruin and had to rebuild, but comments: “I feel disappointed that 
he didn’t do more. I feel disappointed that he didn’t spent a little more time 
looking into these fractured communities.”

Obama’s election was also hailed as a moment of historic symbolism for 
America’s racial politics. Yet his presidency has been marked by unrest in 
major cities andpolice shootings of young black men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/counted-us-police-killings> that 
inspired the Black Lives Matter movement. “All you have to do is turn on the 
television to understand that there really is a great schism in America right 
now and that race relations are very fragile,” Nottage reflects.

“I think the fact is: here’s a movement of young people who feel much more 
comfortable articulating their frustration. I don’t think that it’s a 
reflection of devolving race relations; they’re just tired of the status quo.”

It is a status quo that persists in the economy, at the Oscars and in the 
theatre world too. More than half a century afterLorraine Hansberry’s A Raisin 
in the Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/07/a-raisin-in-the-sun-review-lorraine-hansberry-crucible>
, many feel there is still a lack of diversity among directors and producers, 
with implications for the writers they select and the audiences they attract. 
“By and large the theatre establishment is run by a white majority,” Nottage 
says.

“If you’re looking at the people who head the institutions, there are very few 
African Americans or people of colour. I’m talking about the major theatres 
that position themselves as serving all audiences. What you find is by and 
large people who are shaping what we see and the people who are the tastemakers 
are white.”

She adds: “I actually feel relatively privileged at this place in my career 
that I have managed to climb my way up to the point where I can have my plays 
produced at some of these larger stages, but it wasn’t an easy climb. The 
frustration that I have … a lot of times when I’m produced at one of the major 
off-Broadway theatres, I tend to be the only African American who’s represented 
as a playwright in those seasons and perhaps the only playwright of colour.”

Nottage is now working on a companion piece to Sweat, which began life at the 
Oregon Shakespeare festival <https://www.osfashland.org/> directed by longtime 
collaborator Kate Whoriskey. Asked which playwright she most admires, she has a 
comprehensive answer: “The person whose work introduced me to the craft was
Lorraine Hansberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/apr/23/artsfeatures.stage>; the 
person who taught me to love the craft wasTennessee Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tennesseewilliams>; the person who really 
taught me the power of the craft wasAugust Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/dec/14/theatre.artsfeatures>; and the 
person who taught me the political heft of the craft wasArthur Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/miller>.

“I also think we’re in a really exciting, golden moment in American 
playwriting where there’s a lot being said and a lot of enormously talented 
folks who are writing.” She citesSuzan-Lori Parks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/11/is-2016-the-year-of-the-female-playwright>
,Tony Kushner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/aug/15/tony-kushner-honorary-degree-interview>
,Ayad Akhtar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/may/07/pulitzer-playwright-ayad-akhtar>,
Katori Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jun/07/katori-hall-the-mountaintop> and 
Annie Baker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/12/john-review-play-annie-baker-signature-theatre-new-york>
.

Finally, what does Nottage make of the prospect of President Donald Trump? “I 
absolutely refuse to contemplate that,” she says firmly. “I really do not see a 
future where that is possible.”
 