
Tense times in France, and the pressure finally seems to be getting to the 
coaches. In the last few days, one has fallen out over a bib, one might regret 
signing a new contract, one was sent off, and another admitted he has not been 
himself for months. All this while the weekend action had the usual thrills and 
spills: shocking refereeing decisions, last-minute penalty drama and players 
squaring up to fans – all in the same game. Oh, and a title race that is 
officially ON (again).

The reason? Lille beat Lyon for the second time in four days, following 
Wednesday's3–2 French Cup triumph <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RJG5ih3VrgU> 
with adeserved 2–0 win <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ITaf9zfomIc> at the 
Stade de France in front of a Ligue 1 record attendance of 78,056. "We do 
better against the top teams than the others and that's our big problem," 
admitted their star player Michel Bastos, who set up one goal and scored the 
other. Lille are now three points behind Marseille in third place and the 
coach, Rudi Garcia, has demanded more consistency. "When you can beat Lyon 
twice in a week it means you're at a certain level and we have to stay at that 
level every week."

Lyon's preparations were not helped by the late withdrawals of Hugo Lloris and 
John Mensah, an injury that forced Karim Benzema off at half-time, and a 
bizarre midweek bust-up between the coach, Claude Puel, and Anthony Réveillère, 
the injured full-back, who wanted to swap bibs during a training exercise. 
"There was an altercation," admitted the coach, who reportedly barked at 
Réveillère: 'Who do you think you are? Sod off to the dressing room.' Puel is 
still nonplussed by Réveillère's decision to refuse him surgery after rupturing 
his knee ligaments in November. "We still have question marks over the 
situation but it'sthe first time I've seen anything like that 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/FF/breves2009/20090306_104504_puel-et-l-incident-reveillere.html>
."

The situation bodes well for their Champions League opponents Barcelona, but 
also everyone else in Ligue 1, not least Paris Saint-Germain, who are now only 
one point behind Lyon afterLudovic Giuly's brilliant volley beat Lorient 1–0 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fl93tOalCbI>. It was a huge win for PSG, not 
just because they were without the suspended duo Claude Makélélé and Stéphane 
Sessègnon, or because they reverted to the 4-3-3 system that had failed them 
earlier in the season, but also because they had justlost 3–1 after extra-time  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=osYDyOMk2iw>in the Cup to third-division Rodez. 
"This victory was down to our courage," said the coach, Paul Le Guen. In fact, 
it was down to Mickaël Landreau.

The goalkeeper was terrible last season but is now back to his best form, as 
he showed when he saved a last-minute penalty from Rafik Saïfi that was very 
harshly given. "He took a penalty against me last season and he scored with a 
side-foot, so I knew I had to wait until the last possible second," said 
Landreau, who since saving a penalty from Lubomir Moravcik, then of Bastia, on 
his Nantes debut in August 1996, has now stopped 14 spot-kicks inLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football>.

"We had to bounce back from Rodez, and our aim at the moment is to keep 
defending our second place," said Landreau, whose renaissance is all down to 
his coach, according to Sonny Anderson, the formerLyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> striker who won the title under Le 
Guen in 2003. "Paul has a way of instilling confidence in his players. He's so 
calm, he gives players a lot of responsibility and I'm not surprised to see him 
succeeding."

Saïfi lost his cool at the end of the game, and waded into the crowd to 
confront a fan who had shouted at him as the players headed down the tunnel. He 
demanded the fan withdraw his comment – which he did – but the pair then 
squared up and had to be separated by stewards. The fan was taken away by 
police.

PSG still have tough fixtures to come against Marseille, and away at Toulouse, 
Lille and Lyon, but there's no doubt they are Ligue 1's form team. Marseille, 
by comparison, have strung together three consecutive league wins only once all 
season and their cutting edge was lacking again in a 0–0 draw at home to 
Valenciennes, who hit the post, the crossbar, and saw Steve Mandanda make a 
point-blank save.Valenciennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valenciennes> have not lost since early 
December, and are now three points clear of the drop zone. "I'm not making 
excuses but it took us several months to recover from David Sommeil's heart 
attack [last August]," explained the coach, Antoine Kombouaré. "It affected us 
all a lot, it turned me soft but I am back to my old self again now. That can 
no longer be an excuse for us."

Finishing second is still the objective at Marseille, although attention on 
next week's trip to PSG has been overshadowed by thepublication of 
agent-turned-president Pape Diouf's autobiography 
<http://www.lejdd.fr/cmc/sport/200910/pape-diouf-vide-son-sac_192791.html>, in 
which he talks about Lyon ("they think about the business of football before 
anything else") Barack Obama ("his election gives me more credibility") and one 
particular player who refused to appoint him as agent even though they had got 
on well: "He wasn't sure how he would be perceived if he had a black agent, and 
thought it was too much of a risk for him. His name: Jérôme Rothen." "I am not 
a racist," Rothen responded on Canal Plus. "I will wait to read the section of 
the book in question but I don't want to get in a row about it now."

Toulouse are level on points with Marseille after the result of the weekend, a 
3–0 thumping of Bordeaux <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=frSSUx-lp_c>. TFC's 
Andre-Pierre Gignac scored again, his 16th of the season coming from a nicely 
worked free-kick routine, while Bordeaux have won only once in the six games 
since Laurent Blanc extended his contract with the club. "They beat us in every 
department but especially mentally," said Blanc. "They wiped the floor with us 
physically, and when you play as badly as we did, you can't expect anything." 
Bordeaux's president, Jean-Louis Triaud, added: "The Toulouse gameplan is 
simple, they have nine at the back and one up front and they try to hit you on 
the counter. And yet we were surprised. We were like a fly squashed against the 
window." Bordeaux's top-scorer, Fernando Cavenaghi, is injured for the next six 
weeks and Champions League qualification, which is necessary if they want to 
keep Yoann Gourcuff, is now looking like their best-case scenario.

Caen slipped into the bottom three after losing 2–1 at Grenoble 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jgox9Q_oHEY>, although they were not helped by 
the referee Oliver Thaul showing Gregory Keca a straight red card after nine 
minutes, and then sending the coach, Franck Dumas, to the stands. "When the 
referees are rubbish and just produce a load of shit, it needs to be said," 
ranted Caen's Gregory Proment after the game. "Tonight they produced a lot of 
shit. They were crap. They were … I think I'd better shut up now."

He was not the only one with complaints: both captains had a go at referee 
Tony Chapron after Nice drew 0–0 with Monaco, with Olivier Echouafni (Nice) 
claiming his behaviour was "unacceptable and incomprehensible". It was a 
surreal game, as music was played over the Tannoy during the second half, a 
firecracker landed inches from Monaco goalkeeper Stéphane Ruffier and abusive 
chants were directed at Prince Albert ofMonaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco>, which, said ex-president Jérôme 
de Bontin "were a form of racism that I will be writing to the league about".

"The match was stopped every two minutes, the firecracker shows there are 
still idiots out there, while that music made me think I was in a nightclub," 
moaned the Monaco manager, Ricardo, while his opposite number, Frédéric 
Antonetti, who has probably frequented a few of those in his time, responded: 
"It's true we shouldn't have firecrackers, but let's not exaggerate, it was a 
lot worse in the 1970s and 1980s."

Back then, Lyon had barely even played in the top flight, so for them to be 90 
minutes away from a Champions League quarter-final represents major progress, 
of course, even if defeat against Barcelona this week might cause more problems 
in their squad. Lyon face Auxerre next week and any slip-up then could see PSG 
top the table were they to beatMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille>. There are a few ifs to 
negotiate, but since when has that stopped PSG fans from dreaming?

Results, Week 27: Lorient 0–1 PSG, Marseille 0–0 Valenciennes, Toulouse 3–0 
Bordeaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux>, Nice 0–0 Monaco, 
Nancy 2–2 Le Mans, Grenoble 2–1 Caen, Lille 2–0 Lyon, Rennes 2–0 Auxerre, Le 
Havre 2–1 Sochaux, Saint-Etienne 2–1 Nantes.

Latest Ligue 1 table 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=23>
 