
Conspiracy theories, team-mates fighting over a chair, a Raymond Domenech 
cameo and a surprise jujitsu champion: only one top-eight team may have won, 
but last weekend's action inFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france>
 was memorable for other reasons.

The game of the weekend was Lyon's derby match against St-Etienne, whose 
coach, Alain Perrin, guided Lyon to their first ever league and Cup double last 
season. Perrin is still waiting for the watch that the Lyon president, 
Jean-Michel Aulas, had promised him, and instead received a mini-replica of the
Ligue 1 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> trophy when the 
two men met in the tunnel before the game. In return, Perrin mischievously gave 
his former boss a St-Etienne scarf.

If that didn't ruin Aulas's night, the match almost did: Lyon were 
unconvincing yet again in the 1–1 draw 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jndho5WWJVA>, their fourth in a row at home. It 
could have been worse, as after the second-half dismissal of Frédéric 
Piquionne, Lyon's former Sainté striker who was handed a rare start, the 
referee Stéphane Lannoy ignored Jean-Alain Boumsong's clear trip on Ilan 
Araujo. "We were robbed of the three points,"moaned Perrin 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090202_005923_perrin-on-a-ete-voles.html>
. "When a referee who is 10 metres away doesn't blow for a penalty, it shows 
that it's good to have a president who puts pressure on the referees."If anyone 
knows about that 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/FF/breves2009/20090201_235724_perrin-on-s-est-fait-voles.html>
, it would be Perrin. In response,Lyon released a statement 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/FF/breves2009/20090201_235724_perrin-on-s-est-fait-voles.html>
: "We are surprised and disappointed by M Perrin's defamatory remarks," it 
read. "He probably wanted to explain his team's inability to beat a team 
reduced to 10 men."

Lyon have now failed to win at the Stade Gerland since mid-November, a run of 
form in which they have failed to beat Valenciennes, Lorient and Marseille. As 
L'Equipe put it: "They are a lot less scary these days." And despite Aulas 
insisting the club "need to spend big" in the January transfer window, reported 
moves for Julien Faubert, Pascal Chimbonda, Charles N'Zogbia, Keirrison, Péguy 
Luyindula and Ricardo Oliveira allfailed to materialise 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/FF/breves2009/20090129_125401_et-si-l-ol-ne-recrutait-pas.html>
.

The title-race would be even more interesting if Lyon's rivals were able to 
capitalise on the champions' slip-ups, but Marseille continued their shaky form 
with a1–0 defeat <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IPnwlQsh4bo> at Sochaux, their 
first away loss for more than a year, while Bordeaux drew 2–2 with Lille. This 
was the week that Laurent Blanc finally signed a two-year contract extension 
(with a release clause, apparently, if the France job comes up) while doubts 
over Eric Gerets's future gather momentum. The Belgian cuts an increasingly 
unhappy figure at l'OM and could be tempted to return to Germany, where he had 
offers last summer, at the end of the season. The signings of Brandao and 
Sylvain Wiltord are an admission that his summer recruitment has not worked, 
while two more attacking players will produce a further selection headache 
considering he has yet to work out an attacking system for his team.

The Sochaux match-winner was Mevlut Erdinc, their top scorer who despite 
playing for France Under-18s, is now a senior Turkey international. "My parents 
are Turkish but I didn't really decide to play for them, I just got a call-up 
so went along," he said. His parents showed the same sangfroid after an 
immigration officer spelt their surname "Erding" when they first entered France 
(hence the name on the back of Mevlut's shirt). This was Sochaux's third win of 
the season and keeps them in the relegation zone, but only one point behind 
St-Etienne and Auxerre. "We've drawn 11 out of 22 games, but if we can just 
pick up some wins, we'll be fine," said Erdinc, whose home town of 
Saint-Claude, famous for"les pipes" 
<http://www.parkspipes.com/images/miscellaneous/St_Claude_e.jpg>, can now claim 
another popular export. Mevlut handled himself well when faced with his 
sniggering inquisitors onFabulous Sport 
<http://darren.blog.canal-plus.com/archive/2009/01/25/fabulous-sport-m-erding-vous-repond.html>
 last week, who could not wait to point out that "une pipe" is also French 
slang for a blow job. "I'm proud to come from the town of 'les pipes'," Mevlut 
deadpanned.

PSG were the only top-eight side to win this weekend, a 2–0 victory 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsBhZF9ttlc&NR=1> over Caen, and their steady 
improvement has shown the importance of getting recruitment right. The stats 
bear this out: 74% of PSG's league goals have been scored by their new 
signings. Guillaume Hoarau, in his rookie year in the top flight, is now Ligue 
1's joint top scorer, having won more headers (340, with a 45% success rate) 
than anyone else; another new signing Stéphane Sessègnon has completed more 
dribbles than anyone else (60 compared to Hatem Ben Arfa's 58); while no team 
has scored more headed goals (seven) than PSG. Hoarau's form may be too soon to 
earn him a call-up to the France squad for next week's friendly against 
Argentina but he should soon be moving up L'Equipe's list of top five players 
from La Réunion, which currently reads:1 Florent Sinama-Pongolle; 2 Laurent 
Robert;3 Jean-Pierre Bade; 4 Didier Agathe; 5 Hoarau.

The France coach, Raymond Domenech, appeared on TV show Canal Football Club on 
Sunday night foran entertaining interrogation 
<http://www.foot-news.com/index.php?2009%2F02%2F02%2F4476-dugarry-critique-domenech-sur-canal-plus>
 at the hands of Christophe Dugarry. "I've always liked Christophe and I liked 
him as a player, but now he's a journalist, he has to brush up on his facts," 
said Domenech when accused of playing Eric Abidal at centre-back for the first 
time in his career during Euro 2008. "People talk to me about communication 
issues, but I'm talking now, so what's all that about? I'd rather talk about 
the team but everyone wants to talk about me!"

Dugarry's former team-mate Bixente Lizarazu was also back in the headlines: on 
the day that fellow full-back Willy Sagnol sadly quit the game for good, 
Lizarazu was winning gold in theBrazilian Jujitsu European Open 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/FF/breves2009/20090202_090431_lizarazu-roi-du-ju-jitsu.html>
 in Lisbon. "When I saw the other competitors on Friday with their shaved heads 
and cauliflower ears, they all looked like killers, and I said to myself, 'What 
the hell are you doing?'" he said after dispatching two Italians and an 
Englishman in the Under-76kg category, 35-40 age group.

Perhaps the Le Mans duo Anthony Le Tallec and Ibrahima Camara had seen Liza in 
action: both men were thrown out of the team's lunch meeting after fighting 
when Camara had taken Le Tallec's seat. Their row continued in the hotel lobby, 
and as the team-mates squared up to settle their differences, the coach, Yves 
Bertucci, waded in and suspended both from the squad. The team could have done 
with that fighting spirit against Nantes, whobeat them 2–0 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wnuse92YY20>. "We were crap and that simply 
wasn't good enough," the captain, Mathieu Coutadeur, apologised. Bertucci's job 
has now gone to Le Mans' sports director, the man behind all their signings,
Daniel Jeandupeux 
<http://www.lemans.maville.com/actu/muc72_detail_-Daniel-Jeandupeux-Retrouver-de-la-confiance-_11468-813618_actu.Htm>
, with the ex-coach kept on as assistant.

Elsewhere, goal-shy Rennes and Toulouse played out a predictable 0–0 draw 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RYXy1i6_Fa0> while Valenciennes continued their 
improvement with a 1–0 win 
<http://allvideofoot.blogspot.com/2009/01/video-valenciennes-nice-1-0-31012009.html>
 over Nice. At the bottom,Le Havre lost 3–2 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GrCKo6OAV0A> to Nancy, their seventh defeat on 
the spin. France's oldest club look doomed to the drop, but still continue to 
produce great players from their youth academy. How's this for a starting XI of 
recent Le Havre graduates? Mandanda, N'Zogbia, (Alou) Diarra, Boumsong, 
Chimbonda, (Lassana) Diarra, Digard, Dhorasoo, Hoarau, Niang, Sinama-Pongolle. 
It's a side that might even beat Lyon, on their current form.

Results, Week 22:

PSG 2–0 Caen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/caen>

Valenciennes 1–0 Nice

Auxerre 0–0 Lorient

Le Havre <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lehavre> 2–3 Nancy

Le Mans <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lemans> 0–2 Nantes

Monaco 1–0 Grenoble

Rennes 0–0 Toulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse>

Bordeaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> 2–2 Lille

Sochaux 1–0 Marseille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille>

Lyon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> 1–1 Saint-Etienne
 