
M’Baye Niang ended his Milan scoring drought in style, netting twice and 
setting up one in a convincing 4-1 win over visitingSampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> on Saturday.

The 20-year-old Niang had not scored in 35 previous Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> appearances for Milan.

“As far as I’m concerned the season is just starting, and I’ve got to show 
what I’m capable of,” Niang said, likening his playing style to that of Paris 
Saint-Germain forward Edinson Cavani.

After providing the cross for Giacomo Bonaventura’s opener, Niang converted a 
penalty before half-time then intercepted a pass from Sampdoria’s goalkeeper 
for another one after the interval. Seconds earlier, Niang almost scored with 
an acrobatic airborne backheel deflection following a free-kick from Alessio 
Cerci.

It was Niang’s second brace in Italy, having also scored two while on loan 
with Genoa last season.

“It’s not a surprise to me,” the Milan coach, Sinisa Mihajlovic, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/04/sinisa-mihajlovic-coach-milan-sampdoria>
 said. “He’s come back from an injury and is playing well. He already showed 
last season at Genoa what he’s made of.”

Luiz Adriano added another for Milan with a beautiful chest control and 
volley, and Eder converted a penalty for Sampdoria near the end for his 10th 
goal of the season, drawing him level with Napoli’s Gonzalo Higuaín at the top 
of the scoring charts.Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> 
moved up to fifth, seven points behind the leaders, Internazionale, as 
Mihajlovic got the better of his former club.

“We got a great result which we wanted after struggling in the last match,” 
Bonaventura said, referring to a 1-0 loss to Juventus last weekend. It was 
Sampdoria’s third straight defeat and second consecutive under new coach 
Vincenzo Montells, who replaced Walter Zenga.

Niang has made a few appearances for the France Under-21 team but is still 
waiting for his first callup to the senior side. “He’s a solid, physical 
player,” Bonaventura said. “We have a lot of good forwards. Let’s hope they 
keep scoring a lot of goals.”

Earlier, Torino beat visiting Bologna 2-0 with late goals from Andrea Belotti 
and Giuseppe Vives. Torino moved into eighth, level on points with city rival 
Juventus.
 