
More on my problems following the appearance of a koala bear in Cryptic puzzle 
No 26,288 <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26288> (17 June, 21 
down), set by Qaos. The clue was: 'Bear a left, then a right, then reverse 
(5)', making A/L/A/OK (rev).

The initial attack for having allowed a koala to be referred to as a bear came 
from someone working for a company with its headquarters in Perth, Western 
Australia. (My position was already weakened by the discovery that, underK, the 
Guardian's own style book states, baldly and without qualification:koala not 
koala bear.) But one Australian correspondent from Victoria pointed out that 
Perth lies a very long way indeed to the west of of the natural habitat of the 
koala, while another from Queensland gave it as his opinion that 99% of the 
Australian population regularly refer to koalas as koala bears.

Perhaps the clincher, though, came in a comment posted under my July blog from 
Robi23. After pointing out that the Qaos clue is definitely better than 
'Marsupial a bear, then a left, then reverse (5)' would have been, we were 
reminded that in 1983, for the B-side of his better-known number 'Say say say', 
Paul McCartney recorded, in duet with the late Michael Jackson, a song called 
'Ode to a koala bear'. It is not the McCartney endorsement that counts in this 
context but the fact that the record in question was produced by George Martin, 
in the eyes of most people the greatest record producer of all time, widely 
know as 'The Fifth Beatle' and knighted in 1996 for his services to music. 
Still with us at the age of 88, such a scholar and a gentleman knows full well 
that a koala is a marsupial, not a bear. But he would never have allowed one to 
be called a koala bear and to have an ode for which he was responsible 
dedicated to it unless it was acceptable to do so.

Finally, I was delighted to be sent a copy of a card with a picture on it of a 
charming koala, nibbling a leaf, bearing the legend:

WHAT DO YOU MEAN I'M NOT A BEAR?
I HAVE ALL THE KOALIFICATIONS


PS: Here's Sir Macca and Jacko singing 'Ode to a koala bear 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cIJPxFa9ti4>' together 

______

This is advance notice that the Cryptic for the August bank holiday weekend, 
set by Maskarade, will be published on Saturday 23 August and is a jumbo 
alphabetical jigsaw puzzle. The solution will be available on Monday 1 
September.

______

July's Genius (No 133 by the newcomer Vlad) got a high number of entries (18) 
on the first day but only 221 by the deadline. I have no way of knowing whether 
you found the puzzle particularly challenging, or whether this wonderful 
extended summer has had you doing other more pleasurable things outdoors. The 
first two solvers to send in correct entries have form, Genius-wise: Dave H in 
this country and PSC in Queensland, Australia. The third to finish correctly 
was Hook T, a newcomer in the winners' enclosure, I think.

Incidentally, for those still battling with the August Genius by Enigmatist, 
there was originally a small error in the first line of the specula 
instructions, which has been corrected.

______

Congratulations to John Woodall, who is the winner of the July Genius (No. 
133) puzzle.

______

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk>. 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>. For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 