
At the beginning of summer I nonchalantly scattered a mixed packet of annual 
ornamental grasses, partly because the slugs had eaten everything else and I 
felt a bit desperate. The oats and barleys have nearly all come up in the wrong 
place, as scattered seed is likely to do, but still look much more marvellous 
than I would have expected. Over the winter I am going to edit the garden, 
removing some overly rambunctious geraniums and making space for more grasses. 
This time they’ll be perennials, because life is short enough and there’s 
dancing to do.

Plenty of perennial grasses are reliable, easy to grow and low-maintenance. 
They offer structure without being too formal and give rhythm to the garden; 
make the right choices and they provide plenty of seasonal interest. And, 
praise the Lord, slugs aren’t that interested in them. In other words, I’ve 
seen the light with grasses.

There are some very handsome ornamental grasses out there, but many are just 
too big for small gardens. You could rarely say molinia was overpowering: it’s 
a gentle breeze of a grass, a flirty diaphanous thing that plays with light, 
perfectly accents low plantings and can sit happily at the front of the border. 
Purple moor-grassMolinia caerulea subsp. caerulea ‘Moorhexe’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/47257/Purple-moor-grass-Moorhexe/Details> is 
upright and neat, a narrow column of grey-green leaves crowned with soft purple 
flowers in spring, the whole thing turning touches of russet-red in autumn. It 
grows 45-60cm tall.M. ‘Edith Dudszus’ 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/81061/Molinia-caerulea-subsp-caerulea-Edith-Dudszus/Details>
 is taller at up to 90cm and has darker flowers that teeter between rich plum 
purple and black, floating above tussocks of grey-green foliage. It comes into 
its own in winter and can grow in sun and partial shade.

Want to boost your soil? Get some seaweed | Alys Fowler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/19/why-seaweed-is-great-for-gardens-alys-fowler>
New Zealand wind grass (Anemanthele lessoniana, formerly Stipa arundinacea) is 
a little undervalued because it’s so widely available, but those soft waves of 
pink flowers are really something and the foliage is evergreen, tinted orange, 
yellow and red in autumn, so it adds something year-round. It’s not 
particularly long-lived (you get five good years at best) but it knows its own 
flaws and will happily self-seed. All you have to do is pot up your replacement 
and weed out the rest (or give them away). It can look a little scruffy in late 
summer, so comb it with your hands to remove any dishevelled flower heads or 
tired leaves. It’s rather soothing, like brushing hair.

You can never fail with Hakonechloa macra 
<http://www.rhsplants.co.uk/plants/_/hakonechloa-macra/classid.2000004400/>, 
which makes waves of arching green foliage and keeps itself to a fairly 
contained clump. It works well at the front of the border or in a container, 
and comes into its own at the end of summer. The new growth in spring is 
particularly pleasing.

For shadier spots use Melica altissima ‘Alba’ 
<https://www.shootgardening.co.uk/plant/melica-altissima-alba>, which looks 
best planted in elegant drifts. The flowers are delicate, like tiny grains of 
rice that catch the sun and shiver in the slightest breeze. There’s something 
rather magical about this grass, particularly in a woodland setting.
 