
‘You don’t need a secret recipe to make great limoncello,” says Fabio 
Gandossi, whose family tends Limonaia la Malora, a centuries-old citrus grove 
in Gargnano, on the shores of Italy’s Lake Garda. “You just need a lot of 
lemons and they need to be the very best.” His elixir contains only a handful 
of ingredients: water, sugar, and 94% grain alcohol infused with slivered lemon 
zest. It makes for a subtly sweet sipper perfumed with sunshiny citrus, a far 
cry from the cloying, lurid yellow shots doled out in touristy trattorias.

It takes a full two dozen lemons to give one litre its characteristic saffron 
hue and intense aroma. Local lore has it that the lemons grown in this region 
of the lake – dubbed the Riviera dei Limoni – were once so prized that Russian 
tsars had them specially imported. The first groves date back to the 13th 
century, when Franciscan monks in Gargnano began to cultivate them and produce 
liqueur.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmaking-perfect-limoncello-lake-garda-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b46e661e449584380d0d577dcce8f8b9c186b99%2F0_0_1024_429%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Making%20the%20perfect%20limoncello%20on%20the%20shores%20of%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20Lake%20Garda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmaking-perfect-limoncello-lake-garda-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Making%20the%20perfect%20limoncello%20on%20the%20shores%20of%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20Lake%20Garda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmaking-perfect-limoncello-lake-garda-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b46e661e449584380d0d577dcce8f8b9c186b99%2F0_0_1024_429%2F1024.jpg>
 In winter, the frame of the limonaia, or lemon house, is covered with glass 
panels to form a makeshift greenhouse. 
These days, few lemons are grown on Lake Garda’s shores: winters in northern 
Italy are too harsh for most citrus trees. Further south on the Amalfi coast, 
milder winters and scorching summer days produce enormous specimens so mild 
that they are often eaten raw, thinly sliced and dipped in sugar. In contrast, 
cooler northern temperatures result in bracingly sour fruits with exceptionally 
fragrant zest – perfect for limoncello. Seedlings are usually grafted on to the 
roots of sour orange trees to help them survive the winters.

When the first signs of frost appear on water buckets dotted around the 
limonaia(lemon house), Fabio’s father, Giuseppe, covers the grove with glass 
panels to form a makeshift greenhouse, just as generations have done before him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmaking-perfect-limoncello-lake-garda-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feadbad3011af648ef1a6ffe05b3666364166ac25%2F0_17_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Making%20the%20perfect%20limoncello%20on%20the%20shores%20of%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20Lake%20Garda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmaking-perfect-limoncello-lake-garda-italy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Making%20the%20perfect%20limoncello%20on%20the%20shores%20of%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20Lake%20Garda&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmaking-perfect-limoncello-lake-garda-italy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feadbad3011af648ef1a6ffe05b3666364166ac25%2F0_17_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 The lemons are grown inside a wood and stone framework that is covered with 
glass in winter. 
“For us, the cultivation of lemons is a part of our history,” says Gandossi. 
The market for Lake Garda lemons declined in the 20th century in the face of 
competition from the south – which, not needing elaborate measures to protect 
trees from frost, had much lower production costs. Of the hundreds of lemon 
houses that once dotted the lakeshore, only a few remain. When Giuseppe found 
his, it had been abandoned, with only a few surviving ancient trees. Decades of 
care brought it back to life. “It’s important that people understand this piece 
of our culture. It represents a part of our past.”

• Limonaia la Malora <https://www.facebook.com/LimonaiaLaMalora> offers 
private, Italian-language tours and (from January 2017), tastings for groups of 
10 or more for €3pp
 