
A man has been arrested on suspicion of assaulting the Chesterfield captain 
Ian Evatt at the end of theLeague One play-off semi-final second leg at Preston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/10/preston-north-end-chesterfield-league-one-play-off-match-report>
 on Sunday.

Evatt reported that he had been “punched, kicked and spat on” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/10/ian-evatt-chesterfield-preston-north-end-fan-attack-punched-kicked-spat>
 as supporters invaded the pitch at the final whistle and on Monday he called 
for the Football Association to act. Lancashire police have now made an arrest 
in relation to the matter.

A statement from the force on Monday read: “Police investigating an assault on 
aChesterfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> player have 
arrested a man. The 20-year-old from Preston was arrested this morning on 
suspicion of Section 47 assault and is currently in custody.

“Police are continuing to investigate the alleged assault on Chesterfield 
player Ian Evatt which followed an otherwise largely peaceful incursion on to 
the pitch at the end of the Preston vs Chesterfield match at Deepdale on 
Sunday, 10 May. The player was thankfully not seriously hurt.” Evatt believes 
it is only a matter of time until a player gets seriously injured during pitch 
invasions by an “idiot with a knife”. He told TalkSport: “The only way people 
are going to learn is if the clubs get punished. I don’t want that but how else 
are fans going to learn not to go on the pitch? We can’t bring back the cages. 
There’s got to be a way round it so maybe it is time for the FA to stand up and 
start punishing people for doing it.”

The PFA echoed Evatt’s thoughts and chairman Ritchie Humphreys, his team-mate 
at Chesterfield, was an unused substitute at Deepdale.

A statement read: “The Union is deeply concerned that a member has been 
attacked by fans and will work closely with Ian Evatt, Ritchie Humphreys and 
Chesterfield FC in order to offer our full support and guidance.

“The PFA will continue to address this matter with the relevant bodies to try 
and ensure that this behaviour is eradicated from the game, before a player is 
seriously injured in a similar incident.”
 