
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> pay 
the highest wages in world football, according to the latest edition of the 
global sports salaries survey. Average basic first-team pay at the Premier 
League club has been calculated at £5.77m a year, or £110,962 per week.

United are ranked fourth in the overall sporting pay league behind the NBA’s 
Cleveland Cavaliers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cleveland-cavaliers>, 
who pay an average annual salary of $8.7m (£6.9m), baseball’s New York Yankees 
($7.68m) and another NBA team, the LA Clippers ($7.65m).

Manchester United must look deeper than the next shiny new toy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/manchester-united-paul-pogba> 
The survey is based on the reported pay of almost 10,000 sportsmen at 333 
teams in seven sports and is publishedby Sporting Intelligence 
<http://www.sportingintelligence.com/2016/10/21/gsss-2015/>.

Barcelona are the second highest football payers with an average annual salary 
of £5.65m, followed byManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> on £5.4m.

Last year United were ranked below City but United’s £145m close-season 
transfer splurge, which made Paul Pogba the world’s most expensive footballer 
and also led to the arrival of Zlatan Ibrahimovic, has inflated their wage bill.

The two Manchester clubs are the only Premier League teams in the overall 
sporting top 30, with Chelsea (34), Arsenal (47) and Liverpool (60) lagging 
well behind American sports teams, reflecting the pound’s fall against the 
dollar following Britain’s vote to leave the EU.

The Premier League remains the most lucrative global football league, with an 
average first-team pay of £48,766 a week. That represents a 32-fold increase on 
the annual figure of £77,000 for 1992-93, when the league began.

Further increases are expected after the Premier League agreed domestic and 
global television deals worth approximately £8bn for 2016-19.

Elsewhere in Europe, Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> are German football’s best 
payers, with Juventus topping the league in Italy. But China has emerged as a 
financial force, with the survey revealing that five of the world’s 14 best 
paid players are contracted there.

Ronaldo remains the world’s best paid footballer, on the equivalent of 
£365,000 a week, the survey said.

Television is also having a huge impact on the salaries for NBA stars, with 
the league negotiating a nine-year, $24bn deal in 2014.

The NBA contains six of the world’s top 10 richest teams and 14 of the top 20. 
The survey covers 17 leagues in football, baseball, basketball, NFL, cricket, 
ice hockey and Australian rules football.
 