
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
will play the French side Saint-Étienne in the last 32 of the Europa League.

Arsenal drawn against Bayern Munich in Champions League last 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/arsenal-drawn-against-bayern-munich-in-champions-league-last-16-draw>
United qualified as Group A runners-up and were paired with Christophe 
Galtier’s team, who defeated Anderlecht in their final Group C game to pip the 
Belgian club to top spot.

The tie means a potential meeting of the Pogba brothers – Paul, who joined 
United from Juventus in the summer for aworld-record £93.2m fee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-united-sign-paul-pogba-93-million-juventus>
, and Florentin Pogba, who is three years older than his illustrious sibling 
and has played for Saint‑Étienne, who are eighth in Ligue 1, for the past four 
years.

“That’s a nice thing. Paul was already laughing about it and for sure his 
brother is also laughing. It has happened a few times in the history football 
and it’s a nice thing,” said José Mourinho, the United manager. “Then the good 
thing is the travel distance. We were very unlucky in the group phase, we had 
to go very far, it was very difficult to go to Turkey, Ukraine.

“Now we go to France because the flight is easy and it’s not an easy period, 
there are lots of games, so that is good. Then Saint-Étienne is an historic old 
club with lots of tradition. People of my generation will never forget that 
[Michel] Platini team and it will be difficult because every team now is a good 
team in the competition.

Europa League last 32 draw: Manchester United face St Etienne – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/12/europa-league-last-32-draw-manchester-united-tottenham-hotspur-live>
“For sure, Manchester United is one of the big names in the competition but we 
have two months without theEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league>, two months to forget 
it, then we will see.”

Tottenham Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> 
were handed the short trip to Belgium to face the Group H runners-up Gent, who 
qualified by winning their final match against Konyaspor. Spurs dropped into 
the Europa League after finishing third in their Champions League group.

United and Spurs faced each other at Old Trafford at the weekend, with the 
hostswinning 1-0 thanks to a first-half goal from Henrikh Mkhitaryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/manchester-united-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
. The Armenian was later taken off on a stretcher following a challenge from 
Danny Rose.

“Hopefully he can play at Christmas [Boxing Day],” Mourinho said. “When I saw 
the tackle on TV I was a bit scared. It’s a pity he misses matches in his best 
period.”

Europa League last 32

Manchester United v Saint-Étienne

AA Gent v Tottenham Hotspur

Athletic Bilbao v Apoel Nicosia

Legia Warsaw v Ajax

Anderlecht v Zenit St Petersburg

FC Astra Giurgiu v Genk

Villarreal v Roma

Ludogorets v FC Copenhagen

Celta Vigo v Shakhtar Donetsk

Olympiacos v Osmanlispor

Rostov v Sparta Prague

Krasnodar v Fenerbahce

Borussia Mönchengladbach v Fiorentina

AZ v Lyon

Hapoel Beer Sheva v Besiktas

PAOK Salonika v Schalke 04

Ties to be played on 16 and 23 February
 