
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> are 
closing in on Benfica’s Victor Lindelof and are hopeful of buying the 
22-year-old in January for less than his release clause of around €45m (£37.8m).

The Sweden centre-half is wanted by José Mourinho to bolster United’s defence. 
Once Eric Bailly recovers from a knee injury the Ivory Coast centre-back will 
participate in the Africa Cup of Nations in Gabon next month, meaning he could 
be unavailable for six weeks.

Why are Benfica refusing to pay a small Swedish club €250,000?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/benfica-vasteras-victor-nilsson-lindelof>
Although Marcos Rojo and Phil Jones have impressed during Bailly’s absence 
through injury, along with Chris Smalling, Mourinho believes he requires more 
depth. Lindelof would also offer a further option at right-back. Antonio 
Valencia has excelled in the position yet the manager is conscious the 
Ecuadorian has been a career forward. Mourinho is yet to be wholly convinced by 
Matteo Darmian, the squad’s only bespoke right-back.

Lindelof cost Benfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> €50,000 
when he was signed from Vasteras in Sweden in 2012. Although he has had a pay 
rise, Lindelof earns around €10,000 a week, which reflects the fact he moved up 
from the B side to become a first-team regular only at the start of last 
season. His contract expires in 2020.

The player’s representative, Hasan Cetinkaya, told the Swedish paper 
Aftonbladet 
<http://www.aftonbladet.se/sportbladet/fotboll/a/kV9w6/bekraftar-bud-ska-ha-mote-med-vigge>
 on Wednesday: “There is an offer on Benfica’s table that they are going to 
consider but I am not going to comment on specific clubs.

“We have to think about things carefully. Victor is young, he’s already 
playing at a club which is fighting for titles and are through in the Champions 
League. He has a key role at the club and one has to be careful and think 
things through. We have to think about what is right for him right now.”

United’s executive vice-chairman, Ed Woodward, is confident United will not 
have to pay the amount specified in the release clause for a defender whose 
relative inexperience is reflected in his having won the first of 11 caps in 
March. Benfica’s record sale is the €40m received from Zenit St Petersburg for 
Axel Witsel in 2012.

Everton are hopeful of a double deal for Morgan Schneiderlin and Memphis Depay 
afterMourinho said both players could depart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-henrikh-mkhitaryan-injury>
 should they wish. Each cost United around £25m in the summer of 2015. 
Schneiderlin played at Southampton under the Everton manager, Ronald Koeman, 
who sanctioned his sale to United.

United’s preference would be to sell Schneiderlin and Depay but it is thought 
Everton want to buy the France midfielder and take the Dutch forward on loan. 
Each has been allowed only very limited game time under Mourinho.
 