
So much for all that early season optimism at Old Trafford. In the space of 
eight days, Manchester United have suffered three successive defeats that have 
provided an unwelcome reality check at a time when their rivals across the city 
areblazing a trail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/manchester-city-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
 at the top of the Premier League.

José Mourinho: some Manchester United players not coping with pressure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/18/jose-mourinho-some-manchester-united-players-not-coping-with-pressure-watford>
Maybe breaking the transfer record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-united-sign-paul-pogba-93-million-juventus>
,signing Zlatan Ibrahimovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/manchester-united-confirm-signing-of-zlatan-ibrahimovic-one-year-contract>
 andappointing José Mourinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/27/jose-mourinho-appointed-manchester-united-manager>
 will not suddenly put everything right at United.

Mourinho claimed that he never got carried away in the first place, yet deep 
down the United manager must be alarmed to see how things have unravelled.

He pointed the finger at the officials after this chastening defeat at Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/18/watford-manchester-united-premier-league-live>
 and claimed that United had been on the wrong end of poor decisions against 
Manchester City and Feyenoord, too. However, there was also an acknowledgement 
that improvement has to come from within. Mourinho talked about how “some 
individuals probably feel too much pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/18/jose-mourinho-some-manchester-united-players-not-coping-with-pressure-watford>
” and also highlighted the defensive vulnerability that an impressive Watford 
side brutally exposed.

Luke Shaw’s part in Watford’s second goal was singled out, with the United 
manager frustrated that the left-back had sat back rather than pressed more 
aggressively prior to Juan Camilo Zúñiga restoring the home team’s lead, yet 
there were plenty of other issues to address on an afternoon when Mourinho’s 
side finished the game looking ragged and disjointed.

Wayne Rooney, who was a picture of frustration throughout, finally took things 
too far in injury time and was booked for dissent by the referee, Michael 
Oliver. More misery was to follow for United a couple of minutes later when 
Marouane Fellaini tripped Zúñiga, giving Troy Deeney the chance to convert from 
the spot. His penalty was emphatic and sealed Watford’s first victory over 
United since September 1986.

While Mourinho was entitled to claim United looked the more likely team to win 
once Marcus Rashford had equalised, this was a far from convincing performance 
and too many players were on the periphery of the game. Paul Pogba hit the 
crossbar with a dipping shot in the first half but never did enough to impose 
himself and, rightly or wrongly, it is hard not to look at the Frenchman and 
expect so much more from the world’s most expensive footballer.

Ibrahimovic only came alive in the second half, when he had a hand in 
Rashford’s goal and also drew a superb save from Heurelho Gomes with a far-post 
header. Before that the Swede looked flat, much like the rest of a team who 
were fortunate not to concede long before Capoue’s opener.

Watford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> caught them cold and 
started superbly. The unmarked Sebastian Prödl headed narrowly wide just before 
Odion Ighalo filed an early contender for miss of the season. It was a chance 
that came about following a breakdown in communication between David de Gea and 
Chris Smalling. Both players challenged for the same high ball, De Gea was 
unable to gather cleanly and Ighalo inexplicably sliced wide with the goal 
yawning invitingly in front of him.

The home team carved open a third chance when Daryl Janmaat swung in a cross 
that Deeney, towering above Antonio Valencia, met with a powerful header that 
De Gea clawed away one-handed. There were only 17 minutes gone and it was 
tempting to wonder when United would grab hold of the game. They improved in 
that brief period when Pogba hit the woodwork but Watford continued to look 
dangerous and it was no surprise when Capoue scored.

Whether the goal should have been allowed to stand is a different matter.

Miguel Britos dispossessed Anthony Martial deep on the United left but seemed 
to foul the Frenchman before getting to the ball. Oliver, however, waved play 
on and with United exposed on their left flank, Janmaat escaped and produced 
the perfect cut-back for Capoue, who dispatched a low shot past De Gea to 
register his fourth goal in five league games.

Martial remained on the ground and was clearly in some distress following an 
incident that happened seven minutes earlier when he clashed heads with 
Janmaat. The United forward was unable to continue and questions will be asked 
as to whether he should have come back on to the pitch in the first place.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fwatford-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F284bff4e9ca6ff8d31f54bd5896d0124a179b87e%2F122_0_3146_1887%2F3146.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20United%20stunned%20as%20Watford%20are%20spot-on%20with%20late%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fwatford-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20United%20stunned%20as%20Watford%20are%20spot-on%20with%20late%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fwatford-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F284bff4e9ca6ff8d31f54bd5896d0124a179b87e%2F122_0_3146_1887%2F3146.jpg>
 Étienne Capoue opens the scoring for Watford. Photograph: Andrew 
Couldridge/Reuters 
Mourinho sought to change things by replacing Valencia with Juan Mata and two 
minutes later United were level. Ibrahimovic exchanged passes with Rashford and 
sent a cross that dropped at the England international’s feet after bouncing 
off Valon Behrami. Swinging his left boot at the ball, Rashford made no mistake.

Andros Townsend shines as Crystal Palace overrun demoralised Stoke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/18/crystal-palace-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
Although United were now on top and could have grabbed a winner but for 
Gomes’s save from Ibrahimovic, Watford deserve credit for refusing to settle 
for a point. Whatever Mourinho’s misgivings about Shaw’s defending, it was a 
lovely move down the Watford right involving Nordin Amrabat and Roberto Pereyra 
that created the chance for Zúñiga to beat De Gea only 53 seconds after coming 
off the bench.

Fellaini’s foul on the same player enabled Deeney to add a third Watford goal 
and follow up thewin at West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/west-ham-united-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 with an even more eye-catching result. “I’m happy for the fans,” Watford’s 
manager, Walter Mazzarri, said. “They told me it was 30 years since Watford 
have beaten Manchester United, so this win gives us a lot of satisfaction.”
 