
Louis van Gaal has come out fighting over supporters’ criticism of his 3-5-2 
formation, accepting that the players might be more comfortable with 4-4-2 but 
pointing out that wheneverManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> take the field that 
way they have their coaches’ asses twitching on the bench.

Sir Alex Ferguson gave the nation squeaky bum time, his successor appears to 
prefer an Americanisation for a state of tense nervousness. “I know that with 
4-4-2 the stats are giving positive results, we have won more with 4-4-2 in a 
diamond, but when you analyse the games then we have twitched our ass on the 
bench,” the United manager said before tonight’s trip toLeague Two’s Cambridge 
United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jan/22/cambridge-united-supporting-max-rushden>
 in the FA Cup fourth round.

“I said to my players I was squeezing my ass but I knew that was the wrong 
expression,” Van Gaal said. “I meant I have twitched my ass on the bench 
because we were out of balance. We won against West Ham playing 4-4-2 for 
instance but all the time it was twitching your ass and I don’t like it.

“After I switched the system we won nine in a row [actually eight, then three 
draws] then we lose one game and the discussion about the system start up 
again. It’s ridiculous.”

United supporters who attended the Premier League victory against Queens Park 
Rangers at Loftus Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/18/qpr-louis-van-gaal-manchester-united>
 at the weekend were partly to blame for reviving the conversation, chanting 
for a return to 4-4-2 and urgingthe team to attack with more conviction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/21/daley-blind-louis-van-gaal-manchester-united>
. Van Gaal claims he did not hear the chants and would not have taken any 
notice anyway. “I do not have to take into account 600 million opinions,” he 
said. “I cannot listen to what the media are writing or what other people are 
saying because they are never at the training ground or attending the team 
meetings. It is my job to analyse the games, communicate with the players and 
then make a decision with my staff.

“I do not feel the players are completely comfortable with the new system yet. 
I would like them to be more comfortable but we are working on this in the 
middle of the season so we are doing a lot of things during the matches.”

Van Gaal’s claim he is working out new ideas on the hoof, so to speak, also 
applies to his questionable gamble at Loftus Road of employing Ángel di María 
as a striker.

“It was something I wanted to try, because we needed pace up front to stretch 
the game,” he said. “When we play 4-4-2 Di María can play left midfield, in the 
3-5-2 we haven’t seen him so much because he has been injured. Then he came 
back and I tried him as a striker, because when you have pace in that position 
you stretch the pitch and make a bigger space for your midfielders. I tried it 
in a game because I didn’t have the chance to do it in the preparation at the 
beginning of the season.”

Di María was not a conspicuous success in an unfamiliar advanced role so he 
will be glad to hear Robin van Persie is available again for Friday’s cup tie, 
along with Luke Shaw. United’s problems are mostly in defence, with Chris 
Smalling, Jonny Evans and Ashley Young injured.

Van Gaal may use the game to give Víctor Valdés his debut in goal, though he 
denies having reached a decision. “I have read in the media that he shall play, 
and I thought that a little strange, because at that point I had not made up my 
mind or spoken about it,” he said.

The United manager has been researching his League Two opponents and is 
expecting a difficult game. “When you see Cambridge and analyse them they play 
very direct with long balls,” he said. “They have five or six players above 
1.9m so for us it will be difficult to defend. That’s why you have to prepare 
yourself very well.

“It will not be so easy to beat Cambridge United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cambridge-united>. It never is when players 
have it in their minds that they are up against a weaker team. It is better to 
treat all your opponents the same but not always easy to achieve.

“I keep reminding the players that we are not playing against a weaker 
opponent, and it does not matter who we play, when we lose we are out. That is 
one of the reasons small teams often do well in cups. TheFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> is full of surprises and we have 
to make sure we are not the surprise.”
 