
To describe this week as defining for Louis van Gaal would be to over-state 
his prospects of transforming Manchester United to such an extent thatJosé 
Mourinho no longer appears an attraction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-louis-van-gaal>
, but he could find reassurance from how it began. There was spirit to 
accompany United’svast superiority over Shrewsbury Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/22/shrewsbury-town-manchester-united-fa-cup-match-report>
 and it ensured their manager did not become “The Untenable One” in Shropshire.

Manchester United find their swagger at last to blow Shrewsbury away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/22/shrewsbury-town-manchester-united-fa-cup-match-report>
Tougher assignments await Van Gaal and United in the next six days than that 
served up by a struggling League One side and it will take more than this 
comfortable passage into the FA Cup quarter-finals to alter judgment on the 
manager’s expensive reign at Old Trafford. This was a no-win test, but afterthe 
meek defeat at Midtjylland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/18/midtjylland-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
 it heartened the Dutch coach to witness players he feared had got into the 
losing habit were this time winning with character – some playing on with an 
injury in the closing stages, against lower-league opposition. This was not a 
team resigned to managerial change in the near future and underperforming once 
again as a consequence.

Van Gaal, right, cut a lonely figure before kick-off as he inspected the pitch 
at Greenhous Meadow and engaged only with the youngShrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> Town supporters who requested 
autographs. A professional performance, and a rare routine victory delivered by 
Chris Smalling, Juan Mata and Jesse Lingard, ensured he was not isolated 
afterwards.

Fans gathered from mid-afternoon for a prime spot outside the players’ 
entrance. The small, smart stadium on the outskirts of town sold out within 
hours of tickets being released for the visit of the 11-timesFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> winners, although anticipation 
had been generated not so much by a potential giant-killing act as the fall of 
a giant managerial figure. Van Gaal had nothing to gain in Shrewsbury beyond 
another humiliation that his reign arguably could not withstand or, as it 
transpired, a little more time.

This was no ground for excuses. The facilities were fine – save for a tiny 
press room that meant Van Gaal had to host his post-match press conference by 
the side of the pitch – and the playing surface was pristine, something the 
former Shrewsbury manager Kevin Ratcliffe lamented in a radio interview before 
kick-off. The uneven pitch and restricted confines of the club’s old stadium 
Gay Meadow, he suggested, would have assisted the home side in pushing the 
United manager closer to the exit. Micky Mellon’s team needed all the 
assistance available, having not won a league game at home since 24 October, 
and were immediately encamped deep inside their own half as United started with 
the urgency demanded.

The visitors’ work rate and approach showed they were conscious of the need 
for a reaction to last week’s sorry Europa League display against a Danish side 
who emerged from domestic hibernation to inflict a damaging 2-1 defeat on Van 
Gaal’s team and expose the manager to ridicule from his own supporters. But 
control did not translate into threat immediately, which came as no surprise to 
regular observers of United under the besieged Dutchman.

Smalling put a free header over the bar from Daley Blind’s corner after 76 
seconds.

Had Memphis Depay displayed any composure or even basic accuracy in front of 
goal then Van Gaal could have relaxed long before Mata made the game safe on 
the stroke of half-time. Depay had four attempts on goal before the interval. 
The first struck the Salop Leisure Stand sign 30ft above the Shrewsbury goal, 
the second was fractionally lower, the third brought a good save from the 
goalkeeper, Jayson Leutwiler, and the fourth, a free-kick from just outside the 
area, hit Anthony Martial on the head and sailed over.Mediocrity at vast expense
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/14/memphis-depay-consistency-psv-eindhoven-premier-league-anthony-martial>
, the Holland international epitomised Van Gaal’s problems in many respects.

Midtjylland strike back to humiliate Manchester United and Louis van Gaal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/18/midtjylland-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
It is United’s clear regression that has taken their manager to the precipice 
but he was at least spared the ignominy of a Cup upset against League One 
opposition. A Smalling shot that struck the ground before looping over 
Leutwiler, and Mata’s precise free-kick eight minutes later, delivered respite 
but the away support who were in fine voice from the first whistle will require 
more convincing. Shrewsbury posed no threat to Sergio Romero in the visiting 
goal whatsoever.

Overturning the European deficit at home to Midtjylland on Thursday and 
denting Arsenal’s title ambitions on Sunday would go further to lifting the 
immediate pressure on the Dutchman.

Shrewsbury showed some much-needed improvement in the final third late on, 
missing two decent chances to punish a still worrying United defence, but the 
outcome was never in question. The lively Martial should have added a third 
from Mata’s flick-on early in the second half and Lingard applied a sure touch 
to Ander Herrera’s lofted pass following an incisive United counterattack.

Van Gaal appeared only briefly in his technical area to issue instructions to 
his young substitutes. Urgent intervention was not required as United commenced 
what will have to prove a season-long rescue act in convincing fashion.

West Ham United may not be so obliging in the last eight of the FA Cup but, 
given the serious questions over his future before this tie, United’s manager 
may take solace from being at Old Trafford to find out.
 