
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
have opted against making a move for the Benfica defender Victor Lindelof after 
José Mourinho decided he is satisfied with his defensive options despite the 
prospect of losing Eric Bailly for up to six weeks due to the Africa Cup of 
Nations.

Negotiations with the Portuguese champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/manchester-united-benfica-victor-lindelof-jose-mourinho>
 over the Sweden international Lindelof have been continuing for several weeks 
and reports in Portugal said a deal worth more than £30m was close to being 
agreed. United were keen to purchase the 22-year-old to add depth to Mourinho’s 
squad although they were reluctant to meet his €45m (£38m) release clause.

Manchester United’s Henrikh Mkhitaryan takes breath away with sublime moment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/henrikh-mkhitaryan-manchester-united-premier-league>
But Mourinho’s side have now won five games in a row – while conceding only 
two goals – and the Portuguese has decided to stick with the central defenders 
he already has at his disposal. Phil Jones and Marcos Rojo have struck up a 
solid partnership in central defence and Mourinho can also count on Bailly, 
Chris Smalling and Daley Blind in that position when they are fit.

Smalling is currently out injured while Bailly has just returned to training 
from the knock picked upat Crystal Palace on 14 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/crystal-palace-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
.

Bailly was on Wednesday included in the Ivory Coast squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/wilfried-zaha-ivory-coast-squad-africa-cup-of-nations>
 for the Africa Cup of Nations in Gabon, which starts on 14 January.

Mourinho recently hailed the form of Jones, who has now played 10 consecutive 
games for United without getting injured, his second-longest stretch since 
joining the club in 2011.

“Sometimes defenders now think the most important ability is to build from the 
back,” the Portuguese manager said. “It’s not. The most important thing is to 
defend and that’s what I like about Phil Jones. He likes to defend, he wants to 
play as a defender.”

Ten January window transfer targets – from Lindelof to Upamecano
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/27/10-january-transfer-window-targets-lindelof-upamecano>
Mourinho went on to say Jones could be ready to make a return to the England 
set-up in the near future. “I prefer to say that Jones is doing much better 
this season than in the previous two seasons and he’s giving hope to everyone 
that he can be back to normality and, who knows, be back to the national team, 
be a firm choice at Manchester United, because he’s doing very well.”

Mourinho added the media should give his two current centre-backs more credit 
for what they have done in the past few weeks. He said: “I think, you are the 
ones who admit they [Jones and Rojo] deserve more attention and more headlines. 
[But] they are not worried, they are playing more than ever, better than ever.

“Rojo was also having lots of injuries. He is also [injury] free. In a period 
without Bailly and Smalling, where people could be scared, they stepped up. 
Really solid. I am happy for them.”

United, who are sixth in the Premier League, play Middlesbrough at home on New 
Year’s Eve and then travel to West Ham United on Monday.
 