
Zlatan Ibrahimovic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zlatan-ibrahimovic> 
believes his 17 goals for Manchester United have made his doubters “eat their 
balls” and that José Mourinho’s side can still win the title.

Saturday’s 2-1 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/manchester-united-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
 against Middlesbrough at Old Trafford was a fifth straight league win and 
takes United to 36 points, 13 behind the leaders, Chelsea, as they travel to 
West Ham United for Monday’s late afternoon kick-off.

United needed goals from Anthony Martial and Paul Pogba on 85 and 86 minutes 
to overcome Grant Leadbitter’s strike with a quarter of the game to go but the 
home side felt they should have been ahead before half-time. Ibrahimovich had 
what appeared a legitimate finish struck off by the referee, Lee Mason, for his 
collision with Víctor Valdés despite this clearly occurring after the No9 made 
contact with the ball.

The finish would have taken the Swede to 51 goals in 2016, level with Lionel 
Messi’s highest mark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/jose-mourinho-zlatan-ibrahimovic-injury-disaster-manchester-united>
 for the calendar year. Yet Ibrahimovic was content with the three points and 
in his own particular fashion took personal satisfaction from the stellar start 
to his United career after his summer move from Paris Saint-Germain.

“I had a fantastic year, I am not complaining. I came to United, my first six 
months here has been more than amazing. I am super happy and let’s hope we can 
continue the ride and keep going. I feel good. I don’t know how many years I 
have left but I am enjoying the football. I came to the Premier League and 
everyone thought it would not be possible but like always I make them eat their 
balls.”

Paul Pogba caps dramatic fightback to save Manchester United’s winning run
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/manchester-united-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
Asked to explain this, the 35-year-old said: “It gives me a lot of energy, 
trust me. A lot of energy because they get paid to talk shit and I get paid to 
play with my feet, that’s how I enjoy it.”

United are trying for a sixth consecutive league victory for the first time in 
two seasons.Ibrahimovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/23/zlatan-ibrahimovic-autobiography-review>
 said of their form: “With every game you win, you get confidence. We haven’t 
lost for the last 10 games [actually 12], and it was important to win against 
Middlesbrough. We had to work hard for the win and the important thing is the 
three points because we want to come closer to the top and we are losing 1-0 
and we should have had the goal, I scored.

“Why he whistled, I don’t know. At first he gave the goal and after 30 
seconds, he changed his mind. There was not a lot to speak to him because if 
you open your mouth, they give you a yellow and I was like: ‘Listen, you just 
took a goal from me, and now you want to give me a yellow card.’ OK, we keep 
playing and conceded a goal, it was easy for them and after we were working and 
then it was 1-1, and 2-1 within a minute.

“That was not important – to level with Messi. The important thing was to win. 
For me the win is the same if I would beat Messi or not. Hopefully we can still 
win the league. We had our dips and we were winning and losing and winning and 
losing and hopefully the other teams can do some mistakes and we can close the 
gap closer and come into the top four.”

Ibrahimovic has never played two matches in 48 hours, as he will do when 
lining up at West Ham, with Mourinho confirming he will start there. “It’s 
crazy,” said the centre-forward. “There is no superman, there is no strength 
that can recover from a game so fast and I cannot do nothing about it. If the 
coach wants me to play, I will play. But let’s be realistic, from a game you 
need to recover two or three days.”

A happy Mourinho said: “Zlatan’s disappointed because in this moment he should 
be celebrating being top scorer in 2016. He did it. But he will start on 
Monday. You can tell [Slaven] Bilic that.”

West Ham are 12th with 22 points after Saturday’s 1-0 defeat at Leicester 
City, who visit aMiddlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/burnley-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
 side four points above the drop zone on Monday. Leadbitter said: “We have a 
little league table that we want to finish top of, and that has to be our 
priority this season. One of the teams in that league is coming up on Monday at 
home and we have to look forward.”
 