
It might be assumed Manchester United will have nothing to play for when their 
postponed final game of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/manchester-united-bomb-hoax-old-trafford-evacuated>
 against Bournemouth takes place on Tuesday but that is not quite true. Should 
they keep a clean sheet against the Cherries David de Gea shares the Golden 
Glove award for most in a season together with Petr Cech. And if United do keep 
Bournemouth at bay for the whole 90 minutes, they will finish the season on 34 
goals conceded, the best defensive performance in the Premier League bar none, 
thanks to Tottenham Hotspurletting five in for fun at Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/tottenham-hotspur-mauricio-pochettino-newcastle-united>
.

David de Gea to consider Manchester United future if Louis van Gaal stays
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/david-de-gea-manchester-united-future-louis-van-gaal>
That hardly makes up for missing out on the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/swansea-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 – which they will do unless they win by a 19-goal margin – but come on, it has 
not all been bad news for Manchester United this season, has it? Louis van Gaal 
keeps banging on about needing more creativity in the team but, in addition to 
the meanest defence around, most people have been impressed with the emergence 
of Anthony Martial and Marcus Rashford in attack. Wayne Rooney certainly has.

“The young lads have come in at a really difficult time for the team and they 
have been brilliant,” the United captain said. “They have been under huge 
pressure and they have performed. People forget how young Anthony Martial is. 
He is still learning and improving. It’s always great when you see young 
players coming through and credit to the manager for that.”

Geoffrey Boycott thinks the same. What’s it got to do with him? He has been a 
United supporter since 1962, when Denis Law came back from Torino. He first 
identified the Scot as a star of the future when he was a scrawny teenager at 
Huddersfield, so he knows a bit about the United tradition. “The first half of 
the season was disappointing but the best thing has been when we’ve had to play 
with the youngsters,” England’s favourite slow scorer said in an article in the 
match programme for thegame against Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/manchester-united-abandon-final-premier-league-game-after-security-alert-leads-to-old-trafford-evacuation>
. “They have played positively, with exuberance and without fear. They run at 
the defence and that is what our sides of old have always done.”

Here’s the question then. If United have a miserly defence and exciting 
players in attack, how come their season has been such a damp squib, failing to 
make the Champions League for the second time in three years and setting all 
sorts of unwanted records for scoreless first halves and negligible totals of 
shots on target? If Van Gaal’s brief was to steady the ship after the David 
Moyes season and return United to their rightful place among the giants of 
Europe, then he has failed, surely?

Or at least he has got only half the job done. United are a steady, secure, 
risk-free operation these days, which is probably why Boycott still likes them, 
but they do not frighten the big names around Europe any longer. That was 
starting to be true at the end of Sir Alex Ferguson’s long reign. It was true 
last season when United qualified for the Champions League but were out of the 
competition by Christmas and it almost certainly would have been true had 
Manchester City slipped up at Swansea to allow their neighbours the chance to 
sneak into the top four this time.

If United have a miserly defence and exciting players in attack, how come 
their season has been such a damp squib?

Even Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>
 supporters do not much care for the brand of football that has been served up 
this season. Van Gaal does indeed deserve credit for reducing the age of the 
side, particularly in attack, and showing confidence in youngsters such as 
Martial and Rashford but he is right about the lack of creativity in midfield.

Between a solid defence and an attacking partnership that is going to get 
better United appear to have little to offer to hurt opponents or to bring 
spectators to their feet. They play a safety-first, possession-based game that 
often seems designed to bore opponents into submission rather than play them 
off the park. Martial and Rashford have been excellent at sticking away what 
few opportunities have come their way but just imagine what a plod United’s 
season would have been without them.

Ferguson’s teams at their best could hurt opponents all over the pitch. As the 
Burnley manager, Sean Dyche, put it a couple of years ago, they had a hundred 
different ways of winning a game. This United does not. Their football is 
one-dimensional, laboured and often predictable. That does not matter in itself 
– United fans have no God-given right to be served up entertaining football 
every week – but the current league table indicates failure. All United had to 
do in the second half of the season was get past an ailing Manchester City side 
that has been well below its best – and they could not manage it. All they had 
to doat West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/10/west-ham-manchester-united-premier-league-report-upton-park>
 last week was hang on to a lead for the final 20 minutes – and they could not 
manage that either.

Van Gaal will doubtless maintain that he is only part-way through a three-year 
plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/11/luis-van-gaal-three-year-manchester-united-plan>
 and that United are improving, both of which are just about true. But this is 
the Premier League. Improving at the pace of a snail is never going to be 
enough. Look at how muchLeicester City improved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/07/leicester-city-bonkers-party-league-winning-season>
 over the course of the season. Look at the heights Spurs nearly reached under 
Mauricio Pochettino. Look at what Jürgen Klopphas already achieved at Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/14/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-europa-league-final-sevilla-basel>
 and remember that Manchester City will shortly be under the supervision of Pep 
Guardiola.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Flouis-van-gaal-manchester-united-snail-pace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2554f500c6c9f4b015abd9cecc77e1d5ac01dff1%2F59_70_3041_1825%2F3041.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20United%20are%20improving%20at%20a%20snail%E2%80%99s%20pace%20under%20Louis%20van%20Gaal%20%7C%20Paul%20Wilson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Flouis-van-gaal-manchester-united-snail-pace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20United%20are%20improving%20at%20a%20snail%E2%80%99s%20pace%20under%20Louis%20van%20Gaal%20%7C%20Paul%20Wilson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Flouis-van-gaal-manchester-united-snail-pace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2554f500c6c9f4b015abd9cecc77e1d5ac01dff1%2F59_70_3041_1825%2F3041.jpg>
 Louis van Gaal deserves credit for reducing the age of Manchester United’s 
side by showing confidence in players such as Marcus Rashford. Photograph: Phil 
Noble/Reuters 
Football at the top level in this country now moves far too quickly for 
anything as ponderous as a three-year plan. The best bit of business United did 
by far this season wasswoop for Martial at the beginning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/01/manchester-united-sign-monaco-forward-anthony-martial>
. That, and having the courage to play Rashford, were the only two Van Gaal 
decisions that moved the team forward.

If plans are already advanced to spend another £60m or so in acquiring some 
speedy and skilful midfielders, then Van Gaal might be worth persevering with 
for another season but that would just be transfer business. There is no sense 
in regarding it as the completion of a three-year project.

Manchester United stadium ‘bomb’ identified as training device
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/manchester-united-abandon-final-premier-league-game-after-security-alert-leads-to-old-trafford-evacuation>
Van Gaal has spent two years saying he wants more speed and creativity in the 
team but it is not as if his record with players such as Ángel Di María, 
Memphis Depay and Adnan Januzaj is impressive. On his own terms, because he 
said the target for this season was third place, Van Gaal’s three-year plan has 
to be judged a failure.

United are better than they were but nowhere near as good as they want or need 
to be. They could win theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> 
this weekend, which will be good for Van Gaal’s CV and medal collection, 
although if they go into next season with the same coach they will probably 
reach the end of it no nearer to their ultimate goals. United seem not to know 
where to turn for their next manager, although they have surely seen enough of 
their present one to realise Champions League football might not be attained 
next season either.

What was considered an unfortunate blip when the Ferguson succession was first 
botched is now in danger of turning into something more permanent.
 