
For Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>
, this was precisely the kind of night they wanted before Sunday’s match at 
Chelsea and all the drama that will inevitably attach itself to José Mourinho’s 
return to Stamford Bridge. Fenerbahce were certainly obliging opponents for a 
team that did not want to overexert themselves and the home crowd could even 
afford Robin van Persie a standing ovation after the late reminder of his 
scoring prowess.

Mourinho’s team scored all their goals between the 31st and 48th minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/20/manchester-united-v-fenerbahce-europa-league-live>
, starting with a penalty apiece for Paul Pogba and Anthony Martial, and either 
side of that period they did not really have to extend themselves too greatly. 
Pogba went on to score a sumptuous second goal, possibly his finest moment yet 
in United’s colours, and the home side were entitled to ease up after Jesse 
Lingard completed that four-goal blitz. Had they not been so restrained, there 
was always the sense they could add more against a side who have won only two 
of their opening seven league matches in Turkey this season.

José Mourinho rounds on ‘Einsteins’ again after Paul Pogba’s double strike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/jose-mourinho-rounds-on-einsteins-paul-pogba>
Instead, the most heartwarming moment of the night came six minutes from the 
end when Van Persie turned in a left-wing cross before raising his arm to take 
in the crowd’s acclaim. Van Persie had been serenaded throughout the night and 
it is also worth noting the way the crowd showed their appreciation for Wayne 
Rooney, starting for the first time in five matches.

Rooney’s appearance revived memories of happier times for the England captain 
and that exhilarating night, in September 2004, when he made his United debut 
against the same opposition, scoring a hat-trick in a 6-2 win. Twelve years on, 
this was a more sedate performance from the club’s longest-serving player, and 
something has clearly changed given that this season Mourinho announced Rooney, 
Pogba and Zlatan Ibrahimovic would share penalty-taking duties.

Pogba got his turn after Simon Kjaer bundled over Juan Mata and the world’s 
most expensive footballer aimed a precise finish into the corner. Yet it was 
Martial who picked up the ball three minutes later despite the crowd chanting 
Rooney’s name. Martial had been brought down by Sener Ozbayrakli as he surged 
into the penalty area. The forward aimed for the same side as Pogba and Rooney, 
needing three goals to move alongside Sir Bobby Charlton as United’s all-time 
record scorer, was not given the opportunity to pull one closer to the target 
of 249.

Manchester United v Fenerbahce: Europa League – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/20/manchester-united-v-fenerbahce-europa-league-live>
Rooney, one imagines, might be more perturbed by the suspicion his appearance 
indicates he will be back on the bench at Stamford Bridge and Ibrahimovic will 
return to the starting lineup. Rooney was, however, prominently involved during 
that 15-minute spell at the end of the first half when United put themselves in 
a commanding position they were never likely to relinquish.

The defending for the two penalties was certainly poor, to say the least, but 
Pogba’s second goal was a beauty. Rooney started the move on the right, 
clipping the ball infield where Lingard’s flick gave Pogba the chance to take 
aim. Striding towards the ball, he went for the top corner and scored with a 
lovely, arcing finish from just outside the penalty area.

Mourinho had made seven changes from the goalless draw against Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/liverpool-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 three nights earlier but it was still a surprise, perhaps, that Pogba started 
the match, and likewise that Eric Bailly and Chris Smalling were not rested, 
given Sunday’s fixture.

It was the front of his team where Mourinho shifted everything around, with 
Martial and Lingard operating on the flanks and Mata patrolling the space 
behind Rooney.

Wayne Rooney battles to avoid joining Robin van Persie as a United relic | 
Jamie Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/wayne-rooney-robin-van-persie-manchester-united-fenerbahce>
Mourinho started heading to the tunnel for half-time as soon as United’s third 
goal went in and when the team came back out Smalling had been replaced by 
Marcos Rojo, with Chelsea plainly in mind. The night had turned into a 
damage-limitation exercise for Dick Advocaat’s team and there was a telling 
moment five minutes into the second half when Luke Shaw came to take a throw-in 
near the technical area and received a hug from his manager.

By that stage Lingard had finished another neat passing exchange involving 
Pogba and Rooney with a crisp 25-yard drive. Lingard struck his shot with a mix 
of power and precision and those were the moments when it was tempting to 
wonder what must have been going through Sam Allardyce’s mind.

Allardyce was attending his first match  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/sam-allardyce-attends-manchester-united-england>
since his unceremonious departure as England manager. He was beside Sir Alex 
Ferguson and a few seats away from David Gill, one of the Football Association 
executives who appointed him, watching a performance in which all of United’s 
English players – Michael Carrick included – helped demonstrate the home side’s 
superiority.
 