
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> are 
facing a repair bill running into thousands of pounds because of alleged 
misbehaviour by supporters that has had a knock-on effect for the security 
arrangements surrounding their FA Cup tie at Shrewsbury Town on Monday.

United will be asked to compensate Derby County after a significant number of 
seats were damaged in the away end when the teams met in the FA Cup 
fourth-round at the end of last month,resulting in a 3-1 win for Louis van 
Gaal’s team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/29/derby-county-manchester-united-fa-cup-match-report>
.

Derby have already informed United about what their groundstaff found on the 
morning after the match and intend to charge them for the relevant repairs, 
claiming that more than 300 seats were broken or pulled off whole.

A spokesman for the Championship club said: “There was damage caused to seats 
in the away section and we are liaising with Manchester United.”

It is one of the principal reasons why Shrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> have abandoned plans to 
increase the 9,875 capacity at New Meadow with temporary seating, when they 
host United for a place in the quarter-finals.

Shrewsbury had contemplated putting up two extra areas of seating as they did 
when they played Chelsea in the Capital One Cup last season, meaning another 
500 fans could get in.

The League One club have been in touch with Derby and have also been informed 
there were incidents of ticketless fans trying to storm the gates when United 
played at Cambridge in last season’s competition.

After talks between the relevant authorities, Shrewsbury have decided against 
extra seating because of the additional security risk and high policing costs.

“Each fixture is looked at on a case-by-case basis and all circumstances are 
taken into consideration,” Ch Insp James Baker, the event tactical commander 
for West Mercia police, said. “We have an excellent relationship with the club 
and having jointly discussed the options, we support the club’s decision not to 
provide additional temporary seating.”

United have been allocated 1,500 tickets despite receiving more than 9,000 
applications. The front two rows of seats will be cordoned off with netting.

Wayne Rooney: blame Manchester United players, not Louis van Gaal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/16/wayne-rooney-blame-manchester-united-players-louis-van-gaal> 