
It was a breathless, exhilarating way to start the new era of Mancunian 
rivalry and, at the final whistle, Pep Guardiola could be seen pumping his 
fists in celebration. His team had held out and Claudio Bravo, his new 
goalkeeper, had been spared after a debut that could conceivably have wrecked 
all their outstanding work elsewhere on the pitch.

Bravo will not always be so fortunate if this eccentric performance is an 
accurate measure of what is to come but, on the balance of play, it was 
difficult not to feel the more sophisticated team had won. The firstolés could 
be heard after 34 minutes from the corner of Old Trafford that was splashed in 
blue. A few moments later, Kelechi Iheanacho doubled City’s lead and at that 
stage it was difficult to remember a more one-sided derby since 2011 when 
Roberto Mancini’s team scored six here, Mario Balotelli unveiled his “Why 
Always Me?” T-shirt and Sir Alex Ferguson was driven away in a state of shock.

José Mourinho: Claudio Bravo should have seen red for Rooney tackle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/jose-mourinho-claudio-bravo-red-rooney-tackle-penalty>
Unfortunately for City, it was not too long afterwards that Bravo’s first 
attempt to catch the ball led to Zlatan Ibrahimovic pulling one back and 
thereafter the away team’s superiority had to be balanced by the overwhelming 
suspicion that José Mourinho’s men had sussed out the opposition were relying 
on an accident-prone goalkeeper.

Mourinho was convinced United should have had a penalty in the second half, 
with Bravo implicated again, and Marcus Rashford’s introduction at half-time 
immediately provided a more threatening edge. The home side gave everything in 
the search for an equaliser and it will not soothe their disappointment that 
they contributed to a thrilling contest.

Their problem was they came up against a side that moved the ball with a rare 
combination of speed, fluidity and intelligence. David Silva, such a 
brilliantly measured footballer, chose a good day to put in one of his more 
refined performances. Nolito menaced on the left and Kevin De Bruyne, scorer of 
the first goal, added his own refined touches. If United occasionally looked 
slow in thought and movement, it was because their opponents passed the ball so 
stylishly.

Sergio Agüero was suspended but, attacking-wise, City were the more creative 
team and there were plenty of times in the second half when they could have 
added more goals. Leroy Sané, a substitute, slotted in seamlessly on his debut. 
De Bruyne struck the post in one breakaway move and Guardiola could also 
eulogise afterwards about the competitive courage of his team. Aleksandar 
Kolarov, he reported, finished the match with a front tooth missing. Nicolás 
Otamendi’s head was bandaged and Guardiola identified the combative Fernando, 
another substitute, as the outstanding player of the second half.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmanchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F806257ce4a3a0655c99334951099fecac644b90d%2F0_0_3697_2459%2F3697.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%E2%80%99s%20derby%20delight%20as%20De%20Bruyne%20inspires%20win%20over%20United&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmanchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20City%E2%80%99s%20derby%20delight%20as%20De%20Bruyne%20inspires%20win%20over%20United&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmanchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F806257ce4a3a0655c99334951099fecac644b90d%2F0_0_3697_2459%2F3697.jpg>
 Pep Guardiola hugs his keeper Claudio Bravo after the final whistle. 
Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
More than anything though, this was a glimpse into the free-flowing football 
that Guardiola wants from his teams, the irony being that when the opening goal 
arrived, after 15 minutes, it had its origins in a good old-fashioned whack 
upfield. Kolarov cleared the ball 60 yards, Iheanacho applied the flick and De 
Bruyne expertly did the rest, showing quicker anticipation than Daley Blind, 
steadying himself and firing a precise shot into the bottom left corner. The 
long ball, the flick-on and a goal – not exactly classic Guardiola but, for 
City, a thing of beauty, nonetheless.

Blind had been badly exposed and it was the same player, later in the half, 
who played Iheanacho onside for the second goal after De Bruyne’s diagonal 
left-foot shot had come back off the post.

Unfortunately for Bravo, United had reasonable suspicions before the match 
that he might be susceptible and they were proven correct. This was the 
keeper’s introduction to English football following his £17m move from 
Barcelona and perhaps, in hindsight, it was a mistake from Guardiola not to 
ease him in against West Ham a couple of weeks ago. Yet Guardiola was still 
entitled to expect his new goalkeeper to catch the free-kick that Wayne Rooney 
pumped into the penalty area in the 42nd minute.

Until that point, Bravo had looked assured, often straying 30 yards off his 
goal-line and confident enough to try a couple of passes that many goalkeepers 
would consider too risky. Now, however, he had some actual hand-work to do. He 
collided with John Stones, dropped the ball at Ibrahimovic’s feet and the Swede 
skimmed his volley inside the near post.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmanchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5b74ae25f20c9a3b2e80f55d30e877194327fbe%2F0_0_3227_2249%2F3227.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%E2%80%99s%20derby%20delight%20as%20De%20Bruyne%20inspires%20win%20over%20United&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmanchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20City%E2%80%99s%20derby%20delight%20as%20De%20Bruyne%20inspires%20win%20over%20United&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmanchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5b74ae25f20c9a3b2e80f55d30e877194327fbe%2F0_0_3227_2249%2F3227.jpg>
 Claudio Bravo spills a simple ball before Zlatan Ibrahimovic lashed home. 
Photograph: Phil Noble/Reuters 
Ibrahimovic had another two chances before half-time. The first was a header 
that went straight at Bravo and on the second occasion he had more time than he 
realised with the goalkeeper out of position. Bravo looked like a danger to his 
own team and was fortunate, undoubtedly, that the referee, Mark Clattenburg, 
decided to be lenient 11 minutes into the second half when the goalkeeper threw 
himself, studs-up, into a challenge on Rooney. Again, it stemmed from a mistake 
by the man who had been brought in to take Joe Hart’s place, miscontrolling the 
ball inside his own penalty area before desperately trying to make amends.

Manchester United 1-2 Manchester City: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/10/manchester-united-v-manchester-city-premier-league-live>
Mourinho argued his team should have been awarded another penalty, for an 
alleged handball by Otamendi, but it was the Bravo challenge that irked him the 
most, believing it should have been a red card, too.

United’s struggles in the first half could be summed up by Mourinho taking off 
Jesse Lingard and Henrikh Mkhitaryan at half-time, though he made it clear they 
were not the only ones guilty of “really poor individual performances”. 
Marouane Fellaini was moved further forwards with Rooney shifting to the right 
and Rashford patrolling the left.

The home team poured forwards, but they always looked vulnerable at the back 
and, for a club with United’s ambitions, it was startling to hear Mourinho 
complain that some of his players could not cope with the derby pressures.
 