


In the end the outcome was thoroughly predictable as Manchester United 
strolled into the FA Cup quarter-finals andLouis van Gaal cherished the 
breathing space and respite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/22/louis-van-gaal-fantastic-manchester-united-fa-cup>
 that a routine victory provided. There were no expletive-laden chants from the 
travelling fans or calamitous defensive errors on the pitch on this occasion as 
United emphasised the chasm between two clubs separated by 60 places on the 
league ladder anda million miles apart in many other respects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/shrewsbury-mat-sadler-manchester-united-fa-cup>
.

For Shrewsbury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury>, who are 
fourth from bottom in League One, it was a chastening night at times as they 
spent long periods of the game chasing shadows against a United side that never 
gave their opponents the slightest encouragement to believe that there could be 
an upset on the cards.

Manchester United’s Louis van Gaal spared ignominy but still on precipice | 
Andy Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/22/manchester-united-shrewsbury-fa-cup-louis-van-gaal>
It was not a victory to repair the damage inflicted during that dismal 2-1 
Europa League defeat against Midtjylland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/18/midtjylland-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
 – the only way that will happen is if United overturn the deficit at Old 
Trafford on Thursday night – but this was a professional performance from Van 
Gaal’s players and a positive result to lift the mood if nothing else.

United, in truth, were coasting and there were moments when it felt like a 
training ground game of attack against defence as Van Gaal’s side dominated 
possession and kept pressing forward, pinning Shrewsbury in. The only surprise 
was that we had to wait until the 35th minute for the opening goal, when Chris 
Smalling found himself in foreign territory and struck an angled drive into the 
ground and inside the far post.

When Juan Mata scored a lovely second in first-half injury time the tie was 
effectively over and from that point on it was a simple case of how much United 
wanted to turn the screw.

Shrewsbury Town 0-3 Manchester United: FA Cup fifth round – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/22/shrewsbury-town-v-manchester-united-fa-cup-fifth-round-live>
Mata looked like he was enjoying himself, which was certainly not the case in 
Denmark last Thursday, when his feeble challenge on the edge of the area 
allowed Midtjylland to score the winner. As the Spaniard demonstrated with his 
wonderful free-kick here, he is much more useful in the same position at the 
opposite end of the pitch.

That free-kick, however, turned into a major talking point because of the way 
three United players had deliberately taken up offside positions as Mata lined 
up to connect with the ball. Ander Herrera, Anthony Martial and Jesse Lingard 
stood behind the Shrewsbury wall before running out and debate raged afterwards 
about whether the goal should have been allowed. Van Gaal later revealed that 
United had learned the routine from analysing Midtjylland – at least something 
registered from the videos they watched on the Danish champions.

Lingard, with a simple finish, scored United’s third goal just after the hour, 
in front of the visiting supporters, who by that stage were going through their 
full repertoire of songs, chanting about everything from winning the title 20 
times to Cristiano Ronaldo and Eric Cantona.

Whether they are in the same spirits beyond the weekend remains to be seen. 
After that tricky second leg against Midtjylland, United welcome Arsenal to Old 
Trafford in another must-win game if they are to keep alive their faint hopes 
of finishing in the top four in the Premier League. In that sense it still 
feels like a make-or-break week for Van Gaal, even if United can now look 
forward totaking on West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/fa-cup-sixth-round-draw-quarter-final-chelsea-everton>
 for a place in the FA Cup semi-finals.

Shrewsbury, to their credit, rallied late on and ought to have had a goal to 
celebrate in the final 10 minutes, when Abu Ogogo saw one shot cleared off the 
line by Joe Riley, the United debutant, and then inexplicably headed another 
chance wide when it appeared easier to score. It was that sort of night for 
Micky Mellon’s side.

Smalling had squandered an early opportunity to put United in front when he 
profligately headed Daley Blind’s corner over with only 76 seconds on the 
clock. Yet the England international made no mistake later in the half, when he 
latched on to Morgan Schneiderlin’s header and, aided by a kind bounce, hooked 
the ball beyond Jayson Leutwiler, the Shrewsbury goalkeeper.

United should cut Louis Van Gaal loose while José Mourinho is still free | 
Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/20/louis-van-gaal-jose-mourinho-midtjylland-manchester-united>
It was not exactly finished with aplomb but certainly more effective than the 
shot that Memphis Depay thumped against the top of the Salop Leisure Stand 
after six minutes, much to the delight of the Shrewsbury supporters. United, 
however, kept coming back for more and Depay, after linking well with the 
impressive Cameron Borthwick-Jackson on the left flank, struck a low shot that 
was arrowing towards the bottom corner until Leutwiler clawed it clear with one 
hand. Ogogo later came to Shrewsbury’s rescue when he headed off the line after 
Leutwiler had partially blocked Martial’s shot with his boot.

Smalling’s goal, however, ended Shrewsbury’s resistance and any hopes that the 
home team had of adopting a backs-to-the-wall approach and clinging on. Mata’s 
free-kick, curled inside the post with Leutwiler rooted to the spot, made 
things even more comfortable for the visitors before Lingard, side footing home 
Herrera’s centre, added the third.
 