
Manchester United – and Louis van Gaal – put their Capital One Cup 
embarrassmentat MK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/26/mk-dons-manchester-united-capital-one-cup>
 a little further behind them with this stroll that featured a fine maiden 
strike by Andreas Pereira, and a fourth in four games by Anthony Martial.

Capital One Cup fourth round draw: Sheffield Wednesday to host Arsenal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/24/capital-one-cup-fourth-round-draw-sheffield-wednesday-arsenal>
Last August, United departed Milton Keynes on the wrong end of a 4-0 trouncing 
by the Dons, butIpswich Town <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ipswichtown> 
were allowed scant hope of emulating the League One club.

After Sunday’s two-goal heroics at Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/20/southampton-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
, Martial was stood down from the starting XI. This meant Van Gaal restored 
Wayne Rooney to centre-forward and slotted Marouane Fellaini into the No10 
berth, as he handed a first competitive start to Pereira.

Of the latter’s slick display, the manager said: “We have to evaluate the game 
and not an individual player. He had a big participation in the game because he 
shoots the free-kick in in a fantastic way. But like all the other players 
there is a lot of space of improvement.”

In all Van Gaal made six changes. Yet the team remained packed with leading 
performers, including David de Gea, Juan Mata, Rooney, Daley Blind and Bastian 
Schweinsteiger. The hardy Ipswich fans, though, halfway into a 440-mile round 
trip, were rewarded by Mick McCarthy fielding a completely different starting 
XI from the one who drew 1-1 with Birmingham City last Friday.

After 22 minutes United had their first. Eschewing the serial passing Van Gaal 
prefers, Blind hit a ball from defence into Rooney. The captain held off Piotr 
Malarczyk, touched possession on neatly with his left boot, then finished past 
Bartosz Bialkowski, for a first League Cup goal sincethe 2010 final against 
Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/feb/28/aston-villa-manchester-united-carling-cup-final>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fmanchester-united-ipswich-town-capital-one-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb579fb94e7e684c94ae8ddc3dd92dc7de7206260%2F618_161_2343_1406%2F2343.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20United%E2%80%99s%20Wayne%20Rooney%20ends%20domestic%20drought%20against%20Ipswich&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fmanchester-united-ipswich-town-capital-one-cup-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20United%E2%80%99s%20Wayne%20Rooney%20ends%20domestic%20drought%20against%20Ipswich&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fmanchester-united-ipswich-town-capital-one-cup-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb579fb94e7e684c94ae8ddc3dd92dc7de7206260%2F618_161_2343_1406%2F2343.jpg>
 Anthony Martial came on with 20 minutes remaining and scored his fourth goal 
in four games for Manchester United deep into injury time. Photograph: Gareth 
Copley/Getty Images 
Van Gaal could do with winning a trophy in his second season. As his team 
wandered off for the break the sense was that concentration merely had to be 
kept and United would advance into the fourth round. Yet while it was only 1-0 
Ipswich still had a chance.

When the second half began, the way Ashley Young carelessly ceded the ball to 
allow McCarthy’s side to attack offered encouragement. This came in a period of 
pressure that featured David McGoldrick flashing the ball in front of De Gea, 
and Tommy Oar leading the midfield in a high pressing of their opponents.

Van Gaal would have been happier with the sweetest of free-kicks Pereira 
curled home from outside the area to double his side’s advantage. The 
19-year-old said: “I asked Juan [Mata] for the ball. He gave me the ball 
because we had been practising. I’m very happy. A free-kick at the Stretford 
end as well, it’s like a dream come true.”

After Jones replaced Chris Smalling and Martial came on for Mata, the French 
teenager struck yet again, running through in added time to score in the cool 
manner that is becoming his trademark. Van Gaal said: “He did it against 
Liverpool and now again. We are happy but still we have to keep our feet on the 
ground.”

Next, United face Middlesbrough in the last-16 and the Championship side will 
not fancy travelling to Old Trafford. “I don’t know much about them,” Van Gaal 
said. “The scout shall analyse as he did withIpswich Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ipswichtown> but it is one of the top 
clubs so it shall not be easy. Also this game it was not easy. I am happy with 
the result and the cup draw because we are playing at home. We have to travel a 
lot so it is fantastic we stay at home.”

His United are more solid this season than the last one. They are starting to 
truly resemble a Van Gaal side.
 