
The struggling Manor Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>
 team is on the verge of a takeover after its owner said on Friday that terms 
have been agreed with a new investor.

Speaking at the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, the British businessman Stephen 
Fitzpatrick said the team have been in discussions with several investors over 
the past six months. “We have agreed terms with an investor at the moment and 
we are still working through that,” said Fitzpatrick, whorescued the team from 
administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/04/manor-marussia-confirm-f1-return>
 in time for the 2015 season. “I can’t really talk more about the specifics.”

Fitzpatrick is now prepared to take a back seat as long as it makes the team 
stronger.

“One of the things I was quite clear on, right from the start, was that in the 
current F1, money equals performance,” he said. “So anything that was going to 
bring more funding to the team and help the team develop I was very open to ... 
[even] if that meant bringing in another investor, and even a majority 
investor.”

Manor <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manor> have scored one point this 
season, putting them in 11th and last place in the constructors’ standings 
before Sunday’s season-ending race.

Manor are still aiming for 10th place and are one point behind Sauber, who 
currently hold that position. The difference between 10th and 11th is several 
millions in terms of television rights and revenue distribution.

Losing out on 10th spot would not affect the impending takeover, however. “It 
doesn’t help financially, but the terms of our agreement have been refinalised, 
let’s say,” Fitzpatrick said. “[It’s] not a deal breaker.”

Jenson Button and Felipe Massa sign off with call for stronger rivals to 
Mercedes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/24/jenson-button-felipe-massa-f1> 
The highly rated German driver Pascal Wehrlein secured Manor’s point after 
finishing 10th at the Austrian Grand Prix in July. The team’s other driver, the 
20-year-old Frenchman Esteban Ocon, is joining Force India next season.

Werhlein, meanwhile, is tipped to replace the Brazilian Felipe Nasr at Sauber, 
a move made potentially more likely with the news that Nasr has lost his 
banking sponsor Banco do Brasil.
 