
Jules Bianchi will be foremost in the thoughts of the Manor Marussia Formula 
One team this weekend as they prepare to return to the Japanese Grand Prix 
circuit where he hadhis horrific accident last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/05/lewis-hamilton-wins-japan-grand-prix>
.

Jenson Button will soon call it a day in Formula One, reckons Damon Hill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/21/jenson-button-formula-one-damon-hill>
The 25-year-old French driver died in hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/17/f1-driver-jules-bianchi-dies-from-injuries-sustained-in-crash-at-japanese-grand-prix>
 in southern France in July, nine months after suffering severe head injuries 
when his Marussia skidded off a wet track in fading light at Suzuka and hit a 
recovery tractor.

Bianchi was the first F1 driver to die of injuries sustained during a race 
since the Brazilian Ayrton Senna in 1994.

The Marussia principal, John Booth, said going back to the circuit for 
Sunday’s race would be “extremely emotional” and challenging for everyone at 
the team and appealed for understanding.

He said in a team preview: “We were Jules’s team, and with that in mind I 
would ask everyone to understand and respect that, this weekend, we wish to 
deal with the experience of returning to Suzuka in a very private, 
introspective way. Our commitments will be reflective of this.”

Marussia went into administration after last year’s accident, racing with one 
car in Russia and missing the final three races, but were rescued at the 11th 
hour and many of those who worked with Bianchi are still with the team.

Both current drivers, the Briton Will Stevens and the American Alexander 
Rossi, were in Suzuka last year in reserve roles.

Booth added: “We think of Jules every single day; he will forever be a huge 
part of our team. His name has also been on our car at every single race.

“That tribute, our incredibly fond memories of Jules and the camaraderie we 
have within our team are all we need to race on in his honour in Suzuka this 
weekend.”

Stevens said he would try and focus on racing: “In the same circumstances, 
Jules would have gone about the business of racing in a very focused and 
professional way and that is exactly what I’ll be doing.”
 