
You’ve written a hit play, it’s been programmed for a run at the Royal Court – 
and you can’t take a shred of credit for it? You’d forgive the anonymous writer 
of Manwatching for feeling some frustration – but there’s little in evidence. 
“I keep telling the friends who know it’s me [and who are sworn to secrecy] 
that everyone should do a piece anonymously once in their lives. It’s 
tremendously liberating.”

Related: Manwatching at Edinburgh festival review – a frank insight into 
female desire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/15/manwatching-review-edinburgh-female-desire-roundabout-summerhall-edinburgh-sexual-double-standard>

There are reasons for her anonymity, though; it’s no gimmick. Manwatching is a 
monologue about female heterosexual desire, performed by men – specifically, by 
a different male comedian, sight unseen, at each performance. In the text, 
Anonymous reflects uninhibitedly on her sexual adventures, preferences and 
fantasies, and watching, we’re struck by the novelty of hearing her voice, 
(almost) unmediated. Add the rich pleasure of watching a male performer 
negotiate the text moment by moment – even when it starts joking at their 
expense – and you have an intriguing hour in the theatre, one that reclaims a 
small patch of male privilege and deviously upends the male gaze.

I saw the show – then a work in progress – at the 2015 Edinburgh fringe, with 
comedianJoe Lycett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/19/birmingham-pub-crawl-with-comedian-joe-lycett>
 at the microphone. Standup andstar of the sitcom Uncle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/20/nick-helm-uncle-manchild>,
Nick Helm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/04/nick-helm-if-it-wasnt-for-alice-cooper-i-wouldnt-be-doing-what-i-do>
 was another guest performer who, 18 months on, remembers “a unique 
experience”. A groggy one, too: Helm performed it at 10am, not long after his 
late-night gig of the previous day. “It was disorientating,” he recalls. “And I 
was anxious about what I’d have to say. You don’t know who wrote it; I thought 
it might be pornographic; you have to sight read it before an audience. There’s 
a lot going on in your mind.

“But the audience is there to enjoy it. The experience becomes funny. Not just 
the text, not just the anonymity – the whole situation. When the script becomes 
explicit, the audience has sympathy for you. It’s a deliberately constructed 
awkward situation to put someone in.”
 Like having your trousers pulled down in public … clockwise from top left, 
Nick Helm, James Acaster, Joe Lycett and Marcus Brigstocke. Composite: Getty 
Images/Graham Flack/Will Ireland/Rex 
Its anonymous writer agrees: “When the idea of it being [performed by] an 
unprepared man came up, I liked that power dynamic and the act of trust it 
would require from a man.” To some degree, she admits, the play intentionally 
objectifies its male performer – but it also celebrates his skill. Comedians 
are “great at not acting, at just being themselves,” says the writer, “and very 
good at negotiating the unexpected in a live situation. They also give the 
piece levity. It’s fun, and that is really so key to the gesture.” (Contrast 
this with Helm’s theory as to why standups are the play’s stooges: “Male 
comedians have a reputation for being alpha males, and the text plays with 
that. It’s like a public dressing down. It’s pulling our trousers down in front 
of an audience.”)

Another guest performer was comedian Marcus Brigstocke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/marcusbrigstocke>, who tried – insofar as 
a comedian ever can – tonot make the play funny. “I remember resisting the urge 
to give a nod and wink to the audience. I wanted just to read it and let it be 
what it is.” He didn’t feel anxious, he says, because “as a straight white man 
who went to boarding school, and as a standup, you end up with a confidence 
that few things can really hurt you”.

Of course the part of me that would like to boast is frustrated

It was only retrospectively that Brigstocke sensed why men were invited to 
perform the play. “I think that female sexual desire is still treated with 
great suspicion,” he says now. “You only have to look at how tabloid newspapers 
cover relationships, in which women are ‘hungry for it’, and that carries a 
judgment, whereas with men that’s natural – an affirmation of their 
masculinity.” In which context, putting the play’s words in a man’s mouth 
“removes some of the judgments that are readily associated with women 
expressing sexual desire”.

The writer (who answers my questions anonymously, via email) admits to a 
political impulse behind Manwatching. “I wrote it because I realised I could 
easily picture (and had seen) monologues about male heterosexual desire 
performed by women, but had a harder time picturing it the other way around. I 
don’t feel compelled to discuss my sex life publicly divorced from the 
political context of being a woman who lives in a world where I am constantly 
aware of the male gaze, either in terms of negotiating it as a woman, or just 
seeing its dominance in advertising, film and media.”

Related: Unknown pleasures: do we enjoy art more if it's anonymous? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/03/unknown-pleasures-art-anonymous-dance-umbrella-royal-court>

Remaining anonymous wasn’t the original intention. But as the script evolved, 
its writer increasingly thought it needed to feel like a more universal 
gesture: “An anonymous female voice makes the message so much stronger, and 
means that any woman who wants to take ownership of it can.” Anonymity also 
allowed greater candour about her past sexual relationships: the uncensored 
honesty with which she’s addressed them – and the embarrassment it might cause 
– is why she hopes to avoid anElena Ferrante-style unmasking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/elena-ferrante-literary-storm-as-italian-reporter-identifies-author>
.

Has she ever regretted the decision to conceal her identity? “Of course the 
part of me that would like to boast is frustrated,” she says. “But it’s 
probably good to frustrate the part of you that would like to boast. Mainly, my 
anonymity has turned out to be a protective cloak, which wasn’t the intention, 
but it’s been a very big perk.”

Finally, what’s the favourite piece of speculation she’s heard about 
Manwatching’s authorship? “Someone guessed thatDavid Hare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/david-hare> wrote it, and somebody else 
saidDaniel Kitson <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/daniel-kitson>. It’s very 
funny,” she says, “how quick we are to assume that men wrote everything.” 

 * Manwatching is at the Royal Court, London 
<https://royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/manwatching/>, 10-20 May. Box office: 
020-7565 5000.
 