
The passion and drama of José Mourinho’s first meeting in English football 
with Pep Guardiola continues to feel fresh. The Manchester United managertasted 
defeat against Guardiola’s City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/manchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 at Old Trafford on the Saturday before last and the wounds remain raw.

There is little doubt that the 2-1 Premier League reverse served to puncture 
the optimism that had swelled at United in the wake of Mourinho’s arrival. Now, 
the game is afoot once more.

EFL Cup draw: Manchester United face Manchester City, Liverpool host Spurs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/21/efl-cup-fourth-round-draw-manchester-united-manchester-city>
The EFL Cup fourth round will be headlined by United’s tie against City at Old 
Trafford, after both clubs smoothed their passage into it with away victories. 
City got the job doneat Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/21/swansea-city-manchester-city-efl-cup-match-report>
 and Mourinho’s team were too strong for Northampton Town, albeit after a 
performance that contained its share of imperfections.

Mourinho was prickly afterwards, which was not entirely surprising, given how 
United had wobbled towards the end of the first half and the manner in which 
they had laboured for penetration until the introduction of Marcus Rashford and 
Zlatan Ibrahimovic in the 54th minute. It was all a bit Louis van Gaal.

But his target was a surprise. Mourinho chose to highlight Jak McCourt’s 
scything tackle through the back of Memphis Depay in the 47th minute, for which 
theNorthampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> midfielder 
was booked. It provoked a sulky monologue from the Portuguese, which was 
underpinned by the hint of conspiracy. “Normally, it is easier against 10 men 
and we should have been playing against 10 men very early in the second half,” 
Mourinho said.

Northampton had equalised Michael Carrick’s opening goal through Alex Revell’s 
penalty, which was awarded after Daley Blind had nibbled at Sam Hoskins, and 
Mourinho was asked whether he thought the decision had been correct. “I think I 
should stop to speak about referees’ decisions,” Mourinho said. “And I think I 
should just be waiting for you to speak about them with honest visions and with 
the dishonest visions. I told about the red card [for Northampton] because it 
was really a dangerous situation.

“I’m not speaking about the penalty against Man City [not given to Wayne 
Rooney after Claudio Bravo’s tackle]. I am speaking about the situation where 
we could have had an important injury and even in this situation ... ” He 
tailed off. “I should stop and leave it with you,” he said. “Some honest, some 
dishonest.”

His body language during the game and his words in a flash interview with Sky 
Sports after it – which he gave before the City draw had been made – betrayed a 
man with frustrations and grievances. He did not speak to the press and so we 
will have to wait for his reaction to the next Manchester derby.He had arrived 
in Northampton against a backdrop of dissatisfaction. After the City loss had 
come two more againstFeyenoord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/feyenoord-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
 in the Europa League andWatford  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/18/watford-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
and, for only the third time in his managerial career, he was staring at the 
possibility of a fourth consecutive defeat.

Mourinho had openly criticised some of his players, star names had 
underperformed and confidence was low. Another setback was unthinkable. 
Mercifully for Mourinho and the club, they found the means to pull out of the 
nose dive and it owed much to his call for the cavalry.

On came Rashford and Ibrahimovic, and United found the extra gear. The crucial 
second goal was all about the precision and technique of Ander Herrera but 
Rashford had set up the shooting opportunity for him and it was Rashford 
himself who scored the clinching third.

It said much that Mourinho had to summon two of his big-name attackers in the 
quest to break down League One opposition and there were other aspects of the 
evening that would have grated with him. Marcos Rojo failed to inspire 
confidence at left-back and there were nervous moments for some of the other 
defenders in the first-half, namely Tim Fosu-Mensah and Blind.

Gael Clichy and Aleix García give Manchester City victory at Swansea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/21/swansea-city-manchester-city-efl-cup-match-report>
Further forward, Wayne Rooney ran his socks off to little effect. Mourinho had 
started him as the No9 in his 4-3-3 formation, in what felt like a show of 
faith but, twice, the captain strayed offside when well-placed. In the early 
running, he had shot straight at Northampton’s goalkeeper Adam Smith. Rooney 
was moved to the right when Ibrahimovic came on and it felt emblematic to see 
him shunted to the side when the tie was won.

On the other hand, United did set the tempo and dominate possession and, in 
the end, the result was not only all important but comfortable. Carrick made a 
positive impression on his return to the team for his first action since the 
Community Shield and Rashford remains the man who can make something happen.

Mourinho made nine changes from the Watford defeat – Rooney and Chris Smalling 
were the only survivors – and Paul Pogba was left out of the squad.

United went ahead after Smith picked up a backpass and Rooney’s free-kick hit 
the Northampton wall and then broke to Carrick, who promptly fired a 
first-time, right-footed shot into the far corner of the net.

Fosu-Mensah had headed against the crossbar but he was beaten by Kenji Gorré 
in the 39th minute, who lashed a shot against the top of the United bar. 
Herrera had advertised his goal when he hit the post from distance after 59 
minutes and Rashford had the final word, after Smith panicked under Herrera’s 
high ball.
 