
The years have been kind to Marcel Desailly, the one-time France captain whose 
career led him to some of the biggest clubs in the world, withMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille>, Milan and Chelsea benefitting 
from his rock-solid performances. With the exception of a few extra pounds 
gained – inevitable for a man now in his mid-40s – he still has an air of 
invincibility around him, like a gladiator who knows no fear as he strides into 
the room for our interview.

Desailly was born in Accra in Ghana, where, as fate would have it, his mother 
made a decision that irreversibly changed the course of his life; she married a 
French diplomat. The consequence of that union was a move toFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france>, where the four-year-old Desailly 
experienced a culture far removed from what he had left behind.

Desailly started to play organised football for Nantes, who he joined as a 
14-year-old, but it was only when he turned 17 and broke into the reserve team 
that he realised this path could lead to fame and fortune if he succeeded. He 
made his professional debut for Nantes in 1986 and became the fulcrum of the 
team while still in his teens, gaining the experience needed to smooth out the 
rough edges of his game.

His performances attracted attention from Marseille and Monaco, with both 
clubs making offers for his services. “It’s like a child who is in the family 
house,” recalls Desailly. “He wants to move, he needs to move, no matter what 
the parents are going to give him. Nantes became too small for me. I wanted 
Marseille but all the family were saying go to Monaco because you are 
guaranteed a huge salary, but I said no, I am ambitious it’s not just about the 
money.

“I said the ambition that Marseille have will give me other opportunities. In 
football you have to be lucky. I’m a lucky man. I have not been a skilful, 
talented player. I’ve been a serious player all my life in my diet, sleeping, 
everything, but the luck of coming to clubs that win is also important.”

At Marseille he had to work his way into the first team through persistent 
endeavour and studying of the senior pros. He eventually became a regular 
choice in the backline, playing alongside the legendary Basile Boli. His robust 
performances won him a call-up to the France team during the qualifiers for the 
1994 World Cup in the US. France failed to qualify in the last minute of their 
last match against Bulgaria when David Ginola lost possession and his error 
allowed Emil Kostadinov to score. The Eastern Europeans went to the finals and 
Desailly would have to wait another four years for his firstWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>.

From the Vault: The cross that cost France and started a 19-year feud
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/nov/16/from-vault-ginola-houllier-france-feud>
Marseille reached the European Cup final in 1993 and were pitted against the 
mighty Milan, the dominant team in European football. Having lost the 1991 
final to a Red Star Belgrade team whose dogged approach took a sterile match to 
a penalty shootout, which they won 5-3, Marseille were determined to lift the 
trophy. A single headed goal from Boli was enough to beatMilan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan>.

Marseille were subsequently stripped of their Division 1 title for paying 
Valenciennes to ease off in a league match so they could focus on their 
European Cup final. The club’s flamboyant millionaire chairman, Bernard Tapie, 
spent time behind bars for his role in the fiasco. Months later Desailly was on 
his way out, leaving Marseille to join the Milan team he had played a role in 
defeating.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fmarcel-desailly-interview-chelsea-milan-france-euro-2000%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf232c2e169d80dac15a6cc3d3ff20b24daee545%2F252_452_2300_1380%2F2300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marcel%20Desailly%20interview%3A%20on%20Chelsea%2C%20Milan%20and%20France's%20'amazing'%20Euro%202000&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fmarcel-desailly-interview-chelsea-milan-france-euro-2000%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marcel%20Desailly%20interview%3A%20on%20Chelsea%2C%20Milan%20and%20France%27s%20%27amazing%27%20Euro%202000&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fmarcel-desailly-interview-chelsea-milan-france-euro-2000%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf232c2e169d80dac15a6cc3d3ff20b24daee545%2F252_452_2300_1380%2F2300.jpg>
 Marcel Desailly celebrates after scoring for Milan in their 4-0 win over 
Barcelona in the European Cup final. Photograph: Shaun Botterill/Getty Images 
The move came out of the blue, says Desailly: “I still continue to say that my 
move to AC Milan was not for me. Ariedo Braida, who was the sports director of 
AC Milan, came to watch Alen Boksic because he wanted to buy Boksic, not me. 
Luckily, that day I had an amazing game. I played libero and central defence, 
and I played my best game for Marseille that season. He put a cross against my 
name in his notebook to follow up later. When Marseille put me up for sale, 
Zvonimir Boban in AC Milan got injured, that’s why Milan came and grabbed me to 
replace Boban, to play as a midfielder. It’s all about luck sometimes.”

Desailly became a household name while at Milan as he seamlessly made the 
transition from the French league to the summit of European football in Serie 
A, the richest and most competitive league in the world at that time. Desailly 
found himself teleported into an entirely different world. “Out of 100, 
Marseille was 40 and Milan was 100,” he says. “It’s that simple. Organisation, 
the stadium, 82,000 people in the San Siro for every match, Milanello, the 
training camp, the food, the dress, Milan is the fashion city of the world, the 
international exposure that I experienced; it’s a different world. The money – 
my salary went up by four times what I was earning in Marseille.”

The competition for first team places was stiff, with only three foreign 
players allowed to play in any one match and eight players vying for those 
positions, among them Marco van Basten, Michael Laudrup, Jean-Pierre Papin, 
Giovane Élber and Dejan Savicevic.

Desailly took it all in his stride and adapted. “I love pressure. There are 
some talented players, suddenly they get into a big stadium – an important game 
– and they can’t deliver. The pressure shakes them and blocks them. In my first 
training session everything came naturally: shooting, pressing, tackling, 
understanding the tactics. A few years later, Fabio Capello told me: ‘When you 
came I didn’t really know who you were but the first week of training that you 
played with us, I had no choice but to put you in the first team.’ I enjoyed 
it. It’s like in the jungle, it is only the one who is fit that survives.”

At Milan, Desailly won the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> and two Scudetti. The 
arrival of George Weah, Roberto Baggio and Patrick Kluivert strengthened the 
Milan team on paper but they went into decline when club owner Silvio 
Berlusconi tightened the purse strings. In 1997 Milan had their worst season in 
a decade and, just before the 1998 World Cup, Desailly was approached by 
Chelsea’s director of football, Colin Hutchinson, about a possible move to 
London. The encounter caught him by surprise: “Chelsea? Which club? What are 
you saying? I’ve never heard about Chelsea,” said a bewildered Desailly.

He turned down an approach from Liverpool because he wanted a French school 
for his children. Not even the ludicrous offer of a helicopter to fly him from 
London to Liverpool every day for training could dissuade him. Desailly opted 
forChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> for this reason, 
saying to Hutchinson: “OK, let’s go have a look at your club.”

He arrived in England with a wealth of experience, a big reputation and no 
shortage of self-belief but he found that playing in the Premier league was a 
whole different ball game: “I suffered. My ego got smashed. I really suffered, 
honestly. Playing against Dion Dublin, Duncan Ferguson – big guys. The flick, 
the fighting spirit. Playing against Coventry, Sunderland – the long ball. I 
was unable to intimidate them. In France and Italy I was a strong guy – I would 
look the strikers in the eye and show ‘there is nothing for you today’ – and 
the player would look down and accept that I had won. But in England, no. The 
guy is ready for a fight. The striker will tackle you! I was depressed for four 
months.”

Over time Desailly adjusted to the differences in approach between England and 
continental Europe. He took to studying the English game on video, accepting 
that it was not possible to win every aerial challenge, and instead anticipated 
where the ball would land when it was flicked on, rather than always engaging 
in direct combat. He also began to release the ball earlier, knowing that 
strikers in England were quite happy to tackle defenders, something he had 
never seen in France or Italy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fmarcel-desailly-interview-chelsea-milan-france-euro-2000%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd2f027fd2f81fd8ad37f566545a0922647c549a%2F0_83_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marcel%20Desailly%20interview%3A%20on%20Chelsea%2C%20Milan%20and%20France's%20'amazing'%20Euro%202000&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fmarcel-desailly-interview-chelsea-milan-france-euro-2000%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marcel%20Desailly%20interview%3A%20on%20Chelsea%2C%20Milan%20and%20France%27s%20%27amazing%27%20Euro%202000&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fmarcel-desailly-interview-chelsea-milan-france-euro-2000%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd2f027fd2f81fd8ad37f566545a0922647c549a%2F0_83_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Marcel Desailly uses the Charity Shield to protect himself from the rain after 
Chelsea’s win over Manchester United in 2000. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the 
Guardian 
Besides the changes on the field, he also experienced a huge drop in the 
quality of the club facilities compared to what he had become accustomed to in 
Italy. “The camp we were training in was awful. The stadium only held 32,000 at 
the time, before it was later increased to 42,000. This was balanced by the 
fact that it was a new challenge for me. I was 30 years old, most of career was 
behind me, but the sense of a new adventure gave me a new lease of life.”

Desailly’s international career also prospered. After the failure to qualify 
for the 1994 World Cup, the casualties of that failure were the elder 
statesmen, among them Eric Cantona and David Ginola. A new generation of 
players, including Desailly, Zinedine Zidane, Youri Djorkaeff, Emmanuel Petit 
and Didier Deschamps, took up the mantle. French reached the semi-final of Euro 
1996, losing to the Czech Republic on penalties, but it was now apparent that 
this was a team on the rise.

In 1998 France hosted the World Cup and their team, having now spent a few 
years together, was almost the finished article. Carried forward by a tide of 
intricate passing and the incandescent skills of Zinedine Zidane, they swept 
aside everyone until only the mighty Brazil stood in their way.

From the start of the tournament, Desailly had been the rock at the heart of 
the defence, complementing his elegant defensive partner Laurent Blanc. The 
backline had been virtually watertight throughout the tournament, but with 
Blanc suspended for the final, Desailly would need to be extra-vigilant 
alongside the more vulnerable Frank Leboeuf, playing his first match of the 
tournament.

France were outstanding from the start and two headed goals by Zidane 
effectively ripped the stuffing out of a bewildered Brazil team. In the second 
half, with 22 minutes left on the clock, Desailly received a second yellow card 
after a clumsy tackle on Brazil captain Cafu and was sent off. He spent the 
last part of the second half in the dressing room dreading a Brazilian comeback 
but Emmanuel Petit secured an historic victory with a third goal.

This was the start of the most successful period for French football and 
Desailly was a vital cog in the wheel during this period. He remembers the 
glory days with relish: “From 1998 to 2001 we were the best team in the world, 
like Spain later. There was nothing for any other team. We wonEuro 2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro2000> beating Spain, Italy, Czech 
Republic and Portugal. It was an amazing experience.”

After six successful years playing for Chelsea, Desailly moved to Qatar in 
2004 to wind down his career. He won two league titles with Al-Gharafa and 
Sports Club Qatar in successive seasons. At 36, however, it was becoming harder 
to keep pushing himself and to maintain the high standards he demanded of 
himself.

The decision to retire was on his mind for several months before he finally 
made the hardest choice of his extraordinary career: “One morning, I was 
injured, I was alone in my room, and five o’clock in the morning the sun was 
already shining hard. I put my two feet on the floor and winced. The family 
were not with me because I didn’t want them to move to Qatar and I said to 
myself, ‘It’s time for you to stop’. The two elements were there: physical and 
psychological. I was not ready to come back after my small injury. That day I 
went to the club and told them I wanted to withdraw and end my career. After 20 
years of professional commitment, I was tired. I had given my best.”

Having made the decision to walk away from football, Desailly was finally free 
and he now had to make a decision about his next step. “I don’t miss the game,” 
he says. “Sometimes the 90 minutes, but I don’t miss it. I’m free, I’m 
completely at ease because it was extremely hard. Some people say it’s easy 
being a football player. Let them come and put on their shorts. Every morning 
your toes are cold, the travelling, the pressure, the responsibility. You have 
to be a role model, you are involved in so many things. Now I am free. I am 
committed in different things. The charity work, the TV work, my own business. 
I’m busy but I manage to get time for the family. I don’t want to look back 
because also I can never get the same level of feeling and emotion as when I 
played; it was on the higher side.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fmarcel-desailly-interview-chelsea-milan-france-euro-2000%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff07fe0bfc008b0f30e60d8527c8fe13cc34f94d2%2F0_0_2297_2296%2F2297.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marcel%20Desailly%20interview%3A%20on%20Chelsea%2C%20Milan%20and%20France's%20'amazing'%20Euro%202000&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fmarcel-desailly-interview-chelsea-milan-france-euro-2000%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marcel%20Desailly%20interview%3A%20on%20Chelsea%2C%20Milan%20and%20France%27s%20%27amazing%27%20Euro%202000&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthese-football-times%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fmarcel-desailly-interview-chelsea-milan-france-euro-2000%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff07fe0bfc008b0f30e60d8527c8fe13cc34f94d2%2F0_0_2297_2296%2F2297.jpg>
 Marcel Desailly and Arsène Wenger working together as pundits during Euro 
2016. Photograph: Philippe Lopez/AFP/Getty Images 
Two decades of playing at the highest level was rewarding but Desailly had to 
make some adjustments when he left the game: “I’m a lucky guy because I was not 
as talented as some offensive players but I gave it my best. We all need money 
though. I dropped from the 100% I spoke about earlier that I was earning as a 
football player to zero. How can you get back to a certain level of earning? 
Your capital is what it is, but you can never match what you were earning as a 
player. There is a drop no matter what you want or say, and then you have to be 
careful because now you are a normal person.

“People still recognise us because we are still doing TV work, but it is nice 
to be able to do what you want, go where you want and not get into a place and 
suddenly everyone comes to your table and asks you questions while you are with 
your wife and your kids trying to relax and have a good time. Freedom: that 
word, that aspect, means a lot to me. I’ve been involved in the game, available 
for everyone. Now I want to be myself and travel around the world, meet people, 
and do my charity work.”

After he decided to call it a day, Desailly started to spend more time in 
Ghana and, in time, made a conscious decision to make it his home. The lure of 
the African continent proved irresistible, though he still travels to Europe 
regularly. “I’m a citizen of the world. I’m French-Ghanaian. What I’ve done is 
invest in Ghana, created a project calledLizzy Sports Complex 
<http://lizzysportscomplex.com/> with a bit of estate and sports facility, to 
contribute at a private level to help by building a sports facility.

“I believe it is useful to the community and this is my commitment to Ghana. 
We’ve created 100 jobs and probably around 300 jobs indirectly, and I’m happy 
about that. I’ve brought my kids to Ghana to understand the African way of life 
and also for them to understand where their father is coming from. Not thinking 
that their father is just French. No, their father is African too.”

• This article is from These Football Times <http://thesefootballtimes.co/>
• Follow These Football Times <https://twitter.com/thesefootytimes> and Ponga 
Liwewe <https://twitter.com/pongaliwewe> on Twitter
 