
In November last year, the dress <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EqolSvoWNck> 
that Marilyn Monroe wore to sing Happy Birthday to President John F Kennedy 
sold for$4.81 million <http://www.juliensauctions.com/>. In 2004, several 
pieces of Britney Spears’ usedchewing gum 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/3604616.stm> sold for up to £100 a 
piece. There is even a market for the belongings of despised individuals: A
bracelet 
<https://supernaught.com/products/charles-manson-bracelet-handmade-in-prison> 
Charles Manson made in prison is currently selling for $4,500.

Some of these 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/25/ringo-starr-auction-beatles-white-album-no0000001>
, like Marilyn Monroe’s dress, reflect a moment in history. But the attraction 
ofothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/head-quarters/2013/aug/05/gaga-royal-baby-memorabilia>
, such as Britney Spears’ chewing gum, areharder to explain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jul/12/cornish-cafe-celebrities-leftovers>
. Celebrity items tend to be relatively common artefacts such as clothing or 
furniture. Their previous ownership rarely adds any functional value and they 
are often indistinguishable from other, seemingly identical items in the 
marketplace.

Nevertheless, some people are willing to pay huge amounts of money to own 
these objects and museums regularly hold exhibitions of celebrity collections. 
Why?

Try it at home

The degree to which a person values celebrity memorabilia will fall along a 
continuum. Some people value celebrity belongings enormously, while other 
people care very little. The following thought experiment is adapted from a 
paper <http://jcr.oxfordjournals.org/content/38/2/215.abstract> by George 
Newman and colleagues at Yale University.

Write down the name of your favourite living celebrity or public figure. This 
could be a movie star, a musician, a professional athlete, a politician, etc. 
This should be someone whom you like very much and would be excited to meet 
personally.

Now imagine that you have the opportunity to bid on a sweater that belonged to 
that individual. On a scale from one (muchless likely to purchase) to nine (much
more likely to purchase), how willing would you be to purchase the sweater 
compared to an identical used sweater (in the same condition) that was not 
owned by your favourite living celebrity?

On a scale of one (extremely unpleasant) to nine (extremely pleasant), how 
pleasant would you find the experience of wearing the sweater?

Now consider the following: 

There is very little demand for items owned by your favourite living 
celebrity, so even if you wanted to, it is highly unlikely that you could 
resell the sweater to someone else. How willing would you be to purchase the 
sweater knowing this, and how pleasant would you find wearing it?

And now consider the following information: 

This sweater was given to your favourite living celebrity as a gift but he/she 
never actually wore it or even opened the box that it came in. How willing 
would you be to purchase the sweater knowing this, and how pleasant would you 
find wearing it?

If you have time, repeat this set of ratings but this time imagine that the 
sweater belongs to a living celebrity or public figure who you despise.

How it works

In a series of studies  
<http://jcr.oxfordjournals.org/content/38/2/215.abstract>involving nine hundred 
and forty American respondents, George Newman and colleagues found that, on 
average, respondents’ willingness to purchase their favourite celebrity’s 
sweater was not much affected by the information that they could not re-sell it.

However, willingness plummeted when respondents learned that the sweater had 
never been touched by the celebrity. This was especially the case for 
respondents who were also very sensitive to physical contagion (for instance, 
saying that they would never eat novelty chocolate shaped like dog-doo).

The authors argue that this pattern of findings show that mere associations 
and market forces have limited influence on the cult of celebrity memorabilia. 
Instead, they suggest that magical contagion beliefs are what is driving much 
of the market for celebrity memorabilia in the West.

Magical contagion was first proposed by anthropologists in the late nineteenth 
century when they observed cultural practices focused on the transfer of a 
person’s identity (or soul) into inanimate objects. This is thought to be the 
basis for rituals such as Haitian voodoo ceremonies and Tibetan processes to
determine 
<http://minddevlab.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/Psychological%20essentialism%20in%20selecting%20the%2014th%20Dalai%20Lama%20psychological-essentialism.pdf>
 the next Dalai Lama. There is agrowing wealth 
<http://journal.sjdm.org/14/14117a/jdm14117a.pdf> of research to show that 
magical contagion beliefs are also widespread in scientifically literate, 
Western adults across a variety of contexts.

And these biases arise early. In a study I helped run with Bruce Hood (Bristol 
University) and Paul Bloom (Yale University) we found that children from four 
years of age believed that an object 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17335793> that had once belonged to the 
Queen was worth significantly more than an identical copy. And further research 
we haveconducted 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0090787> with 
George Newman is showing that there are consistent cultural differences in 
people’s motivation for buying celebrity memorabilia.

How did you get on? Do you value your favourite celebrity’s sweater a lot, a 
little or not at all? And what effect did the knowledge that the celebrity had 
never touched it have on your willingness to purchase it? Are you a magical 
thinker too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/blog/2009/nov/22/michael-jackson-auction-glove>
?
 