
It is debatable whether Rangers actually relish their Sunday afternoon instant 
shot at redemption. The dust had barely settled onCeltic’s 5-1 demolition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/celtic-rangers-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 of their Old Firm rivals in September when the pair were drawn together in the 
semi-finals of the League Cup. Stung by what he regarded as wildly excessive 
coverage of Rangers’ woes at Celtic Park, Mark Warburton pointed to the 
personnel overhaul he implemented during the close season as a mitigating 
circumstance. Now, pressure returns to the Rangers manager as he seeks to 
demonstrate even small measures of progress during the intervening weeks.

As is typical, Warburton’s pre-match analysis is not opposition-specific. “Our 
focus has been, every week in the league, to try to get a better level of 
performance and a more consistent level of performance,” he explains. “This is 
another chance, against another very good team, to win a semi-final. There is 
no motivation required for the players. Whoever we are playing, this is a cup 
semi-final.”

Rangers in Scottish Cup final after beating Celtic in penalty shootout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/17/celtic-rangers-scottish-cup-semi-final-match-report>
Warburton, not unreasonably, points towards a domestic record that is not as 
bad as many would portray. The key point, as ever in Glasgow, relates to 
comparison; thearrival of Brendan Rodgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/20/celtic-appoint-brendan-rodgers-manager>
 at Celtic, relatively lavish spending and the immediatereturn of Champions 
League football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/hapoel-beer-sheva-celtic-champions-league-qualifier-match-report>
 automatically makes Rangers seem like poor relations.

“We have played 14 competitive games this season, this will be No15. We’ve 
lost two,” he says. “I’m not happy drawing games but we can bed in players. 
There’s a number of players that have been introduced to the squad and it’s a 
natural process. We knew what we had to do in the summer. We took a gamble at 
the start of last season. We had a really lean squad. You could reel the team 
off every week. We had players who played a lot of minutes and by the timethe 
Scottish Cup final arrived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/rangers-hibernian-scottish-cup-final-match-report>
, we were running on empty.

“There was this talk that I was making a statement at the time by naming only 
five subs. We had nobody else, simple as that. The squad size was a gamble. 
What did we learn? We needed greater depth and quality within the squad and 
that’s why we increased it by two this year.

“We are in a stronger position now. When you lose a game or draw, you have to 
keep your head down. But the fact is that we are gelling a number of players 
together, players are getting used to how you play and the demands.”

Surely the last stand of one of those pre-season signings came in the last 
derby. Joey Barton’s switch north has provena disaster for Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/19/joey-barton-believes-remain-rangers-talks-mark-warburton>
, to the point where the only talk now is of when and how a parting of the ways 
will transpire. In a high-profile incident the week before last, Warburton was 
removed from a press conference while refusing to answer questions about the 
suspended midfield player.

“Whatever business you’re in, sometimes you can’t talk about things,” 
Warburton says. “You can sit there and they think you’re avoiding the question 
or you can say: ‘They’re going through a process here’, which any other 
business would do. But that doesn’t sell papers or get listeners on a radio 
show. The point is sometimes clubs will [speak] or if they can’t there’s a 
reason why. They’re not avoiding the question or chickening out. They’re just 
doing what they have to do.”

Barton was not named in a subsequent answer, but it was clear Warburton wanted 
to dismiss any sense that he resents players who might be prone to speaking 
their mind. “The first message to the players on the first day at the club was: 
‘If my sessions are rubbish, knock on the door and say: ‘I didn’t get that 
session, it didn’t work for me.’’ No problem,” says the former Brentford 
manager. “If you say: ‘Oi, gaffer, that was rubbish,’ I’ll give you what for. 
It’s how you relay the message. If the session didn’t work and they tell me, I 
quite like that because I then have to tweak. If the food’s not right, I tell 
the chef. I don’t go in and say: ‘Oi, that lunch was crap.’ I say: ‘I’m not so 
sure about chicken today, chef.’ Same message but it’s how you tell it.

“The players know most because they’re involved in the game: 99 times out of 
100, the first question I’ll ask at half-time will be: ‘What are your thoughts, 
gents?’ They’re involved in it. I’m watching from the sidelines.”

Celtic surge to Old Firm win over Rangers thanks to Moussa Dembélé hat-trick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/celtic-rangers-scottish-premiership-match-report>
Rangers will inevitably draw on their victory, also at Hampden Park, over 
Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/17/celtic-rangers-scottish-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 in last season’s Scottish Cup semi-final. Win or lose, though, it is hard not 
to get the impression Warburton is uncomfortable with one fixture defining his 
reputation. “We knew the significance of that game and that win, because of 
where the club had been for four years,” the Rangers manager admits. “But the 
record books don’t show that we had a great semi-final and then lost the final. 
They show that we lost the final.

“What we have to do is focus on ourselves. What does that mean? It’s about us 
laying strong foundations here. We have to get it right. We have to get the 
academy right. We have to be producing players to come into the team to impact 
on the balance sheet in two or three years’ time. We have to get the staffing 
right, get the infrastructure right. We have to.”
 