
Mark Warburton does not want his performance as Rangers manager to be judged 
on his record against Celtic. Warburton is preparing to face Brendan Rodgers’
Scottish Premiership leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership/table> on Saturday, 
with a 16-point gap separating the country’s top two.

But the Englishman does not believe the Old Firm rivals’ head-to-heads this 
season will be an accurate reflection of Rangers’ progress.

Warburton has every reason to want to forget this campaign’s derby clashes. 
Rangers werehumiliated in this season’s opener 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/sep/10/celtic-v-rangers-scottish-premiership-live>
 at Parkhead in September, when Rodgers’ side were 5-1 winners.

Their next meeting came in October’s Betfred Cup semi-final when Celtic struck 
late in the game tobeat Rangers again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/23/rangers-v-celtic-scottish-league-cup-semi-final-live>
.

Warburton insists his side have improved since their first match but he 
believes the final standings will be a better measure of his work.

Asked what he should be judged on, he said: “It has to be where we finish. I 
understand [the comparisons to Celtic] and please don’t think for one second 
I’m understating it. But at the end of the season come May, where doRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> come in the league?

“We spoke at the beginning of the season about being highly competitive and 
learning and gelling as a team over the course of the season. So if we do that 
and grab second spot, will we have had a good season? You tell me.”

The Rangers side who line up for the first Old Firm derby to be staged at 
Ibrox in four and a half years will bear little resemblance to the team thumped 
atCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> Park.

Joey Barton’s Rangers career imploded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/rangers-terminate-joey-barton-contract-immediate-effect>
 in the wake of that defeat while Niko Kranjcar is now out for the season with 
a knee injury. Philippe Senderos has barely been trusted to play after a very 
poor debut that day and the man who has largely replaced him, Clint Hill, is 
now rated, alongside the captain Lee Wallace, as having only a 50-50 chance of 
featuring following injuries.

But the manager insists his team have improved: “That was game five of the 
season – we’ve moved on from there. We brought in a number of players but there 
are players who won’t be present this time.

“We’ve gelled as a squad. We are where we are in the league but we’re 
delivering highly competitive performances.

“Are we a better team than we were at the start of the season? Of course we 
are. When you’ve got new players coming in who have only played four games, of 
course you’re going to be better. We’re always striving to be better but we’re 
in a good place right now.”

Warburton also believes his team have now developed the mental strength 
required to cope with Saturday’s match.

He added: “Playing for a club of this stature, whether you are a senior pro or 
a young player, it takes time to learn how to deal with it. It takes time to 
understand how to deal with it when it’s 0-0 after 20 minutes and the boos 
start. But we have a squad which is doing that. We’re 20 games in – we’re in a 
better position.”

Warburton, meanwhile, is relieved his defensive options will not be diminished 
further with the news that the centre-back Rob Kiernan is free to face Celtic. 
He is believed to be facing a possible misconduct charge after allegedly 
swinging a punch at St Johnstone’s Steven Anderson. TV pictures appear to show 
the Rangers defender aiming a jab at his Perth rival during Wednesday night’s 
1-1 draw at McDiarmid Park.

Anderson has already called on the Scottish Football Association to take 
action against the former Wigan centre-back, and the compliance officer Tony 
McGlennan is reviewing the footage. But no action can be taken before 
Saturday’s game at Ibrox. The rules for the SFA’s fast-track hearings process 
state that the compliance officer has two working days to raise a complaint 
against a player accused of misconduct during a match, with the player’s 
response due by the third working day.

That means it will be Monday before Kiernan will have to answer any potential 
charge. But Warburton has defended his player, saying: “There’s nothing in 
that. I’ve watched it again – it’s a push. If you punish that there will be 
more judicial panels than you could possibly imagine.”
 