
Marseille's Ligue 1 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> 
title hopes were dealt a devastating blow as a first-half brace from Karim 
Benzema helped earn deposed champions Lyon victory at the Stade Velodrome.

The France striker's double, which came in the 29th and 41st minutes, were 
added to in second-half stoppage time by Juninho, and all three goals would 
have been celebrated as much byBordeaux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> fans as they were by Lyon 
supporters.

The result in Marseille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> means 
in-form Les Girondins will take a three-point lead at the summit into the final 
two matches.

Marseille's goal was scored by Sylvain Wiltord in the 81st minute but they 
will rue wasting a host of openings they crafted before the break. Their title 
ambitions lie in tatters, with Bordeaux having an easier run-in on paper, and 
the Mediterranean side are now just four points clear ofLyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon>, who strengthened their grip on 
third place.

Lille's Europa League ambitions suffered a blow as they were held 1-1 by 
mid-table Nice at the Stade Metropole. Anthony Modeste gave the southern 
visitors the advantage but Yohan Cabaye equalised for Lille, who are now two 
points behindToulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse> in the 
race to finish fifth and a claim a place in Europe.

Nantes remain in deep trouble at the bottom of Ligue 1 after Moussa Sow's late 
equaliser denied them all three points againstRennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rennes> this afternoon. Les Canaris 
looked set for a crucial win when Mamadou Bagayoko gave them the lead four 
minutes before the break and they dominated the second half.

But Sow intervened in the 84th minute to leave Nantes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nantes> three points from safety in 19th 
position and needing favourable results elsewhere in the final two rounds of 
matches if they are to beat the drop.

The point keeps Rennes in with a slim chance of making a Europa League spot.
 