
He's a centre-forward who hardly ever scores. He wants to play for Arsenal but 
Tottenham will also do. And he scored the winning goal in France's biggest game 
this weekend, but was "disgusted with himself" after the match. Poor old 
Marouane Chamakh: theBordeaux striker's headed goal 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H291_AOZwfU> just before the hour-mark went 
into his own net, giving Olympique Marseille a 1-0 win in the battle of the 
challengers for Lyon's Ligue 1 crown.

It might have been different had Chamakh not shot wide after Yoann Gourcuff's 
early backheel set him up, or if Steve Mandanda had not kept out Fernando 
Cavenaghi when he was clean through. But as the game went on,Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> grew in confidence and despite 
missing four first-teamers – their captain Lorik Cana, top-scorer Mamadou 
Niang, Bakary Koné and Ronald Zubar – found an unlikely hero in Sylvain 
Wiltord, the 34-year-old making his first home start for the club. After 
Chamakh had deflected Karim Ziani's free-kick past Ulrich Ramé, Wiltord even 
had a goal wrongly ruled out 15 minutes from time. "Wiltord is still here", ran 
L'Equipe's headline.

The Marseille coach Eric Gerets knew it was a must-win game and his side are 
now one point behindBordeaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> 
and five behind Lyon. "We showed that L'OM are capable of getting stuck in and 
you could feel what was at stake," Gerets said. "We had more to lose than 
Bordeaux: it was a final for us, not for them. We just have another 15 finals 
to play now." His future still remains unclear though, and perhaps it was 
significant that Marseille won with Hatem Ben Arfa on the bench. To his immense 
frustration, Gerets has been unable to tame the big summer signing. .

This was Bordeaux's chance to show Lyon they are serious contenders but just 
like at Stade Gerland during week 14, they fell short. "We've been knocking 
Lyon for several weeks but sadly they're still in front," said the former 
Bordeaux hero Alain Giresse. "My fear is that no one took the opportunity when 
they dropped points, andLyon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> will 
get back on track before the end of the season."

The Bordeaux manager, Laurent Blanc, on the other hand, was left to bemoan the 
missed opportunities, which included Gourcuff heading wide and Jussiê hitting a 
post late on. The only consolation, it seemed, was that Le Président now has a 
man-crush on Gerets. "I like his attitude, his analysis and I like him as a 
man," said Blanc. "It's a bit like with a woman: when you like a woman, you 
just like her. Gerets is the best signing that L'OM have made."

Lyon's lead is now up to four points after they won 3-1 at Nice 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2LEW_BBQeE8>, with the midfielder Ederson 
setting up goals for Jean Makoun and Karim Benzema, on his return to his former 
club, before Julien Sablé's two-footed challenge on him reduced the hosts to 10 
men. The biggest surprise, in fact, was that Nice had two men sent off and 
neither were their hard-man defender "Sex and Drugs and"Cyril Rool 
<http://www.cahiersdufootball.net/article.php?id=1646>. "Cyril could have been 
part of France's 1998 world champion generation, he's that good," said the Nice 
coach Frédéric Antonetti. "But his personality didn't help. Other guys are 
perhaps smarter and come across better in the media, but it's guys like Rool 
that make you win matches."

Not this time, Frédi, whose bad week started with the League Cup semi-final 
loss on penalties to the second division team Vannes, and continued on Sunday 
when they went down to nine men when the substitute Adeilson elbowed Jean-Alain 
Boumsong after only 15 minutes on the pitch.

"We're on a funny old run as we win away from home and keep drawing at home 
but this was a big win for us," said the Lyon coach Claude Puel. L'Equipe 
suggested that whenLe Havre <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lehavre> 
visit Lyon next week, the champions, having drawn their past four home games, 
might want to use the away team's dressing-room.

Paris Saint-Germain are still in the race and hardly missed Guillaume Hoarau 
in their4-1 win at Nantes <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LiGb5kG5QNE&hl=fr>. 
"We've rarely bossed a game like that and if we can continue playing like that, 
then we have the right to dream," saidJérôme Rothen 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090209_103551_rothen-croit-au-titre.html>
.

It has been a weird week in the capital: as expected, Sébastien Bazin replaced 
Charles Villeneuve as president, beforeBordeaux beat PSG 3-0 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ErfLLsNbROA> in the League Cup semi-final, a 
game in which Mateja Kezman threw off his shirt and left it on the pitch after 
he was substituted. The club suspended him for two weeks and his recruitment, 
at the urging of Villeneuve, appears ever more ludicrous.

"We need to help Kezman, but I'm not too worried about the presidential 
situation because I'm on my sixth in five years, so I don't get too attached to 
them," Rothen told L'Equipe. "Anyway, I never wanted conflict withJacques 
Villeneuve <http://www.svetf1.cz/obrazky/2005/sauber/smr/rsm07.jpg>." "You mean 
Charles 
<http://www.no-media.info/cms/wp-content/plugins/yet-another-photoblog/cache/charles_villeneuve_psg_nm.50dr87xclo08sgs4kkkswoows.brydu4hw7fso0k00sowcc8ko4.th.jpeg>
?" the reporter responded. "Yes, Charles," laughed PSG's answer to Joe Kinnear, 
"but he won't mind, he often used to get our names wrong."

Lille are France's form side, coming from two goals down to beat Sochaux 3-2 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wKFVQxhkpfA>: the sixth time they have been 
behind and got something out of the game. If the season had started in week 
four, they would be top of the table. As it is, they will move into 
joint-second if they win their game in hand against Le Mans next week. Lille 
will still be missing the long-term injury victim Tulio di Melo, butMichel 
Bastos <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UejTE-79EAk>, one of Ligue 1's stars of 
the season so far, should be back. His replacement against Sochaux, 18-year-old 
Eden Hazard, scored their last-minute winner and follows Kevin Mirallas as the 
latest young Belgian prospect to nip over the border and look rather good.

Rennes are doing less well and were victims of the shock result of 2009 when 
Le Havre ended a run of seven consecutive defeats witha 1-0 win 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xhSQqSVlhj0> over the Champions League chasers. 
Rennes have now scored only six goals in their past nine matches andtheir top 
scorer, Mikaël Pagis, last scored on 9 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/oct/07/ligue1football.lille>, with 
Jimmy Briand's last effort one week later. Asamoah Gyan, their €8.5m summer 
signing from Udinese, limped off with yet another injury. Grenoble are also 
goal-shy: they drew 0-0 with Valenciennes, are yet to score in 2009, and have 
only scored four goals in 11 matches in their new stadium.

Both clubs could do with Ligue 1's top-scorer André-Pierre Gignac, back on the 
score-sheet inToulouse's 2-0 win over Le Mans 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A8ND2BH7cbI>. "I'm not letting him go anywhere, 
and if so, he's going to cost €120m," said the Toulouse president Olivier 
Sadran. "After all, Lyon say Benzema costs €100m and A-P has scored more than 
him."

Attention this week remains in Marseille, where France play Argentina on 
Wednesday night. Diego Maradona got a hero's welcome when he flew in on Sunday 
night, 19 years after he almost joined Marseille. He is a bigger draw than 
Raymond Domenech, whose surprise squad picks were the Toulouse goalkeeper 
Cedric Carasso and Saint-Etienne'sMouhamadou Dabo 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090209_165404_dabo-je-ne-m-y-attendais-pas.html>
. For France, expect Eric Abidal to give his Barcelona team-mate Lionel Messi 
an easy ride. "The most important thing is that I don't injure him," said 
Abidal. "If I did that, Barcelona would tear up my contract."

It will also be interesting to hear Domenech's reaction to the allegation in 
So Foot magazine <http://www.sofoot.com/> that Nicolas Sarkoky is so desperate 
to see the coach out of a job that he wants France to miss out on South Africa 
2010. "Keeping on Domenech adds to the current climate of despair in France," 
the magazine reported Sarkozy telling an adviser. "Screwing things up and still 
holding onto your job is great French tradition."

There are obvious similarities between the two men's management styles 
(Florent Malouda, winger, dropped;Rachida Dati, Minister of Justice, sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/20/rachida-dati-france-sarkozy-pregnant>
), but that's about all they have in common. "He is as bloody boring a national 
coach as he was when he played for Lyon," Sarko is alleged to have told a 
friend at the Parc des Princes. On that count, he is definitely in the wrong: 
Domenech may be lots of things, but bloody boring isn't one of them.

Results week 23: Nantes 1-4 PSG, Le Havre 1-0 Rennes, Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse> 2-0 Le Mans, Lorient 1-1 
Monaco, Nancy 0-2 Auxerre, Saint-Etienne 3-2 Caen, Lille 3-2 Sochaux, Nice 1-3 
Lyon, Grenoble 0-0 Valenciennes, Marseille 1-0 Bordeaux
 