
Martin O’Neill <https://www.theguardian.com/football/martin-o-neill> found 
himself talking about his failed attempt to locate any Irish ancestry on the 
part ofJamie Vardy  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/jamie-vardy-leicester-city-interview>
but it is a different and more weighty selection process that preoccupies the 
Republic of Ireland manager. In simple terms, he has 29 options and only 23 
places in his squad for Euro 2016 and he intends to leave the decision over the 
final spots until as late as possible.

It had been suggested that O’Neill would announce the party he will take to 
France on Saturday – after the friendly withHolland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> at the Aviva Stadium on Friday 
night. But he has resolved to wait until after the game against Belarus at the 
7,000-capacity Turner’s Cross stadium in Cork on Tuesday night. The Belarus 
match kicks off at 7.45pm, it will finish at around 9.40pm and O’Neill must 
register his squad with Uefa by the 11pm deadline. It means that the hour or so 
after full-time promises to be hectic, with O’Neill promising to have 
face-to-face conversations with the players that he disappoints. He said that 
he would finalise 90% of the squad on Saturday – and tell each of those who 
have been selected – but, for the last two or, possibly, three places, it will 
go down to the wire. The fiercest battle comes in central midfield, where Harry 
Arter, Stephen Quinn, David Meyler, Darron Gibson and Eunan O’Kane appear to be 
contesting two spots.

“I will have told quite a number of players that they will be going but I 
think if I was a player and I had an opportunity still, and that opportunity 
was Tuesday night [against Belarus], and it was announced afterwards if I’d 
made it or hadn’t made it, I think I’d want to take my chance on that,” O’Neill 
said. “And I think that’s how the players feel. I will have individual 
conversations with the players that don’t make it and I think there will only 
be a few because, by that time, 90% of the squad will have already been told. 
The conversations [with the disappointed players] might not be long.

“I don’t think I should individualise at the minute but you know there are 
certain players here who, if they come through these games, will be on the 
plane for what they have done. Someone can make a late charge to try to get 
into the side. Whether you get an hour, a full game or 25 minutes – do your 
best.”

Vardy’s name came up in the context of recent comments made by Steve Guppy, 
the former Leicester City midfielder, who has explored the possible Irish roots 
of English-born players for O’Neill. Guppy had said that “one of the first 
things” O’Neill had got him to do afterhis appointment by Ireland in November 
2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/08/martin-oneill-roy-keane-republic-ireland>
 was to find out if Vardy was Irish or not. Sadly for them, the Leicester 
striker had no links.

O’Neill said: “We checked it. Stevie Guppy had mentioned him to me a long time 
ago. Stevie was greatly responsible for Cyrus Christie [the English-born 
right-back who is in the Ireland squad]. Obviously, I was aware of Harry Kane 
[whose father is Irish] but he had made it clear that he wasn’t going to 
[switch].We did some recce, it’s in the past and I will leave it. I thinkJamie 
Vardy <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jamie-vardy> would always want to 
play for England but it was at a time when he wasn’t being thought of, so that 
would have been nice.”

O’Neill named a 35-man squad for the Holland and Belarus games but he has 
since cut four players – Paul McShane, Alex Pearce, Anthony Pilkington and 
Jonny Hayes are now merely on stand-by – while a fifth, Marc Wilson, has been 
ruled out by knee trouble. Callum O’Dowda, the 21-year-old Oxford United 
winger, is considered as one for the future. O’Neill’s other major selection 
issue looks like being up front, where Kevin Doyle, of Colorado Rapids, and the 
Ipswich pair, Daryl Murphy and David McGoldrick, appear to be vying for one 
place. The manager suggested that the Everton midfielder, James McCarthy, would 
not feature against Holland because of a hamstring injury but it was not 
serious enough to jeopardise his spot at the finals.
 