
Martin Ling has been named as the new manager of Swindon Town with the former 
player signing a two-and-a-half year deal with theLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> side.

Ling replaces Mark Cooper who was sacked in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/17/swindon-manager-mark-cooper-part-company-departure>
 following a defeat to Millwall that left Swindon without a league win in six 
matches. The club’s chairman, Lee Power,had taken over managerial duties in the 
interim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/19/swindon-chairman-lee-power-temporary-charge-mark-cooper>
.

The 49-year-old has a long association with the club having been part of the 
Swindon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/swindon> side that won promotion 
to the Premier League in 1993 during his two different spells at the County 
Ground where he raked up nearly 200 games.

Swindon confirm chairman Lee Power will take temporary charge of first team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/19/swindon-chairman-lee-power-temporary-charge-mark-cooper>
“I’m really delighted to be back,” Ling told the club’s website. “It’s a bit 
surreal – I came here in 1986 under Lou Macari then came back in 1991, and to 
come back today as manager is a real proud moment and a moment that I’m 
cherishing. Like I say, it’s a little bit surreal but it’s really pleasing to 
be back at a place I know so well.”

Ling has previously managed at Leyton Orient – where he spent five and a half 
years and won promotion from League Two in 2006 in dramatic fashion on the 
final day of the season – Cambridge United and Torquay United and is eager to 
get back working after a spell on the sidelines.

“I’ve been away [from management] for two-and-a-half years and it’s been 
frustrating in certain aspects. I’m pleased to be back and I can’t wait to get 
started, get out there, meet the lads and start managing the football club. 
It’s something I did for 10 years, 450 games and it’s been a while. I’m really 
excited to get out there and start moving that club up the first division 
table.”

He takes over a Swindon side who are second from bottom with 13 points from 16 
games. However, Ling believes that Swindon are better than their position 
suggests. “I think they are in a false position, I really do,” he told the BBC. 
His first match in charge will be away to Rochdale in the FA Cup.
 