
Martin Skrtel has completed his transfer from Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> to Fenerbahce. The Turkish 
Super Lig side announced the deal with a tweet welcoming the Slovakia defender 
and said he would be presented to the media on Friday.

No details over the length of contract were immediately announced, although it 
has been reported that the Istanbul club paid Liverpool £5m for the 31-year-old.

Skrtel joined Liverpool from Zenit St Petersburg in January 2008 and went on 
to make 320 appearances for the club. He helped them win theCarling Cup in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/feb/26/carling-cup-final-cardiff-city-liverpool-mbm>
 and was an important part of the team that came close to winning the Premier 
League title in 2014. However, the 31-year-old has generally been an erratic, 
unreliable performer during his time at Anfield and lost his first-team place 
under Jürgen Klopp.
Fenerbahçe SK (@Fenerbahce) 
Fenerbahçe'ye Hoşgeldin Martin Skrtel! pic.twitter.com/mQVxRETrwt 
<https://t.co/mQVxRETrwt>
 <https://twitter.com/Fenerbahce/status/753567146492518400> July 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Fenerbahce/status/753567146492518400> 
Meanwhile, Klopp intends to discuss Joe Allen’s future at Liverpool after the 
midfielder’s impressive Euro 2016 campaign.

The 26-year-old was a key figure for Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/wales-joe-allen-praise-euro-2016>
 during their run to the semi-finals in France and his performances were 
recognised with inclusion in Uefa’s team of the tournament earlier this week.

Allen has been a more peripheral figure for his club, however, starting just 
eight Premier League matches last season and his deal at Anfield is up at the 
end of the 2016-17 season. Klopp, though, has vowed to talk to Allen regarding 
his contractual situation on the strength of his impressive summer.

“We will find a solution, but it’s not done,” said the Liverpool manager after 
his team’s 5-0 pre-season win against Fleetwood on Wednesday. “Obviously Joe 
Allen is a good player. We never doubted this. He played a good European 
Championship, like the whole Welsh team.

“We have to make decisions, we have to find solutions. We have to talk to the 
player, ask the player and think about our situation. That’s how it works.”
 