
The family of Jules Bianchi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jules-bianchi> 
have issued a new statement on the Marussia driver’s condition, saying the 
25-year-old “continues to fight” for life.

Bianchi suffered a diffuse axonal injury to his brain when he crashed into a 
recovery vehicle in heavy rain during the Japanese Grand Prix at Suzuka on 5 
October, and has been undergoing treatment in Japan.

In the new statement, released via the Marussia website 
<http://www.marussiaf1team.com/news/1044/>, the family said: “It will be four 
weeks this coming Sunday since Jules’ accident and he remains in the Mie 
General Medical Center in Yokkaichi.

“His condition continues to be classified by the medical professionals here as 
critical but stable. Although we have no new information to give, we recognise 
that there are a huge number of people all around the world who are supporting 
Jules and willing him on in his fight.

“We owe it to his many fans to acknowledge the continued outpouring of 
messages, and to provide some information, however brief it may be.

“Jules does indeed continue to fight. Although there have been some reports 
suggestive of plans for Jules’ treatment, at this time his fight will continue 
here in Yokkaichi. We are taking things step by step.

“Once again, we would like to offer our sincere appreciation for the patience 
and understanding being shown towards our family at this very difficult time. 
We also continue to be comforted by the knowledge that Jules is receiving the 
best possible care at the Mie General Medical Center, with the doctors here 
remaining in constant contact with the neurosurgeons at the University La 
Sapienza of Rome, and Professor Gerard Saillant, President of the FIA Medical 
Commission.

“We will provide a further update when it is appropriate to do so. In the 
meantime, thank you to everyone who continues to keep Jules in their thoughts 
and prayers.”
 