
Marussia, who missed the last three Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> races of the 2014 season after 
entering administration in October, are still fighting for survival and hope to 
be racing in 2015.

An auction of the team’s assets, planned for this week, has been postponed, 
while the team principal, John Booth, said negotiations with an investor were 
“at a fairly advanced stage”.

Even if a deal is concluded Marussia would still need the approval of the FIA 
World Council because they have not been able to build a car for the new season 
and will have to use their old model.

Marussia, who have been provisionally entered as Manor for 2015 – collapsed 
into administration owing £31m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/02/formula-one-bankrupt-marussia-caterham>
. After outscoring Sauber and Caterham last season they are due to pick up £26m 
in prize money, provided they can make it to the grid for the opening F1 race 
in Melbourne on 15 March.

Marussia’s financial plight was overshadowed by the injuries sustained by 
their driver Jules Bianchi at Suzuka in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/oct/05/jules-bianchi-crash-f1> – 
the 25-year-old Frenchman remains in a critical condition.

When the team went into administration it caused dismay throughout the grand 
prix paddock, because Marussia are probably the most popular of all the teams.

Booth said talks are “at a fairly advanced stage with a new investor – a 
credible investor. Postponing the auction gives us a bit more time.”

The F1 champions Mercedes will launch their car on the first day of pre-season 
testing in Jerez on 1 February. Last year’s championship runner-up, Nico 
Rosberg, will be the first to try out the F1 W06. He will run on days one and 
three, while Lewis Hamilton, the world champion, will take the wheel on the 
second and fourth days.

Mercedes’ head of motorsport, Toto Wolff, said: “The workload this winter has 
been as great as ever. We are certain that our rivals will be competitive from 
the opening race. This is an exciting time of year as our collective efforts 
all come together in the new car.

“Everybody in Brackley, Brixworth and Stuttgart has put a great amount of 
effort into creating the latest Silver Arrow and I thank them for their efforts 
so far. We are excited to see how the car performs when it begins running.”
 