
Mary Berry has been given her second show on the BBC, just weeks after saying 
she would remain whenThe Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off> moves to 
Channel 4.

Mary Berry’s Everyday on BBC2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> will 
see the Bake Off judge whip up quick dishes and family favourites.

The announcement that the BBC has commissioned the show comes less than two 
weeks afterBBC1 unveiled Mary Berry’s Secrets From Britain’s Great Houses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/04/mary-berry-secrets-from-britains-great-houses-british-bake-off-new-series-bbc>
, in which Berry will tour the UK’s stately homes exploring their pasts and 
cooking up dishes inspired by her surroundings.

Bake Off's Mary Berry: I could make a gardening show with Mel and Sue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/bake-off-mary-berry-gardening-show-mel-sue-bbc-final>
Neither show has a broadcast date, but both are expected in the new year. 

Berry has already fronted two shows on BBC2, Mary Berry’s Absolute Favourites 
and Mary Berry’s Foolproof Cooking, both of which were made by Everyday 
producers Sidney Street.


The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 2 channel editor, Patrick 
Holland, said he was thrilled Berry was returning. “Her everyday recipes are 
inspirational and delicious and her series will be a real treat for the 
audience,” he said.

The shows are among a host of programmes offered to those stars who have 
decided not to follow Berry’s fellow judge Paul Hollywood to Channel 4 when it 
launches its version of Bake Off.

Presenters Mel Giedroyc and Sue Perkins are up to host a Saturday Night BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> show called Let’s Sing and Dance for 
Comic Relief ahead of next year’s Red Nose Day.

Prior to that both sets of presenters and judges will appear in Christmas 
specials of The Great British Bake Off which have already been recorded.

Berry recently said she would be reunited again with Giedroyc and Perkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/bake-off-mary-berry-gardening-show-mel-sue-bbc-final>
, suggesting that they could host a gardening programme together.

Last year’s Bake Off winner, Nadiya Hussain, is also appearing on The One Show 
and developing new projects aftersaying she would make the BBC her home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/14/bake-off-nadiya-hussain-bbc-paul-hollywood-channel-4>
. She had been tipped as a possible host or judge on Channel 4’s version of the 
show.
 