
Mary Berry will tour Britain’s stately homes in what is likely to be her first 
BBC1 outing after The Great British Bake Offmoves to Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/12/bbc-loses-great-british-bake-off>
.

In Mary Berry’s Secrets From Britain’s Great Houses, the cooking judge will 
meet the custodians and staff at some of Britain’s grandest properties, 
exploring their culinary histories and creating her own recipes.

Berry said: “I am so excited to be doing this new series with the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>. I have always had an inquiring mind, 
so I know I will be inspired by the great houses we visit.”

The BBC’s director of content, Charlotte Moore, said: “This series will be a 
real treat forBBC1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> viewers.”

Berry is to appear in two Bake Off Christmas specials but, along with 
presenters Mel Giedroyc and Sue Perkins, has said she will not follow the 
programme – and fellow judge Paul Hollywood – to Channel 4.

Last month, a new Saturday night entertainment show hosted by Giedroyc and 
Perkins wasannounced <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-37801373>, 
weeks after last year’s Bake Off winner, Nadiya Hussain, who had been tipped to 
become a presenter or judge for Channel 4’s version, committed to making the 
BBC her home.

Channel 4 has been criticised for failing to ensure the show’s most 
recognisable faces were signed up before agreeing a £25m a year deal with the 
show’s creators, Love Productions.

Berry recently said she would be reunited with Giedroyc and Perkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/bake-off-mary-berry-gardening-show-mel-sue-bbc-final>
, joking that they could host a gardening programme together.

Tanya Shaw, managing director of Shine TV, producer of Mary Berry’s Secrets 
From Britain’s Great Houses, said: “Following the success ofMary Berry’s Easter 
Feast <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b074bqr2> last year, we are delighted to 
be working with Mary on this exciting new series.

“I can’t think of anyone more perfect to tell the stories of these great 
households and to bring us such a unique insight into Britain’s rich culinary 
past.”
 