
Not so nice Cyril

Perhaps the most notorious football mascot, and certainly one of the breed’s 
serial offenders, is Cyril the Swan. The 9ftSwansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/swansea> mascot’s antics have resulted in 
more than one four-figure fine from the Football League and even a touchline 
ban – usually a sanction reserved for errant managers and coaches.

Swans have a reputation for aggressive behaviour, and Cyril certainly lived 
down to it in 2001 when he tore off the head of Zampa the Lion, his Millwall 
counterpart, and kicked it into the crowd at the Welsh club’s old ground, the 
Vetch Field. He was reported to have told Zampa: “Don’t fuck with the Swans.”

But Cyril’s charge sheet does not end there. He has also been accused of 
throwing pork pies at visiting West Ham fans, and pushing over a rival mascot – 
a woman in a dog suit – before the Mascot Grand National. And he has also 
fallen, er, “fowl” of the authorities for his over-enthusiastic goal 
celebrations.

Mascot fears soccer beaks
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/1999/feb/20/newsstory.sport3>
He was first reported by Steve Dunn, the referee, for running onto the pitch 
to join players’ celebrations after a goal in an FA Cup tie, also against 
Millwall, in 1998, and charged with bringing the game into disrepute. The club 
banned him for two games and considered building him a nest well away from the 
touchline, but his natural exuberance got the better of him again when he 
clashed with Norwich City director of football Bryan Hamilton after celebrating 
a Swansea goal.

Not that his misdemeanours ever seemed to affect his relationship with the 
public. He was voted the nation’s favourite mascot by readers of Match of the 
Day magazine, has appeared on the BBC National Lottery Draw from The Vetch, 
trod the boards in the pantomime Aladdin at Swansea’s Grand Theatre, took part 
in Night Fever, the karaoke show on Channel Five, and released a CD of, 
inevitably, “Nice Swan, Cyril”.

And the club has always backed their man. Or rather, their swan. They arranged 
for him to be represented at his first Welsh FA hearing by Maurice Watkins, the
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
lawyer who defended Eric Cantona for his two-footed lunge on a Crystal Palace 
fan in January 1995. Two national newspapers also launched campaigns to defend 
Cyril while Swansea City were inundated with messages of support for the 
under-fire mascot.

Cyril is among a number of male mascots to have tied the knot with a female 
counterpart. He wed Cybil the Swan in April 2005, at The Vetch, with the 
congregation mostly being too diplomatic to point out that Cybil looked more 
like a duck than a swan. Love is blind, though. “She is the love of my life and 
has made me the Swan I am today,” ‘Cyril’ said. “All my antics are well and 
truly behind me. To be honest I couldn’t afford the fines.”

Murder and mishaps at Ewood Park
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmascots-murder-mayhem-wigs-football-anecdotes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F022a602137336232e8aad6889b6f2ac13e849b31%2F0_366_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mascots%2C%20murder%2C%20mayhem%20and%20wigs%20%E2%80%93%20a%20glimpse%20into%20world%20of%20football%20anecdotes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmascots-murder-mayhem-wigs-football-anecdotes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mascots%2C%20murder%2C%20mayhem%20and%20wigs%20%E2%80%93%20a%20glimpse%20into%20world%20of%20football%20anecdotes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmascots-murder-mayhem-wigs-football-anecdotes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F022a602137336232e8aad6889b6f2ac13e849b31%2F0_366_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
 Ewood Park in May 1995. In the previous year, the stadium’s redevelopment had 
led to the discovery of a dead body. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Getty Images 
An unexpected result of the rebuilding of Ewood Park was the discovery and 
solution of a murder mystery. It was in 1994 that a row of houses in Nuttall 
Street was demolished to make room for the new Jack Walker Stand, and the 
former back garden of No84 yielded a grisly discovery.

“For workman John Griffiths, Tuesday 19 July 1994, was just another day on 
site as he busied himself excavating a boundary trench with JCB operator Tony 
Rowe,” the Lancashire Telegraph reported. “The work was small change compared 
to the giant stand going up piece by piece nearby.

“Everything was slightly behind schedule but as the clock ticked past 11am 
John’s mind began drifting towards his lunchtime pie order. Then he saw it. An 
eerie crack was followed by the sight of a human head falling forward out of 
the banking only feet from where he stood. A flurry of blond hair covered most 
of the face but nothing could hide the empty stare of two, wide open eyes and 
the silent gasp of an open mouth.”

That open mouth, improbably, revealed gleaming white teeth, which, together 
with the blond hair and a pierced ear, at first led detectives to believe that 
it was the head of a woman. But when the rest of the corpse was unearthed, it 
turned out to belong to a local man, Julian Brookfield, a former child actor 
who had been working in a local sex shop when he disappeared, aged 19, in 
August 1984.

Within hours, the police arrested Brian Blakemore, who had owned 84 Nuttall 
Street at the time and killed Brookfield, burying him in the back garden of his 
newly renovated house in the shadow of Ewood Park – never suspecting that when 
that shadow grew longer his misdeed would be discovered.

Blakemore was later sentenced to 12 years in prison for manslaughter and 
perverting the course of justice. He was a well-known character in the area, 
who had a number of jobs but also wrote jokes and songs for performers 
including Keith Harris (the ventriloquist with his hand inside Orville, not the 
former chairman of the Football League).

There was no doubt that Ewood Park was in need of an upgrade. Before Walker 
began the redevelopment, two of the dwellings in Nuttall Street housed things 
other than corpses – including a gymnasium and the club offices, and the room 
where Kenny Dalglish would speak to the media. It is recalled that one 
reporter, a little late filing his copy, hurried across the road to collect the 
Scot’s pearls of wisdom and knocked on the wrong door in his haste.

Invited in and offered tea and cakes by the elderly couple who lived there, he 
was still marvelling at Rovers’ hospitality and wondering when Dalglish would 
show his face while his colleagues and rivals were adding the manager’s quotes 
to the rewrites of their match reports.

Fergie fumes at Derek the driver
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmascots-murder-mayhem-wigs-football-anecdotes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F231807f65c15b58c32a69ca65a13716f916b1003%2F0_133_2910_1747%2F2910.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mascots%2C%20murder%2C%20mayhem%20and%20wigs%20%E2%80%93%20a%20glimpse%20into%20world%20of%20football%20anecdotes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmascots-murder-mayhem-wigs-football-anecdotes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mascots%2C%20murder%2C%20mayhem%20and%20wigs%20%E2%80%93%20a%20glimpse%20into%20world%20of%20football%20anecdotes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmascots-murder-mayhem-wigs-football-anecdotes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F231807f65c15b58c32a69ca65a13716f916b1003%2F0_133_2910_1747%2F2910.jpg>
 Sir Alex Ferguson, centre, at the Manor Ground for his first match as 
Manchester United manager in November 1986. Derek Sutton is sat to his left for 
the first and last time. Photograph: PA/PA Archive/PA Images 
It was the cramped nature of Oxford United’s Manor Ground that led to one of 
the strangest episodes to occur there on one of its biggest days. It was at the 
Manor on 8 November 1986 that Alex Ferguson took charge of his first game as 
manager of Manchester United. Photographs recorded his disbelief as his new 
charges lost 2-0 while he fidgeted in the dugout alongside physio Jim McGregor, 
substitute Jesper Olsen, reserve manager Brian Whitehouse, kitman Norman Davies 
and Derek Sutton. Derek who? Exactly.

Sutton was not even a United employee, but worked for Manchester coach company 
Finglands, and drove City and United to away games. Nicknamed “Sooty” and 
apparently described as a “larger than life character” – surely a warning there 
– Sutton had become friendly with Ron Atkinson, Ferguson’s predecessor in the 
Old Trafford hot seat, who sometimes allowed him to sit in the dugout. On this 
autumn Saturday, Sutton had not been included in the visitors’ seating 
allocation at the space-challenged Manor, so naturally made his way down to the 
touchline and sat down on one end of the visitors’ bench.

Fergie, though, was unaware of this custom, and when he came down the tunnel 
to take his place in the dugout, he greeted Sutton with a distinctly chilly 
“Who the fuck are you?” The result hardly improved his mood and it meant the 
end for courtesy spots for coach drivers.

“Sir Alex wasn’t happy to see Derek in the dugout at Oxford and made it clear 
that it wasn’t going to happen again,” Chris Turner, the United goalkeeper, 
recalled. “Derek was also Manchester City’s coach driver and when Sir Alex 
found out he was a City fan, too, he blew his top. He used to make the 
half-time cuppas but Alex didn’t want poor Derek anywhere near the dressing 
room either.”

The Battle of Bramall Lane
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmascots-murder-mayhem-wigs-football-anecdotes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcaf3e2cc9a0d9fdfa517a7e42cc8d7aa72b6ff32%2F0_85_1616_970%2F1616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mascots%2C%20murder%2C%20mayhem%20and%20wigs%20%E2%80%93%20a%20glimpse%20into%20world%20of%20football%20anecdotes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmascots-murder-mayhem-wigs-football-anecdotes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mascots%2C%20murder%2C%20mayhem%20and%20wigs%20%E2%80%93%20a%20glimpse%20into%20world%20of%20football%20anecdotes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmascots-murder-mayhem-wigs-football-anecdotes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcaf3e2cc9a0d9fdfa517a7e42cc8d7aa72b6ff32%2F0_85_1616_970%2F1616.jpg>
 Sheffield United and West Bromwich Albion players square up at Bramall Lane in 
March 2002. Referee Eddie Wolstenholme attempts in vain to keep the peace. 
Photograph: PA/PA Archive/PA Images 
Sheffield United’s home game against West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> on 13 March 2002 will forever 
be The Battle of Bramall Lane.

The match itself never finished. It was abandoned by referee Eddie 
Wolstenholme after 82 minutes, with the visitors 3-0 up, because United were 
down to six players. The International Football Association Board states that 
“a match should not continue if there are fewer than seven players in either 
team”. It was the first time an English professional match had been called off 
for that reason.

The fixture had history, with a red card in four of the previous meetings 
between the clubs, and the two managers coming from opposite sides of the 
Sheffield footballing divide. Gary Megson, the Albion manager, was a former 
Sheffield Wednesday player, and United manager Neil Warnock a lifelong Blades 
fan, who later admitted that Megson was one of two managers he disliked (the 
other being Stan Ternent).

The drama began after nine minutes when the Blades’ keeper Simon Tracy was 
sent off for handling Scott Dobie’s shot outside the penalty area. Warnock 
brought off Peter Ndlovu and sent on reserve goalkeeper Wilko de Vogt, who 
conceded the game’s first goal 10 minutes later, a header by Dobie.

Albion added a second goal just after the hour, captain Derek McInnes meeting 
a short corner-kick from Igor Balis with a first-time shot from outside the 
penalty area.

Warnock responded by sending on Georges Santos and Patrick Suffo for Gus 
Uhlenbeek and Michael Tonge in the 64th minute, and neither substitute had 
touched the ball when Santos launched himself into a horrendous two-footed, 
over- the-ball challenge on Andy Johnson. Once again, there was history; Santos 
had suffered a broken cheekbone in a collision with Johnson in their previous 
meeting while Johnson was with Nottingham Forest.

The decision to show Santos a red card was one of the easiest of 
Wolstenholme’s career. Players on both sides began squaring up, and another red 
card was shown, to Suffo for butting Albion’s McInnes. Play resumed with United 
down to eight men.

West Brom scored a third in the 77th minute when Dobie knocked the ball into 
the net from close range. Then United’s Michael Brown limped off, leaving the 
Blades, who had used all three substitutes – and lost two of them – down to 
seven men, the minimum for the match to continue.

Robert Ullathorne was then judged unable to continue by the United medical 
staff with muscle spasms and the match was abandoned. A furious Megson thought 
Warnock had deliberately sought an abandonment. “The authorities have to do the 
right thing otherwise they reward cheating, and that was cheating,” he said 
after the game.

Warnock admitted that he “wouldn’t imagine Gary will be having a drink with me 
tonight”, but denied the allegations. “I can say that 100% I did not tell my 
players to come off,” he said. “I accepted we had lost that game and my only 
thought was that we have a tough game against Millwall on Tuesday night and I 
didn’t want anyone aggravating their injury.

“I have no complaints about the sendings-off and we are going to have to deal 
with that as strongly as we can. I don’t think Georges will ever play for us 
again and Patrick Suffo will be transfer-listed.” He was as good as his word. 
Neither player made another appearance for the club.

A Football League spokesman said that options included a replay or awarding 
the points to Albion, but Megson made his feelings clear. “There will be no 
replay,” he said. “If we are called back to Bramall Lane we shall kick off and 
then walk off the pitch. I’ve never ever witnessed anything as disgraceful as 
that.” Five days later, the League announced Albion’s 3-0 win would stand.

The hair-raising case of Bobby Mikhailov
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmascots-murder-mayhem-wigs-football-anecdotes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39b327a65b63e63184e1586789d51ea7b7b6dc9c%2F0_3_1052_631%2F1052.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mascots%2C%20murder%2C%20mayhem%20and%20wigs%20%E2%80%93%20a%20glimpse%20into%20world%20of%20football%20anecdotes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmascots-murder-mayhem-wigs-football-anecdotes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mascots%2C%20murder%2C%20mayhem%20and%20wigs%20%E2%80%93%20a%20glimpse%20into%20world%20of%20football%20anecdotes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmascots-murder-mayhem-wigs-football-anecdotes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39b327a65b63e63184e1586789d51ea7b7b6dc9c%2F0_3_1052_631%2F1052.jpg>
 Borislav Mikhailov ahead of Bulgaria’s 1994 World Cup semi-final tie against 
Italy. It wasn’t just his saves during that tournament that caught the eye. 
Photograph: Action Images 
Not having to head the ball in the normal course of a match meant that 
Borislav “Bobby” Mikhailov, the Bulgaria goalkeeper, who played forReading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> between 1995 and 1997, could do 
something no outfield player would get away with – play in a wig.

Mikhailov starred in the World Cup in the United States in 1994 as Bulgaria 
beat Argentina and Germany on the way to the semi-final, saving two penalties 
in a shootout against Mexico for good measure. He had begun the qualifying 
tournament bald, but a couple of games later he appeared from the tunnel with a 
full head of hair, which seemed to bewilder his team-mates as much as the 
crowd. It was later confirmed that Mikhailov had bought a hair clinic in 
Bulgaria and was promoting its products. His son, Nikolay, who played for 
Liverpool and later FC Twente, under Steve McClaren, also had a receding 
hairline, but did not bother disguising it.

Toupee aside, Mikhailov was voted the second-best goalkeeper in the 1994 
tournament. So why, with all due respect to Reading, did he end up at Elm Park 
around a year later, transferred from Botev Plovdiv for £300,000, washing his 
own kit and uncomfortable with the physical nature of the British game?

Roger Titford, a Royals fan and regular contributor to When Saturday Comes, 
says: “Legend took root that Mikhailov must have mistaken the video of 
Reading’s Division One play-off final defeat to Bolton at Wembley for an 
ordinary home game.

“Implausible though the deal appeared, it did finally happen. The work permit 
unexpectedly took ages and then there was the request to ‘call me Bobby’ 
[perhaps Borislav didn’t look right on the sponsored car] and the well-known 
wig, of course. Then somehow he was between marriages and wouldn’t move out of 
a hotel, wasn’t quite fit, couldn’t kick very far and it all began to smell a 
bit fishy.”

Mikhailov played only 25 league games for Reading over two seasons in which he 
also managed to be fit enough to represent Bulgaria on 14 occasions – as 
Titford says, “the kind of internationals-to-league appearances ratio generally 
found only in Manchester United reserves.”

Pulp Football by Nick Szczepanik is published by Pitch Publishing 
<http://www.pitchpublishing.co.uk/shop/pulp-football> 
 