
The protracted takeover of Leeds United took an unexpected turn on Wednesday 
night when Mike Farnan's consortium, Together Leeds, confirmed it is in 
discussions with the Italian businessman Massimo Cellino over purchasing the
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> club together.

The Football League is deliberating over Cellino's appeal against the decision 
to bar his holding company, Eleonora Sport Limited, from completing the £25m 
takeover after the 57-year-oldCagliari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari> chairman was found guilty of 
tax evasion in Italy. However, the addition of the Together Leeds group – 
fronted by the Manchester-based Farnan and including Welcome to Yorkshire's 
chief executive, Gary Verity, the former Hull City chairman Adam Pearson and 
the Red Strike Marketing executive Frank Devoy – is a surprising development in 
a saga that stretches back to the first week of February.

"Massimo Cellino and Eleonora Sport Limited have and continue to be in 
discussions with Mike Farnan and Together Leeds regarding strategy, partnership 
and co-operation. The talks have been very constructive," read a statement 
released by the group.

"Everyone should be excited by these discussions as they are in the best 
interests of all parties including the Football League,Leeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited>, its players and staff and, 
most importantly, its loyal and enduring fans."

In an interview with BBC Yorkshire, Farnan later added: "[Cellino's] impressed 
me with his passion. We think we can work together. We both feel that this is 
for the good of Leeds. Obviously we've got the appeal decision coming up so 
we'll have to see how that goes. We have enough [money]. We have a clean, clear 
strategy. We have the funds available."

The League is expected to rule on Cellino's appeal in the next few days after 
an independent QC decide he needed more time to assess the legal situation. The 
Cagliari owner admitted on Wednesday that the situation has turned into "a 
nightmare".

"I have to respect the rules, I am just waiting to do it," he said.
 