
It doesn’t, to borrow a well-known phrase from MasterChef, get much tougher 
than this. Or at least that is what chef, presenter and judge ofMasterChef: The 
Professionals, Monica Galetti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/nov/26/masterchef-professionals-monica-galetti>
, would have aspiring female chefs believe.

She appears to have done her best to dampen the enthusiasm of any young woman 
minded to follow in her footsteps. Ahead of the launch of the new series ofThe 
Professionals on Tuesday, she told the Radio Times that women who were really 
serious about a successful career in a professional kitchen should probably 
think about putting off any thoughts of having a family – or possibly even a 
boyfriend.

“At a certain point, women have to decide how much they want their career 
versus having a family and spending time with family,” she said. “That’s it. 
There’s no BS about it – the truth is you’ve got to put it first to do well. 
I’ve seen many amazing chefs, girls, come into the kitchen and then give it up 
to be with their boyfriend. Would he do that for her?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwomen-chefs-choose-between-kitchen-and-family-masterchef-judge-monica-galetti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F962a37134dab3e22d58f289b428e77a155666540%2F0_0_3425_2274%2F3425.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MasterChef%20judge%20tells%20female%20contestants%20to%20choose%20between%20kitchen%20and%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwomen-chefs-choose-between-kitchen-and-family-masterchef-judge-monica-galetti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MasterChef%20judge%20tells%20female%20contestants%20to%20choose%20between%20kitchen%20and%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwomen-chefs-choose-between-kitchen-and-family-masterchef-judge-monica-galetti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F962a37134dab3e22d58f289b428e77a155666540%2F0_0_3425_2274%2F3425.jpg>
 Monica Galetti with fellow judges of Masterchef: The Professionals, Gregg 
Wallace, left, and Marcus Wareing. Photograph: BBC/Shine 
Monica Galetti: 'When I first met Michel Roux I just thought he was mean'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2013/dec/12/monica-galetti-masterchef-professionals-final>
But is Galetti right? The evidence would seem to suggest so, given the 
relatively small number of high-profile female chefs. Behind the glitz and the 
glamour of the professional cookery shows, it seems the industry is struggling 
to keep pace with the times. The latest figures from the Office for National 
Statistics indicate that, while there are 250,000 professional chefs in the UK, 
only about a fifth of them are female.

But Emily Watkins, for one, is having none of Galetti’s negativity. The 
chef-patron of theKingham Plough <http://www.thekinghamplough.co.uk/>, an 
award-winningpub-restaurant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/oct/17/jay-rayner-restaurant-review-kingham-plough-oxfordshire>
 in England’s Cotswolds, was back at work last week, two days after leaving 
hospital following the birth of her fourth child.

“Although there are times when my husband would say that I’ve put my job 
before my family,” she says, “I’m happy with my career. I don’t think I could 
put any more into it or take any more out of it. I always wanted to be a chef 
and I always wanted to be a mum, but the business was my baby and I’d never 
missed a serving.”

Watkins feels that Galetti’s words will do nothing to encourage women into an 
industry that is still dominated by men.

“What she said is a little off-putting to girls because it makes you feel that 
your family and your career are mutually exclusive. People need to have more 
confidence in the industry and realise that you’re not going to be repelled for 
being a woman. Good chefs are very scarce. The demand for good chefs is so 
fierce that it’s an employee’s world.”

For Watkins it wasn’t so much a question of balancing her career and her 
family as of the two colliding. She went into labour with her first childwhen 
she was at work, and with her second and third children she worked until the 
day before they were born.

“With this [fourth] one I was able to have a week off before giving birth,” 
she says. “I’ve got a bit more of a balance now, although there have definitely 
been hard moments when I’ve had calls from the childminder saying one of the 
kids has got a runny nose and I haven’t been able to go.”

Three hours drive north-west in the more remote reaches of the Isle of 
Anglesey, Claire Lara, the chefwho wonMasterChef: The Professionals in 2010 and 
now works as head of food atThe Oyster Catcher 
<http://www.oystercatcheranglesey.co.uk/index.shtml>, Rhosneigr, points out the 
irony in the fact that, while some people are quick to suggest women should be 
in the kitchen, there are hardly any in professional ones. Lara, one of only 
two women to win the series, now has two young children, and moved to Anglesey 
partly to enable her to have a better work-life balance for her children.

“I was pregnant doing MasterChef but I didn’t realise,” she says. “I was 
feeling sick and stressed out, but I just put it down toMichel Roux Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/11/michel-roux-leaving-bbc-masterchef-potato>
 [a former presenter and chief judge on the show].”

Lara balances family and career with the help of her mother and her husband 
Marc, who also works at The Oyster Catcher as a sous chef. She says that, if 
women chefs do decide to have children, then it is better to make as much 
progress with their culinary career as they can before they take a break.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwomen-chefs-choose-between-kitchen-and-family-masterchef-judge-monica-galetti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F105a35276a054ba34d150e89a432968a8df135fc%2F0_0_1330_2000%2F1330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MasterChef%20judge%20tells%20female%20contestants%20to%20choose%20between%20kitchen%20and%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwomen-chefs-choose-between-kitchen-and-family-masterchef-judge-monica-galetti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MasterChef%20judge%20tells%20female%20contestants%20to%20choose%20between%20kitchen%20and%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwomen-chefs-choose-between-kitchen-and-family-masterchef-judge-monica-galetti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F105a35276a054ba34d150e89a432968a8df135fc%2F0_0_1330_2000%2F1330.jpg>
 Rachel Humphrey, head chef of Le Gavroche, London. 
“I was fairly career-driven,” she says. “I’d just made a decision to put off 
having children. The better the position you have in the kitchen, the more 
flexibility you have. The older you get and the more experience you have in the 
kitchen the better.”

Many chefs point to the hard, physical work and the long hours as deterrents 
to advancement for female chefs. Others, such asTom Kerridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/25/my-family-values-tom-kerridge-chef>
, whoseHand and Flowers <http://www.thehandandflowers.co.uk/> pub, in Marlow, 
Buckinghamsire, was awarded two Michelin stars, have suggested – much more 
controversially – that women don’t have the necessary “fire in the belly”.

Rachel Humphrey, head chef at Le Gavroche <http://www.le-gavroche.co.uk/> in 
London, says that she did choose to put her career first, but was aware of the 
consequences. “I made a choice to pursue my career when I was younger,” she 
says, the sound of the kitchen being cleaned between servings at Le Gavroche 
drowning out her voice as we speak. “I’m aware it’s a sacrifice I made, I’m not 
unhappy with it. When people I grew up with were meeting their future husbands 
and getting married, I was at work. I wouldn’t moan about it, that’s my choice.”

She acknowledges the long hours are problematric, but not just for women. “I’m 
here all the time. I leave home at seven in the morning and get back at half 
past midnight. If you do this job at this level, the hours are antisocial for 
everybody, for the lads and the girls.”

Marianne Lumb, owner and executive chef at Marianne 
<http://mariannerestaurant.com/> in west London, is sympathetic to Galetti’s 
viewpoint: “To be any good in the kitchen you have to dedicate your life to it. 
You have to eat, breathe and sleep it, especially having your own restaurant. 
The hours are very long and to have a relationship is very difficult because 
the other person always has to come second. The more successful I’ve become, 
the more understanding men have been of that.”

She says that now, at the age of 40, if she were to have a baby she doesn’t 
think it would be fair on the child. “It’s the first time in my life that I’ve 
started to think about it. But I don’t get down about it, because I’m sure I 
was put on this Earth to cook.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwomen-chefs-choose-between-kitchen-and-family-masterchef-judge-monica-galetti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f8786d78b5a1a26f93605979339cd321d6fc2ef%2F0_48_1116_818%2F1116.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MasterChef%20judge%20tells%20female%20contestants%20to%20choose%20between%20kitchen%20and%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwomen-chefs-choose-between-kitchen-and-family-masterchef-judge-monica-galetti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MasterChef%20judge%20tells%20female%20contestants%20to%20choose%20between%20kitchen%20and%20family&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwomen-chefs-choose-between-kitchen-and-family-masterchef-judge-monica-galetti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f8786d78b5a1a26f93605979339cd321d6fc2ef%2F0_48_1116_818%2F1116.jpg>
 Marianne Lumb of Marianne’s in London 
FEMALE CHEFS AT THE TOP

CLARE SMYTH 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2014/aug/31/profile-clare-smyth-gordon-ramsay-chef-perfect-ten>
Head chef at Gordon Ramsay’s flagship Royal Hospital Road 
<https://www.gordonramsayrestaurants.com/restaurants-and-bars/> restaurant, 
Smyth is one of only three chefs in the UK – and the only woman – to hold three 
Michelin stars.

KIM WOODWARD
A former MasterChef semi-finalist, the 34-year-old is the first woman chef to 
run theSavoy Grill <https://www.gordonramsayrestaurants.com/savoy-grill/> in 
London in its 126-year history.

ANGELA HARTNETT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/aug/17/angela-hartnett-neil-borthwick>
Launched her Murano <http://www.muranolondon.com/> restaurant in 2010 after a 
career with Gordon Ramsay; she has an MBE to pin next to her Michelin stars.
 