
Mathieu Valbuena has said he would have “no problem” playing alongside Karim 
Benzema should they both be chosen to play forFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> in the Euros.

Benzema, who is under formal investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/05/karim-benzema-sex-tape-blackmail>
 in connection with an alleged attempt to blackmail his international team-mate,
is currently suspended from the national team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/10/france-karim-benzema-real-madrid-sex-tape-blackmail>
 while the case is being resolved.

The Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> striker had 
asked the French federation to delay making any decision before Euro 2016 which 
takes place in France. He is under judicial control, meaning he is not allowed 
to have any contact with Valbuena.

Euro 2016: Michael Cox’s group by group guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/12/euro-2016-group-by-group-guide-england-wales>
Valbuena, whose own place is under threat after he was left out of Didier 
Deschamps’ squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/05/karim-benzema-mathieu-valbuena-france-squad-england>
, along with Benzema, to play Germany and England in November,told French 
television’s TF1 
<http://www.tf1.fr/tf1/euro-2016-de-football/news/euro-2016-valbuena-gagner-benzema-possible-9640908.html>
 he would be happy to play alongside the striker: “We will see how it goes, but 
yes, no problem, anything is possible. It wasn’t like it was a murder.”

The midfielder said he was confident that he would still take part in the 
Euros. “The Euros have been our objective for the last two years. We are 
preparing for them and I don’t imagine myself for a second not being involved.

“There is no guarantee. I have had a chat with the coach but I am not going to 
discuss what was said. We talked about a lot of things that made me feel 
better.”

Benzema had requested a face-to-face meeting with Valbuena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/04/karim-benzema-blackmail-charges-mathieu-valbuena-real-madrid>
, with his lawyers hoping a meeting would ease tensions between the players, 
but that request was turned down last week by the investigating judge in charge 
of the case.

Benzema is being investigated over an alleged attempt by one of his friends to 
extort money from Valbuena over a sex tape. He told investigators he approached 
Valbuena about the tape on behalf of “a childhood friend” but claims he did not 
think he was doing anything wrong.

His lawyer has insisted he was not party to any blackmail attempt. “He played 
no part, I repeat no part, in any blackmail or attempted blackmail,” Sylvain 
Cormier, Benzema’s lawyer, said in November.

The European Championship begins in France on 10 June.
 