
When Matt Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/live/2016/jul/08/matt-smith-webchat-unreachable-royal-court>
 was mulling over whether to join the cast ofAnthony Neilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2007/mar/21/features11.g2>’s 
Unreachable at the Royal Court, he apparentlyasked for advice 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/theatre/what-to-see/career-suicide-or-the-role-of-a-lifetime-matt-smith-on-why-his-n>
 from Jonjo O’Neill, with whom he now stars in the play. O’Neill replied: “It’s 
like committing career suicide, but it’s good career suicide.”

Unreachable review – Matt Smith searches for the magic hour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/10/unreachable-review-matt-smith-anthony-neilson-royal-court>
One of the many pleasures of this deeply idiosyncratic show is witnessing 
Smith not committing career suicide but rather adding to his stock in playing 
the quixotic, immature film director Maxim, whose Palme d’Or counts for nothing 
as he makes his latest movie and chases the elusive light. It’s good to see 
Smith back at the Court, where he was first spotted in 2007 in Polly Stenham’s
That Face <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/may/06/theatre1> as the 
teenage son far too deeply attached to an emotionally chaotic and monstrously 
manipulative mother.

Unreachable was created in the rehearsal room by Neilson and his cast. It is, 
as many have observed, a play about the movie business, the creative process 
and the relationship of art to the real world. But it is also – and there are 
similarities to Annie Baker’s phenomenalThe Flick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/may/04/the-flick-annie-bakers-play-about-cinema-is-really-a-love-letter-to-theatre>
 – about the authenticity of experience, how we project ourselves to others and 
what we really feel, and the manipulative artifice of film and theatre under 
whose spell we all fall.Chloe Lamford 
<http://www.loesjesanders.com/lsl/clients/cvs/lamford_cv.html>’s very clever 
design is a demonstration of the latter, particularly in its final coup de 
théâtre. It is also a heartbreaking examination of how we all chase the light, 
convinced that if we could only capture it our lives would finally be perfect.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmatt-smith-unreachable-royal-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6147e9233965545a1ebc94a0e8ac77cd3215c862%2F0_144_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matt%20Smith%20took%20a%20huge%20risk%20with%20Unreachable%20%E2%80%93%20the%20result%20is%20unmissable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmatt-smith-unreachable-royal-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matt%20Smith%20took%20a%20huge%20risk%20with%20Unreachable%20%E2%80%93%20the%20result%20is%20unmissable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmatt-smith-unreachable-royal-court%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6147e9233965545a1ebc94a0e8ac77cd3215c862%2F0_144_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Deeply attached … Julian Wadham, Matt Smith and Lindsay Duncan in That Face in 
2008. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
The script of Unreachable will change during the show’s run, reminding us that 
with performance there is no such thing as perfection, only a constant state of 
flux. Reviewers who complained that Unreachableseemed half-finished 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/8c07f502-474a-11e6-b387-64ab0a67014c.html> or 
under-rehearsed were missing the point: unlike a sculpture or a painting, 
theatre is never finished. The problem in our theatre culture is that we have 
become accustomed to far too much of it being locked down and varnished to a 
high sheen. It means a great deal of theatre is incredibly dull. Safety removes 
all the danger.

Unreachable may not be the most complex, deeply layered or best structured 
play you will see this year, but it exudes a genuine whiff of danger and that 
makes it one of the most watchable pieces of theatre on the London stage. And 
one of the funniest too. It has a beguiling quality as if it doesn’t quite 
understand its own alchemy. It also has some of the best acting that you will 
see on stage from the fireworks ofJonjo O’Neill 
<http://variety.com/2013/legit/global/jonjo-oneill-international-star-you-should-know-1200564302/>
’s “the Brute”, a monstrousKlaus Kinski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/may/21/fiachragibbons> figure smashing 
through the fourth wall, to the quiet delicacy of Genevieve Barr’s money woman, 
and the understated sorrow of Amanda Drew’s producer who has sacrificed her own 
happiness for Maxim’s movies. There’s excellent work from Tamara Lawrance as 
the young star who only ever feels anything when she is paid to act it, and 
Richard Pyros as Carl, the director of photography who knows that he is always 
second best, the also ran.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmatt-smith-unreachable-royal-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ca3b137d9e7fa5cb8737c901082b2a793d58ebd%2F197_456_4326_2596%2F4326.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matt%20Smith%20took%20a%20huge%20risk%20with%20Unreachable%20%E2%80%93%20the%20result%20is%20unmissable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmatt-smith-unreachable-royal-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matt%20Smith%20took%20a%20huge%20risk%20with%20Unreachable%20%E2%80%93%20the%20result%20is%20unmissable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmatt-smith-unreachable-royal-court%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ca3b137d9e7fa5cb8737c901082b2a793d58ebd%2F197_456_4326_2596%2F4326.jpg>
 Beguiling … Genevieve Barr as Eva with Jonjo O’Neill as the Brute in 
Unreachable at the Royal Court. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Smith’s Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/mar/06/matt-smith-doctor-who-interview>
 stint and presence on the celebrity circuit may make him the most famous 
person on stage, but here he’s part of an ensemble, and a very fine part of it. 
It’s that aspect that makes this a less than obvious choice for Smith as much 
as the possibility that Neilson’s notoriously demanding process would have left 
him with egg on his face.

We forget that often the reason that actors get cast in lead roles in TV and 
film is because they really are very good actors, and have proved as much on 
stage where they have been spotted by casting directors. When they subsequently 
return to the theatre it is with a celebrity status that often means that they 
have far more to lose and far more to fear. A lead role in a tried and tested 
classic play or a Shakespeare prince or a new play by a well-known writer with 
a script that they and trusted advisers can read in advance is a far less risky 
option thana musical version of American Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/13/american-psycho-musical-review> 
or the “career suicide” of Unreachable. It’s the crucial difference between an 
actor who just wants to be a star, and an actor who knows that being an actor 
requires constant bravery, and is about lifelong learning on the job.
 