
Mauricio Pochettino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> 
made the candid admission that his Tottenham Hotspur squad had found the group 
phase of the Champions League to be a step too far, as he suggested that 
changes on all levels, including personnel, would be needed to move them 
forward.

The manager watched his team lose 2-1 at Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/monaco-tottenham-hotspur-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
 to exit the competition and he was particularly upset by what proved to be the 
winning goal. Harry Kane had equalised from the penalty spot but Monaco swept 
forward direct from the kick-off to restore their lead through Thomas Lemar.

Pochettino gamble falls flat in Monaco and Spurs crash out after five games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/monaco-tottenham-hotspur-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
Tottenham remain unbeaten after 12 games of the Premier League season – they 
are fifth in the table – but Pochettino said they had failed to balance the 
demands of what he considers to be the toughest division in the world with 
those of theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>.

“We are unbeaten in the Premier League, close to the top but to compete in the 
Champions League was tough,” Pochettino said. “Maybe next season, if we are in 
the Champions League, we need to make some changes. After two and a half years, 
we have reduced the gap at the top of the Premier League but to be competitive 
in that and the Champions League, we need to show more.

“Maybe we need to add more quality in the squad. We have quality, yes, to 
compete in the Premier League but, today, you could say we struggled a little 
bit. When you have problems, injuries, it is difficult to be competitive. At 
the moment, to compete in the Champions League and the Premier League, we 
struggle a little bit.”

Tottenham’s exit from Group E has been characterised by errors at both ends of 
the field and by a lack of ruthlessness; of streetwise edge. “The challenge is 
not physical and tactical – it is to manage your mind,” Pochettino said.

“To play Saturday and then Tuesday or Wednesday is like playing continuously 
in the Premier League. We struggled to be ready to compete in every game. 
Monaco had played their league game last Friday night whereaswe played against 
West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/tottenham-hotspur-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday night and it was like a final.

“To be ready again was difficult. It’s not an excuse. We did not show enough 
quality but we need to improve our mentality. That’s our challenge – to be 
ready, everyone to be better.”

Leicester City top dogs after Shinji Okazaki leads win over Club Brugge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/leicester-city-club-brugge-champions-league-group-g-match-report>
Pochettino said he simply could not explain the collective switch-off for 
Lemar’s goal but it was the latest example of the lack of focus that has cost 
Spurs their involvement in Europe’s elite competition. “It is difficult to 
explain the way we conceded the second goal,” he said. “If you want to go to 
the last 16, you cannot conceded a goal like this.”

Tottenham will drop into the Europa League, if they avoid defeat in the final 
group tie against CSKA Moscow at Wembley. “It is good for the club to be in the 
Europa League and go further in the competition,” Pochettino said. “But remember
last season we played Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/10/borussia-dortmund-tottenham-europa-league-match-report>
 [in the Europa League], we struggled a bit and that level was like the 
Champions League. We are in a process and we need to improve.”
 