
The Internazionale captain, Mauro Icardi, can do no right and a missed penalty 
in a 2-1 defeat byCagliari in Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> on Sunday will not help 
his cause with Inter fans.

Icardi had a fantastic start to the season, with six goals in seven matches, 
but angered “Ultras” at the club with comments in his autobiography, which the 
supporters called “lies”.

The Argentina forward attempted to placate the fans with a statement of his 
own on social media but he was jeered as he walked out before the match and was 
greeted in the San Siro by insulting banners .

The Inter vice-president, Javier Zanetti, has hinted Icardi could even lose 
the captaincy and some fans cheered when Icardi sent his penalty woefully wide 
in the 26th minute after he was pushed over by Bruno Alves.

“We’ll talk about it tomorrow, calmly, with respect to the footballer and 
respect to the fans,” Inter’s coach, Frank De Boer, said. “We have to find a 
solution because this situation is not good.

“It’s the most difficult moment since I’ve been in Italy. It’s not a question 
of bad luck. Today instead I saw a team which didn’t want to win and I think 
it’s a mental matter.”

Samir Handanovic’s late own-goal secured Cagliari a third straight Serie A win 
and sentInternazionale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale> 
spiralling to a third successive defeat in all competitions.

Handanovic, the home goalkeeper, inadvertently forced the ball over his own 
goalline in the 85th minute to seal a 2-1 victory for the visitors after the
Cagliari <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari> striker Federico 
Melchiorri (71) had cancelled out João Mario’s 55th-minute opener.

Milan climbed up to third in the table following a 3-1 win at Chievo, who have 
not beaten their Serie A rivals in almost 11 years.

Juraj Kucka and M’Baye Niang struck quickfire goals either side of half-time 
and, although Valter Birsa gaveChievo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo> hope with a second-half 
free-kick, Dario Dainelli’s own-goal in stoppage time settled the issue.

Vincenzo Montella’s side made it five games unbeaten and became the first 
visiting team this season to win a league game at Stadio Marc’Antonio Bentegodi.

Ciro Immobile’s stoppage-time penalty earned Lazio a 1-1 draw with Bologna and 
kept his side fourth in the table.

Immobile, who had hit the crossbar with a shot in the first half, stroked home 
from the spot seven minutes into time added on, after Marios Oikonomou’s foul 
on Wallace, to cancel out Filip Helander’s 11th-minute opener forBologna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna>.

Atalanta ended their nine-game losing streak at Fiorentina with a 0-0 draw. 
The Bergamo club have not won at the Stadio Artemio Franchi for 23 years while 
the Viola have yet to concede a home league goal in five games this season.

Sassuolo recorded a late comeback victory as they edged the bottom side, 
Crotone, 2-1 at Stadio Citta del Tricolore.

Diego Falcinelli gave Crotone <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crotone> 
an early lead but Stefano Sensi equalised with seven minutes left. Pietro 
Iemmello completed the fightback from close range three minutes from time.

Genoa extended their unbeaten run in Serie A to four matches but were held to 
a goalless home draw byEmpoli after the midfielder Darko Lazovic was sent off. 
Lazovic was shown a second yellow card for his foul on Empoli’s Manuel Pasqual 
in the 34th minute.
 