
The delivery of the prodigy Max Verstappen, who became the youngest winner of a
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> race when he 
triumphed in Sunday’s Spanish Grand Prix, brought an iridescence to a sport 
that for too long has laboured in the single colour of the silver Mercedes.

Everyone apart from the stricken people at Mercedes appeared to be joyous. And 
it felt as though it was the shortest race in history. Theearly crash between 
Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-crash-out-f1-spanish-gp>
, which removed both men from the contest, had so dominated the first hour of 
proceedings, with constant replays, quick-fire post-mortems and the assessment 
of consequences, that the race itself felt like a backdrop to weightier issues.

Mercedes inquest as Hamilton and Rosberg crash out and Verstappen wins Spanish 
GP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-crash-out-f1-spanish-gp>
Verstappen’s victory represented a great day for him and his team, Red Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull>, who had not won a race since Spa 
in 2014. But it was a wonderful occasion for Formula One too.

When Verstappen made his F1 debut for Toro Rosso as a 17-year-old last year he 
was so young that the concerned people at the FIA changed the rules; now you 
have to be 18. Verstappen was actually only 16 in 2014, when it was first 
announced that he would be driving in F1. Many sagacious voices said he was too 
young but there can be no doubts now.

He crossed the winning line aged 18 years and 228 days, beating Sebastian 
Vettel’s previous record by two and a half years – Vettel was 21 and 73 days 
when he won in Italy in 2008.

Verstappen led from lap 44, which was roughly the time everyone started 
concentrating on the race. He was the beneficiary of a split strategy from Red 
Bull. The team decided to give their other driver, Daniel Ricciardo, a 
three-stopper (Verstappen had two) to cover the threat from Vettel, who they 
thought would be the fastest driver in the race after the removal of the 
Mercedes.

But this is to take nothing away from Verstappen, who resisted a long and 
persistent challenge from Kimi Raikkonen to win the race on his debut for Red 
Bull. He joined Red Bull this month because the team wereunhappy with the start 
to the season made by Daniil Kvyat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/05/max-verstappen-daniil-kvyat-ruuthless-f1-red-bull>
.

Verstappen, who also became the first Dutch winner of an F1 race, also had a 
spot of luck, of course, when Hamilton and Rosberg collided.

Hamilton took the lead from pole but Rosberg went past him on the outside on 
the first corner. But coming out of the third bend, Hamilton saw a gap in 
Rosberg’s defence and attempted to overtake him on the inside.

Rosberg moved over and squeezed Hamilton on to the grass. The world champion 
went into a spin and clipped Rosberg’s car as he did so, putting both cars out 
of the race, leaving the field clear for Red Bull and Ferrari to battle it out 
for glory.

Rosberg appeared to be over-aggressive but you are allowed to make one block 
to defend your lead. Hamilton, possibly piqued after making yet another 
indifferent start, may have had a rush of blood and was determined to get 
straight back at his team-mate. But there was a gap, and he was travelling much 
faster than Rosberg, whose engine was in the wrong mode.

It was a terrible day for both drivers but Rosberg, with a 43-point lead from 
the first four races, clearly came out of the situation the better.

The day, however, belonged to Verstappen. Christian Horner, Red Bull’s team 
principal, said: “It’s been an unbelievable performance, from the moment Max 
stepped into the car until the chequered flag he’s been exemplary. He’s not put 
a wheel wrong. He’s been quick, measured, mature. He’s defended incredibly well 
against a seasoned pro like Kimi. To score his first grand prix victory, 
becoming the youngest victor, on his debut for the team is fairytale stuff.”

Horner, enthusing in the unexpected spotlight, added: “The biggest aspect of 
his performance has been in calmness. He’s obviously got a lot of capacity when 
he’s driving the car. We were all getting tense with five laps to go because 
the tyres were at the end of their life and he had Kimi breathing down his neck.

“But he calmly came on the radio and said please could we ask Charlie 
[Whiting] to deal with the blue flags swiftly. There was no agitation in his 
voice, no panic, no tension. He was a young man completely in control of what 
he was doing. And that’s what he’s done from the moment he stepped in the car.”

Horner thought it was “uncanny” how Verstappen reminded him of Vettel. “There 
are an awful lot of similarities. The mechanics were telling me that even the 
way he gets in the car is similar, the same side, the way he pulls his knee up 
to get in the chassis. But he’s his own man as well. He’s a very together young 
guy. You’d never think he was 18. He’s the first driver I’ve had that legally I 
could be his father.”

The man of the moment said: “It’s amazing, I couldn’t believe I was leading. I 
was looking at the pitboard, saw my name with 10 laps to go, then started to 
watch the board.

“I was thinking: ‘Don’t look at it, focus on the tyres and bring it home.’ 
It’s a great feeling. I absolutely didn’t expect this.”

In the general excitement it was scarcely noticed that Carlos Sainz, the man 
Verstappen left behind at Toro Rosso, finished sixth, his best result. He must 
have had mixed feelings.
 