
One of the abiding images from a wonderful Brazilian Grand Prix on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-brazilian-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-rain>
 was the crowd, dancing and cheering with ecstasy at the end.

Earlier, in their giant ponchos, they had booed and given the thumbs down as 
two red flags and five safety cars threatened to ruin their afternoon. They 
represented a study in abject misery.

This is a difficult financial time in Brazil – it usually is – and they had 
paid inflated ticket prices to stand in the torrential rain and watch a 
no-show. At least, that is what they thought when the race got under way behind 
a safety car, a most anticlimactic way to start any grand prix.

By the end, though, after three hours of high skill and considerable bravery, 
the crowd were partying. And they know how to party in this part of the world. 
For sentimentalists there was the sight of Felipe Massa, vainly trying to fight 
back the tears as he embraced his wife and son at the end ofhis last Brazilian 
Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/01/felipe-massa-announces-retirement-from-formula-one>
.

But the greatest memory of all is that of Max Verstappen and his magnificent 
drive through the field to take third place. It was one of the great 
performances ofFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> and 
for a sustained effort in atrocious conditions it must rank alongside the best 
we have seen from Ayrton Senna and Michael Schumacher.

Lewis Hamilton says he can still catch Nico Rosberg to win world title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/lewis-hamilton-hunting-f1-title-nico-rosberg-f1-abu-dhabi>
Lewis Hamilton was terrific too, and did not make a mistake. But it was much 
easier for him, up front on his own, without the traffic and visibility 
problems that Verstappen had.

If you want to understand just how good Verstappen is, look at Daniel 
Ricciardo. The Australian is the real deal, someone who regularly outshone the 
four-times world champion Sebastian Vettel when they raced together forRed Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull>. Behind that smile beats the heart 
of an uncompromising competitor. He has pulled off some classic overtakes and 
is one of the best drivers on the grid.

But even he now realises that he is playing second fiddle to a 19-year-old who 
is destined for greatness. Even Max’s father, Jos, was startled by his son’s 
precocious mastery of a soggy Interlagos.

Lewis Hamilton wins chaotic Brazilian GP to take F1 title fight to last race
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-brazilian-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-rain>
So was Verstappen’s boss, Christian Horner. “Well, they don’t get much better 
than that,” he said, shaking his head in wonder. “I think what we witnessed 
today was something very special.”

Some people compared Verstappen’s drive with those “arrival” displays from 
Senna at Monaco in 1984 and Schumacher in Spain in 1996. We knew he was good 
before this, of course, but this was the finest hour of his short career.

He should have been rewarded with second place. But Red Bull, who are normally 
very sharp with their strategy calls, brought him in for intermediate tyres and 
then had to bring him in again to put him back on wets when the rain got worse. 
That dropped him back to 14th place, before he carved his way through the field 
for his podium finish.

Horner admitted that it had been a nervous Red Bull team. “I think that almost 
necessitated an underwear change for most of the pit wall,” he said. “But again 
he was extremely calm the way he came on the radio. He seemed in control all 
afternoon.

“He was just exploring. Even behind the safety car you could see him having a 
look at different parts of the tarmac, just looking for grip.”

It is a pity that the noisy circus of F1 does not complete its schedule here. 
No one will ever forget the thrilling, title-deciding climaxes in Brazil in 
2008 and again in 2012.

The circuit has a capacity to deliver superb entertainment. Even when it is 
dry its bumpy surface, tight corners and elevation changes make for great 
racing. And when it is wet, wow! They say this event is in danger, that Brazil 
may not be able to afford to stage the race. But Formula One without Brazil – 
or Monza or Silverstone – simply would not be Formula One.

The sport needed this shot in the arm. It has been a long year – the final 
race in Abu Dhabi at the end of the month will be the 21st – and for the most 
part it has been predictable. A totally dominant Mercedes team have won every 
race bar two. Remarkably, they have won 50 out of 58 sincethe new 1.6-litre 
hybrid engines were introduced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/28/new-rules-change-f1-cars-2014> 
in Melbourne in March 2014.

But few of those wins can compare with Verstappen’s drive here. Sunday’s 
Brazilian Grand Prix was the best show we have seen all year.
 