
Max Chilton, the Formula One driver who knew Jules Bianchi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jules-bianchi> better than any other, has 
dedicated his first Indy Lights victory to his former Marussia team-mate.

F1 driver Jules Bianchi dies from injuries sustained in crash at Japanese 
Grand Prix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/17/f1-driver-jules-bianchi-dies-from-injuries-sustained-in-crash-at-japanese-grand-prix>
Bianchi died on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/17/f1-driver-jules-bianchi-dies-from-injuries-sustained-in-crash-at-japanese-grand-prix>
, nine months after sustaining brain injuries at Suzuka, where his car crashed 
into a recovery vehicle.

Chilton, the Frenchman’s team-mate at Marussia in 2013 and last year, said: 
“It’s been a difficult nine months, to be honest with you. I’ve learned a lot 
from him and he was part of that win. I probably thought of him every five or 
10 laps because he was a driver destined to probably be a world champion. I’m 
dedicating this to Jules. He’d have driven the perfect race, as always.”

Chilton, who led 87 of the 100 laps in Iowa, after taking pole, added: “I was 
his team-mate for two years and I had to have an absolutely perfect day to beat 
him. More often than not, he’d beat me.

“ I learned a lot from him and, even though he never raced on ovals, I’m sure 
that I took a lot of what I learned from him out there today.”

Chilton learned about Bianchi’s death on Friday night, as he prepared for his 
race on Saturday. He immediately became part of an army of digital mourners, 
who posted their feelings over the loss of the rising star ofFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>.

Bianchi, 25, was a talented driver. He may even have been a future world 
champion, even though he had not shown the spark of greatness that Fernando 
Alonso and Lewis Hamilton had at a similar age.

Unlike those two, he had not driven a competitive car. He was on course to get 
a drive at Sauber this season, and success there would have propelled him to 
Ferrari, because he was a protege of the Italian team. From there, anything 
would have been possible.

What we do know is that he was capable of making an ordinary car look a little 
better than that. And, as Chilton ruefully confirms, he was the better man at 
Marussia.Formula One had been dreading the announcement. It was no less 
shocking and sad for the fact it was expected.

Kind words are usually uttered about the departed. In the case of Jules 
Bianchi they were universally heartfelt. Friendly and always smiling, there was 
not a more popular figure in the paddock.
 