
Paris Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> came 
from behind to draw 1-1 against Montpellier at La Mosson on Friday night in the 
opening match of Ligue 1 defence in France.

Remy Cabella put Montpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> into the lead 
in controversial circumstances during the 10th minute after Zlatan Ibrahimovic 
appeared to be fouled in the build-up to the goal. Maxwell equalised 15 minutes 
into the second half to ensure that the new PSG coach, Laurent Blanc, avoided 
defeat in his first competitive game in charge.

Montpellier went down to 10 men when their defender Abdelhamid El Kaoutari was 
sent off for a second yellow card 18 minutes from time and moments after PSG 
had brought on their Â£55m signing from Napoli Edinson Cavani. The Uruguay 
striker, who was the top scorer in Italy last season, almost scored his first 
PSG goal two minutes later but his header was blocked by a defender.

PSG almost took an early lead but Ezequiel Lavezzi headed Lucas Moura's 
free-kick into the arms of the home side's goalkeeper, Geoffrey Jourdren, 
before Montpellier stunned the champions by going ahead two minutes later. 
Cabella, who dispossessed Ibrahimovic by the centre circle, appeared to clip 
the Sweden forward's ankle before slotting the ball through to Emanuel Herrera. 
The striker raced down the middle of the pitch but his shot was deflected into 
the path of Cabella who lifted it across the onrushing goalkeeper and into the 
top left corner.

Ibrahimovic could have levelled after 30 minutes during a good period of 
pressure for PSG but Jourdren got down well to tip a powerful long-range shot 
round the left post. PSG spurned another couple of chances to equalise with 
well-taken free-kicks but Ibrahimovic's 30-yard effort flew inches wide of the 
right post and then Lucas's shot landed on top of the net.

Ibrahimovic made amends after an hour when he nodded down a long pass from 
Javier Pastore in the six-yard box and Maxwell blasted it home.

Montpellier had a late chance to win the match despite being a man down when 
Cabella's chip flew just over the crossbar but Paris Saint-Germain looked the 
likelier to score in the game's dying moments. Pastore fired wide of the left 
post before a header from the substitute Adrien Rabiot was cleared off the line 
by Jourdren in injury time.
 