
The last day of the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> season confirms a power 
shift has finally taken place. The Midlands is now the centre of attention, 
something not many observers imagined they would live to see, with Tottenham 
and Arsenal well represented for a change as north London fills the next two 
automatic Champions League qualification slots. The two Manchester clubs, like 
bald men fighting over a comb, are now reduced to a tussle over who finishes in 
fourth place, the one with the extra qualifying round.

Considering the financial resources at their disposal this is undeniable 
underachievement.Manuel Pellegrini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/13/manuel-pellegrini-manchester-city-swansea>
 can spout all the statistics he likes, just asLouis van Gaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/13/louis-van-gaal-battle-with-manchester-city-for-fourth>
 can blame injuries and bad luck, but the two clubs have never been wealthier 
yet this season is going to be the first in Premier League history without 
either of them in the top three.

Louis van Gaal unfazed by uphill battle with Manchester City for fourth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/13/louis-van-gaal-battle-with-manchester-city-for-fourth>
City began to feature at the awards end of the table around five seasons ago, 
the proud Mancunian record is otherwise entirely down to United and the Sir 
Alex Ferguson years. Yet before United dominated the football landscape 
Liverpool did, and one has to go back 35 years, to the last time a Midlands 
team was crowned champions, to find a top three with no representation from the 
north-west. Aston Villa’s title-winning season in 1981 was something of a 
one-off too, even more than it must seem from the perspective of a side just 
relegated to the Championship. The previous occasion when north-west clubs were 
absent from the podium was 1961, when Sheffield Wednesday and Wolves finished 
second and third in Tottenham’s Double-winning season.

With that historical context in mind, finishing in fourth should not really 
count for anything at all. If second is nowhere, as Bill Shankly always used to 
maintain, fourth might as well be in a different division. The Champions League 
has altered how we view these things: fourth place is now considered more 
important than winning one of the cups, but the Champions League is supposed to 
be an old pals’ act, a self-perpetuating, self-aggrandising elite whereby the 
same big, rich clubs just get bigger and richer and hoover up everyone else’s 
best players so that smaller clubs can do little more than stand on the 
pavement outside and look in through the window.

That is why everyone enjoyed Leicester’s gatecrashing act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/leicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season>
 so much. City very much want to be among the grandees of Europe; United used 
to be comfortable in that company until losing their way in the later stages of 
Ferguson’s reign, though by definition you cannot be a bona fide Champions 
League contender if you are still scrabbling around for qualification on the 
final day of the season. Even if City did reach the semi-final, the manner in 
which theyultimately slid out of view 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/04/real-madrid-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
 did nothing to suggest regular reachers of the last four will be hoping to 
avoid them next season.

That is what Pep Guardiola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola>
 is about to take over, regardless of whether City stay in fourth place. There 
will be much tittering from the red half of Manchester if their new luxury 
coach arrives to supervise a Europa League campaign, though apart from the 
initial indignity there is no real reason why City could not survive a season 
out of the Champions League.

Most teams are in it for the money; City already have plenty of that. City 
have hired Guardiola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/11/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-europa-league-champions-league-football>
 to take them to the next level in Europe; fair enough, but does he have to do 
it in his first season? On the evidence of the domestic season now concluding 
Guardiola will have enough of a rebuilding job on his hands just turning City 
back into the strongest team in England. They have never managed to look really 
convincing in Europe and though Guardiola might be exactly the man to effect 
that transformation it is a big ask to expect him to do it straight away.

United do not really need the Champions League either. They have just 
announced record profits for the latest financial quarter, their money-making 
machine could survive a short holiday from the hot spots and hot shots of 
Europe. Van Gaal’s job is supposed to be hanging on a fourth-place finish, but 
he managed that last season and United found themselves out of the Champions 
League before Christmas.

Manuel Pellegrini’s resolve to fly under radar spoiled spell in City cockpit | 
Jamie Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/13/manuel-pellegrini-manchester-city-swansea>
Were he to take advantage of any City slip-up at Swansea and sneak into fourth 
with a United win against Bournemouth on Sunday afternoon he would probably be 
safe for another season, especially if he can bring home theFA Cup next Saturday
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/23/everton-manchester-united-fa-cup-match-report>
, though it is a moot question whether that would be a cause for celebration in 
and around Old Trafford.

What most people think United should do at this point is make a clear 
statement about who will be in charge next season, and possibly beyond. A team 
that could have been dumped out of the Europa League by Midtjylland had they 
not promotedMarcus Rashford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/13/england-marcus-rashford-euro-2016>
 in the nick of time really has no business waiting around to see if Champions 
League qualification can help them arrive at a decision.

United appear to be adhering to the traditional view, as expressed by 
Pellegrini in his final press conference in Manchester. “For a big team, if you 
don’t qualify for the Champions League it is a disaster,” he said. But 
Pellegrini went on to say something else. “I don’t think it matters for one 
year – as happened to United in 2014 and Chelsea this season – but it is not 
the best thing for it to happen over a number of years.” Quite.

With the money United offer players, and the prospect of working under 
Guardiola at City, it is probably not even true that transfer targets would 
turn their noses up because of non-Champions League status. What is true is 
that the very best players,Renato Sanches  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/10/bayern-munich-sign-benfica-renato-sanches-manchester-united>
being a case in point, will always want to join the best clubs. Doubtless to 
Guardiola’s chagrin, Bayern Munich have reached only Champions League 
semi-finals in his three years in Germany, though they do boast three 
successive league titles. That is consistency of a sort and even if the German 
model is not to be preferred to the unpredictability of the Premier League it 
starts at home.

The plain, unvarnished truth is that the pride of Manchester, whichever side 
finishes highest, has some catching up to do on the domestic front before 
entertaining dreams of conquering Europe.
 