
Jim Callaghan may not have actually said “Crisis? What crisis?” in 1979, but 
the then prime minister’s words have gone down in history as the clearest 
example of a politician not in touch with the severity of the issues facing the 
country. Last week has seen a similar debate about the state of our accident 
and emergency services.

Related: NHS in crisis as cancer operations cancelled due to lack of beds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/14/health-service-in-crisis-cancer-ops-cancelled-nhs>

Seen from the position of chair of King’s College Hospital 
<https://www.kch.nhs.uk/news/public/news/view/15909>, there is no question that 
the pressures are real and serious. Constant and relentless effort is required 
to keep essential services running. That we have managed to do so is down to 
the extraordinary efforts of senior and frontline staff. Even with this, the 
picture is one of enormous fragility, not just at my trust but across the whole 
of the NHS.

The story at King’s is reflected in the grim national figures on A&E waiting 
times, trolley waits and “black alerts”released last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-crisis-20-hospitals-declare-black-alert-as-patient-safety-no-longer-assured>
. Of course, the picture varies from area to area. But the underlying story is 
of a service under more pressure than it has been for a decade.

It is hard to think of anything that matters more to people than the health 
and wellbeing of themselves and their family. Given this, can we really be 
happy with our health and care services staggering from year to year, wondering 
whether they will manage to make it safely through the winter?

The reasons for our current predicament are well understood. This is a 
“crisis” that was not only predictable but was predicted. The hard bit here is 
not knowing what to do, but having the will to do it.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Theresa May and Jeremy Corbyn clash over NHS at first PMQs of 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/11/theresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video>
First and foremost of the issues we need to tackle is funding. The NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is not a “bottomless pit” as some 
have suggested, but increasing demand and continuing advances in healthcare 
mean that it needs additional funding year on year of around 4% above 
inflation. Whenever it has not had this for any sustained period of time, it 
has run into trouble.

The funding problems of social care are, if anything, more severe. Half of 
local government funding goes on adult and children’s care. Local authorities 
have done remarkably well in delivering spending reductions while preserving 
services in recent years, but it is inevitable that they will have to take 
money out of their care budgets in order to balance their overall budgets. In 
the end we all want clean streets and good leisure services as well.

It is very hard to improve your swimming technique if you are struggling to 
keep your head above water

There is, of course, scope to improve the way services are delivered. As the 
work of Lord Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/05/nhs-could-save-5bn-a-year-by-cutting-running-costs-say-reports>
 has shown, some hospitals are more efficient than others. We know at King’s 
that there is room for improvement. But sustained progress will only come if we 
can stabilise the financial position. It is very hard to improve your swimming 
technique if you are struggling to keep your head above water.

Additional funding now, together with a concerted move to eliminate the 
deficits that NHS trusts are currently carrying, is essential. This would stop 
the incessant tug of war that currently goes on between different parts of the 
NHS as they desperately try to balance their own part of the system. The energy 
and focus could then go on delivering real improvements in productivity and 
more consistent service quality.

Last week was dominated by a debate between the prime minister and NHS England 
chief Simon Stevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-england-chief-executive-simon-stevens-funding-theresa-may-public-accounts-committee>
 over whether the NHS has in fact been given more money than it actually asked 
for. In reality, the funding agreed in theFive Year Forward View 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/23/nhs-five-year-forward-view-new-lease-of-life>
 was the art of the politically possible at a time when big reductions were 
being agreed in other government departments.

It assumed efficiency savings of £22bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/15/nhs-22bn-funding-black-hole-report-public-accounts-committee>
 – higher than has ever been achieved by the NHS or indeed any other major 
health economy – and significantly underestimated the scale of the structural 
deficits that already existed in hospital trusts. Crucially, it was reliant on 
sustained funding of social care.

Stevens was both right and courageous to set out the true picture as he saw 
it, even if it has been at some cost to his personal relationship with No 10. 
This is his job. It is clear to anyone who works in the NHS that we cannot 
carry on as we are. He has a duty to say so. The prime minister had to make 
some tough decisions to deliver savings when she was home secretary. So did 
Philip Hammond when he was at defence. It is, perhaps, not surprising that they 
believe standing firm now on NHS funding is the right approach. In my view this 
would be a profound mistake. The NHS is different, and needs to be recognised 
as such.

The debate on funding is not just a matter for the government or the NHS. As a 
country we need to make some hard choices. We can help ourselves by being 
fitter and more active, but in the end – if we want the security of having the 
best health and care services available to us – we will have to pay for them. A 
cross-party health and care commission could begin that debate with the public.

Beyond funding, we need to put back together a service that has been 
chronically fragmented by the reorganisations of successive governments. This 
does not need, God forbid, to be another top-down reorganisation, but a 
concerted move to allow health and care organisations to come together at local 
level. Combining hospitals, GPs and community services and moving away from the 
current artificial division between purchasers and providers would improve care 
and reduce costs. In some places this change has already started. It needs much 
more support.

A proper investment plan is needed in the buildings and equipment of the NHS. 
The private finance initiative brought substantial new investment, albeit at a 
very high cost. This has now gone, but nothing has been put forward to replace 
it. Much of the NHS estate urgently needs investment, and many of the buildings 
built under PFI will soon need refurbishing.

As well as investing in the infrastructure of the NHS, we also need to invest 
in the people who work for it. In all the different parts of the public sector 
that I have worked in, I have never come across people with such talent and 
dedication. People are passionate about what they do. And yet we have contrived 
to create a situation in crucial areas, such as nursing, where we struggle to 
recruit and retain the trained staff that we need.

These are the basic building blocks of an NHS recovery plan. There is no doubt 
much more that could and should be done, but without these essential steps we 
are unlikely to succeed.

The NHS has a lot that it can justly be proud about. At King’s, we achieve 
consistently good health outcomes and have seen major advances in areas such as 
trauma, haematology and neurosciences. We are confident that over time we can 
become both m ore efficient and deliver better services.

But like all other parts of the NHS we are now at a crossroads. Without a new 
approach, these advances will be put at risk. The hardest thing for governments 
to do is to listen and act on inconvenient advice. It is also the most 
important.

Lord Kerslake is the chair of King’s College Hospital NHS foundation trust
 