
Maybelline New York is the latest big makeup brand to tap into the rise of the 
“beauty boy”, appointing American YouTuber Manny Gutierrez as its first male 
ambassador following a similar move by its competitor CoverGirl in October.

Gutierrez, who has accrued more than two million followers to his YouTube 
channel <https://www.youtube.com/user/MannyMua733/about> since he started 
posting makeup tutorials in 2014, stars in the brand’s new That Boss Life 
campaign.

He announced the news in an Instagram post, saying he was “honored” and 
“thrilled”.

Gutierrez, who has a Makeup Geek eye shadow palette 
<https://www.makeupgeek.com/mannymua-makeup-geek-palette-1.html> and an Ofra 
lip set <https://www.ofracosmetics.com/pages/mannymua-x-ofra> named after him, 
is part ofa new wave of “beauty boys” 
<http://www.marieclaire.com/beauty/a20197/the-beauty-boys-of-instagram/#alexfaction>
: male-identifying makeup artists who post bold, colourful and elaborate looks 
to social media and rack up millions of followers from the YouTube tutorials.

CoverGirl names makeup artist James Charles its first cover boy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/oct/11/covergirl-james-charles-first-cover-boy-makeup-artist>
In a feature for Marie Claire last year, he said he had become interested in 
makeup as a young boy, playing with his Mormon mother’s lipstick.

“I wanted to play with eyeliner and makeup while other boys were playing with 
G.I. Joes,” he said. “So it was kind of tough for me because I didn’t really 
understand why I wanted to play with the ‘girl’ things rather than the ‘boy’ 
things.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DypNN_E-x5q0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DypNN_E-x5q0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DypNN_E-x5q0&media=>
Gutierrez is friends with Patrick Simondac – or Patrick Starrr – who has 2.8 
millionInstagram followers <https://www.instagram.com/patrickstarrr/?hl=en>, 
and close to two million onYouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCDHQbU57NZilrhbuZNbQcRA>. Both worked at 
makeup counters at Macy’s, Sephora and MAC before their social media careers 
took off; this year, Simondac was chosen as a brand ambassador for nail polish 
line Formula X, and travelled to Spain for NYX Cosmetics.

While many “beauty boys” own the influence that drag makeup has had on their 
aesthetic, they aren’t performing as women, but are rather wearing makeup as 
men. As Gutierrez explained to Marie Claire: “It’s an art form for me. I’m 
still confident as a boy and I will always be a boy. I can be confident with 
bare skinand with a full face.”

In October 2016, CoverGirl paved the way for Maybelline, announcing its latest 
ambassador as James Charles: a teenager who gained social media notoriety the 
month before after bringing his own professional lighting gear to retake his 
senior photos “so my highlight would be poppin’”.

The singer Zendaya reposted the tweet with the comment “you win 
<https://twitter.com/Zendaya/status/772956840367759360?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>”.
James Charles (@jamescharles) 
So I retook my senior photos & brought my ring light with me so my highlight 
would be poppin. I love being extra 💀pic.twitter.com/7Qu1yu8U2P 
<https://t.co/7Qu1yu8U2P>
 <https://twitter.com/jamescharles/status/772883439733338112> September 5, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/jamescharles/status/772883439733338112> 
The appointment was a savvy move for CoverGirl, which was set to profit from 
Charles’ expansive social media reach – now 1.2 million on Instagram, and 
500,000 on YouTube.


At the time, the brand praised his “transformative, dynamic makeup looks” 
which were “an inspiration to women, men, guys and girls who might have been 
afraid to do the same”.

In an interview with the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/16/fashion/meet-covergirls-new-cover-boy.html>, 
Charles said he was part of a growing movement facilitated by the internet: 
“Men in makeup is becoming more widely accepted. But it’s going to take so much 
more open-mindedness to have it be a common thing.”
 