
Ally McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> has spoken 
out in defence of Rangers and Celtic after the drab fare produced by the pair 
on Sunday led to criticism from some quarters.

McCoist, now Rangers' assistant manager, also played in more than 50 Glasgow 
derbies when wearing light blue. He readily concedes the scoreless draw at the 
weekend was far from a classic but believes the level of criticism afforded to 
the fixture has been over the top.

"I can't remember a reaction to an Old Firm game like this," McCoist said. "In 
an ideal situation you want them to be great games of football where everybody 
is happy, but that can't always be the case.

"It certainly wasn't one of the better Old Firm games I've seen, but I'm not 
sure it was as bad as everybody is making out. I agree that as a spectacle it 
wasn't great, but the boys have served up quite a few better ones recently, so 
maybe you can all cut them a bit of slack."

A common debating point in the Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> Park aftermath is that financial 
constraints at each club mean they are unable to attract the quality of player 
they could a decade ago and, consequently, standards have markedly fallen.

"I'm certainly not going to agree with that, even though I played 10 years 
ago," insisted McCoist. "And the last thing that both sets of players want to 
hear now is that they are not as good as the guys were 10 or 15 years ago. 
People are entitled to their opinions, but maybe we should just hold our 
judgement a little bit after one 0-0 draw. Let's not get too carried away."

McCoist and Rangers head to the rather less illustrious surroundings of Forfar 
tomorrow night for aScottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> tie against the Third 
Division outfit. He was yesterday adamant about the dangers of taking the 
part-timers lightly.

"It's about having the same attitude no matter the opposition which I know is 
not an easy thing to do," McCoist said. "The football graveyard is full of 
players fromRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> and Celtic 
who haven't been able to do that."
 