
He may have been eclipsed by two of his team-mates, but one moment of magic 
from Aiden McGeady was sufficient to remind supporters, and maybe his manager, 
that tales of his demise have been greatly exaggerated. The returning winger 
watched his 70th-minute shot rebound from a post after a typically powerful run 
from deep.

In truth, that was the high point of an otherwise quiet night for McGeady, and 
Glenn Loovens and Georgios Samaras were rather noisier, the former opening the 
scoring and setting up Samaras's first of two goals, the second added from the 
penalty spot five minutes from time. Before that Scott Brown's 81st-minute 
goal, his side's third, had secured a place in the last eight at the expense of 
potentially hazardous opposition.

McGeady had not started a match since the home loss to Rangers on August 31, 
prompting speculation that all is not well between Scotland's player of the 
year and his manager. Depending on who you believe, McGeady and Gordon Strachan 
either enjoy a productive but volatile relationship, or have about as much 
desire to be in each other's company as Tiger Woods and Phil Mickelson. 
Strachan has vehemently denied the latter theory and it must be acknowledged 
that McGeady has been a considerable distance short of his best form in the 
season's opening weeks.

Strachan also gave starts to Massimo Donati and Paul Caddis, with Shunsuke 
Nakamura a high-profile absentee.

It is four years since Livingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> lifted Scotland's League Cup, 
a period they have endured rather than enjoyed. Yet a summer takeover by an 
Italian consortium and the appointment of the hitherto unknown Roberto Landi as 
manager has prompted a revival - they are the Division One leaders and won 3-0 
at title favourites Dundee on Saturday.

This promised to be a somewhat sterner test, with Celtic anxious to avoid home 
elimination from this competition for the third season in a row. Donati forced 
Roddy McKenzie into a smart save within 20 minutes after neat build-up play 
from McGeady, before Loovens opened the scoring with a powerful header from a 
Caddis cross. Only wastefulness from Caddis when sent clean through prevented
Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> from putting the tie out 
of sight before the half-hour. Scott McDonald was next to try his luck, 
McKenzie's reactions denying the Australian striker at point-blank range.

An open display of disgust from Calum Elliot, Livingston's sole striker, as he 
was replaced by Jean Cuenca, lit up a tame opening to the second period. Elliot 
had reason to be frustrated, having been without a sight of the Celtic goal.

Only complacency appeared likely to trouble the hosts, but there was little 
sign of that as Paul Hartley hit the Livingston bar with a 25-yard free-kick 
before Samaras scored. Latching on to a Loovens knock-down in the 64th minute, 
the Greek striker scored his third goal in as many days. Having arrived from 
Manchester City for only Â£1m, Samaras looks like being one of the best deals of 
the Scottish close-season.
 