
Fernando Alonso <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso> has 
refused to dismiss suggestions that he could walk away from McLaren if he is 
given another uncompetitive car next year. At first the Spaniard laughed off 
the idea but when pressed if he could absolutely rule out taking next season 
off as a sabbatical, he became more ambiguous. “I can never say 100% anything,” 
he said. “I cannot say that tomorrow I will not have dinner. I do not know if I 
will be hungry or not. My intention is to race. I think I will race. We will 
see how it goes next year. It’s not in my plans not to race.”

Earlier, as Alonso’s close friend Mark Webber described the double world 
champion as a “ticking bomb”‚ Ron Dennis suggested that his driver could take a 
break from the sport. When asked if the driver could miss the 2016 season if 
given another bad car, the McLaren chief said: “I have an open mind to 
anything. Some of the ideas have involved those sorts of considerations – 
sabbatical years. We have a great number of driver options. We have two of the 
best drivers in the world in our cars. At this moment our drivers of next year 
are Fernando and Jenson Button. [Fernando] will definitely finish his career in
McLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren>.”

Alonso’s previous spell with McLaren ended in a bitter rift with Dennis at the 
end of 2007, following the Spygate row. He stands 17th in the championship, 
five points behind Button and McLaren stand a dismal ninth out of the 10 teams 
on the grid.

Alonso is in the first of a three-year contract with the Woking-based team 
having switched from Ferrari, who have been resurgent this season. But should 
he quit McLaren next year, it would be difficult to see him returning in 2017. 
In all probability, it would signal the end of hisFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> career.

After the Japanese Grand Prix in September, in which he was openly critical of 
the underpowered Honda engine, he said he “didn’t know” whether he would race 
at McLaren next year. Later, he committed himself to the team on Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/28/fernando-alonso-mclaren-future-f1-japanese-gp>
.

Clearly he is a deeply frustrated driver. Alonso will be 35 next year and his 
chances of winning a third title are slipping away. Even if Honda manage to 
improve their woeful power unit and McLaren make improvements to their 
indifferent car, it is difficult to see the team running better than mid-table 
next term. Alonso’s anguish is all the greater because Ferrari have taken a big 
step forward since he left the team last year.

Ferrari, however, could be in trouble with race officials, after Mercedes 
wrote to FIA stewards following concerns that the Italian team might have 
benefited from extra wind tunnel time, made accessible through their working 
relationship with the new F1 team Haas. A ruling is expected before Sunday’s 
race.

In qualifying, Nico Rosberg beat Lewis Hamilton again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/f1-nico-rosberg-lewis-hamilton-abu-dhabi-grand-prix>
 to make it six poles in a row as he maintained his recent edge in the Mercedes 
team. Hamilton’s wait for his 50th pole will now have to wait until next year. 
He has not qualified for the front of the grid since the Italian Grand Prix at 
Monza nearly three months ago.

Hamilton finished fastest in Q1 and Q2 but as the dusk changed to darkness and 
the lights came on Rosberg shone once more, bettering his team-mate by 
three-tenths of a second.

Hamilton, who has had some difficulty dismissing the notion that he has 
relaxed a little since winning histhird world title in Austin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-world-title-third-time-us-grand-prix>
 last month, said: “It was a lot more comfortable in the beginning of the year 
for me. Coming into this weekend I’ve tried to make some changes. I’m 
disappointed with myself with one of the things I’ve taken off the car, but I 
couldn’t do anything. I’ve generally struggled all weekend, but Nico did such a 
good job today, in particular in Q3.

“It doesn’t really matter what the [qualifying] number is, what matters are 
the wins and the championship.”

Sebastian Vettel rued a costly error by his Ferrari team after he was 
surprisingly knocked out at the first stage of qualifying. Vettel, the 
four-time world champion, will start 16th at the Yas Marina Circuit after 
Ferrari miscalculated the cut-off time required to make it through to Q2. It 
leaves the German facing the uphill task of ending his debut season with 
Ferrari, which has yielded three victories, on a high. “I should have done a 
quicker lap and we could have made it, but in that moment we thought it was 
enough,” he said.
 