
Fernando Alonso <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso>, a 
two-times Formula One world champion, insists he will be on the grid for the 
2016 curtain-raiser in Australia.

The McLaren chairman, Ron Dennis, claimed at the final race of the season in 
Abu Dhabi that Alonso, who hastwo years to run on his deal with the British team
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/28/fernando-alonso-mclaren-future-f1-japanese-gp>
, may consider taking next year off from the sport.

McLaren’s Fernando Alonso refuses to rule out season-long break from F1
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/28/fernando-alonso-season-break-mclaren-f1>
But Alonso, speaking from Wembley Stadium, dismissed suggestions of a 
sabbatical. Asked if he will be in Melbourne for the season-opening Australian 
Grand Prix, the 34-year-old said: “Yes. I talked to Ron on Friday. I told him 
what had been published. He said, ‘I didn’t mean that and tomorrow I will 
clarify it.’ On Saturday he clarified but no one copied that.

“I said the opposite on Friday, Saturday, Sunday and I’m sure in January and 
February I will keep answering the same questions about my future.”

Alonso has just finished his worst season in Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> following his move from Ferrari 
to rejoin McLaren. The Spaniard retired from eight races – the most since his 
opening season in the sport with Minardi – and scored a paltry 11 points.

Alonso, who won the first of his successive titles with Renault a decade ago, 
said motivation will play a key role in whether he extends his grand prix 
career beyond 2017.

“We have to be open to any possibility,” said Alonso. “Right now it is too 
long ahead to think. Let’s see what happens in one and a half years, what the 
situation is, what targets we have met and what the motivations are to keep 
going on in Formula One.”

McLaren’s disastrous season may drive unsentimental Honda out of F1 | Richard 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/24/mclaren-honda-f1-fernando-alonso-jenson-button>
Jenson Button, who became the first team-mate to finish a season with more 
points than Alonso, says his partnership with the Spaniard will help drive
McLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren> forward.

“He is a good team-mate to have,” Button said. “He is experienced like me. The 
feedback is good and the team really listen to us.

“If we were two young drivers, the team would be developing the car in a 
certain direction but because of our experience they listen to us and we help 
develop the car.

“It is the perfect situation for the team having us two in there and we enjoy 
being part of the development progress.”
 