
Fernando Alonso <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso> has been 
declared provisionally fit to take part in Sunday’s Chinese Grand Prix but must 
pass further tests after Friday morning’s opening practice run at the Shanghai 
International Circuit.

The Spaniard missed the last race following injuries sustained in his 
spectacularcrash in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/fernando-alonso-walks-away-unscathed-after-massive-formula-one-crash>
 last month.

Fernando Alonso 'lucky to be alive' after F1 crash as Rosberg wins Australian 
GP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/fernando-alonso-walks-away-unscathed-after-massive-formula-one-crash>
The FIA, Formula One’s governing body, said here on Thursday it was satisfied 
with the Spaniard’s condition, though a delay in the necessary paperwork has 
held up the driver’s expected smooth return to the track. The FIA also said 
Alonso had to clear a final hurdle before returning.

A statement said: “Further, in accordance with Art. 22.14 of the Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> sporting regulations, he is 
instructed by the FIA medical delegate and CMO to undergo a further examination 
immediately following FP1 to determine his further eligibility to take part in 
the remainder of the event.”

Before the decision was announced, Alonso sounded very upbeat. “I feel good,” 
he said. “I feel OK, honestly. In Bahrain I was mentally 100% ready to race, 
but physically I had a lot of pain and I was ready to try at least and see if 
the pain was manageable or not with the rib broken.

“Now the situation has improved a lot. I am mentally 120% now and physically I 
am 100% with no pain. I have been training with a more or less normal routine 
for the last two weeks, running, bicycle, golf and tennis – many sports, that 
are a big change in approach for this race.

“I did sleep OK for the last two weeks as well, which was quite a good thing 
because in the first 10 days after Australia I could not sleep on one side, 
which was not very comfortable. From Bahrain to here is a big improvement. I 
feel good.”
 