
There it stood in a field in southern England a couple of weekends ago, one of 
the more unexpected attractions at a traditional county show, taking its place 
among the prize sheep, the wood-carvers, the heavy horses and the traction 
engines. A sleek black 21st-century simulator bearing the logos of the 
McLaren-Honda grand prix team, it promised its customers a hint of the thrills 
experienced byFernando Alonso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fernando-alonso> and Jenson Button at race 
tracks around the world.

Jules Bianchi in our thoughts but it’s business as usual, says Jenson Button
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/23/jules-bianchi-jenson-button-hungarian-grand-prix>
The queue was not a long one. Perhaps those who might otherwise have been 
tempted to part with their money were aware ofthe sort of ride actually endured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/05/british-grand-prix-mclaren-f1-fernando-alonso-jenson-button>
 by the two former world champions on the world’s racetracks this season, and 
once again this weekend in Budapest. A genuine attempt to simulate reality for 
a McLaren-Honda driver in 2015 would have involved a series of catastrophes and 
humiliations, including the ordeal of facing the media before and after every 
race in order to answer the same question over and over again: when is this 
spell in purgatory going to end?

McLaren can boast 182 wins from the 770 grands prix in which they have 
competed since 1963, delivering 12 drivers’ world championships and eight 
constructors’ titles on the way. Only the Scuderia Ferrari, which opened for
Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> business 13 years 
earlier, can boast more impressive statistics.

The team’s long history includes the successful recovery from a tragic setback 
in 1970 when their founder, the gifted New Zealand driver Bruce McLaren,was 
killed at Goodwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/story/0,3604,327707,00.html>. Eleven years 
later his successors sold the company to one run by Ron Dennis, who remains in 
charge today.

Dennis began his Formula One career as a junior mechanic, but it was he who 
banished oil stains from the garage floor by decreeing that the team’s working 
area in the pits should be fitted with marble tiling, to be transported from 
race to race. Freudian analysts would probably have fun with that one, but 
Dennis’s ambition transformed a good little racing team into a company that 
today builds supercars for billionaires, with departments active in various 
areas of advanced technology, all housed in a £200m building designed by Sir 
Norman Foster.

This is a team for whom, back in 1988, Ayrton Senna and Alain Prost won 15 out 
of the season’s 16 races. In the back of that year’s car was a Honda V6 turbo 
engine. When the English team and the Japanese company resumed their 
partnership this season, no one could foresee that what had been envisaged as a 
development year would turn into a fiasco, the cars proving unable to mix it 
even with the midfield runners.

There will be no shortage of people in and around Formula One taking pleasure 
from Dennis’s visible discomfort as he lurks in the garage at race after race, 
watching his team stumble from one poor showing to another. He stepped back in 
2009 butreturned to the helm last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/16/ron-dennis-mclaren-chief-executive-f1>
, having deposed his designated successor, Martin Whitmarsh. He has already 
been criticised for his failure to secure a new title sponsor to replace 
Vodafone, thus upsetting the balance sheet, and despite recruiting Lotus’s Eric 
Boullier to sort out a sclerotic team-management structure, the on-track 
performances are dealing a series of blows to his familiar air of superiority.

But not as big as the blows to the pride of Button and Alonso. Imagine how it 
must feel for a former world champion, long accustomed to the view from the 
front two or three rows of the starting grid and still at the peak of his 
powers, to find himself unable even to record a time in qualifying, a 
humiliation Button has experienced twice this season.

British Grand Prix: once mighty McLaren appear to have lowered F1 sights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/05/british-grand-prix-mclaren-f1-fernando-alonso-jenson-button>
Alonso’s average grid position over the season is 16th. Button’s is 17th. At 
Silverstone three weeks ago theyendured the embarrassment of starting 17th and 
18th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/04/lewis-hamilton-pole-position-f1-british-silverstone>
, ahead only of the two hopeless Marussias – an exact repetition of the 
situation in the first three races of the season. Poor Button, who has never 
finished on the podium in the British Grand Prix, failed to complete a single 
lap after the two Lotus drivers collided in the opening minute, forcing Alonso 
into the side of his team-mate’s car. The Spaniard managed tofinish the race in 
10th place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/05/lewis-hamilton-wins-british-f1-gp-nico-rosberg>
, earning his first point of the year.

Button actually has four points, which he scored with a heroic eighth place in 
Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/24/nico-rosberg-monaco-f1-gp-win-mercedes-pit-lewis-hamilton>
 in May. That was a sign of hope, as was the achievement of getting both cars 
into the second qualifying session for the first time, in Spain. But the early 
expressions of optimism – “This was a good starting point,” Button said after 
finishing last in Melbourne, where he has won three times – long ago gave way 
to grim realism, although the two drivers have been widely admired for behaving 
honourably in public by keeping a lid on their frustrations.

They looked a little better in the first two free practice sessions at the 
Hungaroring on Friday withAlonso eighth fastest and Button 12th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/24/sergio-perez-crash-hungarian-grand-prix-formula-one>
 on a track kinder to a car lacking top-end speed. But it is becoming a 
temptation to speculate on the point at which continued failure would force 
McLaren out of the sport. Could their name join the list of those once-proud 
teams – the likes of Maserati, Cooper and Brabham – who disappeared from the F1 
paddock?

“I’m still positive,” Button said this week, “but not as positive as when I 
was winning races.” Although McLaren have an option on the 2009 world 
champion’s services for next year, there is talk of the 35-year-old spendinga 
final F1 season with Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/14/jenson-button-mclaren-f1-two-year-contract-next-season>
, one of his former teams, where he would relish the use of a competitive 
Mercedes engine.

Much of this is Honda’s fault, although the development of the chassis-engine 
combination has not been made easier by cost-cutting rules that restrict 
testing and modification. Contrary to popular belief, however, the Japanese 
company does not have an unblemished record in F1. As an engine supplier they 
won six constructors’ championships in a row from 1986 to 91. But as an entrant 
they ducked out first in 1968, having won only two races in five seasons, and 
then in 2008, during the global economic crisis, after one more win in a 
three-year spell. Their unsentimental board of directors will not have been 
pleased by the current displays, for which there are reasons but not excuses.

It seems unthinkable that Honda will not stick it out until some sort of 
respectable level of success is achieved. In F1, however, the unthinkable 
sometimes happens.
 