
Ugandan graduate Brian Turyabagye was studying engineering when his friend’s 
grandmother fell seriously ill. Accompanying her to hospital, he watched as 
doctors diagnosed malaria and prescribing various treatments accordingly. Only 
as she lay dying did they realise their initial diagnosis was wrong. It was 
pneumonia that was killing her.

Turyabagye, 24, was so shocked by the circumstances surrounding the death that 
he began researching methodologies for diagnosing pneumonia and its treatments. 
To his surprise, he discovered that the illness affects far more children than 
it does adults. According to Unicef,pneumonia kills half a million children 
under five in sub-Saharan Africa <https://www.unicef.org/media/media_89995.html>
 every year, with the region accounting for half of all global deaths from 
pneumonia of children under five.

“Many of those deaths are because of misdiagnosis,” says Turyabagye. “In the 
villages and remote areas, children get sick – and the first reaction is to 
treat them for malaria. Most people are aware of malaria, and the signs for 
malaria and pneumonia are very similar, so it is difficult for health 
professionals to differentiate.”

Even when a correct diagnosis is made, treatment is often unavailable. 
According to the Uganda Paediatrics Association,fewer than 20% of children with 
pneumonia receive antibiotics, which cost less than $1 
<http://www.newvision.co.ug/new_vision/news/1202547/27-kids-die-pneumonia-yearly>
 (81p).

So Turyabagye began designing a biomedical smart jacket that would distinguish 
pneumonia’s symptoms – temperature, breathing rate and sound of the lungs – and 
eliminate most human error, diagnosing pneumonia at a rate three to four times 
faster than a doctor.

He named it “Mamaope”, or “mother’s hope” – a reference to the 27,000 children 
who die of pneumonia in Uganda every year 
<http://www.newvision.co.ug/new_vision/news/1202547/27-kids-die-pneumonia-yearly>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fmedical-smart-jacket-tackles-misdiagnosis-of-pneumonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3beed78523b5733e96cb1988f928c5ee9ce5fd90%2F0_0_7142_4761%2F7142.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Medical%20smart%20jacket%20tackles%20misdiagnosis%20of%20pneumonia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fmedical-smart-jacket-tackles-misdiagnosis-of-pneumonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Medical%20smart%20jacket%20tackles%20misdiagnosis%20of%20pneumonia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fmedical-smart-jacket-tackles-misdiagnosis-of-pneumonia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3beed78523b5733e96cb1988f928c5ee9ce5fd90%2F0_0_7142_4761%2F7142.jpg>
 The Android app that accompanies the Mamaope jacket. 
“We focused on the distinguishing signs of pneumonia,” says Turyabagye. “One 
of the processes that most doctors use is a stethoscope to the check the lungs. 
But [pneumonia] tends to be on side points around the body, not just in the 
chest or back. Its accuracy of being able to diagnose what is healthy, and what 
is not, is very encouraging.”


Currently a prototype, the Mamaope jacket will undergo an official national 
medical examination in January. Certification for use in health centres and 
hospitals is expected by spring.

The jacket could be a major boon to diagnosing, treating and preventing 
pneumonia in sub-SaharanAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. 
Despite international progress tackling measles, HIV and Aids and tetanus, 
funding towards eradicating pneumonia remains extremely low: for every dollar 
spent on global health in 2011, Unicef says, only two cents went to pneumonia.

“Although sub-Saharan Africa accounts for half of pneumonia deaths among 
children under five worldwide, funding for pneumonia prevention, management and 
treatment in the region remains low,”according to Mark Young 
<https://www.unicef.org/media/media_89995.html>, senior health specialist for 
Unicef.

“More resources and more commitment at the highest level will bring us closer 
to stopping this disease from being a major child killer.”

The Mamaope jacket was shortlisted for this year’s £25,000 Africa prize for 
engineering innovation, and Turyabagye hopes this could jumpstart mass 
production of the jacket for use across the continent.


“Really, we are looking to help the next generation,” he says. “Pneumonia has 
such a high rate inUganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> and our 
neighbouring countries, if we were able to distribute in those countries we 
could save a lot of people.”
 