
Players who represent a lot of clubs in their careers can be seen as lacking 
loyalty but some actively seek the opportunity to experience new cultures while 
they play. For these travellers the allure of their wanderlust outweighs their 
love of any one particular club. This is clearly the case for the game’s most 
peripatetic player.

Busily going about his duties as Head of International Relations and Scouting 
at Bundesliga club1899 Hoffenheim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hoffenheim>, as well as appearing on 
German TV alongside Oliver Kahn, is an ex-professional footballer named Lutz 
Pfannenstiel. Standing at 6ft 2in on a good day, and with a striking 
appearance, little about the retired German goalkeeper would appear to be 
especially remarkable upon first impression, but Pfannenstiel possesses an 
unlikely world record: he is officially the only footballer to have played 
professionally in all six Fifa confederations. Pfannenstiel has represented a 
grand total of 25 clubs in 13 different countries, making him football’s 
ultimate journeyman.

Pfannenstiel showed immense promise as a youngster and represented Germany’s 
under-17s . By the time he was 19, Bayern Munich had come knocking, but 
Pfannenstiel had greater aspirations, even greater than representing the 
undisputed giants of German football. He turned them down in favour of 
embarking upon a truly unimaginable adventure.

While many would understand the choice to play for a lesser German team to 
gain experience and guarantee himself more playing time, Pfannenstiel made the 
first of many surprising decisions in 1993 by choosing to leave his team,1. FC 
Bad Kötzting <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1._FC_Bad_K%C3%B6tzting>, to play 
for Malaysian outfit Penang FA. In the years that followed his spell in 
Malaysia, Pfannenstiel began to create the reputation for which he is now 
famous. He moved to England, where he turned out for then-Premier League clubs 
Wimbledon and Nottingham Forest, before jetting off again for a loan spell with 
Orlando Pirates in South Africa.

Pfannenstiel had already seen more in four years of professional football than 
most players see in 20 but this was just the start of his restless 
globetrotting. In 1997 his career took him to Finland, where he played forTPV 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tampereen_Pallo-Veikot> and FC Haka 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FC_Haka>, before he returned to SV Wacker 
Burghausen <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SV_Wacker_Burghausen> in Germany. But 
even a reunion with his homeland couldn’t prevent further travels as just a 
year later Pfannenstiel signed for Singaporean sideGeylang IFC 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geylang_International_FC>.

Pfannenstiel’s career had not always been plain sailing. He had moved due to 
unexpected managerial sackings and clubs being declared bankrupt – and he was 
even stripped naked and left in a ditch by his prankster team-mates at 
Wimbledon’ Crazy Gang in 1994 – but at the turn of the millennium 
Pfannenstiel’s fortunes took a wrong turn and his joyous gallivanting was 
brought to an abrupt stop. The fabled traveller went from having his own TV 
show and modelling for Armani to being faced with fierce allegations of 
conspiring with bookmakers.

Despite protesting his innocence, Pfannenstiel was sentenced to imprisonment 
in one of the world’s most notorious jails for alleged match-fixing. These 101 
days behind bars proved to be by far the worst time of his life. By his own 
admission, his time in prison, the unjustness of his incarceration, the 
reported brutality, the squalor in which he was forced to live and the company 
with whom he was forced to keep, drove him to “suicidal thoughts”.

Nevertheless, along with the hope of being reunited with his family, his 
desire to play football again helped to spur his comeback. Having endured 
almost four months in unbearable conditions, a period of rehabilitation was 
required, but he was soon on the move again. Yet another continent hosted 
Pfannenstiel’s fantastic footballing voyage, as he moved toDunedin Technical 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunedin_Technical> in New Zealand.

Pfannenstiel couldn’t escape the outlandish escapades that were seemingly 
following him to every corner of the planet. In New Zealand he is reported to 
have hunted down burglars who stole one of his prized jerseys, and he somehow 
found the time to steal a penguin from a local zoo with the intention of 
keeping it in his bathtub. At this point it is surprising that the name 
Pfannenstiel isn’t used synonymously to describe some unbelievable caper: 
“Yeah, he woke up under a bridge in Romania wearing just a Gorilla costume. He 
had an absolute Pfannenstiel of a night!” However, extraordinarily, yet more 
controversy awaited the German.

On Boxing Day in 2002, back for another stint in England, this time on loan in 
the Northern Premier League for Bradford Park Avenue against Harrogate Town, 
Pfannenstiel attempted to make a save at the feet of Clayton Donaldson. In a 
freak collision, the Harrogate striker’s knee smashed into Pfannenstiel’s 
chest, collapsing both of his lungs and preventing him from being able to 
breathe. Pfannenstiel was declared dead three times (yes, you read that 
correctly) only to be successfully resuscitated by the Bradford Park Avenue 
physio.

Pfannenstiel celebrated overcoming the minor inconvenience that was his 
deathly experience by doing what he loved doing most: moving clubs and 
travelling the world. Next came a spell with Huddersfield Town, shortly 
followed by another return to Germany to play forASV Cham 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASV_Cham>. 


Baerum Sportsklubb <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B%C3%A6rum_SK> of Norway came 
next, followed by Canada’sCalgary Mustangs 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calgary_Mustangs_%28soccer%29>, another stint in 
New Zealand withOtago United <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Southern_United_FC>, 
and thenKS Vllaznia Shkoder 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KF_Vllaznia_Shkod%C3%ABr> of Albania and FC 
Bentonit Ijevan <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FC_Bentonit_Ijevan> of Armenia. 
By the time of his retirement from professional football in 2011, Vancouver 
Whitecaps, Brazil’s Atlético Ibirama, Norway’s Flekkeroy Idrettslag and 
Manglerud Star Toppfotball, as well as Namibian club The Ramblers all became 
pit-stops on the road to Pfannenstiel’s record-breaking roaming.

Unsurprisingly, he wasn’t content with simply playing the game. So staff roles 
such as club manager, goalkeeper coach and technical director also intertwined 
with his playing career, allowing him to work with many of the clubs he had 
already represented, as well as the national teams of Cuba and Namibia.

Since hanging up his boots, he has told his story in the autobiography The 
Incredible Adventures of The Unstoppable Keeper 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Unstoppable-Keeper-Lutz-Pfannenstiel/dp/1909534285>
. The book focuses on his career and his tenacious charity work, most notably 
his brainchild,Global United FC <http://www.globalunitedfc.com/en/>, an 
international, non-profit football club founded in 2009 with the aim of using 
the sport to “spread the message about climate change and sustainable 
alternatives”. The project uses Pfannenstiel’s experiences in the game as well 
as the support of many of his contemporaries, such as John Barnes, Jari 
Litmanen, Cafu, Lothar Matthaus and Zinedine Zidane.

Having attempted to spark a discussion regarding sport’s ability to influence 
social and economic change – by living for five days and four nights in an 
igloo in southern Germany – Pfannenstiel has also tried to make a difference 
with more conventional methods. He has staged local youth football tournaments 
in multiple continents, as well as organising charity matches in Namibia to 
raise awareness for climate change and the need for clean water resources in 
Africa.

Pfannenstiel isn’t content with being the only footballer to play in six 
continents and is aiming to battle the elements to add Antarctica sometime 
soon. He wants to complete his collection and raise more awareness for his 
chosen causes.

Through his marvellous travels, Pfannenstiel’s career has given him a life 
story to rival even Forrest Gump’s. His willingness to embrace any situation 
makes Jim Carrey’s Hollywood portrayal of aYes Man 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1068680/> look positively docile. Football almost 
got the better of Pfannenstiel on a few occasions; it imprisoned him and even 
took his life for a few minutes. But, thankfully, football was also the 
salvation that kept him going in his darkest hours and was the reason for his 
spectacularly bizarre story.

Lutz Pfannenstiel’s autobiography 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Unstoppable-Keeper-Lutz-Pfannenstiel/dp/1909534285>
 is out now. Follow him onTwitter <https://twitter.com/1_LPfannenstiel>.

• This article appeared first on These Football Times 
<http://www.thesefootballtimes.net/>
• Follow These Football Times <https://twitter.com/thesefootytimes> and Will 
Sharp <https://twitter.com/shillwarp> on Twitter
• Follow Guardian Football on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>
 