
It’s been eight years since the US elected its first black president. In that 
time, Barack Obama has beenapplauded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/nov/02/barack-obama-is-the-first-climate-president>
 andcriticized 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/30/us-fossil-fuel-investment-obama-climate-change-legacy>
 for his administration’s work,welcomed one dog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2009/apr/14/barack-obama-usa-dog-bo> 
– andthen another 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/aug/20/barack-obama-family-dog-sunny-video>
 – to the first family, and even began toenjoy a bit of senioritis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/shortcuts/2016/oct/25/barack-obama-year-of-dgaf-best-moments-final-months-office>
 before beingpulled abruptly back to earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/barack-obama-donald-trump-phonecalls-transition>
. We asked you to share your memories of meeting the Obamas. Here is a 
selection of your replies:


A photo-op in the Oval Office

My son had finished two years working in the White House (as associate White 
House counsel and special assistant to the president) and he and his family and 
my wife and I were invited to the Oval Office for a private session and 
photo-op with the president. Obama was in the midst of negotiating the accord 
with Iran. My wife and I were just back from visiting Iran, and she told the 
president how much the Iranian people liked Americans. ‘Oh, you were in 
Tehran?’ the president asked. I answered, ‘And also in Shiraz, other cities and 
even in Natanz, just outside the fence of their nuclear research facilities.’ 
With a sparkle in his eye, and not missing a beat, the president said, ‘Oh, we 
know where you were!’ We all laughed.– Ronald Florence, USA

Meeting the first lady

On a drizzly and humid morning in Washington DC in 2012, my mum and I stood in 
line outside Barnes & Noble to meet first ladyMichelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> and receive a signed copy 
of her book, American Grown. A week prior to the meet and greet, we were 
required to queue at Barnes & Noble, each purchase a book and hand over our 
passports for screening; they would contact us if there was an issue with 
background checks. A frantic commute from Georgetown couldn’t dim our 
enthusiasm about meeting the first lady. Inside the bookstore, we waited for 
her arrival … and in she walked, with confidence and warmth. She briefly spoke 
about the book, and then thanked all of us for standing in the rain to meet 
her. I went up to meet her and told her I was a law student from Scotland. She 
asked if I was on vacation, to which I said I was, along with my mum. She asked 
us if we were enjoying the city and if we ‘had been to all the monuments and 
the White House’. We thought it funny how she remarked about her home as ‘the 
White House’ – perhaps no matter how long you reside in 1600 Pennsylvania 
Avenue, it will always be ‘the White House” and not ‘my house’. A very honest 
and genuine insight into the life of America’s first lady.– Clare McCaughey, UK
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fmeeting-obamas-barack-michelle-guardian-readers-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c3ad7824794556a3cbf7835c49d8b9534bb351d%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meeting%20the%20Obamas%3A%20'It%20helped%20me%20become%20a%20better%20citizen%20of%20the%20world'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fmeeting-obamas-barack-michelle-guardian-readers-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meeting%20the%20Obamas%3A%20%27It%20helped%20me%20become%20a%20better%20citizen%20of%20the%20world%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fmeeting-obamas-barack-michelle-guardian-readers-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c3ad7824794556a3cbf7835c49d8b9534bb351d%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Michelle Obama hugs students at Martin Luther King middle school, an all-girls 
school in Dakar, Senegal. Photograph: Joe Penney/Reuters 
‘Meeting Obama made me a better citizen of the world’

In 2008, I took my niece and husband to Obama’s campaign stop at Winthrop 
University in Rock Hill, South Carolina. After his speech concluded, I worked 
my way to the front of the auditorium. I was able to shake his hand and tell 
him that he had the most beautiful smile and to keep on smiling because he was 
going to be the next president of the United States. Obama’s inspiring campaign 
speech that day gave me the motivation to go back to college and get a degree, 
something that I always regretted not having. I graduated in 2012 at the age of 
63 with a degree in environmental studies. That chance meeting was life 
changing, helping to make me a better citizen of the world. Thank you, 
President Obama.”– Janice Williams, USA

‘She refused to give autographs. She gave hugs instead’ 

I met Michelle Obama during an outreach day encouraging young women to apply 
to university. She stepped into the room with the grace and confidence that had 
everybody convinced before she even said a word. She spoke about how important 
it is to dream big and never let the world hold you back as a woman. 
Afterwards, she refused to give any autographs, as she gives hugs instead. The 
queue was substantial, but she hugged every single one of us and thanked us for 
helping to support and elevate young women. A completely inspiring lady who 
obviously cares deeply about helping other women.”– Catherine, UK via 
GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/58487127e4b06a0d55b1897a/5018063>

‘How many people get to yell in falsetto at the president?’

In 2010, after the passage of the Affordable Care Act for which I was an 
active advocate, I had the opportunity to meet the president at a fundraiser 
for California senator Barbara Boxer. I could not sleep for three days prior to 
the meeting because of anxiety about what to say to Obama in my 10-15 seconds 
as he walked down a reception line thanking supporters. I practiced my comment 
in the car on the way there, working on my cadence, sincerity and tone. The 
president gave a short speech and then moved down the reception line, shaking 
hands and listening to people as they spoke. When he reached me, I shook his 
hand, looked him dead in the eye – and in a voice that was the highest falsetto 
and 75 decibels too loud, I said, ‘Thank you, Mr President, for giving me hope 
again.’ He looked at me with a wry smile, as I promptly went red in the face. 
On the positive side, how many people get to yell in falsetto at the president 
of the United States? I am forever grateful he didn’t laugh.”– Michael Ozaki, 
USA
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fmeeting-obamas-barack-michelle-guardian-readers-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb00436294f10584cb311feec5794d1cfd84012e%2F0_33_3056_1835%2F3056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meeting%20the%20Obamas%3A%20'It%20helped%20me%20become%20a%20better%20citizen%20of%20the%20world'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fmeeting-obamas-barack-michelle-guardian-readers-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meeting%20the%20Obamas%3A%20%27It%20helped%20me%20become%20a%20better%20citizen%20of%20the%20world%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fmeeting-obamas-barack-michelle-guardian-readers-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb00436294f10584cb311feec5794d1cfd84012e%2F0_33_3056_1835%2F3056.jpg>
 Obama speaks in Iowa City in 2007. Photograph: Charlie Neibergall/AP 
‘He was gracious and kind’

Then senator Obama was on my flight from England back to the US. Upon boarding 
the plane, he dropped gifts that he had for Sasha and Malia, and I helped him 
pick them up – only to discover that it was him! I gave him my university card, 
in case he needed a social worker on his staff, and he humbly accepted the 
card. That was in January 2006, right before he announced his plan to run for 
office. He was a gracious and kind man, and I was happy to have met him.”– Kim 
Denu, USA

A chance encounter on the campaign trail 

My mate and I were studying at Prairie Lights Bookstore, in Iowa City, during 
Obama’s first campaign. We were the only ones on the second story when we 
realized there were snipers on the roof across from us. Obviously curious, we 
looked out the window to see what was going on, having had no idea Obama was 
planning to stop downtown after his speech. As we were looking out the window, 
Obama himself came up the stairs. He called out to us as we were looking out 
the window, asking, ‘Hey guys, would you happen to know where the children’s 
section is? I’m looking for a Star Wars book.’ We pointed him back downstairs, 
and he told us that he was probably already in trouble for heading upstairs 
before secret service had cleared it, so he better go back down. We agreed and 
wished him good luck. That was it, but such a casual and intimate moment that 
has been vivid in my mind ever since.”– Chris Moore, USA

Responses have been edited for length and clarity.
 