
Memphis Depay has shrugged off Louis van Gaal’s departure from Manchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and suggested 
that playing for José Mourinho would be “a nice prospect”.

Depay was left out of the matchday squad for the FA Cup final victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/crystal-palace-manchester-united-fa-cup-final-match-report>
 over Crystal Palace on Saturday despite becoming Van Gaal’s first signing at 
Old Trafford. The 64-year-oldwas finally informed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/23/louis-van-gaal-sacked-manchester-united-jose-mourinho>
 he would be leaving his post as manager on Sunday night by Ed Woodward, the 
executive vice-chairman, with Mourinho now expected to succeed him.

José Mourinho to Manchester United not the best fit but unlikely to be dull | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/22/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-marriage-of-convenience>
Depay, who insisted that he would succeed at United after joining them for 
£25m from PSV Eindhoven last summer, admitted things had not exactly gone to 
plan.

“I said this because I believe in myself. A love-hate relationship [with Van 
Gaal]? I do not know. And now he leaves – this is how things go in football and 
in life. You learn and you become stronger,”he told De Telegraaf 
<http://www.telegraaf.nl/telesport/voetbal/buitenlands/25852614/__Memphis___Zo_gaan_die_dingen_in_het_leven___.html?utm_source=t.co&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=twitterfeed>
.

“If the arrival of Mourinho becomes official, I’ll ask Wesley Sneijder what 
kind of man he is. That’s interesting. It all sounds so, but it is not yet 
official.”

De Telegraaf then reminded Depay that the former Internazionale midfielder 
Sneijder said Mourinho was the best coach he has ever worked under, to which 
the 22-year-old replied: “That’s a nice prospect.”

Daley Blind was more sympathetic to his compatriot’s plight. The defender, who 
was signed from Ajax in August 2014, admitted he felt the club could have 
handled Van Gaal’s departure better.

“A manager at a big club in the Premier League will always be under pressure. 
But in the case of Van Gaal he has not been treated fairly over the last six 
months,” he said.

“I think a manager with the status of Van Gaal, who has achieved so much in 
his career, deserved more respect. No matter what was said or written about him 
as a manager, he never stopped protecting us as players.

“He has defended us under any kind of circumstances, he was always taking the 
stick instead of us. I think I can say that the whole squad is grateful for 
that, for what he has done in that respect for us as players.”

Blind added: “As players we kept believing in each other and we also kept 
believing in our manager, which was part of the reason we were able to win the 
FA Cup. We achieved this as a group, including the manager. In the end, this 
was a successful season in our eyes.

“I’ve enjoyed working with the manager so much. I would have liked to have 
carried on for a long while.”
 