
Memphis Depay is open to a move away from Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> as he recognises his 
career at the club may be over. The Dutchman is willing to go out on loan in 
January as Fenerbahce retain a firm interest in him.

Depay was left behind for Thursday’s 2-1 defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/fenerbahce-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
 in Turkey, José Mourinho unable to find a place for the 22-year-old in the 
21-man squad despite the Europa League being a low priority for the manager. It 
is understood that Depay would consider leaving the club and a temporary deal 
in the winter window is more likely than a permanent departure then.

Memphis Depay’s Manchester United future in doubt after Fenerbahce exclusion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/memphis-depay-manchester-united-fenerbahce>
Depay is conscious a transfer is more realistic next summer and Dick Advocaat, 
Fenerbahce’s manager, remains an admirer after giving the Dutchman his 
professional debut for PSV Eindhoven.

Before Fenerbahce’s victory over United Advocaat signalled he is aware that 
Depay is considering his future when saying: “The potential is there for him to 
be a good player. You cannot lose that. He has the quality to be a top player 
but the problem for him is that there are so many quality players in that squad.

“So for himself it is important to start playing regularly at the age that he 
is at. Otherwise the way, I think, is that maybe he has to find another 
solution [club] because he is too good to sit on the bench. I still believe in 
him. He has the right mentality, the right character to play for United, but 
there are so many options there. Regular playing time will help his 
progression.”

Depay cost United £25m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/07/manchester-united-agree-fee-memphis-depay-psv-eindhoven>
 and was Louis van Gaal’s first signing of summer 2015 after the former manager 
moved to ensure PSV’s top scorer in their title-winning side of the previous 
season joined the club when there were a host of other suitors.

Depay was handed a first-team berth, Van Gaal playing him at first in the No10 
position before moving him out wide. Yet Depay failed to impress consistently 
in his first season and ended it having started only 16 league matches with two 
goals. This season six of his seven appearances have come as a substitute.
 