
1 The third-year student cramming for exams




The “day three of finals” look has been perfected in this year’s autumn/winter 
collections. It’s one we can all relate to: wide-eyed from overcaffeination, 
and inexplicably covered head to foot in Biro. Why has it resonated with 
designers so much this season? Maybe because it’s not hard to draw a parallel 
between the mad panic of the atelier’s deadline and that of a student’s exam 
essay. Take that silhouette: untucked with bits of fabric trailing may look 
relaxed and layered, but we see it as more “couldn’t really be bothered to get 
dressed”. There’s a hint of insomnia and last night’s kebab.

Index-finger-length shirt sleeves to hold nervously like a security blanket as 
you try to remember the true meaning of Proust’s madeleine? Thank you, Maison 
Margiela,Prada <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/prada> and Raf Simons. 
Pyjamas worn by day, because you’ve fallen into a twilight hinterland of 
vampire-like living and can’t remember what month it is? Cheers Fendi,Gucci  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci>and Cavalli.

2 The 90s clubber
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmens-fashion-special-five-key-trends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faeeebc0eae1f962596c949bac9d8bbf1ac36b4bc%2F187_175_2623_1574%2F2623.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Men%E2%80%99s%20fashion%3A%20five%20key%20trends&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmens-fashion-special-five-key-trends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Men%E2%80%99s%20fashion%3A%20five%20key%20trends&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmens-fashion-special-five-key-trends%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faeeebc0eae1f962596c949bac9d8bbf1ac36b4bc%2F187_175_2623_1574%2F2623.jpg>
 Astrid Andersen. Photograph: Getty 
Thanks to the closure of Fabric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/11/fabric-london-nightclub-close-weekend-deaths-teenagers>
, the clubber as we knew him (and her) has been relegated to the chillout room 
for all of eternity. Luckily for us, the look of the nightclub regular has been 
preserved for catwalk posterity.

He is quite possibly a minor member of a boy band or a semi-regular on Casualty

We’re not talking about the breed of discoball regular who wears a bucket hat, 
has a glow stick in one hand and an apple sour in the other. No, this is the 
type of high-end clubber who exists exclusively behind a perfectly preserved 
velvet rope. He is quite possibly a minor member of a boy band or a 
semi-regular onCasualty <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006m8wd>. His padded 
jacket (by Raf Simons or Ami) is XXXL and is the biggest you’ve ever seen, 
verging on silly. Does it need its own postcode, or a cameo in aMissy Elliott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/missyelliott> video?

His other looks are equally alpha and OTT: there’s the shiny, foil jacket that 
looks like one Puff Daddy might have worn in the pre-JLo days (Astrid Andersen, 
Calvin Klein Collection) and the faux fur coat (a bit Benny and Björn from 
Abba, via Dolce & Gabbana, Fendi and Burberry) that shouts, very loudly: “I 
have two free drinks tokens!”

3 The born-again jogger
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmens-fashion-special-five-key-trends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a9858f1b564e94435ceb646a050d9eb8a19d431%2F1216_244_1652_3933%2F1652.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Men%E2%80%99s%20fashion%3A%20five%20key%20trends&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmens-fashion-special-five-key-trends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Men%E2%80%99s%20fashion%3A%20five%20key%20trends&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmens-fashion-special-five-key-trends%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a9858f1b564e94435ceb646a050d9eb8a19d431%2F1216_244_1652_3933%2F1652.jpg>
 Christopher Shannon. Photograph: Getty 
Fashion is no longer a backstage bacchanalia of sex, drugs and rock’n’roll. 
It’s all green juices, competitive spin classes and wheat-free recipes from
goop.com <http://goop.com>. The sartorial revolution in sportswear hasn’t so 
much changed the way we dress as allowed us to go from our morning gym session 
to the office wearing the same outfit (let’s all hope there’s a shower 
available somewhere).

It makes your sedentary, microwave meal-eating, Pokémon Go-playing life look 
pitiful in comparison

This season, things have morphed slightly around our 24-7 “always on” culture: 
it’s more about mixing up sportswear with day- and nightwear. It is now 
entirely acceptable to combine your zip-up running top with shiny disco pants. 
Designers such as Christopher Shannon and Burberry have taken the born-again 
jogger as a muse. This is the guy who, after being the last one to leave the 
party, insists on smugly rubbing your face in his new, pedometer-carrying, 10km 
fun-running lifestyle. It makes your sedentary, microwave meal-eating, Pokémon 
Go-playing life look pitiful in comparison; but, on the plus side, you’re not 
the one refusing to change out of your shorts for the entire day.

4 The accountant who does slam poetry nights
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmens-fashion-special-five-key-trends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9712cbbe63c1bba89557e992c481c91176daeaa2%2F396_130_1794_4016%2F1794.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Men%E2%80%99s%20fashion%3A%20five%20key%20trends&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmens-fashion-special-five-key-trends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Men%E2%80%99s%20fashion%3A%20five%20key%20trends&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmens-fashion-special-five-key-trends%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9712cbbe63c1bba89557e992c481c91176daeaa2%2F396_130_1794_4016%2F1794.jpg>
 Topman. Photograph: Getty 
You think you know Keith, your accountant. You think you know his 2.4 kids, 
cul-de-sac-dwelling life, don’t you? But he’s not quite the open book you 
assume he is. Every fortnight, Keith is third-in-command at a regional 
spoken-word-slash-slam-poetry night. You can often hear him by the photocopier 
asking the nearest ear, “So, would you like to write anything for our next 
meeting?” He carries around a beaten-up copy of The Waste Land and writes blank 
verse about his surprisingly dark observations, so it’s no surprise that in his 
free time The Real Keith goes by the nickname Baby Baudelaire, and ditches the 
grey marl suit for a look that evokes a classic Romantic flâneur: velvet 
smoking jacket (courtesy of Topman Designs) and/or a duffle coat (Dior Homme) 
accessorised with a neckerchief (Louis Vuitton). Don’t worry, he’s working on a 
haiku about that.

5 The hippy who just won’t quit
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmens-fashion-special-five-key-trends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16e0b2c3f2a7a2ca58cc0eeb7799ffd19454082d%2F347_0_1453_3543%2F1453.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Men%E2%80%99s%20fashion%3A%20five%20key%20trends&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmens-fashion-special-five-key-trends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Men%E2%80%99s%20fashion%3A%20five%20key%20trends&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmens-fashion-special-five-key-trends%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16e0b2c3f2a7a2ca58cc0eeb7799ffd19454082d%2F347_0_1453_3543%2F1453.jpg>
 Roberto Cavalli. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
“Nothing after 1983”, is this guy’s motto. He’s not just talking about his 
music tastes, his film likes and his red wine vintage; he also means his 
personal style. His look is more analogue than the casts ofVinyl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/vinyl>, The Nice Guys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/15/the-nice-guys-review-russell-crowe-and-ryan-gosling-cannes>
 andEverybody Wants Some!! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/everybody-wants-some-review-richard-linklaters-sports-jock-comedy-is-a-winner>
 combined. This should be a cinch, considering the cyclical, self-referential 
nature of fashion. Especially this season, where the spirit of Richard 
Linklater’sDazed And Confused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/18/dazed-confused-comedy> and a lost 
summer day in 1976 lives on.

Roberto Cavalli combined slouchy blue jeans with a patterned pirate shirt and 
Converse, while Alessandro Michele at Gucci combined Suspiria colours with 
Exile On Main Street, to create something straight out of the Wes Anderson 
school of thrift-shop chic. Sure, it might seem like we are a chubby sideburn 
away from smelling like patchouli oil, powering up a lava lamp and wearing a 
clog, but this past-as-present vibe is a bit more luxe and self-aware than it 
was the first time around.
 