
Red Bull are Formula One’s famous party animals and everyone should have been 
joining in the champagne frolic here on Sunday after they produced their first 
one-two result sinceBrazil in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/24/sebastian-vettel-f1-grand-prix-win-brazil>
, a win that marked the end of their four-year world drivers’ championship 
hegemony.

The Malaysian Grand Prix was the scene of Daniel Ricciardo’s first victory for 
more than two years and few peoplebegrudged him that after his early-season 
misfortunes. The Australian not only quaffed bubbly from his racing boot but 
persuaded everyone around him to do the same.

Lewis Hamilton blames ‘higher power’ not Mercedes for F1 engine failures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/lewis-hamilton-f1-mercedes-engines-malaysian-grand-prix>
There was also the sight of the British driver Jolyon Palmer, who looks doomed 
not to survive at this level, scoring his first point inFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>.

But the race, like so many this season, was dominated by the two‑hander of a 
soap opera that isLewis Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton> and Nico Rosberg at Mercedes.

This should have been – almost had to be – Hamilton’s race, after a weekend of 
swaggering dominance. But instead of removing his team-mate from the top of the 
championship table, which Rosberg led by eight points, he saw the German extend 
that advantage to 23 with only five races to go.

It was difficult not to feel sorry for Hamilton, even for Mercedes. While 
their two drivers and head of motorsport, Toto Wolff, dissected the day, a 
number of cardboard boxes were carried out of the team’s paddock hospitality 
centre. They contained T-shirts celebrating the team winning the constructors’ 
championship. A Sunday night party was also cancelled.

To win that championship Mercedes needed to win this race, with any points 
scored by their second driver sufficing. That was the likely outcome as 
Hamilton, making the most ofhis commanding pole victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/lewis-hamilton-malaysian-gp-f1-pole-nico-rosberg>
 of the previous day, streaked into the lead, followed by Rosberg.

The first party-pooping moment came on the opening corner, when Rosberg felt 
Sebastian Vettel – whowon this race last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/29/sebastian-vettel-wins-malaysia-f1-lewis-hamilton-second>
, if that can be remembered amid his current travails – crash into his right 
rear wheel. Rosberg was put in a spin and dropped back to 21st place. Crucially 
there was no serious damage and he survived another bang later in the race, 
when he thudded into Kimi Raikkonen, earning himself a 10-second penalty that 
made no difference to him finishing third.

But the real downer for Mercedes came at the start of the 41st lap when 
Hamilton, who appeared serene at the front, seemed to be experimenting with 
self-immolation. Flames burst from the back of his car and he promptly pulled 
over and retired, his weekend in tatters. He has rarely looked as distraught as 
this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdaniel-ricciardo-wins-malaysian-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cce77a1e9e791364946716aa75149e60c81c78c%2F0_24_3992_2396%2F3992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mercedes%20chief%20plays%20down%20Lewis%20Hamilton%E2%80%99s%20fury%20after%20Malaysian%20GP%20blow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdaniel-ricciardo-wins-malaysian-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mercedes%20chief%20plays%20down%20Lewis%20Hamilton%E2%80%99s%20fury%20after%20Malaysian%20GP%20blow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdaniel-ricciardo-wins-malaysian-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cce77a1e9e791364946716aa75149e60c81c78c%2F0_24_3992_2396%2F3992.jpg>
 Lewis Hamilton climbs from his smoking car as he retires from the Malaysian 
Grand Prix. Photograph: Tee/LAT/REX/Shutterstock 
Everyone in F1 knows Hamilton is the faster driver by some distance. But he 
seems destined to lose his title this year – and to a rival whom he has 
dominated in various arenas for more than 20 years.

Wolff thought he would be leading a celebration but instead found himself 
conducting an inquest. This, after all, was the fourth time – followingChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/14/lewis-hamilton-five-place-grid-penalty-chinese-grand-prix>
,Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/26/lewis-hamilton-belgian-grand-prix-grid-penalty>
 andRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/30/lewis-hamilton-suffers-nico-rosberg-pole-russian-f1-gp>
 – that Hamilton’s race had been wrecked for reasons beyond his control and 
that does not include his awful starts in Australia, Bahrain, Canada and Italy, 
where the driver has experienced clutch difficulties for which he may not be 
entirely to blame. Amid the mayhem Wolff strove to appear sanguine. “This is a 
mechanical sport,” he said with a shrug. “It’s a very unfortunate coincidence. 
It’s been really bad for him and for the team. I have no words. I’m gutted in 
the same way.”

When he was asked about Hamilton’s immediate post-race comments, in which the 
driver said there was someone who did not want him to win the title this year, 
without immediately making it clear whether he was referring to God or 
Mercedes, Wolff smiled, in a grim sort of way. “Every remark, every answer 
[Hamilton made] is allowed after such a frustrating moment,” he said.

“If you’re in the lead and about to get back in the championship and the 
engine blows up, and a microphone is put in front of your face, he is allowed 
to say whatever he wants. It’s completely understandable.

Australia's Daniel Ricciardo wins Malaysian Grand Prix - as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/02/f1-malaysian-grand-prix-live>
“Each of us will have expressed his frustration in different ways. There is no 
explanation. It’s a freaky situation that has no rational explanation. After 
recovering a bit he [will] see that. In the heat of the moment, no problem. The 
failures have not been linked. There is no pattern that we can identify.”

Wolff praised Hamilton for going back to his mechanics and engineers to lift 
them for the challenge of Japan next weekend. “Lewis was trying to pick up the 
team, which only the greatest do. In such a moment to find moments to pick the 
engineers up for the next race, it was really great.”

Would Rosberg be described as a lucky champion? “These things happen … Nico 
had a failure at the start of the last race in 2014. It’s frustrating that it 
comes at a crucial moment in the championship. We are letting Lewis down this 
year. I don’t think it will have put any shadow on the championship. And the 
championship isn’t over yet.”

It is not over but the pattern looks increasingly irrevocable.
 