
Mercedes insist Lewis Hamilton can still take the Formula One season to the 
wire despite anotherdifficult weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/09/lewis-hamilton-national-treasure-paranoid-f1>
 at the Japanese Grand Prix.

His team-mate Nico Rosberg <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nico-rosberg> 
won for the ninth time to extend his drivers’ championship lead to 33 points 
with four races remaining this season. Hamilton, who has not won since July, 
was third and the destiny of the title is now beyond his control.

The Lewis Hamilton enigma is quite why he thinks he’s a mysterious riddle | 
Barry Glendenning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/09/lewis-hamilton-national-treasure-paranoid-f1>
Toto Wolff, the Mercedes head of motor sport, said Hamilton can still retain 
the F1 crown because he can take positives from setbacks and “he needs the 
enemy”.

Wolff said: “Thirty-three points is a lot but you can see how quick it goes. 
It’s not over – there are four weekends to go. Lewis functions best when he is 
under pressure and has a target. He will regroup. He is very strong and he 
needs the enemy – sometimes more than one. I think it will go to the end.”

If Hamilton needs enemies he should be in good shape because he made plenty 
more with his petulant behaviour at Suzuka. It started to go wrong when hemade 
a mockery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/06/lewis-hamilton-snapchat-during-formula-one-press-conference-video>
 of the opening press conference by playing with the smartphone app Snapchat.

When he was roundly pilloried for that, he compounded his mistake two days 
later, on Saturday, when hewalked out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/lewis-hamilton-walks-out-japan-gp-press-conference#img-1>
 of the media meeting without taking any questions. Then, after the race on 
Sunday, he appeared to overrule a decision by Mercedes to appeal against the 
driving of Max Verstappen.

A week earlier, in Malaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/lewis-hamilton-f1-mercedes-engines-malaysian-grand-prix>
, Hamilton had risked “losing the dressing room” at Mercedes when he said there 
was someone who did not want him to win the title – his engine had blown 15 
laps from victory.

The Sky TV commentator Martin Brundle spoke for many in Japan when he said: 
“Instead of focusing on the world championship, Hamilton seems to be focusing 
on an app that puts bunny ears on people. It’s childish and stupid.”

Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> is desperately in 
need of promotion and it would be interesting to see what the American company 
Liberty Media, who isexpected to complete its takeover of the sport next year, 
would make of their star turn refusing to engage with the media.

The Red Bull team principal, Christian Horner, also believes the season is far 
from over. “You see sportsmen get on a crest of a wave and it is all going 
Nico’s way while Lewis has had quite a few tough races.

“He will brush himself down, I am sure. He only needs a sniff of something – a 
DNF [did not finish] for Nico and a win for Lewis and he is right back in the 
game again. Things can change so quickly.

“We saw it with Kimi Raikkonen when he stole the championship from under the 
noses of Lewis and Fernando Alonso in 2007. There are still 100 points to play 
for and it would be a foolish man to rule Lewis out at this stage.”
 