
Mercedes are to supply their engines to the Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> back-markers Manor Marussia for 
next season.

Marussia, the smallest team in the sport, went into administration at the end 
of last season and survivedonly after a late rescue deal was put together 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/04/marussia-formula-one-season-manor>
. They have used Ferrari engines for the past two years.

Jenson Button settles future and will race for McLaren in F1 next season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/01/jenson-button-race-mclaren-2016-formula-one>
The new partnership comes amid a general shakeup of the engine landscape, with 
Renault set to buy the Mercedes-powered Lotus and Red Bull’s two teams 
negotiating with Ferrari after breaking from Renault.

The champions Mercedes, whose engine is the most competitive in the sport, 
said the deal withManor <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manor> was a 
multi-year one and the units provided would be “current year”.

“This new agreement should enable us to keep our supply roster at three 
customer teams for 2016, which is our ideal level in terms of technical and 
logistical capacity,” said the Mercedes high-performance powertrains director 
Andy Cowell.

“We will be targeting gains in both performance and reliability for the 2016 
power unit and look forward to delivering those to our new customers at Manor 
Marussia F1 team.”

Mercedes also provide engines for Force India and the former champions 
Williams as well as the works team of Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg but have 
balked at supplying their arch rivals Red Bull.

The Marussia principal John Booth said his team would resume a previous 
technical partnership with Williams Advanced Engineering for the supply of 
transmission and suspension components.

“Combined with Mercedes-Benz power units, we are very excited about the 
strength of our new powertrain package and what it means for the long-term 
future of our team,” he said.

Marussia have scored no points this season, after taking two last year with 
the late French driver Jules Bianchi in Monaco. Their drivers this season have 
been Britain’s Will Stevens, the American Alexander Rossi and Spain’s Roberto 
Merhi.

The 2014 points secured ninth place in the championship, ahead of Sauber and 
now-defunct Caterham, and prize money that has been crucial to the team’s 
survival.

“Together with the potential we are seeing with our 2016 car in the wind 
tunnel, the Mercedes-Benz power unit will assist our return to aggressive 
performance development with effect from next season,” said Booth.
 