
Mercedes team bosses were locked together in gloomy inquest just minutes after 
the start of Sunday’s Spanish Grand Prix afterLewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg 
crashed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/15/f1-spanish-gp-live-lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg>
, leaving the field clear forRed Bull’s Max Verstappen to win the race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/max-verstappen-youngest-winner-f1-history-spanish-gran-prix>
. Ferrari’s Kimi Raikkonen was second with his team-mate Sebastian Vettel in 
third.

Max Verstappen becomes youngest F1 winner in history at Spanish Grand Prix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/max-verstappen-youngest-winner-f1-history-spanish-gran-prix>
Hamilton took the lead from pole but Rosberg went past him on the outside on 
the first corner. But coming out of the third bend Hamilton saw a gap in 
Rosberg’s defence and attempted to overtake him on the inside. Rosberg moved 
over and squeezed Hamilton on to the grass. The world champion went into a spin 
and clipped Rosberg’s car as he did so, putting both cars out of the race.

Rosberg appeared to be over aggressive but you are allowed to make one block 
to defend your lead. Hamilton, possibly piqued after making yet another 
indifferent start, may have had a rush of blood and was determined to get 
straight back at his team-mate. It was a terrible day for both drivers, but 
Rosberg, nursing a 43-point lead from the first four races, clearly came out of 
the situation the better.

Niki Lauda, Mercedes’ non-executive chairman, was in no doubt about who was 
the guilty party. “It is stupid, we could’ve won this race,” he said. “Lewis is 
too aggressive. I need to talk to them and hear their explanation and then we 
will see what happens.” But BBC’s Radio 5’s analyst Allan McNish was probably 
more accurate in his assessment when he said: “Nico Rosberg was in front at 
turn three, but it was a little bit of a misunderstanding. It was very robust 
from both drivers. Rosberg was moving over to defend the corner – it was two 
guys going for the same piece of tarmac, but the big loser out of this isLewis 
Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton>.”

F1: Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg crash out of Spanish GP – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/15/f1-spanish-gp-live-lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg>
The stewards were meeting to assess the situation and they and Mercedes were 
anxious to speak to both drivers. If Hamilton does receive reprimand he will be 
hit with a 10-place penalty for the next race in Monaco – the worst race on the 
schedule for overtaking.

These two have history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/02/rosberg-hamilton-warned-mercedes-axe>
. In 2014 Rosberg was blamed for crashing into Hamilton and earlier that year 
he appeared to be guilty of compromising the world champion’s efforts to win 
pole at Monaco. Then, in Austin last year, the race Hamilton won to take his 
third title, there was another coming together of the two. Rosberg felt that 
Hamilton had been too aggressive in completing an overtaking move. Replays 
vindicated Hamilton but there was bad blood after the race. When Hamilton 
lobbed a cap into Rosberg’s lap the German furiously flung it back at him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-crash-out-f1-spanish-gp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2370ff1e1bc8e1393a56777f68a42387edb1a965%2F0_0_3500_2335%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mercedes%20inquest%20after%20Hamilton%20and%20Rosberg%20crash%20out%20of%20F1%20Spanish%20Grand%20Prix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-crash-out-f1-spanish-gp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mercedes%20inquest%20after%20Hamilton%20and%20Rosberg%20crash%20out%20of%20F1%20Spanish%20Grand%20Prix&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Flewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-crash-out-f1-spanish-gp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2370ff1e1bc8e1393a56777f68a42387edb1a965%2F0_0_3500_2335%2F3500.jpg>
 Red Bull’s Max Verstappen leads Ferrari’s Kimi Raikkonen in Catalunya. 
Photograph: Albert Gea/Reuters 
It did not take Mercedes long to come out with a safe party line. Their head 
of motorsport Toto Wolff said: “Niki Lauda has the drivers’ opinion and 
instinct reaction and it is fair enough. From a teams perspective we have 
looked at all the pictures and looked at the data and it is not clear cut. 
Lewis tried to dive in, Nico closed the door so I would say let’s wait for what 
the stewards say. Both of them were upset about the situation and they know 
what effort went into building the car and there was not any finger pointing.”

When asked if Mercedes would change their view on the two racing each other he 
was very clear. He said: “No. We didn’t have such an incident for a long time. 
If you let them race and if you don;’t have team orders there will be contact. 
I am upset and angry about it but I don’t think I will change the approach.”
 