
When Jane pipped Selasi to become the first Star Baker of the 2016 series, she 
was so surprised she had to blink back tears. If it seemed a sign of things to 
come, it wasn’t: thereafter, Jane bumped safely along in the middle of the 
pack, out of danger and mostly out of the spotlight. It’s not a bad strategy in 
a season afflicted by the Curse of the Star Baker – on top one week, out the 
next.

Week one was also just about the last time Jane’s emotions seemed to get the 
better of her. Where Selasi remained chilled to the point of stasis, Jane was 
simply unflappable, taking both setbacks and compliments in her stride. “Oh, 
thank you!” is about as effusive as she gets. Throughout the competition she’s 
retained the unassuming air of someone who knows exactly what she’s doing. 
“She’s always ahead of the game, isn’t she?” said Selasi in the semi-final.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-jane-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33bf88f39e527a91ff613203a88dde49e4e0586b%2F0_0_1089_653%2F1089.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Messy%20and%20marvellous%3A%20why%20Jane%20should%20win%20the%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-jane-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Messy%20and%20marvellous%3A%20why%20Jane%20should%20win%20the%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-jane-should-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33bf88f39e527a91ff613203a88dde49e4e0586b%2F0_0_1089_653%2F1089.jpg>
 ‘Oh, thank you!’ is about as effusive as Jane gets. Photograph: BBC 
A garden designer by trade and the granddaughter of a bakery owner, Jane 
Beedle was clearly one of the most experienced bakers in the kitchen; not the 
oldest, but older than most. Her official bio lists her twin nemeses as 
macarons and ciabatta, but her Instagram account features a pretty 
professional-looking example of the former. And when she goes wrong, she knows 
exactly why. At times it feel as if she’s got more than one series of GBBO 
under her belt. In a show where frustration and panic are the chief emotions on 
offer, she has refused to give in to either.

That’s not why I like her, though. I like her because she’s messy. When you 
think about it, the oddest thing about Bake Off is that everybody appears to be 
cooking in their church clothes. Not Jane. Just as athletes strive to leave 
everything on the field, Jane leaves it all on the worktop, concentrating so 
intently that she’s oblivious to the blob of meringue on her nose. She emerged 
from one challenge coated to the elbows in flour and icing, with a chocolate 
handprint on her top. She must have finished the day with the silhouette of an 
apron on her outfit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-jane-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1b9eec8c7571eca7f95138b52b6413727b14f6c%2F0_279_4289_2573%2F4289.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Messy%20and%20marvellous%3A%20why%20Jane%20should%20win%20the%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-jane-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Messy%20and%20marvellous%3A%20why%20Jane%20should%20win%20the%20Great%20British%20Bake%20Off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fthe-great-british-bake-off-2016-why-jane-should-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1b9eec8c7571eca7f95138b52b6413727b14f6c%2F0_279_4289_2573%2F4289.jpg>
 Jane leaves it all on the worktop. Photograph: Love Productions/Tom Graham/BBC 
In spite of her messiness, Jane has a particular talent for the sort of fussy 
precision that undoes a lot of GBBO contestants. She’s good at detailed piping 
and flat, shiny surfaces. She can maintain the consistency required to turn out 
24 identical something-or-others with two kinds of sponge. She may not have 
produced the flashiest showstoppers of the series, but Bake Off is, first and 
foremost, an endurance test. Jane has already proved she can stand the heat.
 