
Mesut Özil has said he would like to sign a new contract with Arsenal but that 
he wants to know ifArsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> is staying at the Emirates 
Stadium beyond this season before committing to the club.

The attacking midfielder, who has 18 months left on his contract, said in an 
interview with the German football magazine Kicker 
<http://www.kicker.de/news/fussball/intligen/startseite/668078/artikel_oezil_ich-moechte-erst-klarheit-was-wenger-macht.html>
: “I am very, very happy at Arsenal and have let the club know that I would be 
ready to sign a new contract. The fans want that I stay and now it is just down 
to the club.”

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in England, Spain, Germany, France 
and Italy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Özil, who signed for Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> in 
2013 after three years at Real Madrid, said it is not a financial decision: 
“The club knows that I am here most of all because of Arsène Wenger. He is the 
one who signed me and he is the one whose trust I have. The club also knows 
that I want to be clear what the manager is going to [in the future].” Wenger’s 
contract runs out this summer.

The German international has been criticised for not signing a new contract 
by, among others, Thierry Henry, who said that the German international and 
Alexis Sánchez, who also has 18 months left on his deal, were “holding the club 
hostage” with their wage demands.

Özil, however, said he does not care what former players are saying about him 
as they do not know the full story. “Everyone has a right to say what they want 
but what they have to say doesn’t interest me,” he said. “Ex-players or other 
people who have a view don’t know what is actually being said between me and 
the club.”

Wenger, when asked about the possibility of renewing of Özil’s and Sánchez’s 
contracts beyond 2018, said last month that “every club loses big players” and 
that no individual is bigger than Arsenal. He said: “Arsenal is a big club. It 
is not one or two players who will make the difference. The important thing is 
we are in a strong financial position; that was not the case before [when the 
club changed stadiums].

“We are in a financial position where we can plan our future and do what we 
want to do. And what is important is always to take care of the values of the 
club, and the identity of the club, and not to depend too much on one or two 
players.”
 