
Arsène Wenger says there remains “a gap” between Mesut Özil’s ability and his 
achievements on the pitch as the German gets ready to return to theArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> first team. The manager also 
conceded that Santi Cazorla has had another operation and may not play again 
this season.

Özil has been the object of much speculation regarding his future at the 
Emirates, having just 18 months left to run on his current Arsenal contract. At 
the same time the midfielderis under scrutiny on the pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/arsene-wenger-mesut-ozil-arsenal-danny-welbeck-aaron-ramsey>
,having been accused of going missing in big matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/19/mesut-ozil-arsene-wenger-arsenal>
. Wenger, however, believes the 28-year-old, who is back in the squad for the 
game against Swansea City on Saturday after missing the past three games 
through illness, still has the desire to improve himself further.

Mesut Özil’s Arsenal future does not depend on mine, says Arsène Wenger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/mesut-ozil-arsene-wenger-arsenal-new-contract>
“I think what you want of him is to score goals,” Wenger said. “Certainly we 
all feel there is still a gap between what he can do [and what he delivers on 
the pitch]. I think he is moving in the right way but with such a talent maybe 
you are a little bit unjust because you want always more. You feel there is no 
limitation in his game and so you are always ‘come on, give us more’. You 
always have the feeling that they can do more. This is not a frustration, it’s 
a target. We all are human beings who can improve every day, the problem is 
that we have to first realise that we want more, ask how can we get more and 
after that, we have to do it.

“I think Özil has a passion for the game. You do not get the technique he has 
just by the gift of God. You have to focus on every single pass you make from 
when you’re a kid to get that touch. So that means you have to have a passion 
for the game.”

Wenger says he remains “very relaxed” about Özil’s new contract. He also 
played down remarks, made by the World Cup winner in an interview with the 
German magazine Kicker, that he would only stay at the clubif Wenger extended 
his own deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/mesut-ozil-arsene-wenger-arsenal-new-contract>
, which expires at the end of this season. “I think [the interview] has been a 
bit misinterpreted,” Wenger said.

“He would like to know what happens on the managerial front of course, but I 
don’t think that is the main part of his decision. There are many other 
ingredients in any negotiation and hopefully we will find a conclusion very 
quickly with him. I’m very relaxed about the situation.”

Arsène Wenger says Mesut Özil not exempt from Arsenal’s dirty work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/arsene-wenger-mesut-ozil-arsenal-danny-welbeck-aaron-ramsey>
Wenger also admitted that the Spain international Cazorla, who has been 
missing from the Arsenal side since injuring an achilles tendon in mid-October, 
had undergone another operation and was still some way from returning to full 
fitness. “He had a little procedure, yes, and I have a meeting with the medical 
people today to see what it was,” Wenger said. “Certainly he will not be 
available in the next six weeks, that is for sure. I hope he will be back this 
season but you have to count six weeks preparation and right now he’s not at 
that level. Let’s hope he can come back in the next three or four weeks on the 
pitch.”

On the transfer front Wenger rejected out of hand reports that Arsenal had 
made a £56m bid for the Torino striker Andrea Belotti. The Serie A club’s 
sporting director, Gianluca Petrachi, said on Sunday that he had turned down an 
offer of that amount from Arsenal for the Italy international but Wenger denied 
Arsenal had made a bid, adding “that is what you call today fake news”. He did, 
however, concede that the right-sided full-back Carl Jenkinson could leave the 
club, with Crystal Palace the most likely destination.

“It’s a possibility that Carl will move in the next two or three days,” Wenger 
said. “It’s possible that it’s just a matter of time but I can’t tell you any 
more because we haven’t come to any conclusion yet.”

When pressed as to whether Palace was the likely destination for Jenkinson he 
said: “You look well informed.”

Alexis Sánchez, Laurent Koscielny and Petr Cech are, together with Özil, back 
in the squad having been rested for the FA Cup third-roundvictory against 
Preston North End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/preston-north-end-arsenal-fa-cup-match-report>
 last weekend.
 