
Even the most optimistic Arsenal supporter would not have imagined things 
being so easy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/olympiakos-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
. Arsène Wenger’s side were defensively organised, tactically intelligent and
ruthless up front 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/olivier-giroud-arsenal-hat-trick-olympiakos>
, but their task was made significantly easier thanks to a bafflingly cavalier 
approach from Olympiakos.

Arsenal’s recovery complete after Olivier Giroud’s treble sinks Olympiakos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/olympiakos-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
The peculiar situation before this game – Olympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/olympiakos> knowing they could lose and 
still progress – made things difficult for their coach, Marco Silva. In the 
build-up, he predictably insisted his players would play to win. “Never in any 
game, in any event, do we prepare to lose, and so we will not be doing that 
now,” he said.

Nevertheless, reports suggested Olympiakos would concede possession, soak up 
pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/marco-silva-olympiakos-arsenal-champions-league>
 and counterattack opportunistically. Nothing could have been further from the 
truth – Silva left his two wide players, Felipe Pardo and Sebá, high up the 
pitch against Arsenal’s full-backs, and pushed the midfielder Kostas Fortounis 
forward into a position where the visitors’ centre-backs, rather than central 
midfielders, were challenging him, while the full-backs charged forward.

In possession, it was 4-2-4 at times, and the transitions to a more defensive 
shape were barely noticeable, as Silva asked his midfielders to press. For the 
first 15 minutes, you could have been forgiven for thinking that the situation 
was the reverse – Olympiakos desperately needing the victory.

It was a peculiar strategy from a coach who has built a reputation as a fine 
tactician. In ordinary circumstances Arsenal do not enjoy playing against 
packed, solid defences; they love breaking into space. That is particularly 
true given the nature ofthis injury-hit side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/30/arsenal-injuries-theory-arsene-wenger-alexis-sanchez>
: the wide men – Joel Campbell and Theo Walcott – are pure speedsters, Mesut 
Özil is at his best when launching counterattacks, Aaron Ramsey is back in his 
favoured central midfield position and loves making lung-busting forward runs.

The exception, perhaps, was Olivier Giroud – the penalty-box poacher who lacks 
pace, so it was peculiar that the Frenchman would turn out to be Arsenal’s 
hat-trick hero. Still, Arsenal’s first two goals both originated from direct 
attacks. First, Ramsey sprinted down the left and delivered a fine near-post 
cross, which Giroud converted with significant help from the goalkeeper 
Roberto. Then, at the start of the second half, quick play foundArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> breaking at three stranded 
Olympiakos defenders, with Campbell slipping the ball neatly through to Giroud 
who converted coolly. His hat-trick goal came from the penalty spot.

Olivier Giroud shows animal instinct to destroy Olympiakos with hat-trick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/olivier-giroud-arsenal-hat-trick-olympiakos>
Olympiakos’s approach played perfectly into Arsenal’s hands. Özil would have 
expected to spend this game collecting short passes from the central 
midfielders before attempting to slip a penetrative pass between eight 
opponents parked behind the ball. Instead, he received those passes on the run, 
drifting into pockets of space either side of Luka Milivojevic, his dream 
scenario.

Campbell and Walcott would have expected to be forced wide, stretching a 
compact defence determined to remain narrow. Instead, they were allowed to make 
dangerous runs between defenders and in behind, helped by Olympiakos’s two 
centre-backs sticking tight to Giroud when the Frenchman moved deep.

Arsenal had qualification secured with 20 minutes remaining. Before the game, 
Wenger might have worried about the imbalanced nature of his substitutes’ bench 
– he had an entire back four alongside him – but defensive options proved 
perfect for the latter stages, with Kieran Gibbs replacing Walcott as Arsenal 
protected their lead.

At 3-0, Arsenal showed Olympiakos what they should have done – two banks of 
four, the central midfielders remaining in position, the wingers breaking 
forward sporadically. Arsenal have often been eliminated from this competition 
through tactical naivety – here, it was a complete role reversal.
 