
Mexico City is in the mood for a fiesta and clearly has no intention of doing 
it by half. ThatFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> has 
arrived in town is impossible to miss – the posters, the promotion and the 
beaming local fans are all too obvious. Better still there is a buzz – a 
throbbing sense of excitement and anticipation that is unique to venues where 
passion for the sport far outweighs crass commercialism or political agendas.

On Wednesday, while the teams were unpacking in the paddock, Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> City was revelling in their arrival, 
as well it might. Amid the exaggerated caterwauling of the doom-mongers fearful 
of dropping attendances and viewing figures, this weekend’s race is part of an 
almost unparalleled success story from which F1 would do well to learn.

Nico Rosberg leads home Lewis Hamilton to win F1 Mexican Grand Prix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/01/nico-rosberg-wins-mexican-grand-prix-f1>
After an absence from the calendar of 23 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/01/nico-rosberg-wins-mexican-grand-prix-f1>
, the Mexican Grand Prix returned last year with a bang. That the race was a 
dead rubber in the championship mattered not a jot to the fans and 134,850 of 
them packed the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez. Only Silverstone could boast a 
bigger attendance in 2015 and then only by a few thousand. More impressively, 
the numbers could have been higher. The circuit is located in a public park – 
limited both by space and by having the equivalent of listed status – so 
organisers were unable to construct more grandstands.

To put the figures in perspective, the attendance at Bahrain in 2015 was 
32,000; in Malaysia 44,611. It is what has happened here in Mexico City in 2016 
that really stands out, however. New tracks traditionally suffer a second year 
drop-off on being added or returning to F1. Austria, for example, had a 
disastrous 20% fall in 2015 after coming back in 2014. In contrast, Mexico is 
already 99% sold out again and the numbers are set to be up on last year.

History has its part to play in this passion for F1 – the circuit is named in 
honour of the brothers Rodríguez. In 1961, in his first race at Monza, Ricardo 
was the youngest driver to qualify on the front row – a record he held untilMax 
Verstappen bettered him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/01/max-verstappen-ferrari-f1-sebastian-vetttel-kimi-raikkonen>
 at Spa this year – and raced for Ferrari in 1961 and 1962, taking best 
finishes of fourth and sixth from six races and a second at Le Mans in 1960. He 
was killed aged only 20 at his home grand prix in 1962 when the suspension on 
his Lotus 24 failed on the high-speed banking of the Peraltada – the 
awe-inspiring and daunting turn now truncated for safety purposes.

His elder brother Pedro was even more successful, winning two grands prix, in 
South Africa and at Spa during an eight-year career in F1. He also won Le Mans 
in 1968, one of many victories in sports cars and was acknowledged as a master 
in the wet. Tragically he too died in an accident, at the Norisring in 
Nuremberg, in 1971. Both were formidable drivers and are still revered in 
Mexico, while the interest they engendered in the sport is palpable today.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Ff1-mexico-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-autodromo-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%20Mexico%20GP%20guide%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20the%20Aut%C3%B3dromo%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Ff1-mexico-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-autodromo-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%20Mexico%20GP%20guide%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20the%20Aut%C3%B3dromo%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Ff1-mexico-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-autodromo-video&media=>
F1 Mexico GP guide: everything you need to know about the Autódromo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/28/f1-mexico-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-autodromo-video>
The presence of two Mexican drivers on the grid – Sergio Pérez and Esteban 
Gutiérrez is, of course, also a factor, but not one that can be taken for 
granted. Daniil Kvyat’s presence at Red Bull did not send crowds rocketing in 
Russia after all. But perhaps most importantly of all is the way the race is 
being run. It is organised as a public-private venture between the federal 
government and promoters CIE and they have done so with both care and vision.

“We tried to assess the market to make it interesting for the local people,” 
Rodrigo Sánchez, the race director of communications, explains. “We also did a 
survey to try and understand the pricing situation locally and we have proved 
successful.”

A three-day general admission ticket costs around 1,500 pesos – approximately 
£66 – and rather than just offering the usual spot on a muddy bank or pressed 
up against a chain-link fence, it includes a place in a grandstand.

Crucially in terms of the local population, it is the equivalent price of 
attending around three football matches – something within reach of many 
people. “People are happy to save for the event,” says Sánchez. “We saw on 
digital platforms people’s opinion right after the first race they already 
wanted ticket information for this year.”

Lewis Hamilton wins F1 US Grand Prix with Nico Rosberg second
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-us-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-report>
The result has not just been good at the turnstiles but also financially. The 
grand prix has been assessed to have contributed $232.8m to the economy with a 
further $277.8m worth of global media exposure.

The organisers will not reveal how much they paid for the rights to the race 
but even the top end of the usual prices will be dwarfed by these numbers. That 
F1 must endlessly cycle through half-empty, loss-making, white-elephant 
circuits is clearly not necessarily a given.

Nor is Mexico taking its success lightly. “We have to put in to keep growing 
the sport,” says Sánchez. “Growing the fanbase, keep bringing new people to the 
event, new generations in order to keep F1 growing. This is just the beginning 
for us. We need to keep building and working toward the future and thinking 10 
or 15 years ahead to where we want to be.” Which is an approach new owners 
Liberty might appreciate having already stated their intent to expand the sport 
in the Americas.

On the track, for Lewis Hamilton this weekend is all about the battle for the 
championship – aftervictory at the Circuit of the Americas in Texas last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-us-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-report>
, it is another race he must win and should he do so, will doubtless be roared 
home by tens of thousands of appreciative fans.

But Mexico’s ambition goes beyond the chequered flag on Sunday – a fiesta that 
can only be good for F1 should it continue long into the future.
 