
The TV chef Michel Roux Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/michel-roux-jr> has admitted his 
Michelin-starred Le Gavroche restaurant keeps 100% of the service charge added 
to bills instead of distributing the cash to staff in addition to their wages.


The former Masterchef judge, who this week apologised  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/13/michel-roux-jr-apologises-paying-chefs-minimum-wage-le-gavroche>
for paying chefs beneath the legal minimum wage followinga Guardian 
investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/17/tv-chef-michel-roux-jr-paid-kitchen-staff-below-minimum-wage>
, has revealed he treats the 13% service charge “as revenue”. With the fixed 
price menu with wine at his restaurant in Mayfair, London, costing £212 a 
person, it is likely to amount to several thousand pounds a week.

The government said earlier this year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/521946/bis-16-172-tipping-consultation.pdf>
 that it believed all discretionary payments for service, after tax where 
appropriate, should be received by the worker. It ran a consultation this 
summer and said it was considering prohibiting employers from taking any cut to 
provide greater protection to workers.

Michel Roux Jr's failure to pay chefs minimum wage 'not acceptable'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/18/michel-roux-jr-chefs-minimum-wage-le-gavroche>
The issue at Le Gavroche arose when chefs angered at their illegally low pay 
complained last month that their situation was made worse by not sharing in the 
service charge that many diners assume supplements staff wages.

At the time a spokeswoman for the restaurant said: “All Le Gavroche staff, 
front of house and kitchen, share in the 13% discretionary service charge.”

Now, following further questioning, the restaurant has made clear the service 
charge goes into restaurant revenues. No member of staff receives any of it 
over and above their basic wages.

“Wages are not dependent on fluctuating levels of discretionary service 
charges or cash tips,” the spokeswoman said. “Gratuities form just one part of 
the payroll each month. Service charge is treated as revenue, and the 
restaurant pays all taxes accordingly.”

One chef who spoke to the Guardian said: “Roux was fully aware that to share 
the service charge is what the public expects. He was purporting to share the 
service charge, but he wasn’t. We don’t do this job for the money, but he makes 
out that he shares this money and he doesn’t.”

A spokeswoman for Roux said that in the original statement he was trying to 
make clear that the waiters and chefs were treated equally in the matter of 
service charge, not that they received any of it in addition to their wages.

Roux has also said that in future the 13% service charge will be included in 
customers’ bills, although again, none of it will go to staff in addition to 
their wages.

“There is too much ambiguity between service charges and tips,” he said. “So 
from the end of January 2017 we are going ‘service included’. This will be 
marked on the bill and menus so as to make it clear that no further payment or 
gratuity is needed and credit card slips will be closed.”

Roux said this week he was “embarrassed and sorry” after the Guardian revealed 
he was paying chefs as little as £5.50 per hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/17/tv-chef-michel-roux-jr-paid-kitchen-staff-below-minimum-wage>
 when they were working 68 hours per week.

But he also recalled his own training in Paris in 1976, saying he slept on his 
grandmother’s couch and washed in the kitchen sink. “Did I look at my payslip?” 
he said. “Not once.”

According to a government consultation on service charge and tipping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/02/tips-should-go-to-workers-not-employers-government-report-restaurants>
, 61% of diners believe staff should keep 100% of service charges.

It followed media reports of several restaurant chains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/23/restaurant-tipping-policy-forces-waiters-to-pay-to-work>
 keeping more of the service charge than many customers would expect.

The British Hospitality Association <http://www.bha.org.uk/>, of which Le 
Gavroche is a member, has proposed restaurants should be legally required to 
tell customers how service charges and tips are distributed among staff.
 