
The Michelin-starred chef and TV presenter Michel Roux Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/michel-roux-jr> has criticised the 
glut of cookery contests on TV and shows that glorify celebrity chefs.

Roux, the former MasterChef: The Professionals presenter who quit the BBC last 
year and will front new Channel 4 series, Kitchen Impossible, said there were 
“possibly too many” TV cookery shows.

He took aim at series in which contestants have to outdo each other in the 
kitchen and programmes that “glorify the chef and put us on a pedestal”.

“Beating people is not the best way to approach life. It’s wrong,” Roux told 
the new issue of Radio Times, when asked about BBC1’sMasterChef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/masterchef> and The Great British 
Bake Off.

The hit BBC1 baking show ended its current series, won by Nadiya Hussain, with 
more than 13 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/08/the-great-british-bake-off-final-nadiya-jamir-hussain-gbbo>
 viewers earlier this month, the biggest television audience of the year.

Roux said TV cookery shows “can glorify the chef and put us on a pedestal. I 
worry about that; it brings young people into our industry for the wrong 
reasons”.

He said: “They think they are going to be the next Jamie [Oliver] or Gordon 
[Ramsay]. But it doesn’t happen overnight. They don’t realise that actually 
Jamie, Gordon and myself worked our backsides off to get to where we are.”

Roux, who left the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/11/michel-roux-jr-leaves-bbc-masterchef>
 after refusing to give up his paid endorsement of Bartlett potatoes, backed 
Oliver’s recent public attack on sugar and said government health advice was 
often “unclear and confused”.

“Natural fats, dairy fats, are good for you in moderation. Sugar is the enemy, 
always has been. Look at the label, if there’s anything with ‘ose’ on the end, 
put it down,” he said.

“Chefs who are in the media have a duty to get the message across – we should 
be teaching our children to eat properly. We should be spending more time in 
the kitchen, even if it’s only once or twice a week.

“There are major health issues out there – if we can help by giving advice 
about how to cook and what we eat then it can only be good.”

He added: “There have been at least two generations of mothers no longer 
cooking at home and no longer passing on their basic cooking knowledge. That is 
part of the problem.”

Roux’s new Channel 4 series will put eight people with disabilities, including 
Asperger’s syndrome, autism and Down’s syndrome, through an intensive four-week 
introduction to catering.

“Don’t call them contestants,” Roux told the listings magazine. “They’re not 
competing.

“I had never encountered them before so it was very hard, but I adapted. 
Tourette syndrome, though. The physical ticks, the very very crude language… 
Tourette syndrome absolutely shocked me.”

Roux said he was “not a celebrity chef. A celebrity chef is a chef who spends 
more time on television than in their kitchen. The television work that I have 
done is a by-product of my job, it has never ever taken over my life.”
 