
Let me begin by running through some basic facts we all know to be true. 
First, Michael McIntyre isn’t funny. Second, Michael McIntyre doesn’t so much 
tell jokes as just baldly list things that people do. Third,Michael McIntyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/michael-mcintyre> is a floppy-haired berk 
with a shrill voice who doesn’t deserve any of his success.

OK, good. Now that we’re all agreed on that, here’s something I’ve reluctantly 
come to realise. Michael McIntyre’s Big Show is the best Saturday evening 
variety show in years. God, that felt weird.

It’s true, though. Despite everything – despite knowing that McIntyre is 
ultimately theMrs Brown’s Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mrs-brown-s-boys> of standup, despite 
seeing the bad job he did onBritain’s Got Talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent>, despite his 
unforgivable practice of prefixing household items with the word “man” for a 
series of easy anti-laughs – Michael McIntyre’s Big Show has managed to beat 
the odds to become something genuinely entertaining.

Admittedly the competition isn’t great. The BBC has been especially guilty in 
recent years of handing Saturday night TV shows to whichever personality 
happens to be closest to the office –John Barrowman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2008/sep/07/women.relationships1> had 
one,Rob Brydon <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/rob-brydon> had one, Clare 
Balding had one,Gabby Logan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/06/gabby-logan-interview-how-i-get-ready>
 had one – in the berserk hope that their popularity could single-handedly 
shoulder a circus of a show like this. The end results are always thin gruel: 
tonally inconsistent messes that coast along until they’re quietly put out of 
their misery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmichael-mcintyre-big-show-saturday-night-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F702941545bf54024f6f07fe161c3884d9c002dcc%2F0_0_4284_2856%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20McIntyre%20%E2%80%93%20the%20new%20king%20of%20Saturday%20night.%20Who%20knew%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmichael-mcintyre-big-show-saturday-night-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20McIntyre%20%E2%80%93%20the%20new%20king%20of%20Saturday%20night.%20Who%20knew%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmichael-mcintyre-big-show-saturday-night-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F702941545bf54024f6f07fe161c3884d9c002dcc%2F0_0_4284_2856%2F4284.jpg>
 Feels like it was tailor-made for McIntyre … Big Show. Photograph: BBC/Hungry 
Bear Media LTD/Gary Moyes 
Big Show, though, actually feels like it was tailor-made for McIntyre. It’s 
filmed in a theatre, not an identikit shiny-floored studio, which helps to root 
it in a sense of space. It begins with five minutes of standup – like a 
chatshow monologue, freed from the constraints of topicality and bristling with 
hell-for-leather physicality – that, unusually for this type of show, doesn’t 
feel like it was entirely constructed by the same team of “programme 
associates” that work on every sitcom and panel show going.

Best of all, there are stunts like Send to All, where McIntyre hijacks a 
celebrity’s phone and sends a text to everyone in their contact list. As a 
segment, it sounds as bland as anythingJames Corden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/james-corden> would invent, but in 
practice it often thrillingly threatens to come apart at the seams.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmichael-mcintyre-big-show-saturday-night-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a40ac397995b933cf7bf45207f874d4aa5f5fb1%2F0_0_4284_2856%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20McIntyre%20%E2%80%93%20the%20new%20king%20of%20Saturday%20night.%20Who%20knew%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmichael-mcintyre-big-show-saturday-night-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20McIntyre%20%E2%80%93%20the%20new%20king%20of%20Saturday%20night.%20Who%20knew%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmichael-mcintyre-big-show-saturday-night-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a40ac397995b933cf7bf45207f874d4aa5f5fb1%2F0_0_4284_2856%2F4284.jpg>
 Send to All … the segment that often thrillingly threatens to come apart at 
the seams. Photograph: BBC/Hungry Bear/Gary Moyes 
Last week, for example, McIntyre mass-texted something about arses to everyone 
onCarol Vorderman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/vorderman>’s phone, then 
looked genuinely mortified when one of the first replies came from the 
septuagenarian widow of an astronaut who died in the Challenger disaster. Other 
shows would have neatly snipped this cock-up out of the finished product, but 
Big Show was smart enough to leave it in. Watching McIntyre sweat over such a 
harrowing breach of etiquette helped to humanise him, and added a level of 
anything-can-happen unpredictability above the usual Saturday teatime zaniness.

Clearly, this is not a perfect television programme. The opening titles are so 
gaudy they seem custom-built to make viewers lurch for the off button. The vast 
majority of musical acts are flat and uninspired. Nothing is particularly 
original or challenging. But in the world of Saturday night variety, where 
every new show dies at birth and evenAnt and Dec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> are starting to show 
signs of strain, Michael McIntyre’s Big Show is actually something worth 
getting excited about. You know, if you like that sort of thing.
 