
Former BBC1 MasterChef host and Michelin-starred, Le Gavroche 
<http://www.le-gavroche.co.uk/> restaurant owner Michel Roux Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/michel-roux-jr> has spoken out for 
the first time since it was revealed he was paying chefs below the minimum 
wage, saying: “I am embarrassed and I am sorry.”

The statement follows the Guardian’s report last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/17/tv-chef-michel-roux-jr-paid-kitchen-staff-below-minimum-wage>
 that Roux was paying some of his Mayfair restaurant staff rates as low as 
£5.50 an hour when the legal minimum is £7.20. Chefs preparing a menu including 
starters costing as much as £62.80 for the lobster mousse with caviar and 
champagne sauce, were found to be working routinely 62- to 68-hour weeks for 
about £375 before tax. They should have been paid £490 for a 68-hour week.

“The buck stops with me and I take responsibility for ballsing up on this 
particular front,” Roux said in an interview with trade publicationThe Caterer 
<https://www.thecaterer.com/articles/492925/michel-roux-jr-i-ballsed-up-on-pay-but-it-wont-happen-again>
. “I am embarrassed and I am sorry, but in no way was it done intentionally.”

Chefs had told the Guardian they would be expected to start work at about 
8.30am most days and work through till about 11.30pm with only half to one hour 
off following lunch and about 15 minutes to eat meals in the staff canteen. But 
Roux, who said he was “very hands on” and “I like to be in control of 
everything”, claimed he had not noticed their long hours.

Michel Roux Jr's failure to pay chefs minimum wage 'not acceptable'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/18/michel-roux-jr-chefs-minimum-wage-le-gavroche>
“We are not above the law and I am not in any way looking for excuses but 
there were some mitigating circumstances,” he said. “As chefs you get into that 
routine of working these hours and getting used to it, coming in at 8am instead 
of 9am, and I am to blame. I should have seen but I didn’t. It wasn’t flagged 
up directly to me. Because … I am very hands on… maybe the managers and head 
chefs didn’t come to report to me because they thought I knew. It is my fault.”

Roux said he had started locking the restaurant door in the morning to prevent 
chefs starting early and working longer hours. He said that when he previously 
did this, chefs tried to climb through the kitchen window or bribe the kitchen 
porter with beer to let them in.

“You may think it is funny, but it is part of the issue,” Roux said.

From March, he is planning to reduce the maximum working hours to 50 a week, 
partly by closing for Tuesday lunch in addition to the current closures all day 
Sunday, Monday, and Saturday lunch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fmichel-roux-jr-apologises-paying-chefs-minimum-wage-le-gavroche%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F680b97b3f490f08acb6e1dd256e21c5ea1f33b9f%2F0_1851_4096_4095%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michel%20Roux%20Jr%20apologises%20for%20paying%20chefs%20less%20than%20minimum%20wage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fmichel-roux-jr-apologises-paying-chefs-minimum-wage-le-gavroche%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michel%20Roux%20Jr%20apologises%20for%20paying%20chefs%20less%20than%20minimum%20wage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fmichel-roux-jr-apologises-paying-chefs-minimum-wage-le-gavroche%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F680b97b3f490f08acb6e1dd256e21c5ea1f33b9f%2F0_1851_4096_4095%2F4096.jpg>
 Roux claimed that working at famous restaurants such as his, offers 
‘intangible’ benefits. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
But Roux also stressed the “intangible” benefits of working at his restaurant, 
in comments that may concern chefs who fear some famous restaurants have used 
their reputations as valuable training grounds to extract long hours for low 
pay.

“The work conditions are unbelievable and the benefits of working at Le 
Gavroche and for the Roux family are incredible,” Roux said. “But they are 
intangible. You can’t put a worth on it. You can’t put it on the payslip. ”

Since the Guardian exposed the underpayment, which can result in a fine from 
HM Revenue and Customs, Roux has made an assessment of his chefs’ pay and “will 
be paying everybody who is owed back pay”, a spokeswoman for the restaurant 
said.

The payouts will relate to last year, she said, and applied to a few staff “on 
a case by case basis”. It is likely that some payouts will run into thousands 
of pounds. The restaurant also said Roux had increased pay for some staff to 
ensure they were paid at least the legal minimum and that their salaries would 
remain in place when hours were reduced next year.



One chef welcomed Roux’s comments but questioned why he was closing the 
restaurant for longer.

“It is good that he is taking action on chefs being underpaid, but would it 
not be better to pay the extra money to take us up to minimum wage rather than 
cutting hours,” they said. “We would come in earlier if we could, as he says. 
We enjoy being chefs and the hours are not a problem. He seems to be trying to 
paint a picture of us in which we’re complaining about working hard, and that 
isn’t fair.”

Roux remarked in the Caterer interview that when he was training in Paris in 
1976 he slept on his grandmother’s couch and “had to wash in the kitchen sink 
and boil a kettle”. “Did I look at my payslip? Not once,” he said.

Roux also questioned the way the government has structured the minimum wage, 
with increasing rates for different age brackets, topping out at £7.20 an hour 
for people aged 25 and over.

“If someone comes here and is over the age of 24, has got zero experience … 
[and] they come knocking on my door and say they want a change of career and 
would love to work here; that person, because he or she is over the age of 24, 
needs to be paid at a higher rate,” Roux said.

“Is it fair that person should get a higher rate than a college leaver that 
has got a qualification, is 20 for example, and OK has got limited experience, 
but has got a qualification? It doesn’t seem very fair to me, but that is one 
thing we are facing in our industry.”
 