
If Michail Antonio feels a little nervous in the company of his England 
team-mates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/28/england-squad-announcement-allardyce-antonio-barkley>
, he should treat Wayne Rooney and friends to a wonderful ice-breaking anecdote.

It dates back to November last year when, hoping to do a good deed, West Ham 
United’s joint chairman, David Gold, retweeted an “appeal” posted by one of the 
club’s fans asking that awareness be spread about a “missing” man.

Wayne Rooney to play in No10 role as England captain for Sam Allardyce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/29/wayne-rooney-play-no10-england-captain-sam-allardyce-marcus-rashford>
Accompanying the tweet was a picture of Antonio, the right-winger who had 
apparently morphed into an “invisible” man, remaining virtually unseen by the 
Hammers supporters following his £7m signing from Nottingham Forest that summer.

Indeed, until late November the 26-year-old – who was playing non-league 
football for Tooting and Mitcham seven years ago – made only one appearance for 
Slaven Bilic’s side. During 2016 everything changed, with Antonio becoming 
central to Bilic’s blueprint. Despite sometimes being deployed at right-back he 
ended last season having scored nine goals for West Ham, eight with his head.

If that is a compelling statistic for a midfielder – and as England manager 
Sam Allardyce <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sam-allardyce> seems set to 
adopt a meritocratic, data-driven approach to selection – it was also no fluke. 
At his previous club, Nottingham Forest, Antonio attached end product to 
extraordinary pace and incisive crossing ability by scoring 15 times in 49 
appearances.

With his powerful athlete’s physique leavened by a surprisingly delicate 
touch, it is no surprise Bilic was so keen to persuade Gold to recruit a winger 
who had joined Forest a year earlier for £1.5m following two quietly impressive 
seasons atSheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday>. That breakthrough 
period at Hillsborough came after four frequently frustrating years with 
Reading where his penchant for constantly drifting infield, neglecting to take 
on his marker and frequently wayward finishing irked fans.

“Michail’s game really matured during his first season at Wednesday,” says 
David Prutton, a former Hillsborough midfield team-mate. “He really grew up – 
and really endeared himself to the lads. He has plenty of time for people. His 
non-league experience gives him perspective and grounding and his temperament 
is going to stand him in good stead now.

“His attributes make him a tremendous team-mate – he’s just so quick, strong 
and direct. At Wednesday he was a tremendous outlet for us; he could carry the 
ball 40 or 50 yards.”

Wednesday club officials echo such sentiments. They recall a “very pleasant 
young man” always willing to volunteer for media duties, who arrived with 
“explosive pace” – and the sort of rawness that made him liable to “put the 
ball anywhere but the place he intended”.

At Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> Antonio scored only 
once in 28 appearances and spent endless months touring the country on loan, 
taking in stints at Cheltenham Town, Southampton, Colchester United and, 
initially, Wednesday. John Ward, Colchester’s manager at the time, lamented 
Antonio’s habit of “knocking it on to the A12”, complaining “Michail’s our 
shining light but his finishing is very wayward”.

Ross Barkley’s omission was my biggest decision, says England’s Allardyce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/29/ross-barkley-england-allardyce-manager-slovakia-rashford>
Martin Allen, then Cheltenham’s manager, always suspected that some concerted 
polishing might carry Antonio a lot further than many imagined. “He was very 
pacy with a long throw,” he recalls. “A good athlete and a down-to-earth lad, 
too. I was a bit surprised when Reading let him go – and I thought they could 
have got more money for him.”

Living out of a suitcase on the nomadic, unglamorous lower‑division loan 
circuit would horrify mostEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england>
 counterparts but, to a Londoner who had begun his career combining work as a 
lifeguard at his local leisure centre with playing in front of 200-strong 
crowds for Tooting and Mitcham, it represented a lifeline.

If there were times when Antonio regretted abandoning plans to train as a PE 
teacher he did not show it. Checking into a series of anonymous provincial 
hotel rooms for prolonged stays was sometimes a little soul-sapping but all his 
temporary employers saw was a player ever-present at training and possessing a 
zealous determination offset by rare, appealing humility.
David Gold (@davidgold) 
Michail Antonio has been selected by Sam Allardyce's first England World Cup 
qualifying squad. Well done Michail. dgpic.twitter.com/B7ZdAYJ6Ob 
<https://t.co/B7ZdAYJ6Ob>
 <https://twitter.com/davidgold/status/769981111430680577> August 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/davidgold/status/769981111430680577> 
Whereas a decision to concentrate on football rather than table tennis – a 
sport at which he excelled as a child – proved straightforward, his mother’s 
refusal to allow the 14-year-old Antonio to join Tottenham Hotspurs’ academy – 
she deemed it too far from their south-west London home – proved more painful.

In March this year the winger, who has two small children, made a similarly 
big call in rejecting overtures to represent Jamaica. It was a gamble 
vindicated when Gold tweeted another close-up of Antonio’s face, this time 
accompanying a messagecongratulating him on Allardyce’s England invitation 
<https://twitter.com/davidgold/status/769981111430680577>.
 