
The TV chef Michel Roux Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/michel-roux-jr> has said he will 
scrap the the service charge on all diners’ bills from the end of January after
admitting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/15/michel-roux-jr-restaurant-staff-no-share-service-charge-le-gavroche>
 his Michelin-starred Le Gavroche used the 13% additional fee as revenue rather 
than sharing it among staff.

The former Masterchef judge apologised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/13/michel-roux-jr-apologises-paying-chefs-minimum-wage-le-gavroche>
 earlier this week for paying chefs less than the legal minimum wage, as 
revealed ina Guardian investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/17/tv-chef-michel-roux-jr-paid-kitchen-staff-below-minimum-wage>
, and announced on Friday that Le Gavroche would mark on bills and menus that 
no further payment was needed, although customers could still leave a tip if 
they wished.

In an interview with the Caterer, Roux said he considered tipping and 
voluntary service charges to be different things, but confirmed he was 
scrapping the latter because he was “fed up with this ambiguity”. Instead he 
would raise the price of dishes – a fixed-price menu with wine currently costs 
£212 a person – by 13%.

“For me, tipping and service charge are two different things but by removing 
the service charge and incorporating it into the cost of the menu then it is 
clear, clean and unambiguous,” he said. “And then if diners wish to leave a tip 
on top of that it is up to them.

“I think this is something we should do in the restaurant industry. It is not 
clear for the customer whether or not they should leave extra on the table or 
whether or not it is going to all the staff or how it is being distributed. I 
daresay some restaurateurs have been abusing that,” Roux said.

Earlier this week, the chef said he was “embarrassed and sorry” after the 
Guardian revealed he was paying chefs as little as £5.50 an hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/17/tv-chef-michel-roux-jr-paid-kitchen-staff-below-minimum-wage>
 when they were working 68 hours a week.

Chefs angered at being paid below the legal minimum wage in his Mayfair 
restaurant said the situation was exacerbated by its decision not to share the 
service charge that many diners assume supplements staff wages.


At the time, a spokeswoman for the restaurant said: “All Le Gavroche staff, 
front of house and kitchen, share in the 13% discretionary service charge.”

But after further questioning, the restaurant made clear that no member of 
staff received any of the service charge over and above their basic wages. 
“Wages are not dependent on fluctuating levels of discretionary service charges 
or cash tips,” a spokeswoman said. “Gratuities form just one part of the 
payroll each month. Service charge is treated as revenue, and the restaurant 
pays all taxes accordingly.”

She said the original statement was trying to make clear that the waiters and 
chefs were treated equally in the matter of service charge, not that they 
received any of it in addition to their wages.


One chef who spoke to the Guardian about the issue said: “Roux was fully aware 
that to share the service charge is what the public expects. He was purporting 
to share the service charge, but he wasn’t. We don’t do this job for the money, 
but he makes out that he shares this money and he doesn’t.”


The government said earlier this year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/521946/bis-16-172-tipping-consultation.pdf>
 that it believed all discretionary payments for service, after tax where 
applicable, should be given to the worker. Agovernment consultation on service 
charges and tipping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/02/tips-should-go-to-workers-not-employers-government-report-restaurants>
, led by the former business secretary Sajid Javid, called for service charges 
on customers’ bills to be clear and voluntary and said it was considering 
prohibiting employers from taking any cut, to provide greater protection for 
workers. The consultation found 61% of diners believed staff should keep 100% 
of service charges.

It came after some of the country’s best-known restaurant chains, including 
Giraffe, Zizzi, Pizza Express, Strada and Ask Italian,were accused of keeping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/21/how-much-of-your-tip-goes-to-staff-a-restaurant-by-restaurant-guide>
 all or part of the service charges automatically added to bills, rather than 
passing them on to staff.


The British Hospitality Association <http://www.bha.org.uk/>, of which Le 
Gavroche is a member, has said restaurants should be legally required to tell 
customers how service charges and tips are distributed among staff.

Roux said he hoped other restaurants would follow Le Gavroche and incorporate 
the service charge into menu prices.


“Hopefully others will join me in making it clearer for the public to 
understand what they are paying for, and this move will also ensure there is 
complete transparency for our front of house and kitchen teams,” he said.

 