
While 2016 was a year to remember for Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> and Middlesbrough, much 
work is still to be done if 2017 does not turn into an almighty dud. Neither 
side deserved to win this scrap of a Premier League match, with the goalkeepers 
barely having a save to make and the result not exactly helping either team’s 
bid to move up the table.

McAuley and Morrison complete West Brom fightback against hapless Hull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/west-bromwich-albion-hull-city-premier-league-match-report>
Perhaps it was not surprising this was not a free-flowing affair, given Boro 
and Leicester have scored a combined 41 league goals, a figure equalled or 
bettered individually by Chelsea, Liverpool and Arsenal. The result still keeps 
both teams comfortably above the bottom three but Claudio Ranieri and Aitor 
Karanka may need to improve the attacking potency in order to move further away 
from danger. Boro are in negotiations to sign Aston Villa’s Rudy Gestede but 
Karanka would not be drawn on the mooted deal.

The only real moment of controversy came in the first half when Adama Traoré 
felt he deserved a penalty after going down under the challenge of Robert Huth. 
The admirable defender said afterwards “we got lucky” but Ranieri’s response 
was more to the point, the Leicester manager saying: “If that is a penalty, I’m 
the pope.”

Both sides made five changes from their matches on New Year’s Eve and the 
first half was a fragmented one as a result. Leicester offered little width 
while Boro often found themselves in strong attacking positions only to be let 
down by the end product.

The champions held a two-point advantage over Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> before kick-off and 
Karanka spoke beforehand of the importance of the match because it came against 
a relegation rival. Leicester’s two points from nine away games before this 
match on Monday is the joint lowest total by defending top-flight champions but 
they have enjoyed a far superior record over Boro in recent times, not losing 
in their past 13 meetings.

Leicester started well, with Shinji Okazaki causing problems with his usual 
injection of energy and a persevering run from the Japan forward saw the ball 
at the feet of Christian Fuchs on the left-hand edge of the penalty area but 
the full-back dragged his shot wide.

For Boro, their best outlet was Traoré who continues his season of wonderful 
runs and woeful crossing. On more than one occasion the Spaniard beat his man 
down the right before failing to deliver a telling ball but he was certainly 
Middlesbrough’s most dangerous threat.

In the 18th minute Traoré went down on the edge of the area with the referee, 
Robert Madley, giving nothing, before setting up his team’s best chance of the 
half moments later. Traoré drove to the byline and squared the ball across goal 
for Marten de Roon, but the midfielder could fire only over the crossbar with 
his first-time effort.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fmiddlesbrough-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F990be29ad3dc03c607ddc3a458feeb9f14ede660%2F0_0_4027_2600%2F4027.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Middlesbrough%20fail%20to%20scale%20Robert%20Huth%E2%80%99s%20Leicester%20battlements&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fmiddlesbrough-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Middlesbrough%20fail%20to%20scale%20Robert%20Huth%E2%80%99s%20Leicester%20battlements&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fmiddlesbrough-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F990be29ad3dc03c607ddc3a458feeb9f14ede660%2F0_0_4027_2600%2F4027.jpg>
 No way past Robert Huth and Wes Morgan for Gaston Ramírez. Photograph: Scott 
Heppell/Reuters 
Both sides struggled to create clear scoring opportunities, although 
Leicester’s Andy King and Boro’s George Friend – on for the injured Antonio 
Barragán – both fizzed enticing balls across the box only to evade onrushing 
team-mates.

Of his side’s lack of goals this season, and the interest in Gestede, Karanka 
said: “I think the main thing for scoring goals is creating chances, and we are 
creating chances.

“Two weeks ago against Swansea we scored three, we couldn’t score today but my 
head is with the players we have now because all of them are doing a really 
good job. I want to finish the transfer market with a better squad than we have 
now.

“It was a good result for us, I’m really pleased with the performance. We saw 
when we played away we were better then them [Leicester] and we showed today we 
are better than them.”

Friend had at least made an impact for Karanka’s side and the full-back cut 
inside from the left in the 68th minute, beat two defenders before slicing wide.

Middlesbrough 0-0 Leicester City: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/02/middlesbrough-v-leicester-city-premier-league-live>
Leicester came close when Leonardo Ulloa headed a corner straight at Brad 
Guzan, but the game was descending into a low-grade affair.

Gaston Ramírez went close to snatching a late goal, firing a low shot into the 
side netting after a poor headed clearance from Wes Morgan, but no one deserved 
to win this match.

Ranieri said: “The performance was good, a good spirit. We got one point and a 
second clean sheet in a row, it was good for us. Middlesbrough pushed a lot but 
were only dangerous on two or three crosses. We were so solid, I’m pleased with 
the spirit we showed.

“This season we have conceded so many goals, we had to improve. We have gone 
back to being solid and strong with a good personality.”
 