
Middlesbrough are to challenge Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> in pursuit of the Aston 
Villa striker Rudy Gestede as they seek to boost their goalscoring options in 
the mid-winter transfer window.

The Benin forward, who scored five times in the Premier League last season, 
has started only eight Championship matches for Villa this season and Steve 
Bruce is prepared to let him leave. Gestede attendedBoro’s 3-0 home defeat by 
Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/middlesbrough-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 last week and would favour a return to the top flight but will examine his 
options once the window opens.

Crystal Palace look into loaning Ben Davies and signing Rudy Gestede
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/crystal-palace-loan-ben-davies-gestede-alan-pardew>
Palace are also keen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/crystal-palace-loan-ben-davies-gestede-alan-pardew>
 as they seek to secure back-up to their main forward, Christian Benteke, after
losing Connor Wickham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/crystal-palace-connor-wickham-cruciate-ligament-knee-injury>
 to cruciate knee ligament damage for the remainder of the campaign. Another 
striker on the club’s books, the Chelsea loanee Loïc Rémy, has yet to feature 
this term after suffering a thigh injury in September, though he is approaching 
full fitness and could finally be available in the new year.

Gestede, who cost Villa an initial £4.5m when signing from Blackburn Rovers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/31/aston-villa-jordan-veretout-nantes-five-year-deal>
in the summer of 2015 but has found his opportunities limited following the 
arrival of Jonathan Kodjia, features on Palace’s list of striker options along 
with the Leicester City forward Leonardo Ulloa. There is the potential for 
Jordon Mutch, a former Birmingham City and England Under-21 midfielder little 
used by Palace, to move to Villa Park as part of any deal.

Boro are seeking reinforcements to ease the pressure on their main forward, 
Álvaro Negredo, who swelled his goals tally for the campaign to five with a 
brace in Saturday’swin over Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/middlesbrough-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
. Villa could seek to secure Jordan Rhodes if the forward is made available by 
the Teesside club.
 