
The New South Wales premier, Mike Baird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/mike-baird-to-trumpet-successes-but-health-and-education-arent-among-them>
, has backed his planning minister’s call for negative gearing to be 
reconsidered.

He has also suggested the GST debate might have to be revisited because state 
governments will eventually need more money to pay for ballooning health costs.

Speaking at the National Press Club on Tuesday, Baird was asked if he thought 
negative gearing was a problem, after a speech last week from the NSW planning 
minister, Rob Stokes.

Icac overhaul passes New South Wales parliament despite scathing criticism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/icac-overhaul-passes-new-south-wales-parliament-despite-scathing-criticism>
Stokes told an audience in Sydney on Friday that negative gearing did nothing 
to improve supply where it was needed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/25/negative-gearing-nsw-minister-savages-federal-coalition-policy>
 but it did help some people reduce their taxable income at the expense of 
other Australians.

“Why should you get a tax deduction on the ownership of a multimillion-dollar 
holiday home that does nothing to improve supply where it’s needed?” Stokes had 
said.


“We should promote investment in the type of housing that is needed by the 
burgeoning populations in cities like Sydney.”


Stokes’s comments were quickly dismissed by senior members of the federal 
Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition>, including 
Malcolm Turnbull and Kelly O’Dwyer.

But Baird said Stokes had made an “incredible contribution” to the housing 
affordability debate and he hoped policymakers would listen to it.

“Rob Stokes, for those that know, is an incredibly credentialed – I don’t 
think there’s ever been a planning minister more credentialed in the history of 
this country,” Baird said.

“He’s an incredible asset to the state and he was making a contribution to one 
of the biggest policy challenges we have – housing affordability.

“I know that partisan politics is a brutal reality but I think we need to do 
more as leaders to try to get to a position. Don’t immediately pick up your 
political badge. Just don’t do it. Just stop and say, ‘Well actually there’s 
some wisdom in this, it might not have come from my side but, you know, that 
actually is something that we should consider as part of the overall mix.’ My 
hope is that’s what we do more of.”

Mike Baird to trumpet successes but health and education aren't among them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/mike-baird-to-trumpet-successes-but-health-and-education-arent-among-them>
The Labor leader, Bill Shorten, jumped on Baird’s comments, asking Turnbull in 
question time if his government would continue to rule out negative gearing 
reform.

Turnbull spoke, until his time expired, without answering Shorten’s question.

Baird said on Tuesday that he had also learned a lesson from the bruising GST 
debate earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/07/malcolm-turnbull-im-not-convinced-gst-increase-to-15-will-boost-economy>
.

He said one of the challenges to GST reform was the requirement that every 
state and territory must agree on any change before it can go ahead.

He said voters would accept the need for GST reform if they understood how 
expensive healthcare will become by the 2020s.

“I’d strongly argue that if people are concerned about their healthcare and 
you told everyone in the country that look, at the moment, in the long term, 
your healthcare’s not covered, and that the size and scale of it is quite 
frightening, I think many more people would be open to various tax reform 
options that help address that,” Baird said.

“I think consensus [for tax reform] will be built on the back of the fiscal 
reality of the health challenge we face.”
 