
The New South Wales premier, Mike Baird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/icac-overhaul-passes-new-south-wales-parliament-despite-scathing-criticism>
, will on Tuesday claim credit for progress on infrastructure spending and job 
creation – but acknowledge more needs to be done to improve outcomes in health, 
education and welfare.

Baird will travel to Canberra on Tuesday for an address to the National Press 
Club where he will provide a progress report on 12 policy priorities he 
nominated for the state just over 12 months ago.

“When we announced these priorities in September last year, we promised we 
would publish our progress to make the government accountable for delivering 
our commitments,” Baird said in a statement issued before his National Press 
Club appearance.

Icac overhaul passes New South Wales parliament despite scathing criticism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/icac-overhaul-passes-new-south-wales-parliament-despite-scathing-criticism>
“I’m pleased that in some priority areas, such as infrastructure, job creation 
and litter, we are seeing early positive results.

“At the same time, however, we make no secret of the fact that some areas 
require more work. In particular, there are some long-term social issues that 
are immensely difficult to turn around.”

NSW hit the premier’s nominated jobs target of 150,000 new jobs by 2019 in May 
this year, three years ahead of schedule, but, according to data released by 
Baird’s office, significant challenges remain in reducing levels of domestic 
violence, improving emergency department waiting times, lowering childhood 
obesity levels, boosting education results and ensuring children at risk are 
protected.

Baird’s appearance in Canberra on Tuesday follows a public intervention last 
week by Rob Stokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/25/negative-gearing-nsw-minister-savages-federal-coalition-policy>
, the NSW planning minister, who urged Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison to 
rethinktheir opposition to negative gearing reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/16/turnbull-says-labors-negative-gearing-plan-harms-average-earners-as-gst-ruled-out>
.

Stokes argued that boosting supply alone would not solve Sydney’s problem with 
housing affordability. The tax system needed to be geared towards productive 
investments.

“Earlier this year the NSW government was ready, willing and able to have a 
discussion about tax,” the planning minister said. “Disappointingly our 
leadership on this issue fell victim to the Canberra culture that promotes 
opposition over consensus.

“Surely the focus of the tax system should be directed towards the type of 
housing we need. Why should you get a tax deduction on the ownership of a 
multimillion-dollar holiday home that does nothing to improve supply where it’s 
needed?”

Shooters party wins Orange byelection by 50 votes from Nationals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/shooters-party-wins-orange-byelection-by-50-votes-from-nationals>
Achieving faster housing approvals is one of Baird’s 12 priorities.

The premier’s housing target is 90% of housing approvals determined within 40 
days. Data released before Baird’s speech suggests that, in the 12 months to 
September 2016, there were more than 75,400 building approvals in NSW – the 
highest result of any state since records began.

The prime minister and the treasurer have argued that housing affordability 
problems in Sydney are associated with supply and they have rejected the recent 
call to reconsider the generous tax breaks for housing.

But Stokes has rejected the supply problem rationale, saying a more diverse 
policy approach is required.

“The premise that the more you supply of a product, it therefore increases the 
competition and reduces prices, is great in theory but in relation to the 
housing market it is much more complex,” the NSW planning minister said last 
week.
 