
Ten-man Juventus dropped their first points of the Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> season after being held 
at home by strugglingBologna. Things looked to be going to plan for Antonio 
Conte's side as they took a 30th-minute lead through Mirko Vucinic.

However, Vucinic saw red after picking up his second caution on the stroke of 
half-time to leave them with 10 men.Bologna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> took full advantage and 
equalised through Daniele Portanova at the start of the second half to pick up 
their first point after two defeats.

Milan are still searching for their first win after being held to a 1-1 draw by
Udinese. Antonio Di Natale continued his record of scoring in every league game 
this season with the opening goal in the 29th minute, but Stephan El Shaarawy 
levelled with his first goal in Serie A midway through the second half.Milan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> lost Alexandre Pato midway 
through the first half with what appeared to be a hamstring injury.

Napoli were beaten 1-0 at Chievo. Top of the table going into the game, they 
were knocked off their perch by the substitute Davide Moscardelli's 71st-minute 
goal.

Genoa strolled to a 3-0 win over Catania to send them top of Serie A. Rodrigo 
Palacio opened the scoring after 29 minutes and added a second five minutes 
later. Kevin Constant rounded off a thoroughly satisfactory night in the 79th 
minute.

Palermo survived a late Cagliari comeback to win 3-2. Eran Zahavi scored in 
the first minute before further efforts from Nicolás Bertolo and Fabrizio 
Miccoli padded the lead. That should have killed offCagliari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari> but late goals from Daniele 
Conti and Radja Nainggolan made things uncomfortable for the home side.

Two goals from Stevan Jovetic and one from Alessio Cerci saw Fiorentina claim 
their second win of the season with a 3-0 victory overParma.

Lazio came from behind to beat Cesena 2-1 for their first Serie A win of the 
season. Adrian Mutu putCesena <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cesena> 
ahead in the 14th minute before Hernanes equalised early in the second half 
from the penalty spot after Mobido Diakité was brought down by Cesena's Marco 
Rossi. Miroslav Klose gave Lazio a 54th-minute lead and the Romans held on for 
the win.

Unbeaten Atalanta put themselves in the black with a 2-1 win at 10-man Lecce 
thanks to a double from Germán Denis. He scored from the spot after three 
minutes and again in the 56th minute, with Djamel Mesbah replying in between 
times, before Carlos Grossmüller was sent off. The win, their second of the 
season, took them to one point, wiping out their six-point deduction.
 