
Massimiliano Allegri has been sacked by Milan, the club have confirmed. The 
46-year-old manager was already leaving the club at the end of the season, but 
was told to go earlier in the wake ofSunday's 4-3 loss to minnows Sassuolo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/12/serie-a-round-up-sassuolo-milan-domenico-berardi>
. Allegri's departure brings to an end his three-and-a-half-year stay with the
Rossoneri, with the highlight being their 2011 Serie A win.

"Milan wish to communicate that Massimiliano Allegri and his staff have been 
relieved of their duties with immediate effect,"read a club statement 
<http://www.acmilan.com/en/news/show/150821>. "Milan would like to thank Mr 
Allegri and his staff for the work done and their best professional 
achievements."

The short release added that assistant coach Mauro Tassotti would take 
control, although he is expected to soon be replaced by a permanent manager. 
Filippo Inzaghi, the 40-year-old former Italy andMilan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> striker, currently coaching the 
club's Primavera (Under-19) side is the favourite to take charge.

The loss to Sassuolo proved to be the final straw for Milan's hierarchy, with 
Allegri undone by one of his former clubs. That loss alone was not the trigger, 
though,with Milan woefully off the pace in Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball/table>. They are 30 points 
behind leaders Juventus and are just six points clear of the relegation zone.

Allegri leaves San Siro with league finishes of first, second and third, with 
the Supercopa added to his 2011 title win, and they are still in the Champions 
League, facing Atl√©tico Madrid in the last 16 on 19 February.

In a recent interview with Gazzetta dello Sport, Allegri admitted he had spent 
his "last Christmas" as coach of theRossoneri. "I have eaten panettone here 
once again and to be honest I had no doubt that I would," he said, referring to 
the constant speculation about his future since early this season. "I don't 
know who will be the next coach and it's not really my problem."
 