
Milan missed the chance to go six points clear at the top of Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> after a 1-1 draw at 
struggling Lecce. Zlatan Ibrahimovic struck the opener for Milan four minutes 
after half-time, scoring with a wonderful lob from 30 yards after a quick 
break, but Ruben Olivera equalised with eight minutes to go.

The result leaves them four points clear of Napoli, who drew with Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> on Saturday, and Lazio, who 
gained their first win of 2011 thanks to a late goal from the substitute Libor 
Kozak against Sampdoria.

The match at the Stadio Olimpico looked set for a goalless draw until the 
Czech Republic forward popped up to score the winner six minutes from time. 
Kozak came off the bench and met Cristian Ledesma's cross with a powerful 
header to giveLazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> all three 
points.

Alberto Aquilani scored a terrific late winner as Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> arrested a run of three games 
without a win with a 2-1 success over Bari. The on-loan Liverpool midfielder 
drove home from the edge of the box with 11 minutes remaining to condemn 
rock-bottom Bari to another defeat. Alessandro del Piero had given Juve a 
first-half lead, only for Gergely Rudolf to level shortly after the break.

A late own-goal by Maximiliano Pellegrino gave Roma a narrow 1-0 victory at 
Cesena <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cesena>. The defender stuck out a 
foot in the hope of clearing Fabio Simplicio's close-range effort but poked the 
ball into the back of his own net.

Udinese continued their excellent run of form with a convincing 4-2 win at 
Genoa, Brescia beat Parma 2-0 andCagliari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari> lifted themselves into the top 
half of the table thanks to a 3-1 win over Palermo.

Catania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/catania> and Chievo played out a 
1-1 draw at Stadio Angelo Massimino.
 