
Italian football can be an unforgiving world for British players. The 
methodical practices, tactical rigours and conformist culture have alienated 
some of Britain’s finest exports. Jimmy Greaves, Denis Law, Joe Baker and Ian 
Rush all struggled to adapt to the hard-line approaches of their coaches and 
the panopticon surveillance of the unrelenting media. Few British footballers 
have been entirely successful in Italy.John Charles’ prolific time at Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/feb/23/guardianobituaries.football> 
between 1957 and 1962 – winning threeScudetti and scoring 108 goals in 155 
games – remains an exception.

Other players have enjoyed cult status without truly delivering on the pitch. 
Despite his career-stymieing injuries and psychological battles,Paul 
Gascoigne’s gregarious, mischievous and down-to-earth personality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/nov/17/gazza-channel-4-italian-job>
 ensured he was loved by Lazio fans – that and the small matter of his late 
equaliser in the Rome derby in 1992. Indeed, making a name for yourself in the 
derby can be a surefire way to endear yourself to Italian fans. For Mark 
Hateley, this certainly proved the case at Milan.

Milan: Serie A alternative club guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2014/sep/12/ac-milan-serie-a-alternative-club-guide>
In the summer of 1984, two of football’s most distinguished names earned 
record-breaking moves to Serie A. Diego Maradona left Barcelona to join Napoli 
for £6.9m (then a world record fee) andInternazionale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale> paid Bayern Munich £4.7m 
for Karl-Heinz Rummenigge. Accompanying the duo, and joining the likes of Zico 
(Udinese), Socrates (Fiorentina) and Michel Platini (Juventus) in Serie A’s 
star-studded cast, was Mark Hateley, who arrived from Portsmouth.

Milan paid the Second Division club £1m for the 23-year-old English forward. 
Hateley was bought to replace his compatriot Luther Blissett, who had spent one 
dismal season at the club and earned cult status among fans for being a
super-bidone(rubbish). Though Hateley had enjoyed a prolific season on the 
south coast, scoring 22 goals in 38 games, the fact thatMilan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> plundering the English second 
tier for attacking talent shows how badly they were struggling.

The club were recovering from one of the darkest periods in their history at 
the time. In 1980, they had been relegated to Serie B due to their involvement 
in theTotonero betting scandal <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Totonero_1980> – 
just one year after winning their 10th Serie A title. Two years later, having 
bounced straight back to Serie A, they were relegated once again – this time 
due to desperately poor performances on the field.

Their problems were accentuated by the comparative success of their city 
rivals, Internazionale, who had been crownedSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> champions during Milan’s 
first relegation and Coppa Italia champions during their second. Inter’s 
supremacy was most conspicuous in the Milan derby, in which they had enjoyed a 
six-year unbeaten run between 1979 and 1984. Throughout these years,Milanisti 
suffered while their rivals revelled in schadenfreude. That was until Hateley 
stemmed the tide of blue and black dominance, etching his name into Milan 
folklore.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmilan-internazionale-mark-hateley-serie-a-derby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b23e5a11652594960cc9bf757e2d3a8797c4252%2F0_180_5212_3129%2F5212.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Milan%20v%20Internazionale%3A%20the%20game%20that%20made%20Mark%20Hateley%20a%20Rossoneri%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmilan-internazionale-mark-hateley-serie-a-derby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Milan%20v%20Internazionale%3A%20the%20game%20that%20made%20Mark%20Hateley%20a%20Rossoneri%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmilan-internazionale-mark-hateley-serie-a-derby%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b23e5a11652594960cc9bf757e2d3a8797c4252%2F0_180_5212_3129%2F5212.jpg>
 Mark Hateley and Ray Wilkins at Milan in 1984. Photograph: David Cannon/Getty 
Images 
Hateley was not the only English player who moved to Italy’s fashion capital 
in the summer of 1984. Ray Wilkins left Manchster United to join Milan and the 
two players helped each other settle, albeit at the expense of their Italian 
language skills. Benefiting from his compatriot’s company, Hateley’s impact was 
instant. In the run-up to the season’s firstDerby della Madonnina, the languid 
forward struck four times as Milan went unbeaten in their opening six games. 
The Italian press and Hateley’s team-mates were suitably impressed. “He really 
surprised me,” said Milan captain Franco Baresi. And with the derby 
approaching, the scene was set for the Englishman’s finest hour in red and 
black stripes.

Six years without a win against your fiercest rivals is an eternity in 
footballing terms. On 28 October 1984, theRossoneri were not favourites to 
change this statistic. They were facing a formidable Inter side, led by a 
number of influential figures. Walter Zenga played in goal, World Cup winners 
Beppe Bergomi and Fulvio Collovati led the defence, Liam Brady was in midfield, 
and Alessandro Altobelli and Rumenigge were up front. Despite Milan’s promising 
start to the season, they were a side in transition, most notable for the 
bourgeoning brilliance of Baresi.

For Hateley and Wilkins, the tumult that greeted them as they emerged from the 
San Siro’s tunnel left them under no illusions about the size of the fixture. 
Wilkins later described the feverish atmosphere: “Blue and black at one end, 
red and black at the other, the smoke meeting in the middle, it was something 
quite fantastic.” His side were initially overawed as Inter took an early lead 
through Altobelli’s diving header. After withstanding further pressure, Milan 
equalised through Agostino Di Bartolomei, who volleyed home after some 
intricate build-up play between Hateley, Wilkins and Pietro Paolo Virdis.

Then, with 25 minutes remaining, Hateley’s moment arrived 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xe-ebJZgY4A>. Baresi made a characteristically 
well-timed tackle to rob Altobelli of possession deep inside Inter’s half. As 
the ball broke to Virdis, he took a couple of touches to compose himself and 
curled a cross towards his strike partner. Hateley, who was floating around the 
penalty spot, towered above Fulvio Collovati – a defender renowned for his 
aerial ability – and crashed a header past the flailing dive of Walter Zenga. 
Hateley made it 2-1, and that is how it finished.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmilan-internazionale-mark-hateley-serie-a-derby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9f3b0db1bfeb184f510e17bd28977a41c2b5b30%2F0_242_2759_3678%2F2759.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Milan%20v%20Internazionale%3A%20the%20game%20that%20made%20Mark%20Hateley%20a%20Rossoneri%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmilan-internazionale-mark-hateley-serie-a-derby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Milan%20v%20Internazionale%3A%20the%20game%20that%20made%20Mark%20Hateley%20a%20Rossoneri%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmilan-internazionale-mark-hateley-serie-a-derby%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9f3b0db1bfeb184f510e17bd28977a41c2b5b30%2F0_242_2759_3678%2F2759.jpg>
 Hateley and Wilkins enjoy a day out in Milan. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Getty 
Images 
Praise was heaped on the performances of Milan’s two Englishmen. The most 
flamboyant tribute was voiced by the Italian director and screenwriter,Ugo 
Tognazzi <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ugo_Tognazzi>, who described Wilkins 
and Hateley as “two rare and refined English species in a divine dish.” But it 
was the latter’s goal that entered into the realms of myth.

For more than 80 years, the team who had taken the lead in the derby had, at 
the very least, secured a draw. Hateley’s leap had delivered theRossoneri 
divine intervention. Inter fan Tommaso Pellizzari called it an “epoch-making 
goal”, one that broke Inter’s hegemony in the city. Meanwhile, one Milan 
fanzine writer declared: “For years I had a gigantic poster of Hateley’s goal 
by my bed. For us, that game meant a return to winning ways after years of 
purgatory.”

The defeat did not sit well with Inter’s president, Ernesto Pellegrini. In the 
aftermath, he bumped into his opposite number, Giuseppe Farina, and apparently 
said: “Congratulations, you won the battle, but the war will be ours.” Inter 
finished third, two places above their city rivals, but the ultimate prize 
eluded them and they were helpless to stop the inexorable rise of Osvaldo 
Bagnoli’sVerona, who won a miraculous first Scudetto title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2016/apr/11/hellas-verona-serie-a-miracle-season-leicester-city>
.

The image of Hateley climbing above Collovati was also one for the ages. “I 
was in awe,” said Mauro Tassotti after the game. “Hateley’s leap was 
incredible, demonstrating his timing and strength.” The former Milan defender 
was stood just yards away from the goal and he drew parallels between Hateley 
and Italy’s last great British success, John Charles. “It was the 
quintessential English forward’s goal, just like John Charles. And against an 
uncompromising defender like Collovati … it was a moment of incredible 
athleticism.”

Charles himself added to the hyperbole by claiming: “Mark’s fame will surpass 
my own. Italian defenders are good, but against British forwards like Hateley, 
their tactical astuteness is not enough.” The goal had embodied the 
Englishman’s finest attributes: his power, combative nature and clinical 
finishing. His dishevelled appearance and long hair fit the “warrior” blueprint 
and the Milan faithful promptly nicknamed him “Attila”, afterthe fearsome 
leader of the Hunnic Empire <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attila>.


The Gazzetta dello Sport milked this symbolism, publishing photos of the goal 
under headlines such as “Mark Attila has struck again.” One reporter wrote: “He 
is like Conan, the mythical, invincible barbarian. Like a barbarian, Hateley 
looks his opponents in the eye, like a barbarian he throws himself into the 
most furious of battles and like a barbarian, he celebrates when his rivals are 
destroyed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmilan-internazionale-mark-hateley-serie-a-derby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b0d127ad52aee26f6c88909c1b87e2ade64ad9b%2F0_87_3000_1987%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Milan%20v%20Internazionale%3A%20the%20game%20that%20made%20Mark%20Hateley%20a%20Rossoneri%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmilan-internazionale-mark-hateley-serie-a-derby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Milan%20v%20Internazionale%3A%20the%20game%20that%20made%20Mark%20Hateley%20a%20Rossoneri%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fmilan-internazionale-mark-hateley-serie-a-derby%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b0d127ad52aee26f6c88909c1b87e2ade64ad9b%2F0_87_3000_1987%2F3000.jpg>
 Hateley’s towering header against Inter in 1984. Photograph: Carlo Fumagalli/AP
Physical prowess was not the only weapon in Hateley’s armoury. He was an 
intelligent operator who was constantly aware of his surroundings and his 
opponents’ flaws. “Top strikers try to identify the weakest link in a defence,” 
Hateley later told Scottish journalists during his time at Rangers. This shrewd 
and ruthless streak made him an especially troublesome opponent for defenders.


In Italy, Hateley will forever be remembered for his derby-day heroics. 
Despite auspicious beginnings, Hateley’s progress was curtailed by injuries 
throughout his three-year stay in Milan. He went on to score 17 goals in 66 
games and his fitness problems irked Milan’s president, Giuseppe Farina. In 
1987, the arrival of media magnateSilvio Berlusconi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/20/donald-trump-silvio-berlusconi-italy-prime-minister>
 heralded the dawn of a glorious era for theRossoneri. With the club heading in 
a new direction, Berlusconi desired grace over graft. Marco van Basten was 
Berlusconi’s man and Hateley was on his way to Monaco.

Nevertheless, Hateley retains fond memories of his time in Milan, especially 
his winner in the derby. “I keep two huge photos of that goal on my wall at 
home, one in black and white and one in colour,” he later told Milan Channel. 
“It was one of the most beautiful and important goals of my life, a joyous 
moment for all of us and especially for the fans after a number of difficult 
years.”

How Gheorghe Hagi went from Real Madrid to Barcelona ... via Serie B
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2016/sep/15/gheorghe-hagi-real-madrid-barcelona-brescia>
And just like Hateley, the fans still remember the goal as if it were 
yesterday. So much so that,during the Derby della Madonnina in January this year
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/01/serie-a-milan-win-derby-inter-lose-control>
, Milan fans unveiled a majestic choreography celebrating Hateley’s famous 
strike. The display, depicting the Englishman leaping above Collovati, engulfed 
the entirety of the San Siro’sCurva Sud and was accompanied by a banner read “
sovrastiamoli” (“we tower above them”). The tribute had an almost prophetic 
effect as Milan triumphed 3-0, set on their way thanks toa powerful header by 
the Brazilian centre-back Alex 
<https://twitter.com/SerieA_TIM/status/693902633917095937>.

Hateley, who was covering the game on TV, was understandably moved: “When I 
saw my face represented in the choreography I was shocked,” he said later. “My 
colleagues were discussing the game while I remained stupefied, lost in that 
image. It’s incredible to think that after 30 years the fans still remember 
that goal. I can only thank theCurva Sud and those who came up with the idea.”

On Sunday evening, the San Siro will take centre-stage once again for the 
season’s first Derby della Madonnina. Inter might count themselves fortunate 
as, unlike the derby of October 1984, Milan’s frontline won’t be led by Mark 
“Attila” Hateley.

• This blog first appeared on The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://www.thegentlemanultra.com/>
• Follow Luca Hodges-Ramon <https://twitter.com/LH_Ramon25> on Twitter
 