
The murkiness at the heart of the Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> compulsory purchase case has 
taken another turn, with Lewisham councillors apparently at odds in the battle 
to prevent the sale of land around The Den to an offshore-owned property 
developer.

Last week Alan Hall, head of the council’s scrutiny committee, voiced his 
concerns in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/millwall-the-den-lewisham-council-property-developers>
 over the “spectacularly mishandled” scheme. His fellow councillor Jamie Milne 
has now dismissed those calling for a review of the plan as “Millwall zealots”.
Tweeting a link <https://twitter.com/J_M_Milne/status/792046739016540160> to 
the Guardian report of the gathering unease, Milne commented: “Not everyone on 
Lewisham Council is a Millwall zealot,” before describing those opposed to the 
scheme as “cheerleaders for Millwall”.

Milne insisted he is “keeping an open mind on the CPO”. He has since denied 
his comments were directed at Hall, who has been a lone voice in defence of 
those threatened by the scheme. Milne waspreviously not present 
<http://councilmeetings.lewisham.gov.uk/mgMeetingAttendance.aspx?ID=4314> for 
the council’s own key scrutiny committee meeting when the Millwall CPO was 
forensically reviewed on 20 September.

Millwall given new hope in land battle as disquiet grows over property deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/millwall-the-den-lewisham-council-property-developers>
His comments are likely to cause further distress to those who stand to lose 
homes and businesses under the scheme. Among these is 72-year-old Willow 
Winston, who lives adjacent to the Den and has become something of a cause 
celebre and favourite aunt for supporters of the club angered by the property 
deal. Winston has to date been offered only £58,000 for her home by Renewal, 
the offshore company that is the council’s preferred developer of Millwall’s 
historic backyard.

“It is painful to hear,” Winston said. “The best I can say for this young man 
is that he is speaking out of complete ignorance. Possibly he doesn’t 
understand what has been going on over the last few years. Local residents, 
including Millwall, have been treated appallingly. Mr Milne has picked the 
wrong side here.”

This is not the first embarrassing Millwall-related social media outburst by 
councillors during the current process. In 2014 the deputy mayor Alan Smith 
tweeted a personal attack on Millwall’s chairman and benefactor John Berylson, 
describing the billionaire, who is a registered Democrat, as “a Republican 
funding American venture capitalist”. In September this year Smithposted a tweet
 <https://twitter.com/CllrAl/status/776561135063601152> suggesting, 
erroneously, Millwall had “paid no tax in the UK”.

Pressure continues to build over Lewisham’s insistence on dealing with an 
offshore-owned developer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/26/millwall-property-developer-the-den-offshore-renewal>
 with historic connections to former senior council officers, threatening the 
future of the borough’s only Football League club and drawing a 25,000-strong 
petition in protest. This week Millwall’s chairman wrote to all Labour 
councillors stating his concerns.

A new report by Lewisham’s sustainable development and housing select 
committees has recommended “further information be made publicly available 
about the management structure and ownership of the developer” while resolving 
to write to the mayor ofLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
expressing concerns about the low level of affordable housing in the scheme and 
the degree of due diligence. Meanwhile at Tuesday night’s meeting of the 
overview and scrutiny business panel councillor Hall again called for a review 
of the scheme.

“More alarm bells are ringing over the New Bermondsey land deal,” Hall said. 
“Millwall FC’s chairman is raising further issues of transparency. I have 
called for a full review of governance of this scheme and full disclosure to 
elected councillors. After all this is paid for by large amounts of public 
money.”

“The original vision for New Bermondsey was a ‘Sporting Village’. How can a 
sporting village not include the football stadium in the middle of it? How can 
public money be spent and deliver zero social housing? There are real issues 
with this scheme.”

Lewisham’s powerful elected mayor Sir Steve Bullock serves on the board of a 
Renewal-founded charity called Surrey Canal Sports Foundation Limited, an 
interest he has declared under council rules. Lewisham’s chief executive, Barry 
Quirk, best known locally for earning more pro rata than the prime minister for 
working a three-day week at the council, was a colleague of Renewal’s CEO 
Mushtaq Malik when Malik was a senior Lewisham officer in the 1990s. The 
decision to compulsorily purchase Millwall’s land is currently awaiting a 
further hearing.

• This article was amended on 3 November 2016. An earlier version misdated the 
key scrutiny committee meeting at which Cllr Jamie Milne was not present, 
stating that it was “last month”. That meeting was actually on 20 September. 
Milne has asked us to point out that he was at another meeting on 4 October 
where the CPO was also discussed.
 