
The saga of Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/09/lewisham-millwall-the-den>
, the mayor and the mystery developer is about to reach a decisive point of 
crisis. A final decision on the compulsory purchase of Millwall’s land is due 
on Thursday night in the municipal splendour of Lewisham council’s civic suite.

Already the club’s hopes have received a bitter blow with the publication of 
an in-house council report recommending the Labour cabinet forces though the 
order. The land would then be sold on to an offshore-registered company called 
Renewal, a move that could seeMillwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> FC threatened ultimately with a 
gentrification-led exit from their own backyard.

Millwall stadium wrangle sparks split among Lewisham Labour councillors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/03/millwall-stadium-lewisham-labour-councillors>
Renewal’s ownership remains unknown, although in an arresting coincidence, 
company documents show it was originally set up by none other than the previous 
Labour mayor, Dave Sullivan. Sullivan is a former Lewisham council colleague of 
the current mayor Sir Steve Bullock and of the current chief executive Barry 
Quirk, best known locally for earning more pro-rata than the prime minister for 
working a three-day week with the council.

Among those who might take the chance to speak at the hearing is Zampa Fish, a 
cod wholesaler whose business is now threatened with closure but which is, 
according to Millwall ’s supporters, still unlikely to be the fishiest thing in 
the room.

It is a bewildering state of affairs generally, not just for football but also 
for anyone concerned by the opacity of local government. Already there are 
fears the compulsory purchase order may open the door to other football clubs 
being forced out of their homes by rising land prices and local authorities 
with an eye on the benefits of “regeneration”.

At Millwall’s annual general meeting last Friday the owner, John Berylson, 
spoke of the black cloud over the club’s future. “Our landlord will be Renewal, 
an offshore company domiciled in tax havens with anonymous directors and no 
experience whatsoever, as it admits, of completing a scheme of his complexity,” 
he said. “I am sure that you will all appreciate just how serious this is and 
what a threat it represents to the future of the club.”

The question of who owns the developer has been a point of speculation 
throughout. In an attempt to peel back the veil, the Millwall AMS supporters 
group has now engaged a forensic financial investigator to look into Renewal’s 
history and provenance. According to Millwall AMS’sMickey Simpson, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/hearing-millwall-fc-development-plans-postponed-till-january>
 the investigator is a financial professional giving his expertise in this area 
for no fee in the interest of transparency. His findings, seen by the Guardian, 
demonstrate beyond any doubt the unbroken ownership link between the former 
mayor and the opaque British Virgin Islands company that owns half of Renewal.

There is, by definition, no hard evidence here the former mayor or any of his 
associates have a current involvement with the developer, which has chosen 
corporate anonymity. But such is the historic connection that the head of 
Lewisham’s own scrutiny-committee, councillor Alan Hall, has already called on 
the council to formally deny Sullivan is involved in the scheme. To date Hall 
has received no response to his suggestion.

Millwall score an early goal as they seek the ultimate home win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/25/millwall-goal-ultimate-home-win-lewisham-council-the-den-renewal-property-developer>
Sullivan himself remains a fascinating minor player in the history of UK local 
politics. Often described as “colourful”, the former mayor was engaged in the 
outsourcing of local government services in the 1990s, and was so enamoured of 
New Labour’s prime minister he even gave his son the middle name “Blair”.

For more than a decade Sullivan was also a director of Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/25/millwall-goal-ultimate-home-win-lewisham-council-the-den-renewal-property-developer>
, an arrangement that came out of the council’s sponsorship of the club. After 
leaving politics in 2002 he set up Renewal and began buying up plots of land in 
Bermondsey. The Millwall AMS investigation shows that in 2005 Renewal’s 
ultimate share ownership was split between Sullivan’s personal 24% and a 
company called Independent Advisors Incorporated, registered in the British 
Virgin Islands, which is still Renewal’s part-owner.

A year later Sullivan was asked to leave the Millwall board when the extent of 
his property interests around The Den became clear. Three years later, the AMS 
investigation shows, Independent Advisors Limited became Renewal’s 100% owner 
as Sullivan transferred his shares behind a veil of offshore secrecy. When the 
Guardian asked Sullivan if he was still a part-owner of Renewal in September he
said he was no longer involved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/26/millwall-property-developer-the-den-offshore-renewal>
. Asked if he had sold his shares, he said: “Yes, I must have sold them.”

At the hearing on Thursday Lewisham intends to state that the identity of 
Renewal’s owners is irrelevant to the case. It is a startling position for a 
Labour council to back itself into. The mystery developer stands to benefit 
from public powers and public money, while evicting Lewisham council residents 
from their homes and undermining the area’s outstanding community asset of the 
past hundred years.

The council also intends to address the sales brochure, revealed in the 
Guardian in September, that suggests Renewal’s Isle of Man-based owner has 
already been looking into selling its interest, throwing the council’s plans 
into turmoil.

The pre-hearing report contains a bizarre attempt to dismiss the brochure, 
which was prepared by the estate agent Lambert Smith Hampton. The council 
accepts Renewal’s part-owner had engaged the estate agent, which then produced 
the sale document.

Millwall given new hope in land battle as disquiet grows over property deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/millwall-the-den-lewisham-council-property-developers>
Without the backing of evidence, the council then insists Renewal itself was 
“unaware” this had happened. As a member of the council’s own scrutiny 
committee, councillor John Paschoud, has already toldthe East London Lines 
website 
<http://www.eastlondonlines.co.uk/2016/12/lewisham-council-set-to-approve-new-bermondsey-compulsory-purchase-orders/>
: “I find the explanations that nobody knew anything about it a little hard to 
swallow.”

The report, which is already a source of embarrassment to some Labour 
backbenchers, also refuses to reveal the identity of the mystery developer 
because it fears it would “result in a breach of data-protection legislation”.

Where to go from here? So far Lewisham council has framed this as a battle 
between two private profit-making interests, disregarding Millwall’s own 
historic role and indissoluble ties to its community. Nobody involved disputes 
the need to redevelop and build new homes, but there is plenty that stands to 
fall between the cracks.

Millwall’s community trust  <https://www.millwallcommunity.org.uk/> currently 
occupies the land threatened with seizure. For the past 25 years it has worked 
with local people, mainly children, the elderly, and the disadvantaged, saving 
Lewisham council an estimated £7m a year in care and services. Those involved 
are already starting to feel the strain, just as local residents have suffered 
anxiety and health problems at the heavy-handed tactics of the developer, which 
have included erecting large signs urging them to sell.

Should the council confirm its order, an appeal to the high court is likely. 
Transparent cooperation between club, council and developer would be a better 
outcome for all concerned. For now all parties will look to Thursday’s hearing 
and a land grab that will cast its own minor shadow over football league clubs 
everywhere.
 