
The hearing to decide the compulsory purchase order on Millwall’s land was 
cancelled in dramatic fashion on Wednesday afternoon, just a few hours before 
the order was due to be dismissed or confirmed by Lewisham council’s Labour 
cabinet, with the council’s head of law, Kath Nicholson, referring to an 
investigation into “very serious matters indeed”.

Millwall property developer faces renewed questions over suggestions it wants 
to sell quickly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/26/millwall-property-developer-the-den-offshore-renewal>
A statement read out in council chambers by Alan Smith, the deputy mayor of the
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Borough of Lewisham, confirmed 
that the hearing would be postponed owing to the appearance of “a copy of a 
document which is now the subject of external investigation”.

The order to seize Milwall’s land and sell the freeholds to an offshore-owned 
developer called Renewal has been the subject of much local protest. This week 
a document seen by the Guardian appeared to suggest the developer’s parent 
company had been actively looking into selling its interest in the regeneration 
scheme. It is understood this is the document being investigated. Renewal has 
denied any knowledge of the document or plans to sell.

“Depending on the outcome of that investigation, the document may be referred 
to other authorities,” the email continues. “In reconsidering this matter the 
Council needs to be satisfied as to the veracity or otherwise of the document, 
and any potential impact it may have.”

Millwall score an early goal as they seek the ultimate home win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/25/millwall-goal-ultimate-home-win-lewisham-council-the-den-renewal-property-developer>
Guardian sources have suggested the contents, if confirmed, may have a 
significant effect on the course of proceeding. Last week the council scrutiny 
committee ordered the order on land occupied byMillwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> be called back in for further 
review, stating concerns about the developers’ lack of any past record in 
completing projects of this size and raising the issue of “reputational damage” 
to the council.

Renewal have since stated their commitment to seeing the project through and 
maintain that their scheme will benefit both club and local community in the 
long term. All eyes will now be on the new evidence before the council cabinet.
 