
The Liberal Democrat leader, Tim Farron, has joined the growing chorus of 
dismay at Lewisham council’s “extraordinary” plans to carry outa compulsory 
purchase of Millwall’s land at The Den 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/millwall-compulsory-purchase-order-lewisham-council>
.

Millwall admit council scheme could force club to leave Lewisham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/millwall-admit-council-scheme-leave-lewisham>
In a statement to the Guardian, Farron called on Lewisham council to consider 
the full repercussions of its land seizure. The Liberal Democrat leader said it 
would be “heartbreaking” if the decision to sell the land on to a mysterious 
offshore-owned property developerled to the club having to consider leaving the 
borough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/millwall-admit-council-scheme-leave-lewisham>
.

“Football clubs are a crucial part of British society and are at the heart of 
our communities,” Farron said. “I know how heartbreaking it would be for 
Millwall’s fans and the local community if their club was forced to move 
against their wishes. The details of this case seem quite extraordinary and I 
hope that the council don’t take actions that could risk the club’s future in 
the area.

“Fans often worry about the impact a change of owner may have on their club’s 
future, they shouldn’t have to worry that a club’s own local council would have 
a profound, unwanted impact. Sometimes fans and clubs need to move ground, or 
change how they operate, but this should be done with the fans having their 
say.”

Farron is the first senior Westminster figure to speak out on the issue. His 
call for the council to work instead with the club and the community comes 
three days before a town hall meeting at which the compulsory purchase order is 
due to be confirmed or rejected by the Labour cabinet.

This will be the second time the CPO has been ruled on. The council’s own 
scrutiny committee urged it to reconsider last September after grave concerns 
were voiced by senior councillors at both the murkiness of the process and the 
identity of the parties involved.

Lewisham plans to sell Millwall’s land to an offshore-owned property developer 
called Renewal, a company whose CEO is a former Lewisham council officer, and 
which, records have revealed, had the last Labour mayor of Lewisham as one of 
its founding directors.

As Millwall’s crisis shows, football is about far more than just sport | Tim 
Farron
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/millwall-football-den-compulsory-purchase>
Renewal has never carried out a development on this scale. A draft estate 
agent sales document has already suggested at least one half of the company has 
considered the possibility of selling its interest on for a quick profit. The 
council and its offshore private developer partner have jointly denied that 
this is the case. Lewisham council released a statement on Friday night 
insisting it believesMillwall <https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> 
will not have to leave The Den.

It is understood Lewisham’s cabinet still intends to push through a decision 
that has been condemned by a vast majority of its own backbench labour 
councillors. However, sources close to the cabinet have suggested the gathering 
doubts and the prospect of being the Labour administration that forces 
Lewisham’s only professional sports club out of the borough could yet draw a 
change of mind from councillors asked to shut out the noises off and act on a 
point of principle.
 