
Another day another small victory for football against the enemy – albeit one 
with some fairly startling revelations along the way. On a Tuesday night of 
high drama in the civic chambers,Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall> Football Club won a significant 
stage victory last week in their attempts to resist Lewisham council’s 
compulsory purchase of land around The Den, a move the club believe will 
jeopardise their future existence.

After two and a half hours of meandering interrogation in a muggy suite at 
Catford town hall the council’s scrutiny committee voted overwhelmingly to call 
back in the CPO on Millwall’s land for further consideration. The chair, 
councillor Alan Hall, delivered a devastating verdict, citing “insufficient 
grounds for a compelling case in the public interest”. The committee also 
raised concerns over the ownership and finances of Renewal, the increasingly 
mysterious offshore-owned property developer Lewisham insists is the only party 
capable of delivering the scheme.

The council intends to sell land currently occupied by Millwall to Renewal, 
which in 2011 gained planning permission for a £2bn New Bermondsey‑branded 
regeneration scheme around The Den complete with 2,400 homes, a church-mosque 
complex and a “business incubation and creative space”. Renewal’s scheme would 
be part-publicly funded under the Housing Zone programme of the previousLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> mayor, Boris Johnson.

Why Lewisham’s plans for Millwall’s Den really take the biscuit | Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/09/lewisham-millwall-the-den>
The decision on Tuesday to review the CPO represents a huge step forward for 
Millwall and other potentially displaced residents and businesses. Lewisham has 
repeatedly refused to consider the club’s own plans for the area, a scheme that 
involves more affordable housing, offers 50% profits to the council and would 
maintain the club’s place at the centre of their community. This despite the 
fact Renewal, the preferred and indeed only candidate for the job, admitted in 
the meeting that it has never carried out a development on this scale. The 
developer’s ultimate ownership is still unknown, filtered through a company 
registered in the Isle of Man and the British Virgin Islands.

There were mass protests before the original CPO this month, with 25,000 
people signing a Defend Our Den petition, and anger at the club’s exclusion 
from redevelopment on their doorstep. The club’s community trust sits on one of 
the pieces of land earmarked for development. Loss of surrounding areas, 
exclusion from the benefits, the severing of ties with their own traditional 
community: all of this will push Millwall to the edge of their own backyard. 
Some fans have started resigning themselves, gloomily, to full 
gentrification-led eviction from one of the last real inner‑city footballing 
heartlands.

A fresh council cabinet meeting will be held within a fortnight. Much depends 
on its outcome. With attention now focused on the ultimate identity of the 
developer pushing through this Lewisham council scheme, the Guardian can reveal 
a slightly startling coincidence. Renewal’s current ownership may be unknown. 
But here an arresting fact emerges: according to its records at Companies 
House, Renewal was originally set up and part-owned by the previous mayor of 
Lewisham.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fmillwall-goal-ultimate-home-win-lewisham-council-the-den-renewal-property-developer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb6de43f4c6f7ae0c700bf67710efbf63a25eafa%2F60_85_4973_2984%2F4973.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Millwall%20score%20an%20early%20goal%20as%20they%20seek%20the%20ultimate%20home%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fmillwall-goal-ultimate-home-win-lewisham-council-the-den-renewal-property-developer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Millwall%20score%20an%20early%20goal%20as%20they%20seek%20the%20ultimate%20home%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fmillwall-goal-ultimate-home-win-lewisham-council-the-den-renewal-property-developer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb6de43f4c6f7ae0c700bf67710efbf63a25eafa%2F60_85_4973_2984%2F4973.jpg>
 Match-day routine at the Bermondsey stadium on the site of land formerly known 
as Senegal Fields and handed to Millwall by the council when their old ground 
in New Cross was swallowed up by developers. Photograph: Catherine Ivill - 
AMA/Getty Images 
David Sullivan was leader of the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> council until 2002 before losing 
in the electoral race to the current mayor, Sir Steve Bullock. The same David 
Sullivan was a founding director of Renewal. As recently as 2006, Sullivan 
still owned 26% of the company’s shares.

This historic connection between the Renewal group and Lewisham council has 
not previously been made public. Neither has the former mayor’s triple 
connection to the scheme as a one‑time director of Millwall, a role Sullivan 
still held when his company, Renewal, first started buying up land around The 
Den. It is a conflict of loyalties at which the club’s fans in particular will 
bridle.

Contacted by the Guardian, Sullivan denied any ongoing involvement in the 
current development. “I have absolutely no connection to the current ownership 
of Renewal. I’m not involved. I left Lewisham council in 2002, I left Renewal 
some years ago. I was a director of Millwall but I had to leave over a conflict 
of interest.” Asked if he had sold his shares in Renewal, Sullivan said: “Yes, 
I must have sold them.”

The historic connections between council and offshore-owned developer do not 
end there. Bullock is also director of a company called Surrey Canal Sports 
which was set up by Renewal and now shares its registered address. The mayor’s 
fellow board members include the Renewal director Jordana Malik. Last year 
Lewisham council, which recently closed five libraries, pledged £500,000 of 
public money to Surrey Canal Sports in order to help it build a new sports 
centre.

Malik spoke on Renewal’s behalf at the CPO hearing last Tuesday. Asked 
repeatedly at the hearing why Renewal’s ultimate owners could not be named, 
Malik’s best defence was that these beneficiaries of public money and public 
powers “have a right to privacy”. Closely followed by the bizarre but 
intriguing “they live locally”.

There is of course no evidence here of undue influence, or any evidence of an 
ongoing, current connection between former mayor Sullivan, Lewisham council and 
the current Renewal project to redevelop Millwall’s leased land. But the 
historic link will be particularly galling for fans and the club’s directors, 
who have failed repeatedly to persuade the council to consider Millwall’s own 
proposals – fully costed and with the benefits of the scheme shared around – to 
regenerate the area.

More broadly the involvement of an offshore company in the New Bermondsey 
development is an awkward turn forSadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, who during the London 
mayoral race spoke about his opposition to the ownership of London property by 
“those using anonymous offshore tax havens”.

Khan said in April: “It’s high time all property ownership in London was made 
transparent so we can see exactly who owns what.”

Asked by the Guardian if he intends to seek transparency in the current case, 
Khan appeared to have shifted to a more lenient stance. “Sadiq is clear that 
London is open and encourages investment from all over the world to build new 
and genuinely affordable homes,” a spokesman for the mayor said. “City Hall 
will follow its standard processes for due diligence and the development will 
be treated as business carried out in the UK, meaning the developer will be 
required to disclose and pay tax on profits it makes from it.”

A spokesman for Bullock echoed Khan’s line. “The scheme has been agreed as 
viable and the delivery strategy appropriate. Renewal has also confirmed that 
UK tax will be paid on any profit from the redevelopment scheme.” This in 
reality is an assurance that only goes so far. The details of tax and profits 
will have to be taken on trust due to the absence of filed UK accounts.

This was acknowledged by PricewaterhouseCoopers in the council’s own due 
diligence report, itself an object of exasperation at the scrutiny meeting as 
council officers were, to their own clear annoyance, legally barred from 
actually discussing anything they had read in the reports.

Land-grabs, housing density, mixed-retail schemes, business hubs: at the heart 
of Millwall’s current struggle is a wider question over what function 
football’s grand old community clubs, glossed and burnished, menaced by the 
wider transformation around them, can hope to retain their familiar old 
geographical space. Not least in a city such as London where every hectare of 
concrete and dirt is costed and coveted, where money wears everything thin.

In Bermondsey the currents flow south across the Thames from London’s twin 
financial districts, the City and the Docklands. Millwall and the slightly 
lost, meandering river-bound sprawl of south Bermondsey have sat in the path of 
this for the last three decades. Even the club’s fans are a diaspora now, 
either clinging on to south-east London or dispersed by the same forces. The 
club is owned by a US billionaire. Everyone gets this. Redevelopment is 
inevitable. How it happens is the issue.

With this in mind it is worth asking how a Labour council can prefer to 
support a private developer that offers no profit or interest in the land to 
the borough’s citizens, while simultaneously marginalising the area’s one 
undeniable community asset. Millwall have been in : the area since 1901, first 
as a muster point for local dockers and their families, later as a binding 
strand in a rather overlooked part of London, and more recently as a tangible 
force for good. The Community Trust in particular has won praise for its work 
offering education, courses and help for those with learning problems, and for 
convicted offenders. As David Prescott, speaking for the club at the committee, 
pointed out:

“When the cranes go and the developers go, Millwall will still be there in the 
heart of the community.”

The council’s preferred offshore developer is naturally a more 
commercially-minded operator. At the scrutiny meeting Malik, speaking for 
Renewal, made great play of her company’s soft edges and community spirit, even 
while it has been hoovering up 80 properties in the local area over the last 12 
years. “People don’t sell under duress. People feel they got a good deal,” 
Mailk said, adding: “I have huge amounts of empathy.”

At this point it was pointed out that Renewal had erected two-metres by 
one-metre signs outside the homes of local residents, many of them elderly, 
hectoring them to sell and announcing in bold red type “it will be in your 
interest to avoid the impending COMPULSORY PURCHASE PROCESS”. This before the 
order had even been heard by the council. “That was done by Renewal,” Malik 
admitted. “I apologise. It should never have happened.”

One of the local residents, Willow Winston, was offered £58,000 for her home 
by the developers, which she says is a 10th of its value. At the hearing she 
mentioned the health problems she had suffered as a result of stress. Others, 
including Zampa Fish, a profitable wholesaler that employs local people, have 
been offered sums that would effectively involve closing down.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fmillwall-goal-ultimate-home-win-lewisham-council-the-den-renewal-property-developer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49d365a3bec9272a5a5f1bca342b687fba42402%2F0_15_1181_709%2F1181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Millwall%20score%20an%20early%20goal%20as%20they%20seek%20the%20ultimate%20home%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fmillwall-goal-ultimate-home-win-lewisham-council-the-den-renewal-property-developer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Millwall%20score%20an%20early%20goal%20as%20they%20seek%20the%20ultimate%20home%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fmillwall-goal-ultimate-home-win-lewisham-council-the-den-renewal-property-developer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49d365a3bec9272a5a5f1bca342b687fba42402%2F0_15_1181_709%2F1181.jpg>
 The 2m x 1m Compulsory Purchase Order sign that was put outside Willow 
Winston’s house by the mysterious development company Renewal. Photograph: 
David Prescott/Commucan 
Why would any local council, let alone a Labour one, choose to side with this? 
Why is Lewisham so eager to compulsorily purchase Millwall’s land – a genuinely 
hostile move from the club’s former sponsor – on behalf of an opaque offshore 
developer? Not least when Malik suggested at last week’s hearing the need for 
Millwall’s land speaks to the profitability of the scheme, raising the 
genuinely jaw-dropping prospect of a council using its statutory CPO powers – 
permissible where a clear public good is shown – to help increase the profits 
of its private developer partner.

Why Lewisham’s plans for Millwall’s Den really take the biscuit | Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/09/lewisham-millwall-the-den>
What happens next is vital, not just to the question of what kind of value can 
be put on community, welfare, and the rights of those who simply occupy rather 
than own London’s aggressively coveted spaces. This has been a debilitating 
process all round.

Whatever the ultimate intentions of the developer here, it is now four years 
since planning permission was granted. Stasis has followed. Just as Millwall 
continue to wait and wonder and hope to play a part in this process with all 
parties involved, so lives have been put on hold, businesses interrupted. This 
is not really just a football club story. But with the best possible outcome it 
could yet become one.
 