
Miroslav Klose, the top scorer in World Cup history, is ending his playing 
career and will join Joachim Löw’s coaching staff as he studies for his pro 
licence, the German football association (DFB) have confirmed.

The 38-year-old retired from international football after winning the World 
Cup with Germany in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/11/miroslav-klose-germany-international-retirement>
, scoring twice to bring his total goal tally from four tournaments to 16. He 
is also Germany’s record scorer with 71 goals.

Miroslav Klose announces retirement from international football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/11/miroslav-klose-germany-international-retirement>
Klose’s contract with Lazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> 
expired after last season. The DFB says that, in consultation with Löw and the 
technical director, Hansi Flick, Klose will now undergo an individual training 
program “with the clear aim of embarking on a coaching career”.

Klose, who played 137 games for Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany>, said: “I celebrated my greatest 
successes in the national team and this was a wonderful time which remains 
unforgettable.

“That is why I’m delighted to return to the DFB. In the past few months, I 
have thought a lot about continuing my playing career, but also about looking 
at new avenues, namely becoming a coach.

“Reading a game, preparing painstakingly, developing strategies and tactics 
have always intrigued me and interested me a lot as a player. I am very 
grateful to Jogi Löw and Hansi Flick for this opportunity to sharpen my ideas 
now in practice.”

Having benefitted from his goals for eight years, Löw is now hoping to benefit 
from Klose’s insights off the field.

“I’ve always been able to rely on Miro and that’s why I’m really pleased that 
he is now going to be part of our team,” he said. “He’s a role model as a 
person and a sportsman who always puts everything else after the team and 
success.

“With his views and his experience, I can see him very well as a coach in the 
future and we are happy to support him along the way with the DFB. I am sure 
that we the coaches are going to benefit as much from his presence here as we 
did when he was a player. We’re looking forward to working with Miro.”
 