
Suspended on wires high above Wembley arena, ruggedly hovering and 
somersaulting in a jumpsuit, Bear Grylls looks like Action Man auditioning to 
play Tinker Bell. His other outfits will include an astronaut suit and bright 
flashy swimming trunks in what is the strangest show I have ever seen. It 
mainly takes the form of an acrobatic lecture, in which the TV explorer tells 
stories of human survival in extreme situations.

Bear Grylls on his acrobatic show: 'My son says I'm too old. But that's 
stinking thinking'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/30/bear-grylls-acrobatic-show-endeavour-tour>
But the performance is also part motivational seminar (“Don’t listen to the 
dream-stealers out there,” Grylls warns), intermittent Christian evangelical 
rally (“I see the hand of a Creator everywhere,” our host confides from above) 
and sometimes a big-budget Blue Peter feature, in whichMallory’s 1924 attempt 
on Mount Everest 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1924_British_Mount_Everest_expedition> or the 
Apollo 13 emergency <http://www.space.com/17250-apollo-13-facts.html> are 
turned into a perky CGI slideshow.

As the audience comes in, there is a soundtrack of howling wind and the stage 
is filled with a triptych of vast images of Grylls – one staring, two running, 
in black and white except for piercing blue eyes – forming what resembles an 
altarpiece worshipping manliness. The event is prominently billed as “presented 
by Land Rover”, but no cars appear in the show, which is essentially a vehicle 
for Grylls, although there are a couple of extras who, for example, put on 
parkas and drag a sledge to suggest an Antarctic expedition, during a sequence 
that puts the camp into base camp.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbear-grylls-endeavour-show-acrobat-lecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62cb343724083f4e79317a57f4a59d74e5bad211%2F0_0_4064_2853%2F4064.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mission%20improbable%3A%20is%20Bear%20Grylls'%20Endeavour%20the%20strangest%20show%20ever%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbear-grylls-endeavour-show-acrobat-lecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mission%20improbable%3A%20is%20Bear%20Grylls%27%20Endeavour%20the%20strangest%20show%20ever%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbear-grylls-endeavour-show-acrobat-lecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62cb343724083f4e79317a57f4a59d74e5bad211%2F0_0_4064_2853%2F4064.jpg>
 Too bonkers to be boring … Grylls and his son Huckleberry space walk. 
Photograph: Richard Isaac/Rex/Shutterstock 
While various tests of the human spirit – in ice, sea, jungle or space – are 
dramatised on stage, Grylls, from his hoist in the gods, provides a running 
commentary, sometimes literally (“Surges of foul diarrhoea were pouring out of 
his body”), although the performers, perhaps thankfully, suggest this gastric 
calamity through mime.

The piece seems largely aimed at children. Grylls is currently serving as the 
Chief Scout 
<http://scouts.org.uk/about-us/organisational-information/chief-scout/>, and in 
the audience for the final preview performance (to which press were invited), 
the few of us not wearing toggles felt naked. Parents of younger customers, 
however, might want to have hankies or distractions ready for the occasional 
big-screen projections of near-fatal snake-bites or maggot-infested flesh 
wounds.

Junior consumers (there is an 8+ advisory) may enjoy more the sections in 
which Grylls descends to Earth and asks volunteers to take part in 
demonstrations of making fire without matches or putting up a tent against the 
clock. At the premiere, the eager ranks of raised Scout-uniformed arms were 
ignored in favour of pre-selected candidates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbear-grylls-endeavour-show-acrobat-lecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3255c024e447b415bb47aed591dcfa6408018cec%2F0_0_4000_2343%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mission%20improbable%3A%20is%20Bear%20Grylls'%20Endeavour%20the%20strangest%20show%20ever%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbear-grylls-endeavour-show-acrobat-lecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mission%20improbable%3A%20is%20Bear%20Grylls%27%20Endeavour%20the%20strangest%20show%20ever%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbear-grylls-endeavour-show-acrobat-lecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3255c024e447b415bb47aed591dcfa6408018cec%2F0_0_4000_2343%2F4000.jpg>
 Putting the camp into base camp … Grylls on Everest. Photograph: Richard 
Isaac/Rex/Shutterstock 
The content is generally too bonkers to be boring, but the conception suffers 
from a frequent gap between language and image. While this can be a blessing in 
the passages about explorers losing bowel control, it is more problematic 
during, for instance, a simulation of cliff-diving. Although his narration 
emphasises the high death-rate from the activity, we know that his attempt, 
from a low height with safety wires, wouldn’t have got past insurance or health 
and safety if it were as dangerous as he suggests.

Before the first performance, veteran entertainment promoter Harvey Goldsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2006/mar/10/greaterlondonauthority.olympics2012>
 came on stage to declare that “no one has ever done a show like this before”, 
and, for perhaps the first time in his career, he can not be accused of hype.

 * Bear Grylls: Endeavour <http://www.beargryllslive.com/thetour> tours the UK 
and Ireland until 28 October.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbear-grylls-endeavour-show-acrobat-lecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8a46130d6ab5159c7cb626b0240b7f7a11c77d7%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mission%20improbable%3A%20is%20Bear%20Grylls'%20Endeavour%20the%20strangest%20show%20ever%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbear-grylls-endeavour-show-acrobat-lecture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mission%20improbable%3A%20is%20Bear%20Grylls%27%20Endeavour%20the%20strangest%20show%20ever%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbear-grylls-endeavour-show-acrobat-lecture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8a46130d6ab5159c7cb626b0240b7f7a11c77d7%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Back to earth … Grylls helps an air-crash victim in the jungle. Photograph: 
Steve Parsons/PA  