
Mistletoe

Mistletoe is, as National Geographic remarked 
<http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2015/12/151218-mistletoe-christmas-holiday-kissing-parasite-birds-cancer/>
 last year, “everyone’s favourite parasite”, although the pedant in me has to 
point out that it’s actually a hemiparasite, because as well as ligging 
nutrients off its host plant via a connecting organ known as the haustorium, 
mistletoe does provide some of its own energy via photosynthesis.

The term mistletoe is a catch-all for a number of different plants around the 
world - many related, some not - but the UK native isViscum album 
<http://www.kew.org/science-conservation/plants-fungi/viscum-album-mistletoe>. 
Don’t be alarmed if you’ve never seen any where you live; itsgeographical spread
 <http://www.surveys.mistletoe.org.uk/1990sDistribution.html> across the UK is 
patchy and it is absent from some areas altogether. If you want to seek some 
out, mistletoe favours apple trees, limes, maples and poplars, although it can 
be found on other trees too. If you can’t find any real mistletoe, you could 
invest in the mistletoe cactus (Rhipsalis baccifera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/17/how-to-grow-mistletoe-cactus-alys-fowler>
) as a hanging houseplant and steal a snog under that instead.

For a whole host of information on mistletoe myth and legend, plus practical 
details of how to grow it in your own garden, go to Jonathan Briggs’Mistletoe 
Pages site <http://mistletoe.org.uk/homewp/index.php/faqs/faqs/>. And for more 
on mistletoe and other (hemi)parasites read our rare plant blogger Robbie 
Blackhall-Miles’latest post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/dec/14/mistletoe-and-other-plant-parasites>
. And I recorded a podcast about festive plants last December, which includes a 
segment on mistletoe.Listen here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/audio/2015/dec/24/sow-grow-repeat-christmas-trees-mistletoe-and-festive-plants>

Ivy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ac97632a8517ad8bf3d194316af7b93a4bd3d04%2F0_1441_3579_2148%2F3579.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mistletoe%2C%20ivy%20and%20sage%3A%20the%20foliage%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mistletoe%2C%20ivy%20and%20sage%3A%20the%20foliage%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ac97632a8517ad8bf3d194316af7b93a4bd3d04%2F0_1441_3579_2148%2F3579.jpg>
 Ivy: bend it, shape it, any way you want it; ivy makes fantastic Christmas 
foliage. Photograph: John Glover/Alamy 
Unlike mistletoe, ivy is not a parasite, despite its bad reputation among many 
gardeners: it photosynthesises and gains nutrients from roots buried in the 
ground, not from a tree. As Rosemary FitzGerald writes inA Gardener’s Guide to 
the Native Plants of Britain and Ireland 
<http://www.crowood.com/details.asp?isbn=9781847973092>, “it is considered to 
be the home-owner’s enemy and undesirable in gardens”.

And yet it is a fantastic plant for wildlife, a wonderful evergreen screen and 
a powerful symbol in art and culture, although its role as a festive decoration 
has been fading in the last few decades. It has many advantages over holly, 
though - it’s more widely and freely available, doesn’t spike you as you try to 
arrange it, and is easy to manipulate into swags, wreaths and any other shape 
you can think of. If you want to delve into the meaning of the popular carol 
The Holly and the Ivy, start with thispiece 
<https://www.ft.com/content/cffe8a12-a4a4-11e5-8218-6b8ff73aae15> in the 
Financial Times by Jan Dalley. And you can read our columnist Alys Fowler’s 
defence of ivy as a garden planthere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jan/25/alys-fowler-ivy>. (We’ll 
look at the holly in part two of this series.)

In her book The Green Tapestry 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/d/Books/Green-Tapestry-perennial-plants-garden/000410448X/ref=sr_1_3?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1481800333&sr=1-3&keywords=green+tapestry>
, Essex plantswoman Beth Chatto recommends ivy as ground cover in dry, shady 
spots; under a dense tree, perhaps. She writes: “I had a long bare bank of clay 
at one end of the long shady border which I have completely buried beneath 
shawls of different forms of ivy.”

Christmas rose
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcb35a12afb7327bb09c5924eef61982e615db85%2F0_462_2592_3240%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mistletoe%2C%20ivy%20and%20sage%3A%20the%20foliage%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mistletoe%2C%20ivy%20and%20sage%3A%20the%20foliage%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcb35a12afb7327bb09c5924eef61982e615db85%2F0_462_2592_3240%2F2592.jpg>
 Grown in a pot, the pure white flowers of the Christmas rose will stay 
pristine. Photograph: Juliette Wade/Getty Images 
Or should I say Helleborus niger, for as anyone who grows this plant in their 
garden knows, it very rarely flowers at Christmas, and isn’t a rose. Those 
pesky common plant names, eh? The wonder of this plant is that it boasts the 
biggest flowers of all the hellebores; pure white blooms that push up from the 
soil ahead of the leaves from January on.

Despite its reluctance to flower at Christmas in gardens, it is easily 
obtained as a pot plant in bud now, so you can enjoy the flowers on December 
25. You can risk bringing it inside into a cool environment for a few days, but 
don’t leave it too long to send it back to its preferred habitat outside; or 
just place it on an outside table you can see from a window, or by the front 
door.

Growing H. niger in a large pot isn’t such a bad idea, as it prefers fertile 
but well-drained soil that doesn’t get boggy over winter; it also means the 
petals won’t get splashed with mud.

Sprouts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85ac48e592b1fccc1220e73b7cc325d2e0cccdf5%2F167_23_2583_1550%2F2583.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mistletoe%2C%20ivy%20and%20sage%3A%20the%20foliage%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mistletoe%2C%20ivy%20and%20sage%3A%20the%20foliage%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85ac48e592b1fccc1220e73b7cc325d2e0cccdf5%2F167_23_2583_1550%2F2583.jpg>
 Growing brussels sprouts - akaBrassica oleracea Gemmifera Group - is probably 
best left to the farmer, unless you have a big allotment and plenty of time on 
your hands. Photograph: Matt Cardy/Getty Images 
We all love a few Brassica oleracea Gemmifera Group  
<http://www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/PlantFinder/PlantFinderDetails.aspx?kempercode=f657>
on our plates at Christmas, don’t we? I may be stretching the theme a little 
here, but sprouts are foliage, after all. Sprout “stalks” have become the 
trendy way to buy your sprouts in the last few years, which has at least 
educated people about what part of the plant brussels sprouts come from 
(they’re buds, but you knew that, right?).

They aren’t the easiest vegetables to grow for yourself, either. Like most 
members of thebrassica family 
<http://www.vox.com/xpress/2014/8/6/5974989/kale-cauliflower-cabbage-broccoli-same-plant>
, they are long-season plants that need to be sown in February or March and 
planted out in early summer to limber up for a winter harvest. Sprout plants 
take up a lot of room, and if the tall stalks aren’t firmed into the ground 
sufficiently, the sprouts can “blow” - in other words, fail to form the tight 
balls we expect. If this is a problem - or perhaps you just don’t like sprouts, 
givekalettes <http://www.kalettes.com/> a try - these kale-sprout hybrids were 
bred byTozer Seeds <http://tozerseeds.com> as an alternative to the sprout, and 
naturally grow in a loose formation.

Sage
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca921cbe81432283710d6563457ae9bc3c024620%2F0_498_3884_4852%2F3884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mistletoe%2C%20ivy%20and%20sage%3A%20the%20foliage%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mistletoe%2C%20ivy%20and%20sage%3A%20the%20foliage%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca921cbe81432283710d6563457ae9bc3c024620%2F0_498_3884_4852%2F3884.jpg>
 Sage: a vital part of Christmas dinner. Photograph: Keith Leighton/Alamy 
Not only is sage a vital ingredient of the Christmas classic, sage and onion 
stuffing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/dec/20/how-to-cook-perfect-christmas-dinner#sage-and-onion-stuffing>
, its fragrant, evergreen leaves are also a wonderful addition to a homemade 
Christmas wreath, a table centrepiece with candles, or simply stuck in a vase 
with some silvery eucalyptus leaves, bay branches and rosemary. I’d also urge 
you to try herb guru Jekka McVicar’s wonderfulcrispy sage, apple and walnut 
salad <http://www.lovefreshherbs.co.uk/2015/09/11/jekka-mcvivar-on-sage> from 
her book Jekka’s Herb Cookbook.

Sage is also reputed to have health-giving properties - you name a condition, 
and there’s probably an anecdote thatSalvia officinalis treats it, although you 
should bear in mind that not all of this isproven scientifically 
<http://www.webmd.com/vitamins-supplements/ingredientmono-504-sage.aspx?activeingredientid=504&>
. As Caroline Holmes points out in her bookRHS Herbs for the Gourmet Gardener 
<http://www.rhsshop.co.uk/productdetails.aspx?id=10000108&itemno=9781845338855>
, this reputation is the origin of the Arab proverb “How can a man die who has 
sage in his garden?”

In the garden, sage likes full sun and well-drained soil; the best way to 
promote fresh growth is to prune it right back every spring, rather than 
letting it get too leggy and woody. Purple sage,Salvia officinalis 
‘Purpurascens’ <https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=1761> is 
particularly pretty, especially if grown alongside its green relative. If you 
don’t want to plant it in a dedicated herb bed, it looks lovely underplanting 
roses along with lavender.

 * This is the first in a series of three blogposts on festive plants. To come 
next week: part two on the trees, and part three on the houseplants of 
Christmas.
 