
A nuclear fusion world record has been set in the US, marking another step on 
the long road towards the unlocking of limitless clean energy.

A team at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) created the highest 
plasma pressure ever recorded 
<http://news.mit.edu/2016/alcator-c-mod-tokamak-nuclear-fusion-world-record-1014>
, using its Alcator C-Mod tokamak reactor. High pressures and extreme 
temperatures are vital in forcing atoms together to release huge amounts of 
energy.

Nuclear fusion powers the sun and has long been touted as the ultimate 
solution to powering the world while halting climate change. But, as fusion 
sceptics often say, the reality has stubbornly remained a decade or two away 
for many years.

Now MIT scientists have increased the record plasma pressure to more than two 
atmospheres, a 16% increase on the previous record set in 2005, at a 
temperature of 35 million C and lasting for two seconds. The breakthrough was 
presented at theInternational Atomic Energy Agency’s fusion summit in Japan on 
Monday 
<http://www-pub.iaea.org/iaeameetings/48315/26th-IAEA-Fusion-Energy-Conference>.

Successful fusion means getting more energy out than is put in and this 
requires the combination of pressure, temperature and time to pass a critical 
value at which point the reaction becomes self-sustaining. This remains elusive 
but the MIT record shows that using very high magnetic fields to contain the 
plasma may be the most promising route to practical nuclear fusion reactors.

“This is a remarkable achievement,” said Dale Meade, former deputy director at 
the Princeton PlasmaPhysics <https://www.theguardian.com/science/physics> 
Laboratory. “The record plasma pressure validates the high-magnetic-field 
approach as an attractive path to practical fusion energy.”

Prof Riccardo Betti, at the University of Rochester, New York, said: “This 
result confirms that the high pressures required for a burning plasma can be 
best achieved with high-magnetic-field tokamaks such as Alcator C-Mod.”

However, the world record was achieved on the last day of the MIT tokamak’s 
operation, because funding from the US Department of Energy has now ended. The 
US, along with the EU, China, India, South Korea, Russia and Japan, are now 
ploughing their fusion funding into ahuge fusion reactor called ITER 
<https://www.iter.org/>. 

The giant, seven-storey-high tokamak is being built in southern France, with 
magnetsweighing about the same as a Boeing 747 
<http://gizmodo.com/our-best-shot-at-nuclear-fusion-needs-magnets-weighing-1765662769>
. The volume of ITER’s tokamak will be 800 times bigger than the MIT vessel. 
ITER should be completed in 15-20 years and aims to deliver 500MW of power, 
about the same as today’s large fission reactors. But the project has been 
hampered by delays.

In the meantime, there are numerous private companies hoping to develop small 
scale nuclear fusion reactors. One isTokamak Energy 
<http://www.tokamakenergy.co.uk/>, a spin-off from the UK’s national fusion lab 
<http://www.ccfe.ac.uk/>, which uses high-temperature superconductors to create 
the magnetic field to contain the fusion plasma. The MIT tokamak used copper 
magnets, which require use more power.

Dr David Kingham, chief executive of Tokamak Energy, said the important aspect 
of the MIT world record was that it showed extreme conditions can be created in 
small tokamaks: the volume of the MIT device is just one cubic metre. “The 
conventional view is that tokamaks have to be huge [like ITER] to be powerful,” 
he said. “The MIT people disagree with that view, as do we.” Kingham’s target 
is for his company’s compact reactors toproduce their first electricity by 2025 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/24/nuclear-fusion-needs-a-wright-brothers-moment-says-firm-closing-on-the-target>
.

Rival companies also backing small fusion reactors include Lockheed Martin’s 
famous Skunk Works team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/16/has-lockheed-martin-really-made-a-breakthrough-on-nuclear-fusion>
. In 2014 said they would produce a truck-sized fusion plant in a decade but 
attracted criticism for providing few details.

Others in the field include Tri Alpha Energy <http://www.trialphaenergy.com/>, 
which harnesses particle accelerator technology and is backed by Paul Allen, 
Microsoft’s co-founder.General Fusion <http://www.generalfusion.com/>, which 
uses a vortex of molten lead and lithium to contain the plasma, is backed by 
Amazon’s Jeff Bezos.Helion Energy <http://www.helionenergy.com/>, First Light 
Fusion <http://firstlightfusion.com/> and the University of Washington’s Dynomak
 
<http://www.washington.edu/news/2014/10/08/uw-fusion-reactor-concept-could-be-cheaper-than-coal/>
 are all also chasing the fusion dream.

Prof Dennis Whyte, director of MIT’s Plasma Science and Fusion Center, said 
small, non-tokamak approaches, though less familiar, could be promising: 
“Compact, high-field tokamaks provide an exciting opportunity for accelerating 
fusion energy development, so that it’s available soon enough to make a 
difference to problems like climate change and the future of clean energy, 
goals I think we all share.”
 