
MK Dons’ relegation back to League One was confirmed on Saturday following 
their 4-1 home defeat by mid-table Brentford. Karl Robinson’s side went into 
the game knowing they had to win all three of their remaining matches to stand 
any chance of avoiding relegation after one season in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>, while hoping one of their 
nearest rivals lost their remaining three fixtures.

And despite the Dons taking an early lead through Nicky Maynard, Sergi Canós 
levelled minutes later andBrentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> went on to score three in the 
second half through Lasse Vibe, Ryan Woods and Jake Bidwell.

The hosts could hardly have got off to a better start after going ahead after 
six minutes. A searching ball from Jake Forster-Caskey from inside his own half 
found Josh Murphy down the left, and the Norwich’s loanee’s cool touch and 
inch-perfect cross found Maynard, who had the simple task of tapping the ball 
home from close range.

But the Dons’ lead lasted all of three minutes as Canós struck his sixth goal 
of the season with a looping effort from outside the hosts’ box that flew over 
keeper Cody Cropper and into the top corner. Robinson’s side forced Brentford 
keeper David Button into action moments later when Murphy’s cross from the left 
flank again found Maynard lurking in front of goal, but his effort was superbly 
pushed over for a corner by Button.

Nothing came of that and the visitors were almost gifted the lead midway 
through the first half after Cropper’s reluctance to clear a pass back from 
inside his own box allowed Vibe to nick the ball from under his feet. However, 
Vibe struck his one-on-one effort with Cropper straight at the goalkeeper’s 
body and Dons survived.

Robinson was forced into making two changes during half-time, Cropper being 
replaced by 20-year-old Charlie Burns, who had made his league debut at 
Sheffield Wednesday on Tuesday, while Antony Kay came in for defender Joe 
Walsh, who was suffering from sickness in the first period.

Brentford were unchanged and it was they who started the second half the 
better as they went 2-1 up inside four minutes. Vibe beat the offside trap 
before firing a tame left-footed strike from the edge of the box across Burns 
and into the bottom corner. The visitors sealed the win with two goals in the 
final 10 minutes thanks to Woods’ well-taken effort from the edge of the area 
and Bidwell’s fine finish at the death. The defeat means MK Dons joinBolton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/bolton-wanderers-relegated-johnny-russell-derby>
 andCharlton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/19/charlton-athletic-relegated-league-one-bolton>
 in dropping out of the Championship.
 