
In 2011 John Musker and Ron Clements, the writer-director team responsible for 
Disney’s animated film Moana, took the first of many research trips to 
Polynesia, interviewing elders and community members from Samoa, Tahiti and 
Fiji. It was the beginning of a five-year endeavour to ensure thatMoana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/moana>, a film about a young heroine in a 
nonspecific region of Polynesia, would do better at depicting Indigenous people 
and people of colour than Disney had done in the past.

That same year Disney opened the doors to its $800m Aulani resort 
<http://www.govisithawaii.com/2011/09/23/scenes-from-grand-opening-at-aulani-a-disney-resort-spa/>
, part of the Ko Olina resort development on O’ahu in Hawaii. Dressed in an 
aloha shirt and flip flops, Disney’s chief executive, Bob Iger, said, “We have 
committed ourselves to ensuring that Aulani is respectful and appreciative of 
the unique Hawaiian culture and traditions.”

Moana is a rare and wonderful celebration of the Pacific islands – this movie 
is us | Madeleine Chapman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/23/moana-is-a-rare-and-wonderful-celebration-of-the-pacific-islands-this-movie-is-us>
This bastion of luxury sits at the gateway to the predominantly native 
Hawaiian communities of the Waianae coast, one of the most economically 
disadvantaged areas inHawaii <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hawaii>. 
Standard room rates start at more than $500 a night.

In the midst of a heated conversation about whitewashing in Hollywood, Moana’s 
creators Musker and Clements havetouted their efforts 
<http://www.thenational.ae/arts-life/film/directors-of-disneys-moana-on-the-great-lengths-to-portray-tahitian-culture-as-accurately-as-possible>
,encouraged by Disney’s creative chief 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/features/animation-roundtable-seth-rogen-6-more-avoiding-ethnic-stereotypes-creating-ugly-cute-princ>
, John Lasseter, to get Polynesian culture right. Whereas, by their own 
admission 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/features/animation-roundtable-seth-rogen-6-more-avoiding-ethnic-stereotypes-creating-ugly-cute-princ>
, their research for Aladdin consisted of a visit to a Saudi Arabian expo at 
the Los Angeles Convention Center, for Moana, they worked with a hand-selected 
group of cultural consultants, later dubbed the Oceanic story trust.

But the veneer of “culture” has always been an important part of colonial 
profit-making in the Pacific. Think tiki torches, hula skirts and lu’au. As it 
turns out, “authenticity” makes for even better marketing, and Moana is just 
one of the Polynesian products that the corporation is hoping to sell.

As the Māori scholar Tina Ngata argues <https://vimeo.com/194799458>, Moana is 
a “very flash-looking, prolonged advertisement for a merchandise and tourism 
machine” that includes the 351-room Aulani resort, 481Disney Vacation Club 
<http://www.bizjournals.com/pacific/news/2015/07/27/disney-vacation-club-opeing-at-ko-olina-near.html>
 timeshare units in Aulani, andtalks of regular cruise ship routes 
<http://www.hawaiibusiness.com/talk-story-with-bob-iger-of-the-walt-disney-co/> 
through the Hawaiian Islands. Moana’s release has sparked a flurry oftravel 
articles 
<http://www.travelerstoday.com/articles/31363/20161226/discover-majestic-islands-inspired-disneys-moana.htm>
 about the island “destinations” that inspired the movie’s vibrant landscapes. 
Auli’i Cravalho, the native Hawaiian actor who voices Moana, gave insiderHawaii 
holiday tips to the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/travel/hawaii-aulii-cravalho-of-moana-disney.html>
, and Disney partnered with Hawaiian Airlines to promote the film. Pacific 
Business News came right out with it in an article: “Disney’s ‘Moana’ an 
advertisement for Hawaii tourism 
<http://www.bizjournals.com/pacific/news/2016/11/17/disneys-moana-anadvertisement-for-hawaii-tourism.html>
”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmoana-might-be-great-for-representation-but-its-not-all-heartwarming-for-hawaii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d2fc3ae0cc841f0bd1ca5d1f9dcb0d38cfd4829%2F0_0_1200_675%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moana%20might%20be%20great%20for%20representation%20but%20it's%20not%20all%20heartwarming%20for%20Hawaii%20%7C%20Tina%20Grandinetti&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmoana-might-be-great-for-representation-but-its-not-all-heartwarming-for-hawaii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moana%20might%20be%20great%20for%20representation%20but%20it%27s%20not%20all%20heartwarming%20for%20Hawaii%20%7C%20Tina%20Grandinetti&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmoana-might-be-great-for-representation-but-its-not-all-heartwarming-for-hawaii%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d2fc3ae0cc841f0bd1ca5d1f9dcb0d38cfd4829%2F0_0_1200_675%2F1200.jpg>
 ‘It doesn’t take much of a stretch of the imagination to see “the Darkness” 
that threatens Moana’s island as an unintentional allegory for an exploitative 
industry.’ Photograph: Disney 
The problem here is that this merchandise and tourism machine operates in 
direct opposition to the morals of Moana, a young girl who cares fiercely for 
her people and her island – both of which face the threat of ecological 
destruction. This story is not unfamiliar to people who call the Pacific home.
Rising sea levels 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/12/02/world/The-Marshall-Islands-Are-Disappearing.html>
,depleted fisheries 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-09-02/pacific-tuna-stocks-on-brink-of-disaster-says-glenn-hurry/5704644>
, andintensifying storms 
<http://www.hawaii.edu/news/2014/08/05/rapid-warming-of-the-atlantic-is-source-of-recent-pacific-climate-trends/>
 have already had an impact on Pacific peoples. And while Moana supposedly 
gives voice and representation to those struggles, its release not only helps 
to drive the expansion of Disney’s carbon-intensive global tourism empire but 
also fuels a mass market of plastic merchandise that epitomises the very 
culture of consumption responsible for our planet’s environmental crisis.

As a non-Indigenous settler who calls Hawaii home, it’s not for me to decide 
whether Disney succeeded in accurately representing Polynesian cultures in 
Moana. But having grown up in the islands, it’s easy to see that these 
contradictions have real, material impacts for the people of the Pacific, and 
Hawaii in particular, because they promote and legitimise the consumption of 
native lands, waters and culture by non-native peoples. And the desire for 
environmentally and culturally sustainable alternatives to the tourism economy 
is real.

In a 2010 survey by the Hawaii Tourism Authority 
<http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/travel/destinations/2010-02-15-hawaii-tourism-survey_n.htm>
, 60% of Kanaka Maoli (native Hawaiian) respondents feel that the tourism 
industry is detrimental to the survival of their culture. Why?

Consider for a moment that the caricatured likeness of Maui, a demigod in a 
living religion, is nowplastered on to fossil fuel-powered jets 
<http://www.staradvertiser.com/2016/10/15/breaking-news/hawaiian-airlines-unveils-moana-plane/>
 that cart thousands of tourists to Hawaii from the United States – the country 
responsible for the illegal overthrow, annexation andcontinued occupation 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/hawaii-occupied-state/> of the sovereign 
Hawaiian kingdom.

Many of these tourists then take a shuttle or rental car to Aulani resort, 
part of a master-planned development that was vehemently opposed by the native 
Hawaiian community when it began in the 1980s and 90s. The activist Puanani 
Burgess recalls in the book A Nation Rising: Hawaiian Movements for Life, Land, 
and Sovereignty, the “development was going to change how life was lived on the 
coast by changing the coastline. Their plan called for building lagoons because 
there was no natural beach … They were going to change the landscape of the 
ocean and the ability for fishermen to fish.”

Indeed, today, guests of Aulani and other Ko Olina resorts are directed to 
human-made lagoons blasted out of living reefs that once fed generations of 
Kanaka Maoli families. They play golf on manicured greens fed with water that 
is desperately needed by native Hawaiian farmers on the Waianae coast. They 
lounge by the pool, drinking mai tais served by the descendants of Maui, whom – 
they may be unaware – is not a creation of the Disney imagineers, but a revered 
ancestor of many Kanaka Maoli.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmoana-might-be-great-for-representation-but-its-not-all-heartwarming-for-hawaii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F498363f404b457fa1ea5d898ea597cf806d09336%2F0_0_3840_1608%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Moana%20might%20be%20great%20for%20representation%20but%20it's%20not%20all%20heartwarming%20for%20Hawaii%20%7C%20Tina%20Grandinetti&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmoana-might-be-great-for-representation-but-its-not-all-heartwarming-for-hawaii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Moana%20might%20be%20great%20for%20representation%20but%20it%27s%20not%20all%20heartwarming%20for%20Hawaii%20%7C%20Tina%20Grandinetti&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fmoana-might-be-great-for-representation-but-its-not-all-heartwarming-for-hawaii%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F498363f404b457fa1ea5d898ea597cf806d09336%2F0_0_3840_1608%2F3840.jpg>
 ‘The caricatured likeness of Maui, a demigod in a living religion, is now 
plastered on to fossil fuel-powered jets that cart thousands of tourists to 
Hawaii from the United States.’ Photograph: Disney 
And all the while, just a short drive down the coast, a homeless encampment 
<http://www.civilbeat.org/2015/11/this-waianae-homeless-camp-is-not-what-youd-expect/>
 of more than 200 people, most native Hawaiian, continues to grow.

When you view Moana in the context of Hawaii’s dependence on mass tourism, it 
doesn’t take much of a stretch of the imagination to see “the Darkness” that 
threatens Moana’s island as an unintentional allegory for an exploitative 
industry that continues to devour land and resources for resort development.

Investors come in, buy up land, promise low-paying but much-needed service 
jobs, quash opposition with expensive legal battles and endless appeals, then 
appropriate Hawaiian culture to brand their resorts as unique destinations. 
Meanwhile, housing prices rise, wages stagnate, resources dwindle and profit is 
funnelled out of the islands and back into corporate pockets. At Ko Olina this 
cycle began in the 80s, and continues today with plans forone of the world’s 
most expensive resorts 
<https://www.hawaii.com/blog/atlantis-resort-planned-for-ko-olina/>. 

Disney’s Moana strikes at the heart of proto-Trump America | Lindy West
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/commentisfree/2016/nov/29/disney-moana-trump-america-diversity-election>
Through tourism, land values in Hawaii are dislocated from the needs of the 
local economy, contributing to an affordable-housing shortage that has resulted 
in the highest per capitahomeless rate 
<http://www.kitv.com/story/30472547/hawaii-has-highest-homeless-per-capita-rate-in-nation>
 and thehighest cost of living 
<http://www.hawaiinewsnow.com/story/33590157/hawaii-workers-earn-less-despite-high-cost-of-living>
 in the US. Kanaka Maoli carry a disproportionate share of this burden, often 
being priced out of their own homelands.

Of course, Moana is not directly responsible for any of this and, for many, 
the movie and its heroine are still a win for diversified representation. But 
applauding Disney for profiting from Polynesian stories paints the 
corporation’s presence in the Pacific as benevolent, and erases the struggles 
of Polynesians who are working tirelessly to survive in their homelands and 
reclaim their own, rich storytelling traditions from colonialism.
 