
Mohamed Salah scored a hat-trick as Roma kept in touch with the Serie A leaders
Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> by beating Bologna 3-0 
at the Stadio Olimpico on Sunday night.

Juve’s earlier victory at Chievo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo> 
pushed them seven points clear at the top but free-scoring Roma made sure they 
cut the gap to four points with another impressive home win. Salah’s lucky 
opener punctuated a frustrating first half while his brace after the break was 
convincing.

Miralem Pjanic earlier fired home a 75th-minute free-kick as Juventus clinched 
a 2-1 win atChievo. The Bianconeri had led through Mario Mandzukic’s 
second-half opener until Sergio Pellissier beat Gianluigi Buffon, who was 
making his 600thSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> 
appearance, from the penalty spot.

Milan's young blood 'a big deal' after coming of age in victory over Juventus 
| Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/milans-young-blood-a-big-deal-after-coming-of-age-in-victory-over-juventus>
The substitute Gianluca Lapadula grabbed his maiden Milan goal to earn the 
Scudetto-chasing Rossoneri all three points from their trip toPalermo as they 
stay in third place. His 27 goals helped Pescara achieve promotion to the top 
flight last season but the Turin-born striker has struggled to make an impact 
for his new employers at the San Siro.

After Suso gave Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> the lead 
in Sicily, Ilija Nestorovski set struggling Palermo on a path to their first 
point in five games, only for Lapadula to clinch a 2-1 triumph.

Internazionale’s as yet unnamed new head coach caught a glimpse of the size of 
the task awaiting him as the Nerazzurri struggled to put away the basement club
Crotone.

The club will reveal the identity of Frank de Boer’s successor in the next 
couple of days – with Stefano Pioli the favourite – and the board’s pick has 
plenty to do to revive a title bid.

With time running out, Ivan Perisic broke the deadlock before Mauro Icardi 
grabbed a last-gasp double to secure a 3-0 home victory.

Atalanta extended their winning run to four matches with a 3-0 victory at 
Sassuolo. Alejandro Gómez opened the scoring with his third goal of the season 
while the defenders Mattia Caldara and Andrea Conti were also on target before 
half-time.

Massimo Maccarone’s double helped Empoli to an emphatic 4-0 win at Pescara and 
their first league success on the road this season. The veteran former 
Middlesbrough striker scored twice in the first half, either side of setting up 
Manuel Pucciarelli for Empoli’s second, while Riccardo Saponara added a fourth.

Elsewhere Luis Muriel cancelled out Federico Bernardeschi’s opener as Sampdoria
rescued a 1-1 draw atFiorentina while the Genoa midfielder Lucas Ocampos gave 
Udinese the same treatment by replying to Cyril Théréau’s goal at the Marassi.
 