
Easter Sunday began as it always does in Florence, with a dove being fired out 
of a cathedral on a rocket. For the 49th consecutive year, the bird (a 
mechanical one, happily) found its target: a large cart full of explosives in 
the Piazza Duomo,kicking off a firework display known as Lo scoppio del carro 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oxQfPkQhAGA>.

The event has its origins in the Crusades, and specifically in the story of a 
Florentine soldier who was said to have been the first to scale the walls of 
Jerusalem at the end of the 11th century. He earned a set of flints from his 
commander as a reward, which are used today to light the candle that lights the 
fire that eventually ignites the fuse trailing out of that poor dove’s 
undercarriage.

Thousands of spectators show up to see the fireworks every year, though most 
will be less interested in the history of it all than the opportunity to take 
in a show. After all, what else are people supposed to watch on a Sunday with no
Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> on TV?

In an era when traditional kick-off schedules have been torn up to fit in with 
broadcasters’ demands, Easter remains one holiday upon which Italian football’s 
administrators refuse to encroach. All 10 of this weekend’s Serie A matches 
were played on Saturday, so as not to interfere with religious celebrations on 
the Sabbath. Serie B went further, getting their full slate of games completed 
by Thursday.

Not that you would have caught anyone complaining in Florence. Such scheduling 
had allowed for consecutive days of explosive displays in the city. If the 
Piazza Duomo was the place to be on Sunday morning, then the Stadio Artemio 
Franchi had been the perfect spot to take in some footballing fireworks on 
Saturday night.

At first, Fiorentina’s match against Sampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> threatened to turn into a 
washout. Much was expected of an encounter between two sides chasing a 
Champions League berth, but a combination of heavy rain before kick-off – 
leading to an even heavier pitch – and negative tactics from the visitors 
resulted in the game getting bogged down in midfield.

Sampdoria’s lack of ambition was surprising. They arrived at this fixture 
fourth in the table, two points ahead ofFiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> and seeking to extend a 
four-game winning run that included victories over both Roma and Inter. Their 
manager, Sinisa Mihajlovic, told reporters he had encouraged his players to 
shoot for the moon, since that way “even if you don’t make it, you will still 
land on the stars”.

But his team looked uninterested in the idea of shooting anywhere as they held 
together on the edge of their own area. It was a strategy perhaps designed with 
one particular opponent in mind.Mohamed Salah has thrived so far at Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/mar/12/mohamed-salah-fiorentina-cuadrado-chelsea-roma-europa-league>
 during his loan from Chelsea by exploiting the gaps between defenders who 
underestimate his acceleration. By keeping 10 men behind the ball, Samp ensured 
that he had no spaces to attack.

Had the visitors held out a few moments longer, Salah might even have been 
withdrawn. Vincenzo Montella was preparing to introduce Juan Vargas from the 
bench in the 61st when another forward, Alessandro Diamanti, finally broke the 
deadlock. Unable to unpick Sampdoria’s packed defence, the former West Ham man 
instead simply curved a shot through the crowd into the far corner of the net.

At last, the touchpaper was lit. Three minutes later, Salah came fizzing out 
of midfield like a dove departing a cathedral. He slalomed past two defenders 
before barging the third out of the way and fulminating a right-footed shot 
into the roof of the net.

This was the moment that the crowd had been waiting for. “Siam venuti fin qua 
per vedere segnare Salah,” runs the new favourite chant of the Curva Fiesole – 
“We came here to see Salah score.”

He had not done so in almost a month before Saturday, but his Serie A strike 
rate still stands at one goal for every 94 minutes played – placing him second 
only to Napoli’s Duván Zapata (one goal every 87 minutes). Throw ina Europa 
League strike against Tottenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/26/tottenham-fiorentina-europa-league-match-report>
 anda Coppa Italia brace away to Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/05/juventus-fiorentina-italian-cup-match-report-mohamed-salah>
 and it is easy to see why Salah is already so keenly adored.

Variously referred to as “the Messi of the Pyramids”, “the Purple Pharaoh” or 
“the Goal Sheikh” by the local press, he has already achieved that modern 
Italian milestone of having a pizza created in his honour. One adoring faneven 
carved a heart and the player’s name into the wooden front door of the house 
Salah has been renting <https://twitter.com/22mosalah/status/575298360812396544>
.

Such adulation is amplified by the warmth with which Salah receives it. After 
helping his team to eliminate Roma from the Europa League, Salah posteda video 
of himself celebrating with supporters <https://instagram.com/p/0bXrERkFXT/> on 
Instagram, saying that he had “so much love” for them. After finally being 
withdrawn from Saturday’s game against Sampdoria,he agreed to take a selfie 
with a fan sat near the subs’ bench 
<http://www.fiorentina.it/it/news/articolo.54.27421/mohamed-salah-sostituito-ma-subito-selfie-coi-tifosi-foto.html>
.

Even before he first set foot on a pitch for Fiorentina, Salah made all the 
right noises. At his official unveiling, he told reporters “I have no intention 
of returning to Chelsea,” saying that he hoped for a long and fruitful stay 
with his new club.

He is likely to get his wish. Fiorentina hold an option to extend Salah’s loan 
for another season beyond this one, and another to buy him outright for a 
reported €16m in 2016.

Montella has refused to commit the club to such a permanent deal, reiterating 
on Saturday that “the important thing is that he will be here next season”. But 
unless the player’s form fades away badly over the next 15 months, it is hard 
to see why the Viola would pass on such a talent – still just 22 years old – at 
such a modest fee.

Salah has not just been an individual success for Fiorentina but also a 
tactical one, lending his team a directness that they previously lacked. His 
pace and willingness to run at defenders have allowed Fiorentina to play fast, 
counterattacking football when it suits them rather than always relying on the 
possession and patience that had been the hallmark of Montella’s teams.

It might still be too little, too late to help them reach the Champions League 
through a top-three finish. Asked if Fiorentina might now have a chance of 
breaking into the top three, Vincenzo Montella pointed out that Lazio – who won 
their seventh consecutive league game this weekend – were already six points 
clear and “running away”.

The Biancocelesti might be the one opponent that even Salah cannot outsprint. 
But Fiorentina still have the Europa League and Coppa Italia to compete for as 
well. Their squad is robust enough to sustain the challenge on three fronts,the 
sale of Cuadrado to Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/02/juan-cuadrado-chelsea-fiorentina-signs-andre-schurrle-wolfsburg>
 not only landing them Salah in return, but also making room on the wage bill 
for Montella to add Diamanti and Alberto Gilardino up front.

With Giuseppe Rossi set to return to training this week after his latest 
absence, the potential for growth is tremendous. There are good reasons to 
believe that this firework show is only just getting started.

Talking points

• There might not have been any games on Easter Sunday, but Inter did oblige 
their players to show up for training after they could only draw 1-1 at home to 
last-placed Parma. As the sporting director, Piero Ausilio, put it after the 
game, “The players took their holiday yesterday, and another one today, so 
tomorrow they will work”.

• Remember Filippo, the nine-year-old boy who earned international fame – and 
an invite to Inter training – in 2012 when he showed up at San Siro with a 
bannerbegging the Nerazzurri to win so that his classmates would stop making 
fun of him at school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/feb/20/inter-latest-let-down-young-fan>
? Well, he made his comeback on Saturdaywith a sign advising his team that: “I 
still have six years of school left …” 
<http://www.gazzetta.it/Calcio/Serie-A/Inter/05-04-2015/inter-tornato-san-siro-piccolo-filippo-non-so-piu-come-giustificarvi-110350509637.shtml>

• A very different set of banners were unfurled by Roma fans at the Stadio 
Olimpico, taking aim at Antonella Leardi – mother of Ciro Esposito, the Napoli 
fan who was shot dead on his way to the Coppa Italia final in the capital last 
May. Leardi had presented a new book about her son, titledCiro Vive (Ciro 
Lives), at the same stadium last week, saying that she hoped his death could 
ultimately serve to unite all those who were horrified by it. The slogans 
presented in the Curva Sud on Saturday suggested otherwise. “What a sad thing,” 
read the most prominent. “Making profits from the funeral with books and 
interviews.”

Leardi responded with restraint, saying that she would “pray for God to change 
the heart of these people”. But Roma’s owner, James Pallotta, was forthright in 
condemning the banners, saying via a statement: “AS Roma considers any events 
that lead to the loss of life at a football match, as occurred in the cases of 
Ciro Esposito, Antonio De Falchi, Gabriele Sandri, Vincenzo Spagnolo, Filippo 
Raciti, Vincenzo Paparelli and others, to be a defeat for civil society as a 
whole regardless of affiliations to clubs or fan groups.

“The enormous pain that follows such events deserves maximum, unconditional 
respect from all and necessitates that all parties – fans, clubs and law 
enforcement agencies – strive to ensure that such pain is not renewed, not even 
verbally, in the stands of a stadium.”

• On the pitch, Roma could draw great encouragement from a 1-0 victory over 
Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/04/roma-beat-napoli-serie-a> 
that went a long way towards strengthening theGiallorossi’s Champions League 
prospects. They remain second, one point ahead of Lazio, but this was their 
first home win since November. Perhaps not coincidentally, for a side that 
relies on goals from midfield, this was also the first time that Miralem Pjanic 
had scored over the same span.

• The title race might effectively be over, but the battle to become Serie A’s 
capocannoniere is heating up nicely. Jérémy Ménez briefly pulled level with 
Carlos Tevez on 16 goalswith a fabulous solo effort against Palermo 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/584450531231277057>, but the 
Argentinian quickly got back in frontby crashing home an indirect free-kick 
inside the box <https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/584445268801687552> 
after a questionable back-pass decision had gone Juve’s way against Empoli.

• Neither of those was the goal of the week, mind – that honour falling to 
Atalanta’s Mauricio Pinilla andhis spectacular overhead kick against Torino 
<https://twitter.com/btsport/status/585018096248692736>. Sadly for his team, 
the striker followed that up by getting himself sent off for a preposterously 
unnecessary kick at Migjen Basha in what finished up as a 2-1 defeat.

• The game of the weekend took place at the Bentegodi, where Verona raced out 
to a 3-0 lead over Cesena – aided by a pair of goals from the ageless Luca Toni 
–one a splendid volley 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/584703010233651203> – only to get 
pegged back before the end to 3-3. It could yet turn out to be a crucial result 
for Cesena, who were able to close the gap on 17th-placed Atalanta to four 
points.

Results

Atalanta 1-2 Torino, Cagliari 1-3 Lazio, Fiorentina 2-0 Sampdoria, Genoa 1-1 
Udinese, Inter 1-1 Parma, Juventus 2-0 Empoli, Palermo 1-2 Milan, Roma 1-0 
Napoli, Sassuolo 1-0 Chievo, Verona 3-3 Cesena

Latest Serie A standings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball/table>.
 