
As Monaco prepare to take on Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> at Wembley on 
Wednesday, they have signalled their intention to lobby against the imminent 
revamp of the Champions League, which the club views as a “prototype of a Super 
League” in which “France is the big loser”.

La Liga president attracted by Champions League breakaway
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/09/la-liga-president-champions-league-breakaway>
Monaco’s vice-president, Vadim Vasilyev, told the Guardian that while he 
agrees that theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> needs to be reformed 
because the group stages are often “boring”, he is unhappy with the way the 
changes were devised and with a perceived failure to ensure fair representation 
for Ligue 1 clubs.

Uefa announced the reform of the Champions League in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/26/europe-top-four-leagues-guaranteed-four-automatic-champions-league-places>
 but the details will not be rubberstamped until December. The plan is that, 
from 2018 to 2021, the most powerful clubs will receive more money – 49% more – 
from the tournament and more guaranteed places in the group stage.

Each of the four highest-ranked domestic leagues – which are currently those 
of Spain, England, Germany and Italy – will be guaranteed four automatic places 
in the group stages, sparing teams who finish fourth in those leagues from 
having to contest play-offs. That will leave only 16 group spots for 
representatives of the continent’s other 51 national leagues, although a club 
from one of the big leagues could take one of those spots, too, by winning the 
Europa League.

Critics in many countries, including France, have complained that the revamp 
will widen the gap between big clubs and smaller ones, and further distort the 
competitiveness of domestic leagues. However, Vasilyev said he was in favour of 
assigning more places to “important clubs” in Europe’s top tournament but was 
opposed to the reform because it did not improve the standing of French clubs, 
with only the top two from Ligue 1 to be given automatic entry to the group 
stage while a third team will have to navigate their way through qualifying 
rounds. That is the same arrangement as currently exists and Monaco, third in 
Ligue 1 last season, had to win two-legged ties against Fenerbahce and 
Villarreal to join Tottenham inthe group stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/champions-league-draw-manchester-city-barcelona-arsenal-celtic>
 this season.

Uefa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa> classes Ligue 1 as the 
fifth-best domestic league in Europe and Vasilyev says the reform will make it 
more difficult to overtake the fourth-placed league, Serie A.

“We need more big clubs from big countries in this competition to make it more 
interesting and more passionate,” Vasilyev said. “I think that in recent years 
the value of the group stage has been diluted. Clearly a reform was needed to 
bring back the value of the competition in the eyes of all people who love 
football. That’s where I agree fully with the strategy. But where I don’t agree 
is that the gap between Italy and France cannot be tolerated. It’s simply too 
much. France should have three automatic places; that would be correct.”

French clubs have complained that they were not consulted about the reform, 
which was driven primarily by officials from Juventus and Bayern Munich. 
Vasilyev said the reform amounted to exploitation of the departure of Michel 
Platini as Uefa president, the Frenchman having been deposed before being 
banned from football by a Fifa ethics committee last December. “I’m sure that 
had he been there, this could not have happened,” Vasilyev said. “The vacuum 
that was left after his departure was not filled and France did not react and 
did not predict these changes.

“The problem was that all the French representatives say they did not learn 
about these reforms until they were announced on the day of the draw. It was 
not done at Uefa level – French clubs weren’t involved. It is really a pity for 
such a big football country not to be part of important discussions that define 
the future of Europe’s most important competition. It’s sad.”

Karl-Heinz Rummenigge, the ceo of Bayern Munich and chairman of the European 
Club Association, has claimed that the Champions League reform is a compromise 
that reduces the risk of elite clubs breaking away from Uefa to form a 
lucrative super league, a claim endorsed by at least one French club president, 
Jean-Michel Aulas of Lyon. However, Vasilyev believes that a Super League is 
still a likely development. He is open to that possibility but says any new 
tournament must not be completely exclusive.

“The new format is already a prototype of a Super League,” he said. “I think 
long term it will go in the direction of creating a Super League, although I 
think that is quite difficult logistically. And for the spirit of competition 
there should always be kept places for teams that make it [through domestic 
leagues], so that we don’t have stagnation if one day a closed league is 
created. Stagnation is never good. But more important clubs? Yes, for sure, 
that’s what we should aim at. But right now we are focusing on the fact that we 
are not even well represented in the Champions League! We will try to fight to 
save what can be saved.”

Uefa will elect its new president on Wednesday from a choice of two 
candidates, Slovenia’s Aleksander Ceferin and the Dutchman Michael van Praag. 
The French Football Federation has pledged its support for the former. “We need 
to see the new president and tell him that we feel this reform is not fair,” 
Vasilyev said. “There are some points that have been voted on and some that 
still have to be decided. We just have to get the maximum that we can. We need 
to preserve the future of French football.”

Vasilyev is more satisfied, meanwhile, with events on the pitch at the moment. 
Saturday’s 4-1 victory over Lille sent Monaco to the top of Ligue 1 and 
extended a bright start to the campaign that has also yieldedan impressive 
victory over Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/28/monaco-paris-saint-germain-match-report>
 on top of progress in the Champions League. Vasilyev admits that reaching the 
group stage helped Monaco to hold on to key players, despite interest from 
other clubs, notably Manchester United, who hoped to lure the defender Fabinho. 
Vasilyev also said he was expecting a big season from Radamel Falcao, the 
striker who has returned to Monaco after unsuccessful loan spells at Manchester 
Unitedand Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/01/radamel-falcao-signs-chelsea-deal>
 but sustained a thigh injury last month.

Mario Balotelli bags double and says he can still win Ballon d'Or
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/11/football-mario-balotelli-liverpool-nice-marseille-jurgen-klopp>
“I don’t know if he will be ready for Tottenham – that’s for the coach to make 
the final decision – but what I would like to say is that whereas English clubs 
failed to relaunch Falcao, whether because they didn’t have the patience or 
willingness to do so, at Monaco this will be his season,” he said, before 
suggesting that Falcao’smove to Old Trafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/02/radamel-falcao-joins-manchester-united-loan>
 in the summer of 2014 came too soon after he tore knee ligaments. “When you 
take a player after a big injury you cannot count on a miracle to happen and he 
starts performing from the first game,” Vasilyev said. “This is where there was 
probably a misjudgment from our side and the player’s side. The big clubs need 
results immediately, they don’t have the patience to relaunch the player. You 
need time, you need to put up a special plan and strategy, increase playing 
time gradually and know in advance that the player will not be performing at 
his top level immediately. I’m confident he will get back to his best this 
season with Monaco.”
 