
Lille's record for August matches against French teams under coach Rudi Garcia 
now stands at 11 games without a win, after the Ligue 1 champions were beaten 
1-0 at home toMontpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> on Sunday 
night. What was a quirky stat is fast becoming an issue, and Garcia's pre-match 
joke that his team would be underdogs – "Montpellier are the team that always 
wins in August while we always lose in August" – does not sound so funny now.

Last season, Lille drew their first four league games; the season before, they 
won only once in their first seven league matches. It's now five years since 
they won their first home match of the season and overall, Garcia's August 
record is one win in 14 league matches.

Just as in last week's 1-1 draw with Nancy, when they had 73% possession, 
Lille dominated on Sunday night, only to find Montpellier's second-choice 
goalkeeper, Laurent Pionnier, in inspired form. Olivier Giroudscored the only 
goal with 15 minutes left 
<http://watchonline4u.com/lille-vs-montpellier-live-stream-online-14-8-2011/> 
while John Utaka hit the post late on in an archetypal smash-and-grab away 
performance. "We'd win this match nine times out of 10, and I'd be more worried 
if we had deserved to lose," said Garcia. "At least you journalists can keep 
writing about [the struggles in] August."

"Lille undeniably miss Gervinho," wrote L'Equipe, while RMC feared that the 
August slump "is the black cat that won't go away".

"There are doubts that this Lille side can live up to its status [as 
champions]," wrote So Foot. Everyone agreed on one thing: Lille's star player 
Eden Hazard was again superb, especially in the first half. "A dynamite 
dribbler, whose technical brilliance was in vain," wrote Nord Éclair.

This has been a tricky time for The Eden Project: Hazard was last week 
suspended from the Belgium squad for three matches for his reaction to being 
subbed off after an hour of June's Euro 2012 qualifier against Turkey. His 
crime? Eating a hamburger with his dad from a stall outside the stadium, before 
the match had finished. "What have you done now, Georges?" wailed La Dernière 
Heure, fearing that Belgium's best player (yes, Chelsea fans, right now he is 
better than Romelu Lukaku, because he can dribblelike this 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bZQm_q_Z-eg>, and score goals in big games, as 
he didagainst Marseille <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GQCNZfUhyfQ>, and Lyon 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9or4Ai5LCik&playnext=1&list=PLCB7BAFF79C01A6CC> 
would quit international football.

Instead, Hazard's management team released a statement defending their player 
from accusations about his attitude, and demanding respect to avoid 
self-imposed exile. "He is suffering from the recurrent attacks on his 
professionalism after making a mistake borne out of frustration."

While the Belgium coach Georges Leekens said the ban was "light", the 
statement pointed out, quite rightly, that Patrice Evra and Franck Ribéry 
received five- and three-match bansfor their role in France players going on 
strike during the 2010 World Cup 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2010/aug/17/nicolas-anelka-banned-for-18-matches-france>
. "There is absolute unanimity [about Hazard's professionalism] among the most 
rigorous coaches in the world, like Louis Van Gaal, Claude Puel or Carlo 
Ancelotti, who wanted him in the recent past, or like Arsène Wenger, Roberto 
Mancini and Leonardo, who wanted to recruit him this summer," the statement 
added.

To that list of admirers, Hazard can also add Inter president Massimo Moratti, 
who said, "My son always tells me we should sign Hazard," and Real Madrid 
sports director Zinedine Zidane: "I would bring Hazard to Madrid with my eyes 
shut."

But Lille president Michel Seydoux is not in selling mood. "We want Eden to 
stay and he will stay," he said. "We're not going to talk about this for 175 
years. I'm like a robot who repeats the same message every day at the same time.
There was a good film about that <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T_yDWQsrajA>, 
wasn't there?" He would know. Seydoux is also a film producer and often 
compares the two industries: "The coach is the director and the players are the 
actors."

In that case, Hazard is the lead man, but he cannot carry this team on his 
own. His support cast were off the pace on Sunday, especially Moussa Sow, who 
missed four chances. "He had a rotten night, and the memory of his last game 
here [a hat-trick in a 3-2 win over Rennes] seemed a long way away," said Nord 
Éclair. Lille are looking for another striker, but Seydoux can only afford to 
bring someone on loan. "We will bring in two players if we can, but we can't 
stretch the finances too much," he said.

Lille's economic concerns will ease next season, when the club moves into its 
new 50,000-capacity stadium, boosting the annual budget from €65m (2010-11) to 
€90m. For that to be a real success, though, Lille must reach the Champions 
League again. No wonder the understated Seydoux admitted: "We may have been 
champions a bit too early." With joint-leaders Caen and then Marseille next up 
for Lille, September can't come soon enough.

Week Two talking points

• Hamburgers were also on the agenda at Marseille this week, when it emerged 
that André-Pierre Gignac,whose puppet on Les Guignols 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LeyEK23I3GU> stuffs his face with burgers and 
doughnuts, had been sent to Fat Camp in Merano, Italy, to lose weight. Karim 
Benzema went to the same place earlier this summer and lost seven kilos, while 
regular visitors include Zinedine Zidane, Laurent Blanc and, er, Sharon Stone. 
"From a psychological point of view, it's good that A-P took this challenge," 
said OM doctor Christophe Baudot. On the pitch, OM's problems are in defence:
they were 2-0 up at Auxerre at half-time but ended up with a 2-2 draw 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/saber-khlifa-nice-15014772/>, their 
fifth 2-2 in a row in Ligue 1 (going back to last season). They have now let in 
eight goals in three competitive matches this season. Arsenal scout Gilles 
Grimandi was at the game, prompting speculation that goalscorer André Ayew, 
whose buyout clause is an affordable (and under-valued) €13m, was being 
watched. "Arsenal are a big club," he said after the game, forgetting to add 
that OM are too. Lucho González, the Argentine playmaker keen to leave the club 
after he was home-jacked last March, may also be on the radar. "Lucho's feet 
and thinking are fast enough to play for Arsenal," said one reporter at the 
game.

• Lyon hit the woodwork three times, had a goal ruled out and found Ajaccio 
goalkeeper Guillermo Ochoa in super form in Saturday's 1-1 draw at Stade 
Gerland. "On any other day, we would have won by several goals," said Miralem 
Pjanic. Coach Remi Garde got a huge ovation from the home fans and could start 
Tuesday's tough Champions League qualifier against Rubin Kazan with new 
centre-back Bakary Koné, who last week was training with Guingamp. Lisandro 
López best reflects the change of mood at the club: he was French player of the 
year in 2000-10, but last year cut a surly figure as his relationship with 
coach Claude Puel (whom he would never refer to by name in interviews) 
disintegrated. Lisandro, who was captain on Saturday, looks like his old self, 
bristling with intent and already with two goals to his name. Garde may be 
enjoying a honeymoon period at the moment, but that could change if Lyon fail 
to get past Rubin.

• The star of the first two games has been Rennes forward Jonathan Pitroipa, 
who scored a late equaliser in his side'sdeserved 1-1 draw with Paris St-Germain
 <http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/rennes-psg-14982454/>. He was 
superb in last week's 5-1 win over Dijon, and scored twice in the Europa League 
win over Olimpia Rustavi. Fans have said he matches the pace of ex-Rennes' John 
Utaka with the dribbling skills of Jérôme Leroy, while pundits have nicknamed 
him "the new Gervinho". Caen, Montpellier, Toulouse, and Saint-Etienne are the 
only sides with 100% records so far, with the latter two looking good for a 
top-six challenge.

Week Two results: Rennes 1-1 PSG, Lyon 1-1 Ajaccio, Toulouse 2-0 Dijon, 
St-Etienne 1-0 Nancy, Sochaux 1-2 Caen, Lorient 1-1 Bordeaux, Valenciennes 0-0 
Brest, Auxerre 2-2 Marseille, Evian 1-0 Nice (first points for the new boys 
<http://www.101greatgoals.com/videodisplay/saber-khlifa-nice-15014772/>), Lille 
0-1 Montpellier
 