
The Montpellier president, Louis Nicollin, has claimed that Arsenal have 
completed the signing of France forwardOlivier Giroud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/olivier-giroud>. Speaking to French 
newspaper Midi Libre, Nicollin said the transfer had been completed after 
Arsenal met the player's release clause. Nicollin said: "I wish him well."

Giroud, part of Laurent Blanc's Euro 2012 squad which was knocked out by Spain 
in the quarter-finals on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jun/23/spain-france-euro-2012>, is 
thought to command a transfer fee in the region of £13m.

The 25-year-old scored 25 goals for his club last season and helped Montpellier
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/montpellier-football-team> win the Ligue 
1 title, igniting the interest of several top clubs. Last week, the Arsenal 
manager, Arsène Wenger, revealed a deal was "90%" complete as he looked to add 
the promising Frenchman to his squad, which has already been bolstered by the 
arrival of Germany's Lukas Podolski.

Arsenal have not yet made any official comment but it is understood that an 
announcement by the club is imminent. Once the transfer for Giroud is formally 
complete,Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> could then look 
to offload some of their fringe players, including Nicklas Bendtner, Marouane 
Chamakh, Carlos Vela and Denílson.

However, Nicollin maintained a move to take Chamakh in the opposite direction 
back to France was not part of the Giroud deal. Wenger, who is at the European 
Championship working as a media pundit, is convinced Giroud can be a big hit at 
Arsenal.

"I think he has exceptional potential and will integrate very well in our 
collective and our way of playing," he said last week. "He is a real team 
player and knows how to combine with other players and I'm sure he will do well 
with us."
 