
With stories of tragic deaths, riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/30/warned-prisoners-could-riot-minister-didnt-listen>
, audacious escapes,drug-fuelled violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/dec/03/prison-violence-cuts-overcrowding-governors-liz-truss>
 and chronic staff shortages increasingly prevalent across the prison system, 
and the former head of the service claiming that the current crisiswill take 
years to sort out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/18/uk-prison-reform-programme-fail-phil-wheatley-director-general>
, it might seem a strange time to call for more fruit and veg to be introduced 
into prisoners’ diets. But the way we feed prisoners has never been more 
important.

Last year an inmate at HMP Northumberland staged a protest on a high railing 
after being served a cold meal, while areport released by HM Inspectorate of 
Prisons 
<https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmiprisons/wp-content/uploads/sites/4/2016/09/Life-in-prison-Food-Web-2016.pdf>
 a few months ago concluded that poor nutrition is contributing to the current 
state of disorder, from Bedford to Belmarsh.

Prison violence is the worst I have seen in my 30-year career
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/dec/03/prison-violence-cuts-overcrowding-governors-liz-truss>
“Studies have found that nutritional supplements reduce disciplinary 
incidents, aggression and violent behaviour,” the inspectors noted. “In other 
words, prisoners eating well is not just a matter of prisoner wellbeing but is 
also of practical and financial concern to the prison service.”

Recently I spent some time talking to prisoners and former prison staff about 
this, and came away convinced that food is even more important than the 
inspectors claimed.

I spoke to one woman who served a short sentence of seven weeks earlier this 
year. She contacted me to talk about her experience of prison food (or, in her 
words, “the lack of it”) as a pregnant woman who was also lactose-intolerant. 
The prison kitchen was notified of her diagnosed intolerance and the fact she 
was six months pregnant. Soya milk was promised to substitute the dairy milk 
received daily by all prisoners in their breakfast pack. Additional calories 
were also promised.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fbedford-prison-rioters-shouting-in-jail-gangways-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bedford%20prison%20rioters%20shouting%20in%20jail%20gangways%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fbedford-prison-rioters-shouting-in-jail-gangways-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bedford%20prison%20rioters%20shouting%20in%20jail%20gangways%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fbedford-prison-rioters-shouting-in-jail-gangways-video&media=>
Bedford prison rioters shouting in jail gangways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2016/nov/07/bedford-prison-rioters-shouting-in-jail-gangways-video>
Four and a half weeks later, she had received no form of milk that she was 
able to drink and spent most of her time chasing up staff members who 
continually assured her they would rectify the situation. Coupled with 
carb-heavy meals lacking fresh fruit or vegetables (“No one wants to eat pasta 
and chips in the same meal. It’s just not normal,” she told me) and none of the 
extra calories she was promised, she went on to lose half a stone. Another 
pregnant inmate cried herself to sleep every night because she was so hungry.

“Your punishment is to have your freedom taken away from you – not to be 
starved or have your health compromised,” she said. And I couldn’t have put it 
better myself.

Another woman I spoke to found that prison had the opposite effect on her 
weight. She put on five stone during her three years in prison. She and her 
cellmates took daily doses of Laxido (a powdered form of laxative) to help pass 
the food and worked in the prison vegetable patch – only to find the produce 
grown there went to local restaurants, not the prison kitchen.

With 46% of adult prisoners reconvicted within a year of release and prison 
deaths and self-harm at record levels 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/Bromley%20Briefings/summer%202016%20briefing.pdf>
, we are feeding some of society’s most vulnerable and mentally unstable 
individuals food that is damaging them further. Prison, of course, is a place 
of punishment – but is also meant to change the people serving time in them for 
the better. How are they meant to leave prison in a healthier physical and 
mental state of mind, when they aren’t properly fed?

Of course food is far from the only problem in prisons, but that doesn’t mean 
improving it is not important. When Jamie Oliver campaigned against chicken 
nuggets and Turkey Twizzlers in school meals in 2006, viewers watched 
children’s behaviour improve and classrooms become calmer, more civil places. 
Something similar could happen in prisons, if we only stopped ignoring their 
kitchens. For starters, how about justice secretaryLiz Truss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liz-truss> joining prisoners for a meal?
 