
José Mourinho praised Henrikh Mkhitaryan’s fine first goal for Manchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and expressed 
disappointment at the behaviour of Zorya fans after his side progressed to the 
Europa Leage knockout stage.

United beat the Ukrainian side 2-0 through Mkhitaryan’s 48th-minute goal and a 
late effort from Zlatan Ibrahimovic. Yet during the first half Daley Blind 
complained of having a laser pen pointed at his face and a firecracker was 
thrown towards goalkeeper Sergio Romero. At the interval two flags were stolen 
from United supporters by home fans and fighting broke out momentarily.

Manchester United defeat Zorya Luhansk to advance in Europa League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/manchester-united-zorya-europa-league-match-report>
Talking of the firecracker in particular, Mourinho said: “The support was 
beautiful and they don’t need to do that to make it more beautiful. For the 
goalkeeper … [it was dangerous]. The stadium was beautiful, the supporters, the 
Man United fans were good too. But maybe Uefa is not happy and is going to take 
some money from Zorya, which I think Zorya doesn’t deserve that.”

Regarding Mkhitaryan, whose goal was an impressive effort,the manager said: 
“He has a strong mentality, he was very determined to fight against his 
difficult adaptation and he’s doing that in the best way. He worked really hard 
physically, tactically, and the talent we know is there.

“The talent we knew what we were buying. He fought to improve and now he is 
playing good in the Premier League,Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> and the EFL Cup, and 
now evolving a bit more happiness for him,so I’m very pleased.”

United are now unbeaten in seven but have drawn six of their eight matches in 
the Premier League. “We have been playing well, that’s why our heads have not 
gone down,” said Mourinho. “When you play well and you don’t win matches, you 
always have the hope the good results will come.

“The reality was, nobody was better than us, even when we had disappointing 
results. We have always been better than our opponents so we have never lost 
confidence.”
 