
José Mourinho rounded on the “Einsteins” who rated Paul Pogba as the poorest 
player in the Premier League, after the Frenchman scored twice inManchester 
United’s 4-1 win over Fenerbahce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/manchester-united-fenerbahce-europa-league-group-a-match-report>
 at Old Trafford on Thursday night.

Pogba scored a 31st-minute penalty and a superb long-range effort just before 
half-time. A second spot-kick from Anthony Martial and Jesse Lingard’s 25-yard 
shot completed United’s scoring before Robin van Persie registered a late 
consolation.

Paul Pogba gets two in Manchester United demolition of Fenerbahce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/20/manchester-united-fenerbahce-europa-league-group-a-match-report>
This put Mourinho’s team top of Group A with six points, the same as 
Feyenoord. Pogba disappointed inMonday night’s 0-0 draw at Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/liverpool-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 and drew criticism but the manager hit back.

“First of all, in some of your mouths, he goes from the worst player in the 
Premier League to a great player in 48 hours,” Mourinho said.

“I am not specifically saying it is you. I say media, especially the Einsteins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/22/jose-mourinho-hits-out-at-football-einsteins-for-trying-to-undermine-him-manchester-united>
. We know he is a very good player. We know he needs some time to show his 
potential. I know Italian football very well. I know teams play completely 
different from the Premier League.

“I am not saying we are better but we are different. Different in the 
intensity, the number of touches on the ball, everything is different and he 
needs time to adapt. He is a self-confident boy.

“He was not depressed because some people said he was a bad player. He was not 
depressed. He was calm. It is always nice for a player to score, to score at 
home and especially to score such a beautiful goal.”

Pogba revealed that Wayne Rooney, who made a first start since the 3-1 victory 
at Northampton in the EFL Cup, had allowed him to take the penalty.

“It was Wazza or myself to take it. But I told him I wanted to take it and he 
let me take it,” the Frenchman said. “I’m very happy to take the penalty and 
score it and for a player like him, the captain of the side, to let me take the 
penalty, is big respect to him. I’m very glad for that.”

José Mourinho criticises ‘cautious’ Liverpool after bore draw at Anfield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/jose-mourinho-liverpool-anfield-manchester-united-jurgen-klopp>
Of the decision to then switch penalty takers to Martial, Mourinho said: “The 
first penalty taker was Paul, we made that decision which he took and then 
probably he did not want to repeat because it’s a second penalty a couple of 
minutes later. Maybe he didn’t want to repeat and probably because Martial was 
the one who had the previous action [was fouled for it] and Martial is also a 
good penalty taker.

“That meant that decision is not a problem for me. I always give the 
indication of the one that has the responsibility to take but with the freedom 
for the other guys to make the decision on the pitch.”

Despite the display and margin of victory, Mourinho claimed a side that showed 
seven changes from Anfield might not have affected his selection for Sunday’s 
trip to Chelsea.

“Independent matches – I chose this team because I felt it was the team to win 
it and because I felt after such an intense game on Monday that some of these 
players would be in better conditions to perform than others but I start 
thinking about Chelsea tomorrow [Friday],” he said.

“Am I happy with the performance? Yes. Am I happy with individual 
performances? Yes, and I am happy with the result which is the most important 
because the result is difficult.

“We put ourselves in a difficult position by losing the first match [at 
Feyenoord] especially as we have the double match with Fenerbahce. To go to 
Istanbul without winning this match would be even more difficult.”
 