
The dilemma: After my mother passed away recently, it’s been just my older 
sister, my dad and me. My sister and my dad often have fiery arguments about 
the overload of responsibilities of the house and they give up on each other. 
My sister and me don’t feel loved by a father who is himself so emotionally 
weak. We are always doing our own tasks and since the string that held us 
together, my mum, is no more, my dad is unable to do his parenting.

We were very close when mum was here. I know he loves us, but he does not seem 
to care like mum would. We’re pretty much drifting apart. It’s more like he 
needs our support than he is taking charge and behaving like a father.

Mariella replies: I’m so sorry about your mum. Losing a parent at any point is 
painful, and in youth particularly so. Whatever the circumstances, even if 
death offers respite from a long or painful illness, the absence of a person 
who once occupied space in our world looms incredibly large. It sounds like 
your mother provided the firm ground on which your family was built. It’s no 
wonder you’re experiencing tectonic emotional shifts now that she’s gone.

In every family there are complex dynamics: between parents, between siblings 
and between adults and children.Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> units are a precarious 
structure and losing one element can undermine the whole edifice. Your mother’s 
death won’t simply have wreaked emotional havoc but also left your everyday 
relationships in disarray. Without her presence your relationships with each 
other need to be readjusted and redefined. Communication is key – and it 
doesn’t sound like there’s much of that going on in your house. Instead of 
pulling together you’re breaking apart.

There’s a tendency to deify the dead, particularly parents. The surviving 
parent never quite comes up to scratch

Along with the high drama of mourning, there are the mundanities of life to be 
tackled. Your father and sister have identified a convenient way to cope with 
their distress, by airing grievances of a domestic variety instead of tackling 
the large elephant lurking in the room. It may not be constructive, but it’s 
definitely not uncommon.

For the novelist Julian Barnes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/03/profile-julian-barnes-new-novel-out-noise-of-time>
 the regular route of being encouraged to “get over it” proved an anathema. He 
wrote inLevels of Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/10/levels-life-julian-barnes-review>
 about the ire caused by the platitudes and perceived provocations dispensed by 
friends attempting to steer him through his devastation. Barnes and advertising 
guruLord Saatchi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2014/nov/16/observer-profile-maurice-saatchi-josephine-hart-cancer>
, whose wife also died of cancer, may not be kindred spirits philosophically, 
but for both of them, when it came to mourning, “getting over it” was not an 
ambition. Savouring the memories, living with the misery, not bucking up, may 
be the path that suits some. For others, pragmatism and practicality are the 
way forward – the stiffer their lip, the more chores they load up on, the more 
the accrued weight of duty will outweigh the pain.

There simply isn’t a perfect way to cope with the existential angst, the 
misery, the loneliness and the all-consuming sadness induced by loss. There’s 
something to celebrate in how devastating we find the removal from our orbit of 
those we’ve lived with and loved. It seems impossible that the world should 
still be turning, or others still going about their unaltered lives. There’s 
also a tendency to deify the dead, particularly in the case of parents, so the 
surviving parent never again quite comes up to scratch. It’s a dysfunctional 
legacy that allows discord and resentment to flourish. Maybe that’s what’s 
happening in your home.

Your father probably hasn’t changed. His foibles are just exposed more starkly 
since your mother passed. As you say, he loves you both, but in the midst of 
his own mourning he may be finding it hard to fully focus on his girls.

There are plenty of professionals well equipped to help you navigate this new 
world you are facing (Cruse <http://www.cruse.org.uk/>: 0808 808 1677). There’s 
also much you can do yourselves to help ease the stress levels. A frank 
discussion about how you are all coping and what you could do to support each 
other better would be a good start. You’ll be amazed how helpful sharing and 
airing can be when you’ve been suffering silently for too long. Acknowledging 
the wider impact of your mum’s passing, reasserting your commitment to each 
other, noting the new challenges you now have to shoulder and extolling the 
positive benefits of pulling together rather than apart will all help to create 
a new sense of unity.

I realise it’s a heavy burden to place on your presently frail shoulders, but 
I’m hopeful that if you start the conversation the rest of the household will 
eventually engage, too.

Finally, I recommend you read A Trick I Learned from Dead Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/03/trick-i-learned-kitty-aldridge-review>
 by Kitty Aldridge. It’s a small book full of humour, warmth and wisdom that 
culminates in a glorious glimmer of hope – all things I wish for you in your 
current situation.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 