
When news broke, some months ago, that a new TV adaptation of EF Benson’s Mapp 
and Lucia <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/mapp-and-lucia.html> books was to be 
broadcast this Christmas a mighty dread seized the minds of all Bensonites, me 
included. The general feeling was that the books shouldn’t be messed with 
lightly – and should only ever be touched by brilliant types like us, who 
really “got it”.

For those not yet acquainted with the Mapp and Lucia novels, written between 
1920 and 1939, they are delicious send-ups of the snobbish cultural lives of 
upper-middle-class people in interwar Britain. Amid endless musical evenings 
and ridiculous mannered luncheons we watch social rivals Miss Mapp and Lucia 
vie with each other to become Queen of Tilling-on-Sea. The books are as 
fabulously plotted and as funny asPG Wodehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/pgwodehouse>’s Jeeves and Wooster books or 
hisBlandings novels.

As if the books weren’t enough to worry about, there is also the near-perfect 
Channel 4 series (1985) with the blissful cast ofPrunella Scales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jun/14/prunella-scales-timothy-west-family-values>
,Geraldine McEwen <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jan/23/itv.television>
 andNigel Hawthorne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/18/madness-king-george-alan-bennett-nigel-hawthorne>
, whose memory should be revered and certainly not messed with.

However, being of an open-minded disposition, dismay slowly turned to intrigue 
when it emerged that the new series was written bySteve Pemberton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jun/16/steve-pemberton-favourite-tv>
 (who, it turns out, is a true Bensonite and very much “gets it”). Intrigue 
turned to optimism when I heard Mapp was to be played byMiranda Richardson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/miranda-richardson> and Lucia by Anna 
Chancellor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jun/10/anna-chancellor-room-of-my-own>
. And, when it was revealed that Pemberton andMark Gatiss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/mark-gatiss> would also be in it, I let 
myself settle into guarded excitement.

Now, having seen a preview of the first of three hour-long episodes, I can 
tell you it’s marvellous – and a credit to the great man. Pemberton (Georgie 
Pilson) and Gatiss (Major Flint) are as funny and charming as they should be. 
Richardson’s Mapp is spookily close to that of Scales and very good as a 
result. But it is Chancellor who stands out. It’s not that she’s a better Lucia 
than McEwen, it’s just that she’s so different (stronger, calmer) and perhaps 
closer to the Lucia of Benson’s imagination. Plan your week around it.

• Mapp and Lucia is on BBC1 29-31 December.
 