
When I was 24 and still had a waist, a lot of incredibly wealthy men would 
chase me around. One of these men saw me in London and invited me to have 
dinner with him in Paris. So I did what any 24-year-old would do: I said yes.

The next day he sent his private Learjet to pick me up and flew me over. He 
owned Perrier, so he was fabulously wealthy. He wined and dined me and was 
clearly trying to get into my pants, but I wouldn’t give it up. Finally he 
said: “I’ll give you anything you want.” And I said: “A ticket home!” So the 
next morning, true to his word, he arranged for the jet to take me back to 
London.

On the jet we talked about how our friend had made a move on me

I was sitting in the jet and the stewardess offered champagne. Then I saw this 
other woman on the plane. She was slightly older, but was immaculately dressed 
and poised on the edge of her seat. She was wearing a very tailored black suit 
with a stunning gold brooch. Very elegant. She looked at me and said: “Bonjour, 
comment t’appelle tu?” “Bonjour,” I said. “Je m’appelle Laurence. Et vous, 
madame?” And she said: “Coco. Coco Chanel.”

So we spent the flight back to London exchanging stories and talking about how 
our mutual friend had tried to make a move on me. She remained very calm and 
just laughed and said: “Ah Gussy, that is his way.”

She asked me which hotel Gussy had put me in. I said: “De Crillon.” And where 
did you dine, she asked? “Maxim’s de Paris.” I went on to ask her if she liked 
London and she said: “Of course.” And where do you dine when in London, I 
asked? She said, “The Savoy, Prunier and L’Escargot.”

She wanted to know more about my upbringing as she was clearly still slightly 
intrigued to see a 24-year-old joining her on this trip back to London, so I 
talked about my background and education. I told her I came from Liverpool in 
the north of England and went to the same school as the Beatles and regularly 
fought with George Harrison in the playground. I was surprised she knew all 
about them.

I then went on to tell her that I’d gone to the London School of Economics 
when I was 17 with Mick Jagger, by which she was less impressed. She asked 
about other cities I had visited. “Young man,” she said: “C’est la vie.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fmy-journey-in-a-private-jet-with-coco-chanel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d6876320166e358fea9ff7c9040083571a561c8%2F551_119_914_914%2F914.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20journey%20in%20a%20private%20jet%20with%20Coco%20Chanel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fmy-journey-in-a-private-jet-with-coco-chanel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20journey%20in%20a%20private%20jet%20with%20Coco%20Chanel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fmy-journey-in-a-private-jet-with-coco-chanel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d6876320166e358fea9ff7c9040083571a561c8%2F551_119_914_914%2F914.jpg>
 Photograph: Getty Images 
Laurence Isaacson is a co-owner of L’Escargot. The restaurant is hosting a 
monthly supper club called Supper at the Snail, starting on 29 September. 
Tickets available fromtabl.com 
<https://www.tabl.com/events/158035-supper-at-the-snail>
 