
‘One critic described it as ‘a real gold-plated stinker’,” says Tim Hutton. 
“Another called it ‘three hours of non-musical torture’.” It’s a bright August 
morning in Kent and the 32-year-old producer and record company boss is reading 
from the glossy eight-page booklet that accompanies one of his label’s singular 
releases. “The composer was very matter-of-fact about the reviews being 
diabolical,” Hutton says. “He said: ‘If you’re writing a musical, you either 
want five-star reviews or one-star reviews. No one remembers the average.”

This is the world of Stage Door Records <http://www.stagedoorrecords.com/>, 
the boutique record label that Hutton has run, pretty much by himself, since 
2008. Initially home to vocal collections by such past and present stars of 
musical theatre as Anthony Newley, Meredith Braun and Twiggy, since 2009 Stage 
Door has specialised in a very particular area: deluxe reissues of original 
cast recordings of flop West End musicals.

“I prefer the term ‘lost’,” Hutton says. “I’m a self-confessed musical theatre 
geek and I saw a gap in the market. Everyone focuses on successful British 
musicals – the Phantoms, Les Mis, Cats – but I’m shining a light on 
lesser-known works.”

But why? Hutton grew up in Qatar and spent his teenage years listening to 
Julie Andrews and Barbra Streisand records, and cast recordings that his 
father, a pilot, would bring back from the US and the UK. “Then you delve 
deeper,” he says. “You go a bit further off the map.”

A move to London in 2000 led to a fascination with Andrew Sabiston and Tim 
Williams’s short-lived West End musical Napoleon 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zW9EpT20ahc&list=PL4q-Wbw_sn1o8kahl4cZ2P_J2sobmZ44p>
 (“Historical tosh” – the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2000/oct/19/theatre.artsfeatures2>). Hutton 
tracked down the 1994 Toronto cast recording, and played it non-stop. “It was 
just breathtaking,” he says. “I thought: I need to share this. After setting up 
Stage Door I contacted the writers and they let us reissue it. We had no track 
record. It was purely down to my enthusiasm.”

Hutton’s enthusiasm has now been responsible for releasing numerous lost 
musicals back into the wild; works of a rare and peculiar stripe, such as Sandy 
“The Boyfriend” Wilson’s 1971 adaptation of John Collier’s 1930s society satire
His Monkey Wife, <http://www.stagedoorrecords.com/stage9043track11.mp3> AKA 
Married to a Chimp, plus, a full decade before Spinal Tap’s Saucy Jack, Denis 
De Marne and Ron Pember’s 1974 musicalJack the Ripper 
<http://www.stagedoorrecords.com/stage9039Track8.mp3>, with the memorable 
tagline “Fun, terror, song and dance”. However, Hutton is keen to stress that 
he’s not out to poke fun at these spurned works. “A lot of these musicals 
gained a notoriety they didn’t deserve,” he says. “They’d be in lists of the 
worst musicals of all time but I’d listen and think: ‘This needs to be heard!’ 
Put your preconceived ideas aside.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnagasaki-the-musical-the-label-bringing-west-end-disasters-back-to-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92e4bdb4bea92ff3a55430840421d1f4c6b8bdc3%2F0_0_3917_4950%2F3917.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nagasaki%20the%20musical%3F%20The%20label%20bringing%20West%20End%20disasters%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnagasaki-the-musical-the-label-bringing-west-end-disasters-back-to-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nagasaki%20the%20musical%3F%20The%20label%20bringing%20West%20End%20disasters%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnagasaki-the-musical-the-label-bringing-west-end-disasters-back-to-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92e4bdb4bea92ff3a55430840421d1f4c6b8bdc3%2F0_0_3917_4950%2F3917.jpg>
 First among equalisers … Edward Woodward in rehearsals for 1969’s Two Cities. 
Photograph: Central Press/Getty Images 
On opening night, there were standing ovations. After the reviews, you could 
have swung a horse in there
Jeff Wayne on Two Cities 
While no one can deny that a Jack the Ripper musical might possess a certain 
kitsch or morbid appeal, to hear Hutton talk about how he tracked down the then 
80-year-old Pember, and the phone call he received from Pember’s wife saying: 
“We’ve waited 40 years for this” is to hear a man in love with his work.

One of Hutton’s proudest discoveries was the original 1969 London cast 
recording of Two Cities <http://www.stagedoorrecords.com/stage9045.html>, a 
musical interpretation of Charles Dickens’s A Tale of Two Cities, which opened 
at the Palace Theatre in London on 27 February 1969, and closed 44 performances 
later. Written by Constance Cox and US theatre producer Jerry Wayne, it also 
featured music by his 23-year-old son, Jeff, who nine years later would launch 
the HG Wells-inspired rock opera War of the Worlds.

“You can sum that up in one word,” Jeff Wayne says. “Nepotism. We opened at 
the Palace with no out-of-town run. My dad took the risk and it didn’t pay off. 
We knew there were problems. On opening night, there were standing ovations. 
The next day, after the reviews, you could have swung a horse in there and not 
hit anyone.”

Two Cities gradually pulled in the crowds, with the show’s star, Edward 
Woodward, winning the 1969 Evening Standard and Variety Club awards for best 
male performance. But it was too late. The plug had already been pulled. “My 
most vivid recollection was that I’d let my dad down,” Wayne says. “I thought 
he should have gone with an established composer. He passed away in 1996. I 
don’t recall us ever listening to it again.”

Yet when Wayne revisited Two Cities for the Stage Door remaster he found it 
better than he expected. “I was initially hesitant,” he says. “But to see 
something we worked on all those years ago being out there again … I think my 
dad would be thrilled.” Now he thinks it seems “not bad at all”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnagasaki-the-musical-the-label-bringing-west-end-disasters-back-to-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00d8c7a32b1b2cc908d1bb772d600fe8f7a80745%2F0_341_3760_2256%2F3760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nagasaki%20the%20musical%3F%20The%20label%20bringing%20West%20End%20disasters%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnagasaki-the-musical-the-label-bringing-west-end-disasters-back-to-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nagasaki%20the%20musical%3F%20The%20label%20bringing%20West%20End%20disasters%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnagasaki-the-musical-the-label-bringing-west-end-disasters-back-to-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00d8c7a32b1b2cc908d1bb772d600fe8f7a80745%2F0_341_3760_2256%2F3760.jpg>
 West end boy … Tim Rice in 1983, around the time of his selectively popular 
Blondel. Photograph: Keith Waldegrave/Associated /REX 
If Evita had flopped they would have said: ‘Well, they were barmy. A musical 
about an Argentine dictator'
Tim Rice 
Alongside full cast recordings, this year Hutton established a reissue series 
entitled Lost West End, collating stand-out tracks from otherwise overlooked 
productions, such asPrisoner Cell Block H 
<http://www.stagedoorrecords.com/stage9041track9.mp3>;  
<http://www.stagedoorrecords.com/stage9041track5.mp3>I, Robert Purvis and Paul 
Prescott’s infamous1983 “supper spectacular” 
<http://www.stagedoorrecords.com/stage9041track5.mp3> which closed during dress 
rehearsals; and the 1983 musicalBlondel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IbBY2NESwy8>, written by Tim Rice, someone not 
normally associated with West End failure.

“Without denying its right to be on an album called Lost West End, it wasn’t 
totally unsuccessful,” laughs Rice. “It ran nearly a year. We never got the 
story or set right, [but] Cameron Mackintosh was involved, money was no object, 
so we shoved it straight into theWest End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/westend>, which was a mistake. A lot of 
people thought it couldn’t fail because my name was attached.”

Rice, who hopes to reissue the entire Blondel score through Stage Door, is 
generally approving of the label’s mission, but with qualifications. “Most of 
the shows he has reissued, including Blondel, probably deserved not to be 
hits,” he says. “They may have wonderful songs, but the score is not always the 
key thing. It’s the story. If that doesn’t work, the musical gets forgotten. 
Also, sometimes the timing is just wrong for the subject-matter. Chicago, Blood 
Brothers: great shows but the timing wasn’t right first time round. We got it 
right with Evita, but if it had flopped they would have said: ‘Well, they were 
barmy. A musical about an Argentine dictator? Idiots!’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnagasaki-the-musical-the-label-bringing-west-end-disasters-back-to-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda8f9ae637fb165d61f2f17c2a2df65a12b4d8b7%2F0_754_3568_4082%2F3568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nagasaki%20the%20musical%3F%20The%20label%20bringing%20West%20End%20disasters%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnagasaki-the-musical-the-label-bringing-west-end-disasters-back-to-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nagasaki%20the%20musical%3F%20The%20label%20bringing%20West%20End%20disasters%20back%20to%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnagasaki-the-musical-the-label-bringing-west-end-disasters-back-to-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda8f9ae637fb165d61f2f17c2a2df65a12b4d8b7%2F0_754_3568_4082%2F3568.jpg>
 Hats off … Tom Courtenay as Andy Capp in Manchester. Photograph: 
Dorricott/ANL/Rex/Shutterstock 
Timing is a theme Hutton repeatedly returns to, perhaps understandably given 
that alongside Jack the Ripper and His Monkey Wife, Stage Door has also 
reissued “gold-plated stinker”Tess of the D’Urbervilles 
<http://www.stagedoorrecords.com/stage9036Track3.mp3>, and Out of the Blue 
<http://www.stagedoorrecords.com/stage902516.mp3>, a 1994 musical about the 
dropping of the atom bomb on Nagasaki, which closed after just 20 performances. 
“Tess opened the same time as The Lion King and Mamma Mia,” Hutton says. “Two 
happy endings and here comes Tess. One-star reviews. Critics said it was bleak. 
C’mon! It’s Tess of the D’Urbervilles, not Hello, Dolly! But audiences wanted 
The Lion King. With Out of the Blue, yes, it was a musical about the atomic 
bomb and how could you trivialise these events? But it wasn’t trivialising 
events any less than Miss Saigon or Les Misérables. If it’s told sincerely, no 
subject is out of bounds. The Book of Mormon proves that.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Ftony-awards-highlights-hamilton-wins-big-as-corden-acknowledges-orlando-attack-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hamilton%20wins%20big%20as%20Corden%20acknowledges%20Orlando%20attack%20%E2%80%93%20Tony%20awards%20highlights%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Ftony-awards-highlights-hamilton-wins-big-as-corden-acknowledges-orlando-attack-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hamilton%20wins%20big%20as%20Corden%20acknowledges%20Orlando%20attack%20%E2%80%93%20Tony%20awards%20highlights%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Ftony-awards-highlights-hamilton-wins-big-as-corden-acknowledges-orlando-attack-video&media=>
Hamilton wins big as Corden acknowledges Orlando attack – Tony awards 
highlights video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/jun/13/tony-awards-highlights-hamilton-wins-big-as-corden-acknowledges-orlando-attack-video>
Viewed in the light of Trey Parker and Matt Stone’s fiercely funny religious 
satire, and the recent Broadway success of Lin-Manuel Miranda’ship-hop musical 
about Alexander Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton>, Stage 
Door’s reissues might be regarded as out-of-bounds and mistimed musicals that 
have come of age; except for one thing. Unlike a rediscovered novel or 
unearthed film, Stage Door’s cast recordings present only part of the story. 
Surely a true revival would involve a return to the stage. Well, even that is 
under way. Stage Door’s 2014 reissue of the 1982 cast recording of Trevor 
Peacock &Alan Price’s Andy Capp <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ruPDjjV_L7E> 
was followed bythe musical’s first ever revival 
<http://www.finboroughtheatre.co.uk/productions/2015/andy-capp-the-musical.php>
, last winter at the Finborough theatre. Jeff Wayne is currently in talks with 
West End producers interested in reviving Two Cities, while preparations for 
Stage Door’s latest release, Maddie (“Thoroughly monotonous Maddie” – the 
Independent) have led the show’s writers to prepare a new version for the West 
End.

For the moment, however, Hutton is most excited about his label’s forthcoming 
releases, including a third instalment of Lost West End, a musical based on the 
life of Sir Francis Drake starring Paul Jones of Manfred Mann, and a long-lost 
British musical from 1963 that ran to just 12 West End performances. “I can’t 
say too much,” he says, excitedly. “But I’ve been in touch with the composer’s 
son who found reel-to-reel tapes of the original score in his father’s archive. 
No one thought any tapes had survived. I’m really looking forward to hearing 
it.”

A quick spot of research unearths a contemporary review of the musical from 
Bernard Levin in the Daily Mail. It bears a one-word headline: “Ugh”.

 * Maddie – 20th Anniversary Deluxe Edition, is released by Stage Door  
<http://www.stagedoorrecords.com/>on 14 October.
 