
Each Monday since the beginning of the year, the Guardian's G2 section has 
been running a little piece by me for beginners on how to solve crosswords. The 
one at the end of last month was on dictionaries. Some publications have strict 
rules about puzzles, for example specifying that no word may be used as a 
solution unless it appears in a specified dictionary. Others will not allow 
proper nouns. The Times, for some reason, allows people's names, but only if 
they are dead. The present crossword editor of the Times told me that he didn't 
know why this was, but that he had inherited the rule and was sticking to it.

For my part, I inherited a rule that in order to pass muster, a word had to 
appear in either Chambers or Collins. By and large, I have also stuck to it, 
resisting siren calls from setters that their pet new word is to be found all 
over Google. Only very occasionally does the rule get bent, as for a Gordius 
clue in February: Leading Republicans' euphemism naively downplaying illegal 
torture in other nations (9) for RENDITION.

My impression is that Collins is the more widely-owned of the two, but 
Chambers tends to be most setters' dictionary of choice. This is mainly, I 
suspect, because it validates more obscure words and a fuller range of 
archaisms, especially from Spenserian and Shakespearean English. Chambers was 
the route by which a Shed clue got through in January for DEPHLOGISTICATE, 
meaning to deprive of phlogiston - an imaginary element believed in the 18th 
century to separate from every combustible body during burning. Chambers also 
has a wider range of Scottish and other regional vocabulary than Collins: the 
Scottish "hotch" means to fidget eagerly and "giff-gaff" means give and take, 
while "ea" is East Anglian for a Fenland drainage channel. It also has more 
types of flora and fauna and rarer abbreviations, like the "sp" used in 
genealogy - sine prole for without issue/childless.

So a Chambers should be on every serious solver's bookshelf. The Chambers 21st 
Century Dictionary, first published in 1996 but since updated, is laid out in a 
more user-friendly way than its predecessors, which often required you to hunt 
through quite long lists of words and phrases grouped together under a single 
headword. But the good old plain The Chambers Dictionary - mine is the 1993 
edition - has more entries in it than the new one, so a second-hand copy of 
this picked up viawww.bookfinder.com <http://www.bookfinder.com> will serve 
more than adequately.

Collins used to have a huge advantage in addition to the way it listed its 
entries. Unlike Chambers, it contained a large number of names of well-known 
people, dead and alive. This feature was invaluable to the crossword setter and 
solver alike, and it was also helpful to the searcher after general knowledge. 
In the new, jumbo Collins English Dictionary: Complete and Unabridged, they 
have all been thrown out. It still lists the US Declaration of Independence on 
July 4 1776, but gone is the man who drafted it - Thomas Jefferson, 1743-1826 - 
though Jefferson City, Missouri, pop. 35,481 [1990], is retained. You can no 
longer check the spelling of Tchaikovsky or his given names (Pyotr Ilyich), nor 
how old John Lennon was when he died, or what his middle name was before he 
changed it to Ono (ans: 40, Winston). Nor can you look up the year when 
Laurence Olivier's film Henry V was released (ans: 1944), or when Tiger Woods 
first won the US Masters, or what his real first name is (ans: 1997, Eldrick). 
And so on.

HarperCollins's defence of this wanton act is that market research said this 
was what potential buyers wanted. Did any respondents really reply that they 
were happy to lose Thomas Jefferson so long as they could check which state 
Jefferson City was in, and what its population was in 1990?

Following my piece in the paper, one of my correspondents, Mr B of Coventry, 
77, tells me that he is so angry about the dropping of people from his new 
dictionary that he can hardly bear to open it. Another, Mr B of Havant, 
complains about the modern publisher's habit of shrink-wrapping large books so 
that you can only discover what is - or, in this case, is not - inside a 
dictionary after you have bought one and got it home. It is extraordinary that 
Collins should have so lightly thrown away its unique selling point in the 
world of single-volume dictionaries.

I am thinking of starting a grassroots campaign to bring so much pressure to 
bear on the unhappy editor of the new Collins dictionary, Jeremy Butterfield, 
that he will have no option but to give us back our names in the next edition. 
Will you join the movement?

Â· Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor.
 