
Napoli’s hopes of a Champions League spot were dealt a blow on Sunday by a 2-0 
defeat atVerona in Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>
.

Luca Toni scored both goals for Verona, one at the start of each half, to take 
his tally to 13 league goals this season.

“I don’t like losing and I don’t like losing like this,” the Napoli coach, 
Rafael Benítez <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rafael-benitez>, said 
afterwards. “We approached the game wrongly. We played very badly in the first 
half and we had that same wrong attitude at the start of the second when we 
immediately conceded again.

“It’s a pity because we came into the game after a couple of very good 
matches. We lack consistency; we can’t manage to be at a great level for more 
than two or three matches.”

Verona midfielder Jacopo Sala was sent off in the final minute following a 
second booking.Napoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> remain 
level on points with third-placed Lazio, who are playing at Torino on Monday 
night. They also failed to reduce the gap to second-placed Roma, who also play 
on Monday, at home to Sampdoria.

Elsewhere Sassuolo hammered Parma 4-1 to move 11 points clear of the 
relegation zone on a big day at the bottom of Serie A.

Nicola Sansone was the key man for Eusebio Di Francesco’s side, bagging a 
first-half brace and earning a penalty to set up the victory. Domenico Berardi 
converted the spot-kick and then Simone Missiroli capped off the win four 
minutes later.

Parma’s 19th defeat of the season leaves them 14 points adrift of safety and 
looking like certain relegation candidates to add to their crippling financial 
woes.

Conversely, Sassuolo, who ended a run of four straight defeats, now have a 
considerable cushion above the bottom sides in 13th and, barring a disaster, 
should be able to start planning for another season in Italy’s top flight.

Chievo remain 16th but they have now extended their gap over the drop zone to 
eight points after a 2-0 triumph at eighth-placedGenoa. Alberto Paloschi scored 
twice forChievo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo> and that was 
enough to give them a valuable victory.

Cesena picked up an unlikely point as they drew 1-1 with Internazionale at San 
Siro. Gregoire Defrel put the 19th-placed strugglers in front after half an 
hour, before Rodrigo Palacio spared Inter’s blushes three minutes after the 
break.

Palacio’s equaliser will have been warmly received in Bergamo after Atalanta, 
who sit just four points above the drop zone, were held to a 0-0 draw byUdinese.
Cesena <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cesena> and Cagliari are now both 
on 21 points directly below Atalanta in the table.
 