
Gonzalo Higuaín wrote himself into the Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> record books as his 
hat-trick firedNapoli to a 4-0 win over 10-man Frosinone that sealed a 
second-placed finish.

Higuain’s 19-minute second-half treble made him the first player to score 36 
goals in a Serie A campaign, nudging ahead of Milan’s Gunnar Nordahl, who 
scored 35 in 1949-50.

It was also a night to remember for Marek Hamsik, who put himself alongside 
Diego Maradona in scoring 81 league goals forNapoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> – the second highest in the 
club’s history.

Stuttgart relegated from Bundesliga for first time in 41 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/14/stuttgart-relegated-bundesliga-first-time-41-years>
The second-place finish books Napoli’s qualification directly to the group 
stages of next season’s Champions League.Frosinone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/frosinone>, whose relegation had already 
been confirmed, were up against it from the moment Mirko Gori was sent off in 
the 12th minute.

Napoli’s win saw off competition for second spot from Roma, who were 3-1 
winners atMilan. Mohamed Salah put them in front in the first half with Stephan 
El Shaarawy scoring against his parent club after the break and Emerson adding 
a third before Carlos Bacca’s 86th-minute consolation forMilan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan>.

The champions, Juventus,completed their triumphant campaign with a 5-0 rout of 
10-manSampdoria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> in Turin at 
which they were presented with the trophy in front of their fans.

The club had sealed the title last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/25/roma-napoli-serie-a-match-report>
 and they warmed up for the Coppa Italia final by putting 10-man Sampdoria to 
the sword.

Paulo Dybala was outstanding throughout, scoring twice, with Patrice Evra, 
Giorgio Chiellini and Leonardo Bonucci also finding the net as Milan Skriniar 
saw red for Samp.

Matteo Politano scored twice for Sassuolo as they beat 10-man Internazionale 
3-1. Politano’s first-half double, in minutes six and 39, either side of 
Lorenzo Pellegrini’s effort putSassuolo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sassuolo> in control. Inter’s Rodrigo 
Palacio had made it 2-1 in the first half but Jeison Murillo’s red card on the 
hour ended any hope of a second-half comeback.

Sassuolo will qualify for next season’s Europa League if Milan lose next 
week’s Coppa Italia final againstJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>.
 