
Napoli warmed up for Thursday night's Europa League match at Swansea City with 
a 2-0 victory atSassuolo.

Rafael Ben√≠tez's team are third in Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> but have been 
exasperatingly inconsistent all season. The Swiss midfielder Blerim Dzemaili 
gave Napoli a half-time lead and Lorenzo Insigne made the game safe with a 
superb finish as he burst into the penalty area to bend his shot past Gianluca 
Pegolo.

A bizarre own-goal gave the Serie A leaders, Juventus, the jitters, triggering 
memories of last weekend's dramatic collapse at Verona, before they recovered 
to beatChievo, second from bottom, 3-1.

Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, who have proved 
irresistible at home, raced into a 2-0 lead inside half an hour after the Ghana 
midfielder Kwadwo Asamoah's curling long-range shot and Claudio Marchisio quick 
reaction to a rebound from Andrea Pirlo's free-kick.

Having infuriated their coach, Antonio Conte, by squandering a two-goal lead 
in a 2-2 draw at Verona last week, Juve then allowed Chievo back into the game 
with a soft goal just after the break. Stefan Lichtsteiner fired an attempted 
clearance straight at Martin Caceres and the ball ricocheted off the stunned 
Uruguayan into goal.

Fernando Llorente calmed Juve's nerves when he headed in a Pirlo cross just 
before the hour to restore their two-goal advantage.

The Spaniard's 10th league goal of the season ensured Juve, who have scored at 
least three goals in each of their last five home games, maintained their 100 
percent home league record this season.

Mattia Destro grabbed a double and Miralem Pjanic capped an inspirational 
performance by scoring a majestic free-kick to giveAS Roma a convincing 3-0 win 
at home toSampdoria, keeping them nine points behind in second spot. Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> had plenty of chances but had to 
wait until a minute before half-time when Destro headed in a corner. Pjanic 
curled in his free-kick in the 54th minute and Destro completed the scoring 
three minutes later, cleverly turning his marker and firing into the roof of 
the net from close range after Gervinho had opened up the defence.

There was plenty of drama lower down the league as Livorno won 2-1 at Cagliari 
despite having two players sent off. The Brazilian pair Emerson, with a 
30-metre strike, and Paulinho, from the spot, put Livorno 2-0 ahead in Sardinia 
before their compatriot Nene pulled one back for Cagliari.

Livorno held on for the points despite having Federico Ceccherini sent off for 
a second yellow card after 85 minutes, then Marco Benassi dismissed for a 
tackle from behind in stoppage time. Daniele Conti was also sent off for the 
hosts in the 71st minute.

Genoa fought back from 3-1 down to draw 3-3 with Udinese, Alberto Gilardino 
netting twice in the final 21 minutes, and visiting Parma thumped Atalanta 4-0.

Catania moved off the bottom with a shock 3-1 win at home to Lazio. Stefano 
Mauri scored his first goal for the away team since completing a six-month ban 
for failing to report match-fixing in 2011.
 