
Maurizio Sarri is not much one for birthdays. You could imagine him lighting a 
cigarette off the candles on a cake sooner than stopping to blow them out. But 
even he would concede that his 57th was a little bit special. He celebrated it 
by taking his childhood team back to the top ofSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>.

Born in Naples, but raised in Tuscany, Sarri was the only Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> supporter in his class at school 
and could hardly have imagined that he might one day wind up as their manager. 
Indeed, he might have struggled to believe in that scenario as recently as 
2012, a year that he began without a job after being sacked by third-tier 
Sorrento. He certainly would have done so a decade earlier, back when he was 
still working for a bank.

Sassuolo shock Serie A leaders Inter with last gasp penalty win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/sassuolo-serie-a-inter-penalty-win>
Even today he sometimes talks like a man who might need to pinch himself to 
check that this is all real. Sunday’s 5-1 rout of Frosinone not only moved 
Napoli into first place but also made them Italy’s winter champions – a 
notional title awarded to the side that sits top of the table after half of the 
games have been played. Afterward, Sarri observed that: “When I signed, my only 
hope was to still be manager at this stage.”

It was a joke, but laced with truth – as his gags so often are. Sarri is a man 
possessed of a wicked and dry sense of humour (commenter CalcioZucchinipicked 
up on some entertaining recent lines just last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/07/umar-and-cassano-provide-latest-subplots-in-thrilling-serie-a-drama#comment-66308233>
) that comes out often in his dealings with the press.

 On the eve of this game, one reporter had asked Sarri whether he still 
considered the word “Scudetto” to be “una bestemmia” – a swearword, as the 
manager had defined it while playing down his team’s title credentials through 
the first half of this season. “Yes it is,” replied Sarri in solemn tones. “But 
you know, I am a Tuscan, and where I come from we swear quite a bit.”

 Not even the most cautious Napoli supporter could exclude their side as a 
contender at this stage. The winter title might not hold any real value, but in 
recent years it has proved a surprisingly reliable predictor of future success: 
its last 12 winners have all gone on to finish the season as Serie A champions.

 Napoli themselves had not been winter champions for more than a quarter of a 
century. The last year in which they were, 1990, was the last time they won the 
league.

 That success was founded on the brilliance of Diego Maradona, a man quick to 
criticise Sarri’s appointment last September. The Argentinian had recanted his 
words and apologised by November, and on Sunday expressed his “great joy” at 
the club’s latest triumph. “Knowing that the city of Naples and my Neapolitan 
fans can celebrate today makes me even happier than them,” he said. “Now I want 
to win the league, come on lads!”

 It is not just the fact of Napoli’s victories, but the manner of them that 
has won sceptics like Maradona around. The Frosinone win represented the fifth 
time this season that thePartenopei have scored five goals in a single match. 
Several of this weekend’s efforts, and most notably the ones fromMarek Hamsik 
<https://twitter.com/sechesi/status/686207231331831812> and Manolo Gabbiadini 
<https://twitter.com/calcio_totale/status/686242379700002822>, were really 
rather beautiful.

 Aesthetics alone will not win you a league title, but having the most 
prolific attack in the league, allied with the joint-second stingiest defence, 
will certainly take you a long way. It does not hurt to have a player like 
Gonzalo Higuaín up front, either. His two goals against Frosinone give him 18 
in 19 league games this season. That puts him an extraordinary seven clear of 
second-placed Eder in Serie A’s scoring charts.

Even so, Napoli did need some help to claim their winter title. They had begun 
the weekend behind Inter and level on points with Fiorentina in second place. 
Both of those teams had winnable home games, againstSassuolo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sassuolo> and Lazio respectively; both 
found a way to lose.

 Fiorentina’s defeat was most surprising. Lazio arrived fresh from a home draw 
against Carpi and having won only a single league match – albeit in impressive 
fashion, away to Inter – since October. Flat and insipid for so much of this 
campaign, they served a reminder of the directness and pace that carried them 
to third last season as they swept to a deserved 3-1 victory at the Stadio 
Artemio Franchi.

 It was a different story at San Siro. Inter had beaten Sassuolo 7-0 in each 
of the past two seasons, but knew that the team facing them this time would be 
a different proposition. Sixth in the table at the start of the weekend, 
despite having played one game fewer than all of the sides around them, the
Neroverdi had established themselves as a side to be reckoned with.

 They attacked Inter from the get-go, and their hosts responded in kind. On 
another day, this match might have led to five or six goals, but both keepers 
were in spectacular form. The save made by Sassuolo’s Andrea Consigli on the 
stroke of half-time, finding the strength in his wrist to push Adem Ljajic’s 
effort around the post at full-stretch, must go down as one of the best in 
Europe this season.
Paolo Bandini (@Paolo_Bandini) 
Absolutely extraordinary save from Sassuolo's Andrea Consigli vs Inter at end 
of 1st half. Incredible reach:pic.twitter.com/Ba5XBnFa91 
<https://t.co/Ba5XBnFa91>
 <https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini/status/686163591943335936> January 10, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini/status/686163591943335936> 
 Samir Handanovic made some vital interventions at the other end, too, but as 
the second-half progressed Inter appeared the more likely winners. Instead, 
they were sunk deep into injury time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/sassuolo-serie-a-inter-penalty-win>
, Domenico Berardi converting from the penalty spot after Miranda bundled 
Gregoire Defrel to the floor.
Andrea Poma (@andypoma87) 
Handanovic illegale! 😱 #InterSassuolo 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/InterSassuolo?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/k80ibAzOvH 
<https://t.co/k80ibAzOvH>
 <https://twitter.com/andypoma87/status/686184114442125312> January 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/andypoma87/status/686184114442125312> 
 For Sassuolo, this was further validation of an extraordinary season. They 
remain sixth but have now faced all five of the teams ahead of them and beaten 
or drawn with all of them. On a budget roughly one quarter the size of Serie 
A’s richest teams, Eusebio Di Francesco has built a side whose tempo and 
furious pressing game can make them a match for just about anybody.

 Sunday’s win reinforces the sense that they can sustain a European challenge. 
But they were not the only ones celebrating it. News of Berardi’s goal was met 
with a gleeful roar from the 2,000 or so Napoli fans who were gathering before 
kick-off in the away enclosure at Frosinone’s Stadio Matusa.

 There was no doubt a similar reaction among Juventus’s supporters all over 
the peninsula. That goal by Berardi – a player who theBianconeri had part-owned 
until recently, and whom they still have an option to purchase outright in 2016 
- paved the way for the reigning champions to climb up to joint-second in the 
table by beating Sampdoria on Sunday night.

 Not bad for a side that begun the campaign with five points from its opening 
six games. This was Juventus’s ninth consecutive win, and Sarri had identified 
them as enduring favourites for the Scudetto before it was even achieved.

 “Four league titles in four years,” observed the birthday boy. “That does not 
seem like a small thing to me.”

 Indeed not. But then, neither does Napoli’s first winter championship in 26 
years.

Talking points

• This was not Maurizio Sarri’s birthday cake 
<https://twitter.com/pelle1966/status/679396198537666560>, but it should have 
been (In fact it was made by a Napoli fan club, named in his honour, near to 
his old hometown of Figline Valdarno at the end of last month.)

• Another figure much beloved of Napoli’s supporters these days is Pepe Reina 
– who has won them over with his saves,his enthusiastic mid-game celebrations 
<https://twitter.com/Marcocalcio22/status/655796871336697858?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 and genuine affection for the city that he now represents. As such, the mayor 
of Naples is now considering granting him honorary citizenship. “It’s a 
hypothesis, we’ve talked about it these last few days,” Luigi De Magistris told 
Radio Kiss Kiss. “Beyond being a great goalkeeper he is showing himself to be a 
defender of Naples and of Neapolitans.”

• Perhaps the most charming story of the season so far arrives from Modena, 
where Lorenzo Pasciuti scored his first goal of the season for Carpi and in the 
process became the first player in Italian football history to score for the 
same team in all of the country’s top five divisions. He has been with the club 
since 2010, when they were still playing in Serie D, and played a prominent 
part in their rise from there to the top-flight. There were questions about 
whether he could cut it at this level, and he did not make his first top-flight 
appearance until November, but he has played well enough lately to carve out a 
role. “There were some people who said I couldn’t make it in the fourth 
division,” said Pasciuti. “But I won there just like I did in the third and the 
second. Someone then said that I couldn’t play in Serie A, but I give 
everything and today I’m happy with my goal.” Even happier, indeed, for the 
fact that it helped his team to a 2-1 win over Udinese.

• Not even divine intervention could rescue Fiorentina against Lazio this 
weekend. Sister Daniela, the nun who has become a lucky mascot for theViola in 
recent seasons,was spotted fleeing her seat 
<http://video.gazzetta.it/suora-viola-ha-visto-abbastanza-via-tribuna-0-2/1bf24160-b711-11e5-94a7-a45ed75195b0>
 after the visitors’ second goal went in.

• Roma’s game against Milan on Saturday was supposed to decide the fate of at 
least one manager,with reports speculating that the loser would be fired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/roma-milan-serie-a-match-report>
 andeven Sinisa Mihajlovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/07/sinisa-mihajlovic-job-coach-milan>
 likening their situation to that of two desperate pistoliers preparing for a 
decisive duel. It was probably inevitable, then, that the match should end in a 
draw that did not leave either side truly satisfied - although it is Rudi 
Garcia who now seems closest to the brink. Corriere dello Sport quoted him as 
saying he was “disgusted” with the result, and several outlets are reporting 
that Garcia will be replaced this week.

• As frustrating as Roma have been lately, it should be noted that they are 
still only fifth, five points outside the Champions League places. Milan are 
another five points further back, and have now fallen behind the surging 
Empoli. Massimo Maccarone’s eighth goal of the campaign was enough to seal the 
Tuscans’ latest victory, away to Torino. They have now won five of their last 
six matches in Serie A.

• Verona’s defeat at home to Palermo means that they have gone the entire 
first half of this season without a win. Already 11 points from safety, it is 
increasingly hard to see them charting a course to survival.

Results: Atalanta 0-2 Genoa, Bologna 0-1 Chievo, Carpi 2-1 Udinese, Fiorentina 
1-3 Lazio, Frosinone 1-5 Napoli, Inter 0-1 Sassuolo, Roma 1-1 Milan, Sampdoria 
1-2 Juventus, Torino 0-1 Empoli, Verona 0-1 Palermo
 