
Lazio’s Serie A match against Napoli halted due to racist chanting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/04/lazio-napoli-serie-a-match-halted-due-to-racist-chanting-kalidou-koulibaly>
Napoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> fans expressed a show of 
solidarity with Kalidou Koulibaly on Sunday, wearing masks depicting the 
defender, after the Senegalese 24-year-old was racially abused by Lazio fans on 
Wednesday.

The mid-week match at the Olympic Stadium in Rome was suspended for around 
three minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/04/lazio-napoli-serie-a-match-halted-due-to-racist-chanting-kalidou-koulibaly>
 after repeated booing by the Lazio fans whenever Koulibaly touched the ball. 
Napoli would go on to win the game 2-0 to extend their stay at the top of Serie 
A, but Lazio were subsequently fined €50,000 (£38,250) and a stadium ban for 
their supporters for the next two home league matches.

Napoli fans responded on Sunday, prior to their team’s match with Carpi, with 
thousands of masks distributed by the supporters’ group Quelli del Sangue 
Azzurro on show at the Stadio San Paolo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fnapoli-fans-support-kalidou-koulibaly-masks-protest-against-racism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff16340c3a30edb27548786df6a5dab58b566a8f%2F0_216_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Napoli%20fans%20wear%20masks%20of%20Kalidou%20Koulibaly%20in%20protest%20against%20racism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fnapoli-fans-support-kalidou-koulibaly-masks-protest-against-racism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Napoli%20fans%20wear%20masks%20of%20Kalidou%20Koulibaly%20in%20protest%20against%20racism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fnapoli-fans-support-kalidou-koulibaly-masks-protest-against-racism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff16340c3a30edb27548786df6a5dab58b566a8f%2F0_216_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Lazio were fined €50,000 euros (£38,250) and received a stadium ban after 
their fans racially abused Kalidou Koulibaly on Wednesday. Photograph: Carlo 
Hermann/AFP/Getty Images 
“Everyone in Naples is offended by what happened to our young star. Because of 
this, we want to show our full support to Koulibaly” read a statement from the 
group, who also displayed banners with further messages of support for the 
former Genk player, who signed for Napoli in 2014.

Koulibaly had previously thanked those who had supported him on Wednesday in a 
post on social media <https://www.instagram.com/p/BBWABrCx07q/>. “I thank my 
team-mates, the public and our fans, who have been a great support against 
these ugly chants. I want to thank everyone for the messages of solidarity 
which I have received,” he wrote on Thursday.

Koulibaly started Sunday’s match in defence as Napoli went on to win 1-0, 
their eighth consecutive league win, after Gonzalo Higuaín scored his 24th 
league goal of the season. Napoli remain two points clear at the top, after 
second-placed Juventus won 2-0 at Frosinone.
 