
Within the opening minutes of her solo comedy show You’ll Never Have All of Me,
Natasia Demetriou <https://twitter.com/ItsTheBigGirl> has lavished kisses on 
the first few rows, argued that we should be prepared to share the blame with 
her if the material doesn’t go well, and deliberately flashed her knickers. For 
most of the subsequent hour, she inhabits characters who share some of that 
honest panic. In between, she solicits our suggestions for improvisations while 
pawing her own face as though trying to wipe it off her skull. Meeting 
Demetriou later in the office upstairs at the Invisible Dot venue in north 
London, I congratulate her on this monstrous elevation of nerves into an art 
form. After all, no one could really be that jittery and still set foot on 
stage. Could they?

“It’s all real,” she says, mock-glumly. “Before the show tonight, I couldn’t 
move my arms and legs. I was basically in a coma. I have to make a joke out of 
it because otherwise the show would be me standing there whimpering.”

It wasn’t such a problem when she was with the other members of the sketch 
groupOyster Eyes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cNbb2PvsP80>, whom she met 
while studying acting at Leeds University. “That was still nerve-racking, but 
at least if a line didn’t work, you knew someone was going to come in with 
something else.” She starts berating herself for her career choices. “It’s 
embarrassing to say you want to be a comedian. Admitting that you want 
attention and you think you’re such a laugh. It’s like, ‘Well, you’re a 
dickhead.’”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtFPT9rNHauQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtFPT9rNHauQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtFPT9rNHauQ&media=>
Hysteria surrounding the Edinburgh fringe, where she took the show this year, 
only exacerbates her usual state. “I’ve got friends who are nurses and 
teachers. They’re making a difference. I’m like, ‘Sorry I’m so stressed – I’m 
working on a character and my wig hasn’t arrived.’ And they’re like, ‘I just 
cut someone’s bowel open today.’” I really hope she’s referring to the nurses, 
not the teachers.

The standup who hates doing standup could easily be a Demetriou character. She 
would fit in nicely alongside the Scottish martial arts instructor forced to 
specialise in “Asian-style kicking and punching” after being banned from 
teaching karate. Or the dreamy sex expert inspired by the time Demetriou swiped 
right on Tinder. “I only use Tinder to have horrible conversations with 
people,” she insists. “I accidentally liked this man on there and he sent me 
some really horrendous things. I was like, ‘I’m gonna be even more horrendous.’ 
I was by myself, having the time of my life. Then I felt slightly sick.”

Her most infectiously funny creation is the galumphing entrepreneur Boulla, 
recently heard onFresh from the Fringe 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p027nnfx> on Radio 4. She appears in the new 
show with an imperfect grasp of English (“Monday! Tuesday! January!”) and a 
radical business proposal (pizzas in nightclubs) for which she is seeking an 
investment of £16. “She came from my stupid – my lovely – Greek cousins, who 
are always coming up with business ideas.”

Putting the show together, she worried about a lack of variety. “I realised I 
didn’t have any characters who weren’t doing ridiculous things in ridiculous 
voices. I wanted one who was quiet and stood still.” Out of this came a flash 
of genius: the timid villager attempting to perform standup while clutching a 
baby to her shoulder. Laughter is discouraged since it might wake the child. 
Audience members are asked to raise their hands instead to signify amusement.

Like the recent Wembley Previews by Sheeps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/aug/19/sheeps-review-bedlam-edinburgh>
, You’ll Never Have All of Me is a show about putting on a show. A song 
performed withMae Martin <https://twitter.com/TheMaeMartin>, the Canadian 
standup and fellow Dot regular, revolves around Demetriou convincing herself 
that she can get through the evening. It also features a cheesy supportive 
interjection from her brother, Jamie, whose credits include a hit show of his 
own (People Day), severalChannel 4 Comedy Blaps 
<http://comedyblaps.channel4.com/#/jamie1> and, as his sister points out on 
stage, “a line in Rev”.

He’s not the only family member incorporated in the show. There are childhood 
snaps, pictures of her dog and a film of her father attempting unsuccessfully 
to tell a joke; the evening ends with her parents’ phone number projected on 
the screen. “These are the things I’m surrounded by. ‘Do I wanna walk any 
further than what’s in my room? Nah. I’ll do some comedy about my dog.’” This 
complacent image is belied by the level of detail in the new show, and in her 
work as one half (with Ellie White) of the Sexy American Girls Family, who 
appeared in Edinburgh inthe Invisible Dot Circus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/13/multitasking-standups-edinburgh-fringe-the-wrestling-the-circus-comedywealth-games>
.

So does Demetriou really have to do it if she finds it all so distressing? “I 
ask myself that a lot. Everyone who does comedy at my level thinks the same 
thing: ‘What am I doing with my life?’” She calls out to Martin, who is sitting 
quietly at the other side of the room: “Am I right, Mae?” “Big time,” comes the 
doleful reply.

She turns back to me. “But it’s that thing of, ‘Oh, I’ll give it a couple more 
years.’ I’ll force myself to get out of bed earlier and write something 
amazing. Can you make that the last line? ‘I’ll write something amazing.’”

• You’ll Never Have All of Me 
<http://www.theinvisibledot.com/events/332-natasia-demetriou-youll-never-have-all-of-me>
 is at the Invisible Dot until 25 October.

More comedy coverage

Noel Fielding review – solo standup set is a holiday from reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/21/noel-fielding-review-solo-standup-mighty-boosh>

Lee Mack review – latterday Eric Morecambe is gloriously daft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/20/lee-mack-standup-comedy-review-apollo-london>

Ahmed Ahmed review – adolescent gags about pot, ‘cougars’ and race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/16/ahmed-ahmed-review-soho-theatre-standup-comedy>

Kevin Bridges: you can’t be complacent in comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/15/kevin-bridges-you-cant-be-complacent-in-comedy-autobiography>

Never mind the broadcasts: TV doesn’t make or break a standup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/07/tv-make-break-standup-comedians-never-mind-buzzcocks>

Angela Barnes: the salty standup mentored by ‘Auntie’ Sarah Millican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/06/angela-barnes-standup-comedy-edinburgh-sarah-millican>

All hail the Pajama Men: the Velvet Underground of comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/30/pajama-men-velvet-underground-comedy>

Sheeps, Beasts and the new breed of sketch show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/29/new-sketch-show-sheeps-beasts-the-pin>

Lee Evans review – when he starts talking he stops being funny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/28/lee-evans-live-at-the-o2-review>
 