
Anyone visiting the new National Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre> studio might experience 
the soul-destroying misery of the Calais jungle, take part in the 1916 Easter 
Rising or sit on a toilet while being serenaded by a giant psychedelic cat.

The theatre launched its immersive storytelling studio, a place where new work 
will be developed using the latest virtual reality technologies, on Tuesday. 
The studio is the next step in a journey that began in March last year, when 
the theatre’s then recently appointed directorRufus Norris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/31/rufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview>
, a VR enthusiast, commissioned“fabulous wonder.land”, a virtual reality film 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/fabulous-wonder.land/id1066348823?mt=8> based 
on theDamon Albarn-scored wonder.land musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/05/wonderland-review-occasionally-dazzling-often-garbled>
.

wonder.land review – occasionally dazzling, often garbled
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/05/wonderland-review-occasionally-dazzling-often-garbled>
VR is one of the fastest growing and fastest changing industries with tech, 
games, film and TV companies falling over themselves to work out how best to 
use it. The National is one of the few theatre companies to join the club.

“On all sides it is like a gold rush,” said Toby Coffey, head of digital 
development at the NT. “We’re not trying to be the first or the biggest or the 
most, it is about creating the best. We’ll throw stuff away as readily as we 
will push it forward … it is about creating the right things.”

The theatre sees VR as part of its remit to be “a pioneer of dramatic 
storytelling”. On Tuesday, the storytelling studio, which is not open to the 
public, showcased examples of recent VR experiments, including showing an 
immersive film of the Easter Rising to the cast and crew ofThe Plough and the 
Stars, a revival of Sean O’Casey’s 1926 play which opened last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/28/the-plough-and-the-stars-review-lyttelton-london-national-theatre-sean-o-casey>
.

It also made a Calais camp film which premiered at the Sheffield Doc/Fest in 
June where viewers, wearing headsets, follow the story of Aamir, a Sudanese 
refugee. The film was made after Norris spent time volunteering with the Good 
Chance theatre company in Calais last Christmas. In January, crews arrived with 
360 cameras to capture footage that was used to illustrate Aamir’s moving 
journey from Sudan, to Calais, to a hostel in Glasgow. Coffey said it was not a 
documentary but verbatim theatre and that was important.

Mahdi Yahya, founder of Room One, a company that helped produce fabulous 
wonder.land and Home/Aamir, said no other theatre was experimenting in VR 
projects like the National. He said most companies were interested in making 
experiences which were “look how cool this is that I can step into this 
environment. Nobody is doing anything which has a story or message behind it, 
the whole point here is how can we tell stories through this new medium?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fnational-theatre-creates-virtual-reality-studio-for-new-projects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c1c1e6c4bf79ae60ccca54d4465ee79601e5039%2F80_0_2400_1440%2F2400.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=National%20Theatre%20creates%20virtual%20reality%20studio%20for%20new%20projects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fnational-theatre-creates-virtual-reality-studio-for-new-projects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=National%20Theatre%20creates%20virtual%20reality%20studio%20for%20new%20projects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F02%2Fnational-theatre-creates-virtual-reality-studio-for-new-projects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c1c1e6c4bf79ae60ccca54d4465ee79601e5039%2F80_0_2400_1440%2F2400.png>
 An immersive film of the 1916 Easter Rising in Ireland, from the National’s VR 
studio. Photograph: National Theatre 
Quite where the theatre goes with the new technology remains to be seen, said 
Coffey. “Are you going to have 1,100 people in the Lyttelton theatre with a 
headset on for two hours? No, because that’s a VR cinema not a theatre.” But 
those future theatregoers may have a headset on for a few minutes at a time, to 
augment a particular production. “This is all up for grabs, this is all to be 
learned.”

Coffey said theatre practitioners in particular got the storytelling 
possibilities which come with VR. “We’re all used to working in 360 and very 
spatial environments whereas film makers have been trained in a kind of locked 
perspective. Some film makers are dragged into this kicking and screaming 
because they have lost that control mechanism.”

The studio is part of the National’s new work department and is using what 
used to be production office space for its blockbuster musical War Horse. 
Coffey said it was important for the studio to be part of new work at the 
National Theatre, in the same south London building where, eight years ago,
staff experimented with ladders and cardboard horse heads while coming up with 
War Horse <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/sep/10/theatre1>. “This is 
the high tech equivalent of the cardboard horses’ heads,” he said

The NT said it hoped to make the Easter Rising film available to theatregoers 
from September while the wonder.land film – seen in an installation at the 
theatre earlier this year by more than 90,000 people – was available to 
download on iTunes and Google Play. A further life for the Calais film is still 
to be confirmed.

Yahya said things moved particularly quickly in the world of VR. “What we have 
now, we won’t have next year, it’s going to be completely different, which is 
brilliant.” Coffey agreed and said there was little point in trying to predict 
what the VR experience for theatregoers might be like in the future.

Things move particularly quickly in the world of VR. “ I can’t keep up now, I 
can’t bookmark things fast enough. Everyone is trying to get on it [VR], to 
make content, but the truth is no one really knows the direction of travel. To 
say where it will be in five years … we’ve just got to keep working, working, 
working with it and it will be where it is in five years.”
 