
When Neil Warnock arrived at Rotherham United in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/rotherham-neil-warnock-new-manager>
, they were in the relegation zone, three points from safety, and heading only 
one way. A couple of weeks later they were six adrift, only one point above 
Bolton Wanderers. Then Warnock got his feet under the table.

Liverpool sink Yellow Submarines to reach Europa League final - Football 
Weekly Extra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/audio/2016/may/06/liverpool-sink-yellow-submarines-to-reach-europa-league-final-football-weekly-extra>
Rotherham’s defeat by Blackburn Rovers last weekend was their first since 
February, an 11-game unbeaten run that saw victories over Sheffield Wednesday 
andMiddlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/08/rotherham-middlesbrough-championship-match-report>
, plus a draw against play-off-bound Derby County, who spent more on players 
this season than Rotherham did on their entire stadium. Safety was confirmed 
with two games to spare but in retrospect it was nailed on as soon as Warnock 
walked through the door.

Before joining Rotherham, Warnock thought he was done. After leaving Crystal 
Palace in December 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/27/neil-warnock-sacked-manager-crystal-palace>
, it looked as if his future was a pleasant life at home in Cornwall, with the 
odd media appearance and the occasional advisory gig to keep things ticking 
over. One of those came at Queens Park Rangers, who wanted Warnock to give 
Chris Ramsey a hand, but when Ramsey was sacked andWarnock took temporary charge
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/qpr-chris-ramsey-neil-warnock>
, the “glint in his eye” returned. “It gave me a buzz, on the training ground,” 
he says. “I forgot how much I enjoyed it.”

Even then, after Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink was appointed the new manager at 
Queens Park Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/qpr-jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-new-manager>
 and Warnock’s help no longer required, he did not expect to rock up at 
Rotherham. “They had asked before Christmas if I’d help out, but I said no 
chance – it’s too far. But then I went up there to watch them against QPR in 
January, and I just enjoyed it so much, when they asked me to help out, I said: 
‘Let’s give it a go then.’”

And give it a go he has. Warnock, with the help of his trusty sidekick Kevin 
Blackwell, has employed a very recognisable style of football: uncomplicated, 
organised, a bit of steel and priority given to, shall we say, getting the ball 
up front in quick-smart fashion. But off the pitch has been just as important, 
where the atmosphere has been lightened and the players are far more relaxed; 
most of the squad, when asked about Warnock’s tenure, will refer to his 
positivity. Warnock and Claudio Ranieri might not be the most obvious kindred 
spirits but their respective successes this season have shown that keeping 
things light and positive on the training ground is a decent place to start for 
any manager.

The Leicester comparison might be a little tenuous – Rotherham looked in 
trouble, but were not 5,000-1 to stay up – but there are other similarities. 
“It’s a massive boost for everybody,” Warnock says ofLeicester’s title win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/leicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri>
, “because they won’t be anywhere near the top half wages wise, and Rotherham 
will probably be the lowest next year, depending on who gets promotion. 
Nowadays, money isn’t the be-all and end-all – Leicester have showed that. It’s 
shrewd additions, a good recruitment policy and team spirit.”

Lee Frecklington, club captain and veteran of the back-to-back promotions that 
took Rotherham into theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>, confirms: “The team spirit 
in the dressing room is the best I’ve ever known here. I think even through the 
promotion years I’ve never known a dressing room that was so happy to come to 
training every day. He [Warnock] creates a really positive environment when he 
comes into training, always with a smile on his face, always making sure he 
uses the word ‘enjoy’.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fneil-warnock-rotherham-championship-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37db67bd8c067f7973d4707f5e9a2804232b0628%2F0_79_1328_797%2F1328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Neil%20Warnock%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20do%20enjoy%20the%20blood%20and%20guts%20...%20it%E2%80%99s%20my%20cup%20of%20tea%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fneil-warnock-rotherham-championship-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Neil%20Warnock%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20do%20enjoy%20the%20blood%20and%20guts%20...%20it%E2%80%99s%20my%20cup%20of%20tea%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fneil-warnock-rotherham-championship-manager%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37db67bd8c067f7973d4707f5e9a2804232b0628%2F0_79_1328_797%2F1328.jpg>
 Rotherham’s Lee Frecklington wins the last-minute penalty that earned a win 
over Leeds in April. He says Warnock ‘creates a really positive environment 
when he comes into training’. Photograph: ProSports/Rex/Shutterstock 
The short-term nature of the project seems to have helped, too. When Warnock 
arrived he made it clear that he was there for 16 games and wanted to enjoy 
himself, telling the players in no uncertain terms that they should as well. 
“He said it was a 12-week project, we’re going to give it everything we can and 
maybe we’ll enjoy the ride along the way,” says Frecklington. “Because it was 
only a short-term plan everyone’s given everything they can for these 12 weeks, 
and that’s turned out to be enough.”

“If I’m honest, most people there – the players included – thought we were 
down,” says Warnock. “But right from day one we said: ‘Look, we’ve got a great 
chance if we stick together, and you listen to what we’ve got to say.’ We 
started on a run which has been fantastic. Someone’s just rung me to say it’s 
the best runRotherham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham> have had 
since 1959 at this level.”

Warnock has won promotion to the top flight three times (with Notts County, 
Sheffield United and QPR) and managed there with four different clubs, but he 
has never looked at home, always seeming slightly uncomfortable, resembling a 
boy forced into wearing a smart but uncomfortable suit when he would rather be 
out playing in the park, getting grubby. “The Championship’s a difficult 
league, but I do enjoy the blood and guts … it’s my cup of tea.”

Warnock represents one of the curious paradoxes of the Championship, a 
division in which many enjoy life but are essentially driven by a desire to get 
out of it. For most, promotion is a means to an end, a way of getting to the 
shiny riches and polished challenges of the Premier League, but you get the 
sense for Warnock that promotion itself is the prize, rather than what comes 
after it. He is like the gentleman thief, motivated not by the gold but the act 
of cracking the safe. Football’s Thomas Crown, if you want to extend the 
metaphor to breaking point. Warnock has been promoted seven times in his 
career: nobody has managed eight, which is why one more season, with a 
promotion at the end before he finally does retire, would seem like the perfect 
way to go out.

A big factor in this late-career resurgence seems to be his wife, Sharon, who 
gave him her blessing and even encouraged his return to the game, despite being 
diagnosed with breast cancer in December. “I just think she wanted to get me 
out from under her feet really,” Warnock says. Sharon’s treatment is going 
well, to the extent that she wants him to continue next season.

Where that will be, nobody yet knows. Warnock is relatively coy about where he 
will be in August, but he says it will be in the Championship and has already 
fielded several offers. He repeatedly stresses the importance of having a good 
chairman, which would probably rule out a fair few clubs. “I’ve been surprised, 
the people that have spoken to me,” he says, although he has not discounted 
staying at Rotherham, talking about the club and chairman, Tony Stewart, with 
genuine warmth. “It’s like in the old times,” he says. “I’ve got a chairman 
here who’s just let me manage, and I think he’s enjoyed it. He’s given me 
support when I’ve needed it, and for me that’s how football clubs should be.”

Stewart, Frecklington and seemingly most of Rotherham want him to stay, but he 
has promised to leave any announcement about his future until the season is 
over. “It’d be fantastic,” he says about bowing out with another promotion next 
season. “No disrespect to Rotherham, going up would be very difficult with 
them, but having said that, there’s a lot to be said for contentment, and a 
working environment I enjoy. I’ve got a lot to think about really.”
 