
“You can only really be the person you are,” Neil Harris says, explaining how 
he deals with the rigours of management on a grey, wet morning in Bromley. The 
rain is teeming down and his players are not due to arrive for another two 
hours, but Harris is in a bright and positive mood despite another early start.

“As soon as you try to change the person you are, that’s when you’re heading 
for a fall,” Millwall’s manager explains and it is not a surprise that there 
are no motivational slogans on the walls of his spartan office at the training 
ground.

Millwall had forgotten who they were before Harris was appointed. While Ian 
Holloway’s arrival in January 2014 initially raised expectations after Steve 
Lomas’s brief and undistinguished reign, they were 23rd in the Championship when
he was sacked 14 months later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/10/millwall-ian-holloway-neil-harris>
. With his departure, Millwall were forced to look into their soul for an 
answer.

They turned to a club legend. Harris played in some of Millwall’s most 
successful teams – he started up front when they werebeaten by Manchester 
United in the FA Cup final in 2004 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/may/24/match.manchesterunited> – and 
he was placed in temporary charge after Holloway’s exit. He could not save them 
fromrelegation to League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/28/rotherham-reading-championship-match-report>
 but, after careful thought, he saw enough positives toaccept the job on a 
permanent basis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/29/neil-harris-appointed-full-time-manager-millwall>
.

Neil Harris appointed full-time manager of Millwall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/29/neil-harris-appointed-full-time-manager-millwall>
Harris’s first full season in management has been a success, no matter the 
outcome of Millwall’s play-off semi-final againstBradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford> City. They had lost their sense 
of identity and one of his main objectives was to restore the connection with 
the supporters.

“It’s huge at any club,” he says. “The way Atlético Madrid fans buy into what 
they do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/04/diego-simeone-atletico-madrid-champions-league-la-liga-real-madrid>
, they don’t always have the ball, they play a very defensive minded game, but 
they work so hard and they get end product. I’m not likening us to Atlético 
Madrid. But style of play, formation, group ethos and mentality, then I look at 
Atlético Madrid, Leicester, Burnley, Millwall, teams that don’t always have the 
football but work extremely hard and play a 4-4-2 formation or variations of 
it.”

He is adamant about what it means to represent Millwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall>. “You don’t have to be the best 
player,” he says. “It hasn’t got to be 1,000 passes a game, it’s got to be high 
tempo, aggressive and you can’t ever shirk a challenge. It’s frowned upon.”

It comes naturally to some players and can be coaxed out of others. “We might 
show a player pulling out of a tackle early on and say: ‘You can’t do that’,” 
Harris says. “You haven’t got to be over-aggressive and injure somebody but you 
have to put your foot or head in if it’s a 50-50 ball. I want to say to a 
winger: ‘If you try to take on the defender and lose it and we pass you the 
ball a second time and you cross it behind the goal, what are you going to do 
the third time?’ If he’s not going to take someone on or cross the ball, he’s 
not brave enough to play for this club.”

Harris led Millwall to fourth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball/table>, four points off 
an automatic promotion place, and he is relishing the chance to take on 
Bradford. He believes that the experience will be beneficial for the young 
players he has brought into the first team after a ruthless summer clear-out, 
even if they lose, and Millwall have the second leg at home after beating 
Gillingham in their final league match. They visit Bradford on Sunday, having 
lost 1-0 at Valley Parade in March.

Fostering a strong team spirit has been crucial. There has been a lot of time 
to kill on the motorway and in hotels during long trips up north. But he is 
careful not to become too matey with his players and wants them to feel his 
presence whenever he walks into a room, without creating a culture of fear.

Harris’s approach sounds straightforward on the surface – he admits that he 
has an old-school mentality and remembers working a nine-to-five office job in 
the City – but he thinks deeply about tactics and how to reach modern players.

If he can work at home, he is not afraid to leave the training ground in the 
afternoon to spend time with his wife and three children. Harris, whose playing 
career was put on hold when he wasdiagnosed with testicular cancer in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/jan/23/cancer-neil-harris-matt-duke-hull-millwall>
, knows when to close the laptop and spend an hour watching an old film or an 
episode ofOnly Fools and Horses.

Yet his phone is always on. Learning how to keep players happy is an evolving 
challenge and Harris has made mistakes. He looks at the names on the whiteboard 
and recalls making a senior player travel north for an away game last season, 
only to leave him out of the 18-man squad. It went down badly – but he was new 
to the job.

He has had to raise his voice on a couple of occasions and his assistant, 
David Livermore, has had to be the good cop. But Harris forgets quickly. When 
they lost to Bradford, he was unhappy about conceding a late goal. Yet he sat 
outside the dressing room for 90 seconds, gathered his thoughts and cleared the 
air. Millwall beat Burton Albion, promoted in second place, two days later.

“You have to take every player individually nowadays,” Harris says. “The days 
of going to the pub – that’s what we used to do back in the late 90s. The 
Saturday or Sunday after a game, that was the culture. Of course, they 
socialise but now it’s different. Players go for a coffee and a green tea now.”

Harris is also adaptable. He is not rigidly stuck to 4-4-2, having used a 
4-3-3 system while he was managing the under-21 side, but he likes it. “I 
played in successful 4-4-2 teams,” he says. “That’s stuck with me. If we take 
this club, what do the fans like to see? Two centre-forwards on the pitch. Wide 
players crossing the ball. They’ve always liked wide players. Paul Ifill, 
Steven Reid, Lucas Neill, Christophe Kinet. That’s the mentality, pace and 
excitement and balls in the box. Blood and thunder.”

He slaps his hands. “Get the ball forward,” he says. “Get the ball in their 
box. If you piece together how you’re going to get that on to the pitch, 4-4-2 
fits the bill. We’ve adapted. I have played 4-3-3 this year. Would I hesitate 
to change? Not at all. It’s how you deliver messages to players.”
 