
Hibernian have appointed the former Celtic manager Neil Lennon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/neil-lennon> on a two-year contract.

Lennon replaces Alan Stubbs, who quit the Easter Road club to take over at 
Rotherham just 11 days after leading them to their first Scottish Cup win in 
114 years.

Brendan Rodgers looks like the right man to lead Celtic’s revival | Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/21/celtic-brendan-rodgers-right-man-revival>
However, the Hibernian <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hibernian> chief 
executive Leeann Dempster has acted swiftly and Northern Irishman has been 
joined in his move to Edinburgh by his former Parkhead assistant Garry Parker.

The duo’s first act will be to prepare a plan to get Hibs out of the Scottish 
Championship after two failed promotion campaigns under Stubbs.

The 44-year-old Lennon had looked set for a return to Celtic Park – where he 
won three successive league titles and led the Hoops to the last 16 of the 
Champions League during his first stint in charge – last month when it emerged 
he was among the final two candidates being considered to replace Ronny Deila.

Topm Boyd, the ex Hoops captain, said: “I don’t think anybody will have the 
wrong impression of Neil after Bolton. Everybody knows the reasons for why 
things happened there.

“There have been plenty examples over the years where managers struggle 
because of the financial circumstances at a club.

“But he certainly won’t have to deal with that at Hibs and he will know what a 
club like that needs to get back into the Premiership.”

Hibs chairman Rod Petrie told the club’s web site: “We are delighted to have 
secured a head coach of Neil’s calibre and profile, and we look forward to him 
bringing his drive and mentality to our campaign to win the Championship this 
season and secure promotion back to the top flight of Scottish football.”

Leeann Dempster, the club’s chief executive, added: “As soon as Neil was 
identified as the outstanding candidate we were determined to bring him to 
Easter Road. He has managed at a very high level, taking Celtic to the last 16 
of the Champions League, and we were attracted by his ability to get the most 
out of players and his driven, winning mentality.

“On behalf of everyone at Hibernian FC, we would like to extend a warm welcome 
to both Neil and Garry.”

But despite being interviewed for the post, he lost out when the Scottish 
champions chose toappoint the former Liverpool manager Brendan Rodgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/23/brendan-rodgers-celtic-manager-unveiling-parkhead>
.

The former Leicester and Celtic midfielder has been out of work since leaving 
crisis-hit Bolton in March, but has beaten the likes of John Hughes, Stuart 
McCall and former Oldham and Doncaster Rovers manager Paul Dickov to the post.
 