
Netflix has admitted that it was too slow out of the blocks to enter a bidding 
war forThe Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off> as the US 
streaming giant didn’t seriously believe the hit show would leave the BBC.

Netflix’s content chief Ted Sarandos, who commands a $6bn (£4.9bn) annual 
budget with commissions including House of Cards, Stranger Things and Orange is 
the New Black, indicated that the US streaming service may have been keen to go 
head-to-head withChannel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> for the 
show.


“We knew it was brewing [a potential move from the BBC], but I didn’t actually 
think it would happen,” said Sarandos, in an interview with the Radio Times.


Channel 4 to start sponsorship bids at £8m for Great British Bake Off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/23/channel-4-to-start-sponsorship-bids-at-8m-for-the-great-british-bake-off>
Asked if in this case Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> was 
simply “too slow off the mark”, Sarandos said: “Yes, yes!”


ITV has said that it did not bid for Great British Bake Off, the biggest show 
on UK TV, becausethe producers did not have deals tying in any of the show’s 
stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/20/itv-bake-off-sue-perkins-mel-giedroyc-mary-berry-paul-hollywood>
.

Sarandos said that previous series of Bake Off have proved very popular on its 
US service, as have otherBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> shows 
including Top Gear.

Netflix has also shown an appetite for buying UK shows, picking up the likes 
of BBC shows Happy Valley and Peaky Blinders, as well as Charlie Brooker’s 
Channel 4 show Black Mirror.


In the case of Black Mirror, Netflix struck a deal last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/08/netflix-new-series-charlie-brooker-dystopian-drama-black-mirror>
 to commission 12 new episodes, a move which angered Jay Hunt, Channel 4’s 
chief creative officer.


Sarandos said that Hunt’s attitude to Netflix snapping up Black Mirror smacked 
of a “slight” double standard when she wasquick to defend Channel 4 poaching 
Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/27/channel-4-bake-off-privatisation-bbc-c4-james-purnell>
 from the BBC in a similar fashion.


“The ambitions that [Brooker] and [executive producer] Annabel Jones had for 
the new season … were seemingly out of reach or beyond the appetite that 
Channel 4 had for the show. So they cancelled it. And we picked it up.”


Sarandos said TV is becoming a much more competitive marketplace which is 
“great for talent and really great for viewers”.


Last year, Jeremy Clarkson and his fellow former Top Gear hosts signed a 
multi-year deal r 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2015/sep/07/jeremy-clarkson-not-worth-the-money-amazon-spent-says-netflix-exec>
eportedly worth £160m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2015/sep/07/jeremy-clarkson-not-worth-the-money-amazon-spent-says-netflix-exec>
 to make a new motoring series for Amazon’s video service.


Richard Hammond and James May, along with Top Gear executive producer Andy 
Wilman, left the BBC show after Clarkson’s contract was terminated after a
“fracas” with a Top Gear producer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/25/jeremy-clarkson-top-gear-contract-bbc>
.

 