
The office of plastic surgeon Dr Yannis Alexandrides, on the second floor of 
his clinic at 111 Harley Street, has a reassuringly expensive air. The ceiling 
is high, the desk large and the decor includes an artwork featuring a pair of 
full-size seated skeletons that the doctor, for obvious reasons, would prefer 
not to be photographed with.

Makeup, manicures and manscaping: how male grooming went mainstream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/sep/13/makeup-manscaping-male-grooming-mainstream>
Dr Yannis, as everyone in the practice calls him, is himself very reassuring, 
calm and precisely spoken. If he concurs with what you’ve just said, he looks 
over his clasped hands and says “correct”. And he broadly agrees with my 
assertion that plastic surgery is a costly option (his prices for a facelift 
start at £6,500).

“It’s expensive because it requires very high expertise to be performed well,” 
he says. “It requires some kind of hospitalisation, usually, so it comes 
attached with this cost. And also follow-up, so it’s not just about having an 
operation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fnever-mind-the-botox-meet-the-men-opting-for-non-surgical-treatments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9c8ab93a312a34537d6faaf20cd925a3c0f1db3%2F0_0_4550_2732%2F4550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Never%20mind%20the%20Botox%3A%20meet%20the%20men%20opting%20for%20non-surgical%20treatments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fnever-mind-the-botox-meet-the-men-opting-for-non-surgical-treatments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Never%20mind%20the%20Botox%3A%20meet%20the%20men%20opting%20for%20non-surgical%20treatments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fnever-mind-the-botox-meet-the-men-opting-for-non-surgical-treatments%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9c8ab93a312a34537d6faaf20cd925a3c0f1db3%2F0_0_4550_2732%2F4550.jpg>
 Smooth operator: Dr Yannis Alexandrides. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the 
Guardian 
According to figures released by the British Association of Aesthetic Plastic 
Surgeons (Baaps), there were 51,140 cosmetic surgery procedures in the UK last 
year, up a whopping 13% on the previous year. Of those, 4,164 procedures were 
performed on men. This is almost twice the number of men who had cosmetic 
surgery a decade ago, remaining at about 9% of the total.

The broader figures chime with the numbers at 111 Harley Street 
<http://www.111harleystreet.com>. “Funnily enough, we’ve seen a small decrease 
in surgeries for men last year,” says Dr Yannis, “but we’ve seen a big increase 
in non-surgical treatments.” And that’s where the real uptake in male vanity 
seems to be occurring.

Cosmetic procedures also break down into surgical and non-surgical: a facelift 
is the former; among the latter are “injectables” (Botox, dermal fillers etc), 
laser treatments, facials and prescription skincare regimes. At 111 Harley 
Street, they provide all this in addition to – or, increasingly, in place of – 
surgery. According to the clinic’s managing director, Agata Podwika, while 
surgery has seen a small decrease, the number of men having non-surgical 
treatments has risen by 50% year on year.

Botox wasn’t marketed at guys. Men have caught up massively with the options 
that are out there

David, 50, a client who has had regular Botox treatments since 2001, has also 
had filler injected into his lips and “laser lipo” on his jaw and neck (“Really 
chuffed with that one,” he says). He’s a big fan of the subtle effect of 
skilfully deployed non-surgical treatments. “You’re not gonna look like the 
‘Bride of Wildenstein’,” he says (I believe him, but can’t confirm; we spoke on 
the phone). He claims that acceptance of these treatments has risen sharply 
among men since he started. “Back then, Botox wasn’t widely known about, it 
wasn’t marketed at guys,” he says. “Men have caught up massively with the 
options that are out there.”

When Daniel Smith had his first Botox treatment last June, he was 34. Although 
he had been concerned about some wrinkles that he felt aged him beyond his 
years, he was apprehensive about what he calls “that frozen look” and only had 
a small dose. He has a picture on his phone from his most recent treatment, in 
December, with 13 dots drawn on his forehead and round his eyes, to indicate 
where the injections were to go.

“I’ve lost quite a deep vertical and horizontal frown line, but I’ve kept some 
subtle age lines,” he says, “Personally, I saw a dramatic difference in the 
effect round my eyes, so I’m happy with that. I’d definitely do it again.” If 
he wants the effect to persist, he’ll have to do it again, in about three 
months’ time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fnever-mind-the-botox-meet-the-men-opting-for-non-surgical-treatments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F100053ca5cb33d0b16a477bd99cc53079e690368%2F0_0_4824_2896%2F4824.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Never%20mind%20the%20Botox%3A%20meet%20the%20men%20opting%20for%20non-surgical%20treatments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fnever-mind-the-botox-meet-the-men-opting-for-non-surgical-treatments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Never%20mind%20the%20Botox%3A%20meet%20the%20men%20opting%20for%20non-surgical%20treatments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fnever-mind-the-botox-meet-the-men-opting-for-non-surgical-treatments%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F100053ca5cb33d0b16a477bd99cc53079e690368%2F0_0_4824_2896%2F4824.jpg>
 I’ve got a bone to pick with you: Skeleton artwork in Dr Yannis’s office. 
Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
Smith doesn’t see cosmetic intervention as a brave new world for his gender, 
because he already works in skin care (he also has an interest to declare; he 
does brand consulting work for 111Skin, Dr Yannis’s range of products). But he 
does perceive a growing openness about anti-ageing procedures for men. “I 
think, a few years ago, people had Botox and didn’t talk about it. I tell 
everyone. If people say: ‘Hey, your skin looks great’, I’ll show them the photo 
and say: ‘This is where I had it.’”

Smith has no interest in graduating to plastic surgery, but he doesn’t rule 
out other procedures in the future. “If you were asking what I’m thinking of 
next,” he says, “it wouldn’t be filler. It would be a Silhouette lift.”

The Silhouette, or “soft thread” face lift is one of several procedures 
marketed as a non-surgical counterpart to classic plastic surgery (Liposonix is 
a proprietary, noninvasive alternative to liposuction; a “non-surgical nose 
job” involves the strategic injection of fillers to minimise bumps or 
irregularities). With the soft thread lift, a needle is used to pull filaments 
under the skin of the face to tighten the neck and jawline. If that sounds 
horrible, try watching a YouTube video. The effect lasts between three and four 
years.

People are in the workforce a lot longer. You’ve got younger people you’re 
competing with

When it comes to cosmetic surgery, it seems that dissuasion is often part of 
the consultation. A 2008 Baaps survey found that half of plastic surgeons 
turned away 10% of their patients in the course of a year, and that one in five 
surgeons had turned away 30%. Reasons for refusing patients included 
unrealistic expectations, preexisting medical conditions and people wanting 
procedures that weren’t warranted. I put it to Dr Yannis that lots of his 
patients must come with preconceived notions of what plastic surgery can 
achieve for them in terms of wellbeing.

“Correct,” he says. “I think it’s important to understand the psychology of a 
patient who seeks plastic surgery. That’s paramount, at the end of the day, 
because it’s an elective surgery. We remind patients that this is for them to 
become happier, more confident, to boost the morale. If you feel, even beside 
the fact that you can technically perform a successful operation, that the 
patient wouldn’t be happy, would not be more confident, or might actually have 
more problems, then, in my book, you shouldn’t go ahead.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2009%2Fmay%2F14%2Fdavid-mitchell-soapbox&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Mitchell's%20Soap%20Box%3A%20Male%20grooming&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2009%2Fmay%2F14%2Fdavid-mitchell-soapbox>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Mitchell%27s%20Soap%20Box%3A%20Male%20grooming&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2009%2Fmay%2F14%2Fdavid-mitchell-soapbox&media=>
 Click here to see David Mitchell discuss male-grooming products. 
This raises the thorny question of what precisely is a legitimate frame of 
mind in which to seek cosmetic surgery.

“A lot of people come in,” says Dr Yannis, “and they say: ‘Look, I’m not 
really bothered, but everywhere I go everybody says, Oh, you look so tired.’” 
This runs counter to my experience of British life, where everyone goes round 
telling everyone else how tired they feel. It sounds like an excuse.

“People don’t retire as early as they used to,” says Dr Tammy Manning, Dr 
Yannis’s surgical nurse. “You will see gentlemen come in for anti-ageing 
procedures because they’re in the workforce a lot longer. You’ve got younger 
people you’re competing with.”

For what it’s worth, the very existence of this pressure is denied by both the 
male clients I spoke to. “No pressure at all,” says David. “I do it personally 
for myself. I like to look as good as I can. There’s no need to look like an 
old knacker.”
 