
The company building the UK’s first new nuclear power station for decades is 
facing questions over the health of its fleet of French nuclear plants after an 
investigation which has left the country with the lowest level of nuclear power 
for 10 years and the prospect of power cuts during a cold snap.

 Thirteen of Électricité de France’s (EDF) 58 atomic plants are offline, some 
due to planned maintenance, but most for safety checks ordered by the regulator 
over anomalies discovered in reactor parts.

The outages have prompted warnings of potential planned power cuts and pushed 
up wholesale power prices, boosting coal and gas operators but squeezing small 
energy suppliers. Carbon emissions will possibly rise too as France, which last 
yearforged a historic climate change deal in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
, has to import more fossil fuel power.

The problems stem from a fault identified last year by the Nuclear Safety 
Authority (ASN) in the as-yet-unfinished reactor at north-western France’s 
Flamanville plant – the same designapproved for Hinkley Point C in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-station-gets-go-ahead>
.

Pierre-Franck Chevet, president of the ASN, told Le Figaro 
<http://www.lefigaro.fr/societes/2016/11/22/20005-20161122ARTFIG00306-la-situation-du-nucleaire-est-tres-preoccupante.php>
 the situation was “very worrying” and the discovery had led to “unprecedented” 
checks at all the country’s nuclear plants, which provide 75% of France’s 
electricity and normally help it export power to other countries. The issue is 
higher than expected carbon concentrations in steel reactor components, which 
could make them vulnerable to cracking.
Outages map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/french_reactors_map/giv-15726F6ncGQ5NeNyz/>
EDF insist its French fleet, much of which dates back to the 1980s, is safe 
and that its reactors will start coming back online within weeks.

And while experts do not expect the episode to result in a big financial hit 
to EDF, they believe it could turn up the pressure on a company which is 
already stretched.


“The longer than expected outages at some of EDF’s nuclear plants place 
additional pressure on the company at a time that it is already under 
significant financial stress,” said Jim Watson, research director at the UK
Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Research Centre. “It 
has already taken a big risk in pursuing the Hinkley C project in the UK 
because other reactors using that design [in Finland and France] have suffered 
from delays and large cost overruns.”

Peter Atherton, associate at analysts Cornwall Energy, said the failure of 
earlier inspections to pick up on problems was “a very serious thing, a bit of 
a stain on the whole French programme”.
Nuclear generation chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-02T15:14:45/embed.html>
A spokesman for EDF – which has already cut its nuclear electricity output 
target and its profits expectations for this year – said the company was 
confident the reactors would reopen by the end of December. “Safety is our top 
priority,” he said. “EDF as operator is responsible for nuclear safety, and we 
have the presence of an independent and strong safety authority (ASN).”

But the most immediate concern is the possibility of power cuts in the world’s 
fifth biggest economy.

French grid operator RTE said the low nuclear output and France’s unusually 
high reliance on electric heatingmeant a cold snap could result in “exceptional 
measures” 
<http://www.rte-france.com/en/news/assessment-electricity-supply-demand-balance-winter-careful-vigilance>
. Those include lowering the voltage and, as a last resort, rolling power cuts 
around the country for two hours or so at a time.

The outages have also pushed up European wholesale power prices. Henry 
Edwardes-Evans, an energy trading expert at Platts Power inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, said the reduced nuclear 
output and rising coal costs over the summer had been a “double whammy” that 
has driven up wholesale prices, which have been low in recent years.
Wholesale prices chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-30T16:16:35/embed.html>
The higher wholesale prices have also caused problems for smaller energy 
suppliers. “The nuclear outages played a significant role in GB Energy going 
bust,” said Atherton, referring to the three-year-old UK supplier with160,000 
customers which ceased trading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/27/gb-energys-collapse-to-hit-160000-households-with-higher-bills>
last weekend, blaming “swift and significant increases in energy prices”.

Nuclear critics believe the situation shows the need for France to diversify 
away from nuclear and invest more in renewable sources such as wind and solar 
power, which account for less than 4% of electricity generation, compared with
25% in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/28/record-46-of-uks-electricity-generated-by-clean-energy-sources-in-2015>
.

Charlotte Mijeon, of the anti-nuclear group Sortir du Nucléaire (Get Out of 
Nuclear), said there was a “chain of responsibility” for the crisis in France’s 
nuclear industry which ranged from the government at the top to subcontracted 
private suppliers.

“The system of nuclear safety in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> has always been limited,” she said. 
“It starts from the premise that the industrials are honest and the moment 
there is a problem they will flag it up to the safety authorities and it will 
be sorted out.”
 