
Jaap Stam won the treble during his first season as a player in England, and 
although the former Manchester United defender’sfirst campaign as a manager in 
the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/01/jaap-stam-player-talks-dressing-room-good-manager-reading-alex-ferguson>
 cannot end in similar glory, there was plenty in this debut here to encourage 
fans ofthe Dutchman’s new club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/reading-appoint-manchester-united-ajax-jaap-stam-manager-championship>
. Reading, 17th in the Championship last season, played with style and purpose 
and deservedly beat Preston thanks to a cunningly worked goal by another 
impressive new signing, John Swift.

Norwich City hit their stride as Jacob Murphy sets up rout at Blackburn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/blackburn-rovers-norwich-city-championship-match-report>
“It was very good to watch, that’s what we’re aiming for,” said Stam. “We’ve 
only been working for six weeks and you can’t achieve miracles in six weeks but 
we’re very happy with how we played.”

The beginning of the Stam era coincided with a more poignant milestone, as 
this was the day on whichReading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> 
renamed their stadium’s north stand in honour of Eamonn Dolan, the influential 
academy manager who died from cancer in June at the age of 48. Fittingly, 
Reading’s lineup included a beneficiary of Dolan’s tuition, with Jordan Obita 
stationed at left-back in a side that also featured three players signed since 
the appointment of Stam. Two Dutch recruits – the centre-back Joey van den Berg 
and winger Roy Beerens – impressed but Swift outshone them.

The 21-year-old Englishman joined Reading after rejecting an offer to remain 
at Chelsea, where he made only one senior appearance in two years. His 
performance here suggests he could blossom at the Madejski as he bestrode 
central midfield with elegance and menace. Stam did likewise on the sideline, 
where the burly figure in the sharp shirt and tie was only a pair of shades 
away from resembling a US secret serviceman, albeit one who spent 90 minutes 
gesticulating and hollering at his charges. “I wasn’t shouting just for the fun 
of it,” said the 44-year-old. “If you see things during the game you try to 
help the players out. I know that sometimes it’s useless because they can’t 
hear but that’s my nature. That’s how I was as a player and that’s how I am as 
a manager.”

Nottingham Forest and Britt Assombalonga edge Burton Albion in thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/nottingham-forest-burton-albion-championship-match-report>
His team look to be responding well to his pointers so far. They were 
particularly impressive in the first half, when they played with intensity, 
precision and classical Dutch width. “We knew how they were going to play but 
we didn’t press quickly enough and allowed good players to get a rhythm, that 
was disappointing,” said the visiting manager, Simon Grayson. For a while it 
seemed Preston would be reprieved by sloppy finishing as Reading spurned 
several early chances, Swift and Deniss Rakels among the culprits. But after 35 
minutes Swift made the breakthrough from a rehearsed corner routine, walloping 
the ball into the net from 10 yards after Garath McCleary’s low pull-back.

Preston improved in the second half but Daniel Johnson missed their best 
chance, shooting straight at Ali Al-Habsi in the 54th minute. Then Swift, with 
an exquisite reverse pass, and McCleary, with a pinpoint cross, created a 
wonderful chance for Rakels to double Reading’s lead but the striker shot 
feebly from five yards. There were some dicey moments in the home box late on 
as the visitors pressed for an equaliser but Reading held out for three points 
from a performance that augurs well.
 