
Alan Burns had an “epiphany” about the potential of ocean energy after being 
pummelled by the surf off Rottnest Island, near Perth. Two decades later and 
Burns’ company, Carnegie WaveEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy>, appears to be finally on the 
verge of delivering on his dream.

Wave energy – at least in theory – has the potential to provide one third  
<http://www.abc.net.au/science/articles/2009/02/23/2498704.htm>of Australia’s 
electricity needs. The challenge has been to design a wave energy system that 
can resist the brutal power of the ocean, and to find a niche in the market in 
the face of plunging costs of solar energy and other renewables.

Carnegie believes it may have found the answer. For the last six months, it 
has been operating theworld’s first multi-machine wave energy installation 
<http://reneweconomy.com.au/2015/carnegie-installs-final-unit-in-worlds-first-grid-connected-wave-energy-plant-27462>
 (the CETO 5) – just a few kilometres from where Burns swam all those years ago.

We will have commercialised a power technology quicker and cheaper than any 
other technology that came before it.
Michael Ottaviano, Carnegie Energy CEO 
It’s been delivering zero emissions electricity and desalinated water to the 
facilities at Garden Island – Australia’s biggest naval base – and now plans to 
take that concept a crucial step further, to a renewable energy micro-grid 
based around wave energy.

The first micro grid – also to be based at Garden Island – is a local energy 
grid that combines wave energy, solar (photovoltaic) energy, a desalination 
plant and energy storage. In this case it will use three of its commercial 
scale CETO wave energy machines, each with a capacity of 1MW, and add 2MW of 
solar and 500kW hours of battery storage. The micro grid can connect or 
disconnect from the electricity network and operate autonomously, and the idea 
is to enable Garden Island to be completely independent for its electricity and 
clean water requirements. The plan has already got the backing of the
Commonwealth Bank <http://renews.biz/100554/carnegie-seals-20m-deal/>, in the 
first major private sector financing transaction for a wave technology project.


Carnegie believes this micro-grid concept can be applied elsewhere – in island 
communities off Australia and other areas in the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian 
oceans, as well as coastal communities in remote and fringe-of grid areas 
around the world.

“This is seriously transformational, because it allows island, off grid and 
fringe grid communities to tap into the biggest advantage of wave energy, which 
is its consistency,” says chief executive Michael Ottaviano.

“This is going to allow very high penetration of renewable energy into island 
networks. Up until now that has not been possible. Cheaper battery storage and 
solar helps, but the combination of wave with other renewables makes it easier 
to take higher penetration renewables into places it hasn’t been before, 
comfortably and cost effectively.”

Renewable-focused micro-grids are expected to play an increasingly prominent 
role in the world’s electricity systems 
<http://onestepoffthegrid.com.au/us-giant-enters-australia-market-to-take-suburbs-off-the-grid/>
. In Australia, the Byron Bay shire is considering an approach from Siemens and 
Brookfield to create a renewable focused micro-grid, while smaller townssuch as 
Tyalgum 
<http://onestepoffthegrid.com.au/this-northern-nsw-town-could-be-first-to-decide-to-quit-the-grid/>
 are considering doing the same.

Developers of new housing divisions – such as KLW for its Huntlee development 
near Newcastle, are looking for renewable-based micro-grids rather than 
connecting to the main grid, whilea new company chaired by Professor Ross 
Garnaut 
<http://onestepoffthegrid.com.au/how-garnaut-co-plan-to-help-communities-take-the-power-back-from-the-grid/>
 is looking for similar projects in South Australia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fnew-generation-wave-energy-could-it-provide-one-third-of-australias-electricity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff96c28d64d0f20bb272d243fcafdb1114bc1f97a%2F0_0_3000_3504%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20generation%20wave%20energy%3A%20could%20it%20provide%20one%20third%20of%20Australia's%20electricity%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fnew-generation-wave-energy-could-it-provide-one-third-of-australias-electricity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20generation%20wave%20energy%3A%20could%20it%20provide%20one%20third%20of%20Australia%27s%20electricity%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fnew-generation-wave-energy-could-it-provide-one-third-of-australias-electricity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff96c28d64d0f20bb272d243fcafdb1114bc1f97a%2F0_0_3000_3504%2F3000.jpg>
 Carnegie Energy’s next wave energy prototype CETO 6 (rendering) Photograph: 
supplied 
Carnegie’s plan, however, is to establish its own micro-grid business, 
targeting those islands and communities that may be too small for competitors. 
By adding solar, wind and storage, these communities will be able to reduce 
significant amounts of diesel, and the later addition of wave energy could take 
the renewable energy penetration to 100%, and provide desalinated water.

“Its lack of onshore footprint is also a major advantage for islands, as is 
its lack of aesthetic impact,” Ottaviano says. “Its inherent synergies with 
seawater desalination also help.”

Indeed the technology is having minimal impact on the environment, he says. 
The only part in contact with the sea floor is a standard pile foundations used 
for years in the marine space.

“The CETO units themselves have been designed to avoid being a trap for marine 
life and we constantly monitor potential impacts such as acoustic or fouling,” 
he says, noting that the current project has over 350 measuring devices 
collecting data and feeding back in real time. And because the system is 
completely submerged, there is no visual impact.

Carnegie is now emerging as one of the leading wave energy developers in the 
world. Others have come and gone, with prototypes generating publicity rather 
than electrons when mishaps saw the machines sink to the bottom of the ocean, 
in the case ofOceanlinx 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-04-15/damaged-wave-generator-carrickalinga-could-take-year-to-remove/5390374>
, or projects abandoned, in the case ofOPT 
<http://renews.biz/100283/opt-makes-powerbuoy-progress/>.

Ottaviano says technology “attrition” is to be expected. The same thing 
occurred in other technologies, such as solar thermal, where industry standards 
– and the best way to capture the energy - have been slow to develop.

But he points out that Carnegie has only been doing “serious” technology 
development since 2009, and has spent “just” $118m in that time.

 “That is just a blink of the eye compared to the amount of time invested in 
solar, nuclear, gas, or coal,” he says. “And the money invested is just a drop 
in the ocean compared to the hundreds of billions that have been spent on 
nuclear, and is still being spent, and the billions being spent on offshore 
wind.

“Wave is one of the last renewable technologies to be commercialised. And if 
Carnegie is able to commercialise its wave energy technology for, say, $160m, 
that is exceptionally good value for money.

“And we will have commercialised a power technology quicker and more 
cheaplythan any other technology that came before it.”
 