
The Newcastle United midfielder Jonjo Shelvey has decided not to appeal 
against his five-match ban afterbeing found guilty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/newcastle-jonjo-shelvey-five-game-ban->
 of a Football Association misconduct charge.

The 24-year-old continues to deny using racially aggravated language towards 
an opponent, but after considering the independent regulatory commission’s 
written reason for its decision this week, has opted not to take the case any 
further.

Crystal Palace target Levante’s Roger Martí as Newcastle stand firm over 
Mitrovic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/crystal-palace-roger-marti-mitrovic>
Shelvey said: “I am very disappointed and frustrated with the outcome of the 
hearing. I strongly maintain that I did not use the offensive language that has 
been alleged. Despite my strong disappointment, we think an appeal is very 
unlikely to change the panel’s decision on the case, so I have decided not to 
take that option.”

Shelvey revealed that his decision was based partly on his wish not to cause 
Newcastle, who currently lead the Championship, further disruption as they 
attempt to return to the Premier League.

He said: “Appealing the ban would also extend the period of uncertainty for 
the club and the team during such an important part of the season. This would 
not be fair on my club, manager or team-mates and I want to draw a line under 
this now so that I can return to help my team with our promotion challenge as 
soon as possible.”

Shelvey was given a five-game ban and a £100,000 fine on Tuesday for an 
aggravated breach of Rule E3(1) after being charged with “using abusive and/or 
insulting words towards an opponent” which “included reference to ethnic origin 
and/or race and/or nationality”.

Football League your thoughts: Newcastle top of the tree at Christmas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/dec/17/football-league-your-thoughts-newcastle-united-top-championship-at-christmas>
The charge related to an incident in the 87th minute of the Newcastle’s 2-0 
Championship defeat by Wolves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/newcastle-united-wolverhampton-wanderers-championship-match-report>
 at St James’ Park on 17 September and is understood to have involved an 
exchange with the visitors’ Moroccan midfielder Romain Saïss.

Shelvey’s absence at a key stage of the season will come as a blow to the 
manager Rafael Benítez. However, he has promised to keep his team on track 
while he awaits the return of his £12m playmaker.

Benítez said: “Jonjo has maintained his position from the outset and as such 
has received our full support. Now he has made the decision not to appeal the 
verdict we can focus on the upcoming games without uncertainty and distraction.”

The Football Association, too, has a right of appeal if it believes Shelvey’s 
punishment is unduly lenient and the club are awaiting confirmation from the 
governing body of its views and therefore when his suspension will begin, with 
Newcastle due to face Sheffield Wednesday at St James’ Park on Boxing Day.

While supporting their player as he protested his innocence, Newcastle have 
condemned intolerance within the game. “Newcastle United does not tolerate any 
form of discrimination or abuse and condemns the use of racist, sexist or 
homophobic remarks in the strongest possible terms,” a club statement read.
 