
Rafael Benítez insisted he “always knew how difficult this division would be”, 
conceding his team are short of confidence after theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> title favourites endured a 
second successive defeat at the season’s outset.

“That wasn’t the kind of performance we were expecting,” Benítez admitted 
after Hudderfield Town’s first victory at St James’ Park for 63 years enabled 
the Yorkshire club to maintain their own 100% record. “We knewHuddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield> would be difficult to break 
down but we didn’t play at the level we wanted to. We improved a lot in the 
second half but it’s really disappointing.”

With the unsettled midfielder Moussa Sissoko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/02/real-madrid-newcastle-moussa-sissoko-diame-clark>
 watching on from the stands, Newcastle produced a largely lethargic display 
with the likes of Jonjo Shelvey a virtual passenger throughout. “I’ve seen the 
team doing well in training but we have to show the same things in the match,” 
Benítez said. “We need to show the same quality, personality and character. 
We’ve not seen that today.

“We made too many mistakes and we need to show that character and quality to 
improve things. The players on the pitch were trying – they are good players. 
They can do much better because we didn’t play at the level we were expecting. 
The only positive today was the fans.”

Football League your thoughts: Villa stop the rot as Bolton win away at last
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/aug/13/football-league-your-thoughts-villa-stop-the-rot-as-bolton-win-away-at-last>
The 52,000 near sellout will not be replicated again until Benítez’s players 
match the commitment from the stands out on the pitch. Too often they were 
second best to a Huddersfield side for whom the on-loan Manchester City 
midfielder Aaron Mooy excelled.

“I don’t think the start to the season has been a reality check,” Benítez, who 
has spent £43m on new players this summer, said. “We always knew how difficult 
this division would be.”

The hosts at least opened their goal account courtesy of Dwight Gayle’s 
equaliser on the hour, the£10m summer arrival from Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/newcastle-dwight-gayle-signs-ritchie>
 following up to head into an unguarded net after Danny Ward had saved his 
initial penalty, Mark Hudson having handled in his efforts to clear a centre 
from Daryl Janmaat.

It cancelled out a soft opener for the visitors. Nahki Wells, the forward who 
is wanted by Derby County and who may well leave before the closure of the 
transfer window at the end of the month, guided a left‑foot shot into the 
bottom corner after meeting a cross from Rajiv van La Parra, who was also 
unmarked when he took possession down Huddersfield’s left in added time at the 
end of the first half.

The winner arrived with eight minutes remaining, Jack Payne, a shrewd summer 
acquisition from Southend, accepting a pass from his fellow substitute Elias 
Kachunga to beat Matz Sels with a confident finish into the corner of the net 
as Newcastle were embarrassed by a basic counter-attack.

“It’s a big result for us,” David Wagner, the head coach, said after guiding 
Town to their best start for nine years. The German succeeded where his close 
friend Jürgen Klopp had failed,Liverpool having been defeated here last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/06/newcastle-united-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
. “We had a bit of luck but we showed our quality and it was a great reward for 
our supporters who I thought were magnificent. We altered our gameplan to keep 
things tight and it worked.”

Gayle and Matt Ritchie, a half-time substitute, each squandered close-range 
headers as the hosts failed to carry a threat up front. Mohamed Diamé only 
sporadically impressed on debutfollowing his move from Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/newcastle-sign-mohame-diame-hull-city>
, but the forward was not alone in under-performing, and a significant 
improvement is needed for the visit of Reading on Wednesday, where the hosts 
will again go in search of their first points of the campaign.

“It’s good that we have an immediate opportunity to bounce back,” Benítez 
said. “It’s clear that we’re just lacking a bit of confidence at present.”
 