
Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang has emerged as Newcastle United's top attacking 
transfer target this summer but, although the 24-year-old St-Etienne striker 
appears to favour a move to Tyneside, he would cost around £15m and has several 
suitors.

Aubameyang, a Gabon international, has been tracked by Newcastle for at least 
the past year and has spoken of them as "a good club" with a "monumental 
stadium". Although Aubameyang also says he has his heart set on a move to 
England, matters are complicated by interest from Guus Hiddink's super-rich 
Russian side Anzhi Makhachkala and has also been watched regularly by Paris 
St-Germain, Atlético Madrid and Tottenham Hotspur.

Newcastle have distanced themselves from reports in France that they have made 
a £25m double bid for Aubameyang and his highly rated 18-year-old central 
defensive St-Etienne team-mate Kurt Zouma but, with their one-time target 
Wilfried Bony on the point of joining Swansea City from Vitesse Arnhem, their 
interest in Aubameyang remains real.

Aston Villa's Darren Bent remains another forward high on Alan Pardew's 
shopping list. Yet although the West Ham United centre-half James Tomkins and 
the Norwich City winger Anthony Pilkington have also been identified as 
targets, Newcastle appear to be modifying rather than abandoning their once 
strict recruitment policy of importing good value players, usually aged under 
26, from abroad.

Joe Kinnear, Newcastle's director of football said: "We will look abroad 
again. I've been palling up with Graham Carr [the chief scout] and we will go 
abroad. We will go to everywhere in Europe looking at matches. We will scour 
the length and breadth of Europe to find what we want.

"I'm not saying, 'Hey, let's go and get Ronaldo and Messi', but each night I 
will be going to matches. We will go elsewhere to try to open the doors on new 
signings."
 