
Newcastle moved up to fourth in the Championship with a 2-0 victory that 
brought an end to Brighton’s six-month unbeaten run in the league. The Seagulls
had not lost in the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/16/championship-round-up-brighton-rotherham>
, excludingMay’s play-offs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/07/middlesbrough-v-brighton-championship-promotion-decider-live-boro-albion>
, since February but could not prevent the Magpies from making it three wins in 
a row after starting the campaign with two defeats.

The Newcastle captain Jamaal Lascelles put Rafael Benítez’s side in front 
after 15 minutes with a powerful header before Jonjo Shelvey added the crucial 
second in the 64th minute with a sublime free-kick.

Football League your thoughts: Terriers retain lead as Fulham snap at their 
heels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/aug/27/football-league-your-thoughts>
Brighton, whose manager Chris Hughton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/chris-hughton-signs-new-contract-brighton-manager>
 led Newcastle to promotion in 2010, could find no way back after that having 
been reduced to 10 men when Sam Baldock was sent off for a second caution in 
the 55th minute.

Shelvey’s first goal for Newcastle since his £10m move from Swansea in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/12/jonjo-shelvey-signs-newcastle-transfer-swansea>
 followed that dismissal and after that Brighton battled but to no avail.

On a day when it was confirmed Newcastle are close to adding aerial strength 
to the squad by moving for Ipswich’s Daryl Murphy, it was coincidental that it 
was a header which put them ahead. It was not from lone striker Ayoze Pérez, 
asked to lead the line in the absence of Aleksandar Mitrovicand Dwight Gayle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/newcastle-dwight-gayle-signs-ritchie>
, but the unlikely source of centre-back Lascelles, who rose just inside the 
18-yard box to power a brilliant header inside David Stockdale’s right-hand 
post after meeting the fine free-kick delivery of Matt Ritchie.

Brighton, with eight points from four matches previously this season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/12/brighton-hove-albion-nottingham-forest-championship-match-report>
, looked hungry to impress but the noise levels had been lifted and Newcastle 
enjoyed the rest of the half.

Manchester United’s Marcus Rashford taps in last-gasp winner at Hull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/27/hull-city-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
Yoan Gouffran almost scored a belter of a goal nine minutes later. A move that 
started in the right-back position, where Vurnon Anita made a tackle, ended 
with a blistering 30-yard drive from Gouffran which crashed off the crossbar.

Newcastle looked confident in possession but still had to be wary of a 
Brighton side showing glimpses of why they have been so hard to beat for so 
long.

Seconds before Baldock’s sending off, the Seagulls almost levelled. Anthony 
Knockaert, the subject of a failed bid from Newcastle in the summer, cut inside 
and struck the bar from 12 yards.

But Brighton’s task was made harder when Baldock, already cautioned for a foul 
on Pérez, arrived late to wipe out goalkeeper Matz Sels after he cleared his 
lines and that was enough to earn him a second yellow.

Nine minutes later the lead was doubled when Mohamed Diamé was brought down by 
Steve Sidwell 25 yards from goal. Shelvey, back in the side under Benítez, 
curled a fine free-kick over the wall and inside Stockdale’s top-left corner.

Shelvey almost had a second too, but his low strike destined for the bottom 
corner was turned behind as Brighton struggled to find a way to make a game of 
it.
 