
Steve McClaren is hoping for a much-needed double transfer breakthrough as he 
attempts to dragNewcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> out of yet another 
worrying tailspin.

FA Cup: talking points from the third round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/11/fa-cup-talking-points-third-round>
The Bordeaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> midfielder Henri 
Saivet is understood to be on Tyneside on Monday to discuss a potential move, 
and the club are also understood to have formalised their long-held interest in 
Swansea’s Jonjo Shelvey.

Saivet, a 25-year-old Senegal international, has spent much of his career 
playing as a winger but has occupied a central role for his club this season 
and will cost in excess of £4m. Bordeaux confirmed on Monday that they had 
reached a deal with Newcastle and McClaren said in his press conference that 
the player “was in the building” to have his medical.
Newcastle United FC (@NUFC) 
McClaren confirmed that Henri Saviet is on Tyneside having a medical and 
discussing terms. "We are just waiting for the outcome."#NUFC 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/NUFC?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/NUFC/status/686556771633225728> January 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NUFC/status/686556771633225728> 
Shelvey, who was coveted by Alan Pardew during the former Newcastle manager’s 
time at St James’ Park, appears to be heading out of Swansea after losing his 
place under first Garry Monk and then Alan Curtis.

He was reportedly involved in a row with a Swansea fan following the club’s 
3-2 FA Cup third round defeat by League Two Oxford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/oxford-united-swansea-city-fa-cup-match-report>
 on Sunday.

Shelvey has been linked with a £10m switch to Newcastle as McClaren attempts 
to end a run of four consecutive 1-0 defeats to ease themselves out of the 
relegation zone with home games against Manchester United on Tuesday and West 
Ham at the weekend.
 