
Newcastle United’s eight-month pursuit of Rémy Cabella is drawing to a close. 
The 24-year-old Montpellier midfielder, who was part ofFrance’s World Cup squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2014>, is expected to interrupt 
a holiday in Corsica to undergo a medical on Tyneside on Monday and finalise 
personal terms.

Reports in France <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> claim 
Newcastle will pay £12m for Cabella – a sum that may disappoint Mike Ashley, 
the club’s owner, who originally had a much more modest figure in mind.

Whatever his precise price, the Newcastle manager, Alan Pardew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-pardew> – who, desperate to 
reinforce his attack, has also inquired about the Monaco striker Emmanuel 
Rivière – regards Cabella as the ideal replacement for his team’s former 
creative catalyst Yohan Cabaye, who defected to Paris Saint-Germain last 
January.

Meanwhile, Newcastle will confirm Mathieu Debuchy’s switch to Arsenal once 
they have signed a new right-back. That man is likely to be theHolland 
international Daryl Janmaat <https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland>, who 
has emerged as Pardew’s key target. A £5m bid has already been turned down by 
Feyenoord, but Janmaat is still expected to be on the St James’ Park books by 
the end of the week.

At left-back, Pardew’s plans have been disrupted by Davide Santon’s latest 
injury. The Italian has a history of knee problems and will miss the entire 
pre-season as he undergoes rehabilitation. While Santon will be absent from 
Newcastle’s impending summer tour of New Zealand, it is hoped he will be fit to 
return to action by early autumn.
 