
Jonjo Shelvey is free to play for Newcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> at Leeds United on 
Sunday after pleading not guilty to a Football Association charge of racially 
abusing an opponent, and requesting a personal hearing.

Newcastle’s Jonjo Shelvey may face ban after FA charge for using racist 
language
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/newcastle-jonjo-shelvey-charge-fa-allegedly-abusing-wolves-player>
It is understood the alleged offence centres on comments aimed at Romain Saïss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/newcastle-jonjo-shelvey-charge-fa-allegedly-abusing-wolves-player>
, Wolverhampton Wanderers’ Moroccan midfielder, in the 87th minute of 
Newcastle’s Championship defeat at St James’ Park on 17 September. That was 
also the minute in which Newcastle’s Vurnon Anita was sent off, although the 
two incidents are not necessarily connected.

Saïss speaks and, more importantly, understands very little English but his 
team-mates complained about Shelvey’s language after the final whistle and the 
referee reported the matter to the FA. Shelvey, though, is understood to have a 
witness who supports the midfielder in disputing Wolves’ version of events and 
says he did not make the precise remarks alleged.

Following a near two-month investigation the FA is confident the charge will 
be upheld by an independent disciplinary commission but Newcastle are aware 
that certain Wolves players are believed to have offered contradictory accounts 
as to the comments actually made by Shelvey.

The personal disciplinary hearing is expected to take place next week and will 
also offer the 24-year-old, said to have been taunted about his baldness by 
Wolves players, a chance to cite any mitigating factors, including provocation. 
Should he be found guilty by the independent panel, Shelvey will serve a 
minimum five-game suspension but could be banned for longer. The former 
Liverpool forward Luis Suárez wassidelined for eight games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/dec/20/liverpool-luis-suarez-patrice-evra>
 in 2011 after being found to have racially abused the former Manchester United 
left-back Patrice Evra.

Losing Shelvey would be a blow to Rafael Benítez’s divisional leaders. The 
former Swansea City playmaker has emerged as a key influence this season, 
starting all but two league games and proving increasingly exempt from 
Benítez’s beloved rotation system. Before the FA charge, Newcastle’s manager 
had suggestinged that Shelvey could soon add to his six England caps.

Rolando Aarons, the Newcastle winger, has ruptured a cruciate ligament and 
will shortly undergo knee surgery likely to keep him out for the remainder of 
the season. Aarons, who turns 21 on Wednesday, has been plagued by a series of 
injuries and had only just returned to training before this latest setback.
 