
8.47am GMT 

Here's a headline you don't see often, if at all: "Football club helps out 
aspiring journalists." 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2013/news/football-club-helps-out-aspiring-journalists/>
 It appears on the HoldTheFrontPage site over an article about journalism 
students being invited to Chesterfield FC's ground to write reports on its 
match last month with Burton Albion.

The five would-be sports reporters are studying at Huddersfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/huddersfield> university. According to their 
lecturer, Dave Devenport, it was their first real taste of sports journalism. 
"They all came back really buzzing after the experience,” he said.

Nick Johnson, who heads the Chesterfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chesterfield> club’s media department, 
said: “We are always happy to help journalism students by providing them with 
experience."

Doubtless he would have been happier if the football league two clash had not 
ended in a 2-0 victory for Albion. But well done to Chesterfield FC.

Sadly, the much more common football journalism story is about reporters being 
banned from grounds.

In the latest examples, Newcastle <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/newcastle> 
United's management barred journalists from the city's three papers - the 
Journal, Evening Chronicle and Sunday Sun.

Why? Because the club deemed the Chronicle’s coverage of a supporters' protest 
against its owner,Mike Ashley <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley>
, appeared too sympathetic to the fans.

Port Vale's chairman, Norman Smurthwaite, disliked a report by the Stoke-based 
daily, The Sentinel, so its reporter and photographer were not allowed to enter 
the press box.The club then asked the paper to pay £10,000 a year 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-stoke-staffordshire-24743660> for access 
to the press box and press conferences.

Nottingham Forest has limited the Nottingham Post's access to its club and has 
banned journalists from The Guardian and The Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/sep/14/roy-hodgson-england> 
from its press box.

As my colleague, Marina Hyde, noted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/oct/30/newcastle-united-journalist-alex-ferguson-mike-ashley>
, these actions echo past media bans instituted by the former Manchester United 
manager Alex Ferguson.

Earlier this year, Southampton FC ordered journalists from the Southern Daily 
Echo to stop interviewing fans outside its stadium. AndCrawley Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crawley-town> banned a reporter from the 
Crawley News because the club's management disliked two of he paper's headlines.

As the New Statesman's Martin Cloake observed: 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/business/2013/11/why-are-football-clubs-able-ban-journalists-when-they-dont-what-they-report>
 "Imagine the uproar if a group of lobby correspondents were banned from 
parliament for reporting criticism of the government."

It isn't a new story, of course. Down the years there has been a depressing 
list of bans on journalists by football clubs (see Cloake's 1997 article for 
example <http://www.wsc.co.uk/the-archive/42-Media/6367-silent-witnesses>). 
That doesn't mean we should condone it.

The problem for journalists, especially those who work on local and regional 
papers, is their dependence on maintaining a relationship with the club in 
order to obtain news.

But clubs dislike any criticism and tend to view local media as little more 
than a branch of PR in which journalists should be "fans with iPads".

Seen from a business perspective, negative reporting is potentially harmful. 
Similarly, as far as coaches are concerned, critical reporting could affect 
whether they keep their jobs.

At sensitive moments, therefore, clubs will seek to use/misuse their power to 
gag newspapers. In the end, it is a clash between commerce and press freedom.

But I wish journalists (and their papers) responded to bans more aggressively. 
Clubs need to grasp that an absence of news coverage is likely to have a 
greater commercial impact than the occasional moments of criticism.

Updated at 9.29am GMT
 