
Patients with cancer are having their operations cancelled by hospitals with 
increasing regularity as theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
winter crisis deepens, theObserver can reveal.

In an alarming escalation, the previously unthinkable step of calling off 
cancer surgery has become more commonplace in the last fortnight, as a rapid 
increase in patient numbers has placed intolerable pressures on beds and staff.

The revelation will fuel increasingly bitter arguments between the government 
and NHS staff, both over the extent of the crisis and where blame lies.

Today, writing for this newspaper, the chair of King’s College Hospital, 
London, Lord Kerslake, a former head of the civil service, suggests Theresa 
May’s government is not sufficiently in touch with the reality facing NHS 
hospitals and staff to appreciate the severity of the crisis.

While ministers play down the pressures as normal for midwinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/three-deaths-worcestershire-royal-hospital-nhs-winter-crisis>
, and direct blame at managers and GPs, Kerslake says the only way services are 
maintained at current levels is because of “extraordinary efforts of both 
senior and frontline staff”. He adds: “Even with this, the picture is of 
enormous fragility, not just at my trust but across the whole NHS.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Theresa May and Jeremy Corbyn clash over NHS at first PMQs of 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/11/theresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video>
Related: It is clear to anyone in the NHS that we cannot carry on as we are | 
Bob Kerslake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/14/nhs-cannot-carry-on-as-we-are-bob-kerslake-hospital-chief>

Kerslake <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/bob-kerslake> also sides with 
Simon Stevens, chief executive of NHS England, who last week questioned the 
prime minister’s claim about NHS funding, after No 10 officials began a 
briefing war against him. His remarks come after Dr Sarah Wollaston, chair of 
the Commons health select committee, criticised the government for blaming GPs 
for the crisis. She said in a tweet: “Pretty dismal stuff for govt to scapegoat 
GPs for very serious NHS pressures. Failure to understand the complexity or own 
responsibility.”

Investigations by the Observer show that appointments for cancer operations 
began to be cancelled in December and that trend has accelerated this year. 
Leeds TeachingHospitals <https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> Trust, 
one of the largest and best-regarded NHS trusts in England, has this month had 
to cancel bookings for some complex cancer operations, as well as more 
straightforward cases. Its doctors say that lack of post-operation intensive 
care beds has forced them to postpone surgery. One patient, Andy Claridge, was 
due for a radical robotic prostatectomy at the Leeds trust on 7 January but 
received an email from a clinical services manager the day before, postponing 
treatment.
 Lord Kerslake, the chair of King’s College Hospital, says Theresa May’s 
government is not in touch with the reality of the NHS crisis. Photograph: 
King's College Hospital 
The email said: “Unfortunately the trust has had to cancel planned surgery due 
to the lack of inpatient beds. All three of our planned surgical cases for this 
Saturday have been cancelled as a result. I understand from my surgical 
colleagues that they are trying to open a list on 28 January to replace the 7 
January. I will let you know once I get confirmation. On behalf of the team, 
may I apologise for this situation which has been imposed on us.”

Claridge told the Observer he fears the delay will cause his cancer to worsen. 
“I found out in an email. I didn’t even get a phone call. It’s highly unusual 
for this to happen. My consultant said cancelling cancer operations was 
unprecedented. Hearing this news knocked me sideways. I had prepared mentally 
for surgery and I felt completely defeated, like someone had zapped me of 
energy. I felt so let down. My partner was also devastated.

“I know my cancer is operable and there are many more in worse situations, but 
I worry about my cancer getting bigger the longer I have to wait. When Jeremy 
Hunt says the NHS is coping, he needs to really look at what is happening. If a 
hospital is cancelling cancer operations then it isn’t coping.”

Clare Marx, president of the Royal College of Surgeons, confirmed that a 
system under whichcancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/23/nhs-pathology-services-cannot-keep-up-with-increase-cancer-tests>
 operations were protected had given way. “Historically, they have been 
protected due to their urgent nature. However, feedback from our members 
suggests that since the start of January, a large number of hospitals across 
the UK are now cancelling cancer surgery. This will be extremely worrying to 
patients and their families. It is heartbreaking for a surgeon to have to 
explain to a patient who has cancer that their operation has had to be 
cancelled as there are no beds available. It is increasingly clear that no part 
of the system and no patient is immune from the pressure the NHS is 
experiencing.”

Jonathan Ashworth, shadow health secretary, blamed ministers. “This is 
shocking and brings into sharp focus the reality of how the NHS crisis is now 
impacting patient care. I cannot imagine the intolerable emotional strain 
cancelling these operations must place on cancer sufferers. It’s shameful this 
is happening in Theresa May’s Britain.”

Kerslake says that increasing demand and advances in healthcare mean the NHS 
needs additional funding year on year of around 4% above inflation to maintain 
service levels. According to calculations by Professor John Appleby, chief 
economist at the Nuffield Trust health thinktank, this would mean the NHS 
receiving £5bn more in real terms next year. Its budget would then be £128.6bn.

Appleby blamed the current problems on underinvestment. “The NHS buys a very 
select group of goods and services – syringes, drugs, doctors, MRI scanners – 
all of which drive healthcare costs up faster than the rest of the economy. 
Until 2010, health spending rose at around 4% higher than inflation. Ending the 
unprecedented financial squeeze and returning to this historical average seems 
essential if we are to ensure that our health service is fit for the future.”

“For almost six years, funding for both health and social care has not kept 
pace with the level of need.There have been many more hospital admissions, GP 
appointments and A&E attendances each year, so we should not be surprised that 
the NHS appears to be creaking under the pressure. A more sustainable approach 
to funding our health and social care services is urgently needed.”

An NHS England spokesman said: “Everyone in the NHS will be pulling out all 
the stops to make sure all patients get their surgery as quickly as possible. 
There has been a steady increase in operations over the last 15 years but, 
despite this, the NHS is helping more people survive cancer than ever before.”
 