
The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is wasting billions of 
pounds a year through inefficient use of staff, paying over the odds for 
supplies, “bedblocking” and undue reliance on agency workers, two official 
reports warn on Friday.

Around 8,500 “bedblocking” patients are stuck in NHS hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/07/-sp-bedblockers-worsening-nhs-hospitals-crisis>
 every day – costing the health service £900m a year and driving up use of the 
private sector.

An inquiry ordered by health secretary Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> into NHS productivity and 
use of its resources has found that hospitals in England could save £5bn a year 
of their £55bn budget by 2020 using measures such as cutting their running 
costs and reducing unacceptable variations in the quality of care that patients 
experience.


The review, undertaken by the Labour peer Lord Carter of Coles, claimed that 
hospitals are not making the best use of their income and need to improve 
urgently if the NHS is going to make the£22bn a year of efficiency savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/23/nhs-miss-22bn-efficiency-target>
 it has pledged to deliver by 2020-21.

“The NHS is expected to deliver efficiencies of 2–3% per year, effectively 
setting a 10–15% real terms cost reduction target for achievement by April 
2021. While the NHS ranks as the best value healthcare system in the world, we 
know more could be done to improve quality and efficiency in our hospitals so 
they can meet this expectation,” the report says.

Carter’s inquiry, based on a detailed examination of how 136 of England’s 156 
acute hospital trusts operate, urged trusts to reduce “unwarranted [and] 
inexplicable variation” in key areas of medical practice as a way of making 
savings.

For example, while only 0.5% of patients who have a new hip or knee fitted 
develop an infection afterwards, in some hospitals it is 4%, which costs money 
because the patient stays in longer and needs more treatment. If every hospital 
could reduce that margin to 1%, that would save £300m a year, according to 
Carter. Tackling variation in running costs could save another £1bn, he 
estimated.

Similarly, hip replacements cost £788 in some hospitals but elsewhere can cost 
double that – £1,590. From April, the pricetrusts have paid for routine items 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/jul/23/nhs-spending-procurement-price-comparison>
 such as bandages, needles and rubber gloves will be published to stop them 
“paying wildly varying costs for the same goods”.

Less efficient hospitals need to learn from more efficient ones and improve 
their practice to save money, Carter said.

Tackling “delayed transfers of care”, patients who are fit to go but cannot be 
released because social care is not in place, would save £900m. Around 8,500 
such patients are stuck in hospitals every day, far more than the 5,500 
previously thought, Carter’s research found.

Trusts also make “significant” savings by reducing the amount of sick leave 
staff take <https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/aug/19/nhs-sick-leave>, 
which can also vary widely, and working with nearby hospitals to ensure 
services are not duplicated unnecessarily.

In a separate report the National Audit Office warns that the NHS’s systems 
for recruiting doctors, nurses and midwives are “fragmented”, inefficient and 
expensive.

In 2015 the service was short of 50,000 staff, a 6% vacancy rate, and was 
becoming increasingly reliant onexpensive agency staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/29/hospitals-told-cut-staff-nhs-cash-crisis>
 to plug gaps in rotas.

“Given the size of the NHS, workforce planning will never ben an exact 
science, but we think it clearly could be better than it is,” said Amyas Morse, 
the head of the NAO. Labour saidcuts to the number of nurse training places 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/04/nhs-recruits-one-in-four-nurses-from-abroad>
 in recent years had created critical shortages of staff.

The Royal College of Nursing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nursing> 
warned that Carter’s moneysaving drive could ultimately endanger patient 
safety. “The focus on efficiencies must not be at the expense of safe care. In 
the past efficiency drives have eclipsed the focus on safe staffing levels and 
patient care. In the future the two must go hand in hand,” said Janet Davies, 
the RCN’s chief executive.

“All the evidence shows that it is the number of registered nurses which has 
the biggest impact on patient care in acute settings and any new metric to 
measure staff deployment must not be used by trusts to hide a diluted skill 
mix,” she added.

NHS experts voiced other doubts about Carter’s plan. Nigel Edwards, chief 
executive of the Nuffield Trust thinktank, warned that hospitals could see so 
many NHS-wide targets as “another round of thekneejerk centralisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/06/nhs-health-service-reforms>
 that has served the NHS badly in recent years”.

The NHS needs to find closer to £10bn of efficiency savings, double the £5bn 
Carter has identified, but does not know where they will come from, Edwards 
added.

Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents hospitals, 
said trust bosses would be “nervous” about having targets foisted on them, such 
as their running costs being no more than 7% of their income. He also 
questioned a central plank of Carter’s strategy by insisting that there can 
sometimes be good reason for variation in performance existing between trusts.


 