
The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> in England lacks a 
convincing plan to plug a £22bn “black hole” in funding within five years, 
according to parliament’s spending watchdog.


A significant number of acute hospital trusts are in “serious and persistent 
financial distress”, there is a “spiralling” trend of increased deficits and 
the current payment system is “not fit for purpose”, the public accounts 
committee said.


A report published on Tuesday found that reliance on agency staff, sometimes 
at “rip off” costs, had contributed to the dire situation and NHS trusts were 
also trying to meet unrealistic savings targets.


The conclusions followed a further examination of  a National Audit Office 
inquiry into NHS finances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/16/nhs-trusts-expect-to-overspend-by-22bn-warns-official-report>
, which was published in December.

 Meg Hillier, the chair of the committee, said the government had done little 
to support trusts facing financial problems. “Without urgent action to put 
struggling trusts on a firmer financial footing there is further serious risk 
to services and the public purse,” she said.

“In particular, it is unacceptable for senior government officials simply to 
point to excessive agency costs as a source of trusts’ difficulties.

“It is the job of those officials to take action to control spending on agency 
staff, and to address its underlying causes. The use of agencies is a 
sticking-plaster solution to deep-rooted problems with NHS workforce planning.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fnhs-22bn-funding-black-hole-report-public-accounts-committee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf350dfc86d6c55e5aa5dbab6e3231986a7b0671%2F1963_535_3797_2278%2F3797.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NHS%20struggling%20to%20plug%20a%20%C2%A322bn%20funding%20'black%20hole'%2C%20says%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fnhs-22bn-funding-black-hole-report-public-accounts-committee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NHS%20struggling%20to%20plug%20a%20%C2%A322bn%20funding%20%27black%20hole%27%2C%20says%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fnhs-22bn-funding-black-hole-report-public-accounts-committee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf350dfc86d6c55e5aa5dbab6e3231986a7b0671%2F1963_535_3797_2278%2F3797.jpg>
 The Department of Health, headed by Jeremy Hunt, has come under fire for not 
acting sooner to control spending on agency staff. Photograph: Teri Pengilley 
for the Guardian 
The committee examined the finances of acute hospital trusts which make up 
more than half of all NHS trusts and two thirds of all foundation trusts.


Trusts are usually designated as acute if they provide services such as an 
accident and emergency department.

The NHS is expected to find £22bn in efficiency savings by 2020-21, but MPs on 
the committee remain unconvinced that such savings are possible.


“There is not yet a convincing plan for closing the £22bn efficiency gap and 
avoiding a ‘black hole’ in NHS finances,” the report concluded.

The financial health of NHS trusts and NHS foundation trusts has 
“significantly worsened in the last three financial years”, the MPs said, with 
acute hospital trusts “at crisis point”.


In 2014-15, trusts had a net deficit of £843m, a rapid decline from the £91m 
recorded in 2013-14 and the £592m surplus in 2012-13.


Trusts’ finances “look set to deteriorate further”, with forecasts that the 
total overspend could amount to £2.5bn in 2015-16, the report said.


Targets set by Monitor and NHS England for 4% efficiency savings were 
“unrealistic and have caused long-term damage to trusts’ finances”, the report 
found.


The MPs sharply criticised the NHS and ministers for failures in workforce 
planning, contributing to a 24% increase in spending on agency staff by acute 
trusts between 2012-13 and 2014-15.


NHS England told the committee that spending on temporary staff was the 
largest driver behind trusts’ increasing deficits. It claimed that “some 
agencies providing temporary staff had taken advantage of the situation to 
charge ‘rip-off’ fees”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fnhs-22bn-funding-black-hole-report-public-accounts-committee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe637f5dee5ff633b163dc3a6053b792224119adf%2F197_408_2830_1698%2F2830.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NHS%20struggling%20to%20plug%20a%20%C2%A322bn%20funding%20'black%20hole'%2C%20says%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fnhs-22bn-funding-black-hole-report-public-accounts-committee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NHS%20struggling%20to%20plug%20a%20%C2%A322bn%20funding%20%27black%20hole%27%2C%20says%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fnhs-22bn-funding-black-hole-report-public-accounts-committee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe637f5dee5ff633b163dc3a6053b792224119adf%2F197_408_2830_1698%2F2830.jpg>
 George Osborne is facing calls to use his forthcoming budget to protect the 
NHS. Photograph: Peter Nicholls/Reuters 
NHS Improvement told the committee that the £4bn cost of agency staff in 
2015-16 could be £880m lower if there were no “excessive” agency charges.


“The use of agency staff in the NHS is nothing new and that the opportunity 
for agencies to take advantage of staff supply shortages was predictable,” the 
report said.

“Yet [the Department of Health], NHS England and NHS Improvement are only 
recently making serious attempts to control agency spending.”


Responding to the report, Dr Mark Porter, chair of the British Medical 
Association council, said George Osborne should use Wednesday’s budget to stop 
the NHS heading to “financial ruin”.


 “There is a complete mismatch between the government’s promise of extra 
funding and the reality on the ground,” he said.

“If the chancellor squanders this chance the NHS will continue to slide 
further into financial ruin.”

A Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
spokesperson said: “We know some parts of the NHS are under pressure due to our 
ageing population, but we disagree with the claim that we are not acting 
quickly enough.

“We are intensively supporting challenged trusts to improve finances, while 
clamping down on rip off staffing agencies and helping hospitals become more 
efficient.”
 