
More than 20 hospitals in England have had to declare a black alert this week 
after becoming so overcrowded that they could no longer guarantee patient 
safety and provide their full range of normal services.

Share your experiences of the NHS this winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/share-your-experiences-of-the-nhs-this-winter>
Unprecedented numbers of patients requiring care has led to at least 23 
hospital trusts declaring they cannot cope since Monday, inquiries by the 
Guardian have established.

Struggling hospitals have been forced to take highly unusual steps in order to 
manage a surge in demand for care. They include cancelling cancer operations, 
treating adults in children’s wards and even closing a birthing centre to help 
cope with a sudden influx of patients who need to be admitted for treatment.

Hospitals <https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> are expected to come 
under even greater strain over the next few days as unusually cold weather 
sweeps across much of the country, which doctors fear could prompt a spike in 
serious breathing problems, among other conditions.

University hospitals of Leicester NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>
 trust was under so much strain on Tuesday that it declared a “system critical 
incident” – even higher than a black alert – and had to make patients wait in 
ambulances before being offloaded into the care of A&E staff.

The Royal Surrey hospital in Guildford, which is used by many of health 
secretary Jeremy Hunt’s constituents, declared black escalation status on 
Monday because it had become “extremely challenged” by the sheer number of 
patients whom it needed to find a bed for. At one point that day it had 27 
patients who needed a bed but nowhere to put them.

Lewisham hospital in south London became so full on Monday it had run out of 
beds and in an email to staff it described the situations as “critical” and 
“not safe”. The hospital had nowhere to put the next patient brought in as an 
emergency by ambulance, it added.

Under guidance which NHS England issued to NHS acute trusts last October ahead 
of this winter, hospitals were told to declare what is called a black alert 
when they have become “unable to deliver comprehensive care [and] there is 
increased potential for patient care and safety to be compromised”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftheresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20and%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20clash%20over%20NHS%20at%20first%20PMQs%20of%202017%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftheresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20and%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20clash%20over%20NHS%20at%20first%20PMQs%20of%202017%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftheresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video&media=>
Theresa May and Jeremy Corbyn clash over NHS at first PMQs of 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/11/theresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video>
The NHS document outlining the operational pressures escalation levels (Opel) 
system explains that Opel 4 means that “decisive action must be taken ... to 
recover capacity and ensure patient safety” in the face of “rising system 
pressure”. That black alert is what most of the 23 trusts have gone onto this 
week, though some have described it as a “serious internal incident” or in 
similar terms.

The Royal College of Emergency Medicine, which represents A&E doctors, warned 
that thealready chaotic situation in the NHS could get even worse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-fail-winter-without-cash-injection-hospital-doctors-tell-theresa-may>
 as the winter weather worsens and that the A&E system is at risk of breaking.

“Emergency departments are overflowing with patients, internal major incidents 
are being declared around the country and staff in emergency departments are 
struggling to cope with the immense demand being placed on their services,” 
said Dr Taj Hassan, president of the Royal College of Emergency medicine.

“These crowded environments are stretching the clinical workforce to their 
limits and, more importantly, at times are unsafe for patients.”

He urged ministers and NHS leaders to draw up an urgent action plan to rescue 
A&E care to avoid the quality of care patients receive starting to deteriorate. 
“Without dedicated funding and planning, both patients and staff will 
increasingly suffer”, he added. However, it is understood that reports of a 
package of emergency funding for A&E units are wide of the mark and that the 
Department ofHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> will not be 
producing any more money, despite mounting problems.

On Tuesday the Royal United hospital in Bath closed its Paulton Birth Centre 
for two weeks, which is usually used by women having a low-risk pregnancy who 
want a natural birth, and began using it to house medical patients instead.

Our NHS trust is close to a tipping point – and we are not alone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2017/jan/11/our-nhs-trust-is-close-to-a-tipping-point-and-we-are-not-alone>
In an email to staff it explained: “This is because we are experiencing 
unprecedented bed pressure across the health community and the current bed 
spaces in Paulton are required to take care of medical patients in a safe 
environment.” Mothers-to-be left disappointed by the temporary closure could 
have their babies at an unspecified location elsewhere, it added.

Two days in a row Broomfield hospital, Essex, had to tell a patient with 
oesophageal cancer that they could not have their scheduled oesophagectomy – 
which could cure them – because it had no free intensive care bed in which to 
care for them after the procedure. One cancer specialist at the trust said: “I 
have never seen so many cancer operations cancelled.”

A spokesman for the Leicester trust, which runs the city’s two main hospitals, 
said: “The system critical incident, the top level alert, was put in place [on 
Tuesday] at 8am and we finished it at 1pm [on Wednesday]. This is an alert 
higher than Opel 4. It’s essentially when this starts to impact part of your 
business or other businesses.

“For us, [Tuesday’s] situation impacted on the wider health system. We had to 
hold ambulances at our A&E as they couldn’t offload patients. We were at system 
critical; that’s the highest point.”

Its main problem was its inability to discharge older patients, in order to 
free up beds, because local social care was inadequate, the trust added. It had 
also put more staff on to its frontline and cancelled elective surgery to help 
it cope.

Caroline Landon, chief operating officer at the Epsom and St Helier trust in 
south London, told the Guardian: “For a short period last week we used our 
paediatric day case units to care for adult patients who urgently needed a 
hospital bed. We also used our adult day case unit and medical infusion suite 
for the same purpose.”

A doctor at the Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells NHS trust said it had decided 
not to declare an internal emergency because its bosses did not want bad 
publicity. Things are so stretched there that she had seen a patient with 
urinary problems being given a bed bath in the middle of a corridor, with just 
a plastic sheet to shield her from the rest of the ward.
 