
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> pathology services cannot keep 
up with the increasing number of samples being taken from the growing number of 
people being tested for cancer, raising fears that some will be diagnosed late.

That is the conclusion of a report published on Wednesday by Cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Research UK, which warns that 
units are “struggling to cope” with the number of biopsies and blood samples 
being taken as the ageing and growing population produces more cases of 
suspected cancer.

Experts fear the lack of capacity and shortages of pathologists could hamper 
the NHS-wide drive to improve Britain’s poor record in early identification of 
cancer.

“Diagnostic services, including pathology, urgently need support and 
investment to ensure that diagnoses aren’t delayed and patients benefit from 
the latest treatment,” said Emma Greenwood, Cancer Research UK’s director of 
policy.

“The UK’s cancer survival is lagging behind other European countries and 
improving early diagnosis through diagnostic services is one of the ways to 
address this. The diagnostic bottleneck will only get worse without action now 
and this involves addressing staff shortages in imaging, endoscopy and 
pathology.”

The research found that the number of NHS pathologists is failing to keep pace 
with rising demand, leaving pathology services under growing pressure.

“Pathologists are the medical specialists who diagnose cancer. They also play 
a vital role in the prevention, treatment and monitoring of cancer and are at 
the forefront of research to improve the length and quality of life of people 
with the disease,”said Dr Suzy Lishman, president of the Royal College of 
Pathologists.

Meanwhile, women with ovarian cancer – the deadliest female cancer – are being 
“left stranded without vital support at every turn”, from diagnostic tests to 
access to nurses, according to a report by the charity Target Ovarian Cancer.

Its Pathfinder 2016 study found that only one in five UK women (20%) could 
identify bloating as a major symptom of the disease.

Two in five women (41%) visited their GP at least three times or more before 
they were referred for ovarian cancer tests, risking a delayed diagnosis.

And 80% of women diagnosed with ovarian cancer said they had encountered 
mental health problems since being diagnosed.

“Women with ovarian cancer are being failed at diagnosis, in access to trials 
and effective drugs, and they lack support,” said Annwen Jones, the charity’s 
chief executive.
 