
Nice football club will wear a special kit to honour the victims of the Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nice> terror attack last month in their 
Ligue 1 season opener against Rennes on Sunday.

Eighty-five people were killed and 307 injured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/04/death-toll-from-nice-truck-attack-rises-to-85-after-man-dies-of-injuries>
 on 14 July when a cargo truck ploughed into crowds celebrating Bastille Day on 
Nice’s Promenade des Anglais. The attack was the worst terror attack in France 
since last November’s Paris attacks.

Bordeaux’s Jérémy Ménez loses top of ear after kick in Lorient friendly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/04/bordeaux-jeremy-menez-loses-part-of-ear-lorient>
The French club, managed by Lucien Favre, will pay tribute to the victims by 
wearing a variation of their white away kit but will replace the club’s sponsor 
with a logo of a heart, made up of the names of the 85 people who died. The 
white shirt will be devoid of all traditional sponsors and the shirt will 
include only the club’s logo and kit supplier.
OGC Nice (@ogcnice) 
Voici le maillot que porteront les Aiglons dimanche en hommage aux victimes du 
14 juillet.#OGCNSRFC <https://twitter.com/hashtag/OGCNSRFC?src=hash> 
#TousEnBlanc <https://twitter.com/hashtag/TousEnBlanc?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/5RZqEqiuS8 <https://t.co/5RZqEqiuS8>
 <https://twitter.com/ogcnice/status/763411183923765248> August 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ogcnice/status/763411183923765248> 
Nice, who finished fourth in Ligue 1 last season under the now Southampton 
manager Claude Puel, open this campaign at home to Rennes on Sunday, one month 
on from the Bastille Day attack.

After the match the shirts will be auctioned with the money raised being 
donated to victims’ charities.

The club are also asking all their supporters to dress in white for the match. 
The players will enter the stadium with the fans asked to respect a silence 
during their entry and for a further minute of reflection.

On the 85th minute a tribute to the 85 dead will be flashed on the big screen 
and will be repeated at every Nice home game this season.
 