
You’ve already seen Nick Helm in BBC3’s Uncle, in which he plays the 
slackerish title character, incapable of maintaining a relationship with anyone 
other than his pre-adolescent nephew. But now the leather-larynxed comic is 
returning to the channel with Heavy Entertainment, a Stewart Lee-style showcase 
for what he does onstage. If you’re uncertain about the distinction, Helm 
himself is very clear: “The Nick Helm in Uncle is a prick. And the Nick Helm 
onstage is a cunt.”

Helm’s stand-up is not what you’d call conventional. He bellows out 
self-aggrandising pomp-rock numbers. He recites poetry. He yells jokes 
punctuated by pyrotechnics. He perspires a lot. You might assume that this 
fusion of rock and comedy is entirely without precedent. But Helm assures us 
that all manner of men in tight trousers have helped him to find his voice. 
Here, he sets out the mix of gothic horror and downright weirdness that makes 
up his cultural DNA…

Alice Cooper


“I have been to see Alice Cooper about 20, 30 times. If it wasn’t for him, I 
wouldn’t be doing what I do. He’s the ultimate entertainer. In a world that has 
no morals, a 60-year-old man cutting his head off onstage every night and 
strangling his daughter, who is dressed as a nurse, is the closest we’ve got to 
family entertainment. If you don’t like Alice Cooper, you haven’t got a soul. 
Stick to Coldplay.”

Army Of Darkness


“The night I rented out Army Of Darkness my life changed. The child in me 
died. It’s a combination of all of my favourite things – fantasy, swords and 
sandals, swashbuckling fights, stop-motion skeletons – it’s got everything I 
ever wanted as a 12-year-old boy in a film. Also, it’s a great test with a 
girl. Because Alice Cooper tickets cost 50 quid, but I’ve got Army Of Darkness 
on DVD. Watch Army Of Darkness with a girl and if she’s still awake at the end 
you know you’ve found someone special.”

Tommy Boy


It’s my favourite comedy film of all time. I went to the cinema to see it. 
Babe was playing on one screen and Tommy Boy was playing on the other. I went 
with my sister; there were probably about eight other people in the cinema. We 
watched it because Babe was sold out. And we spent an hour-and-a-half laughing 
at two guys hitting each other round the head with planks of wood. It’s a 
really fond memory. I love Chris Farley. You hear all the stories about him 
shitting out of the window on Saturday Night Live, or sticking a pool cue up 
his arse and licking it, but he’s more than that.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsPeI1IuARrk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsPeI1IuARrk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsPeI1IuARrk&media=>
Batman

“Everyone’s got their own Batman. For somebody out there, their Batman is Joel 
Schumacher’s Batman. Their favourite Batman is George Clooney. But the best 
Batman is the 1990s animated Batman, the Saturday morning kids’ cartoon. It’s 
all art deco, and it’s got a real classiness to it. Mark Hamill is the 
definitive Joker. It’s adult entertainment. Without being porn. Well, itis 
porn. It’s Batman porn.”

Sid James


“I’ve got two pictures of Sid James in my kitchen. Not one, two. What I love 
about one of the pictures is that he looks like a Hollywood matinee idol. It’s 
Sid James, in a black hat, red neckerchief and blue cowboy shirt. He’s just 
looking up into the distance. He looks like he was born to be a star, he could 
be Gregory Peck or someone. You need to see it or you’ll just think that I’m a 
bellend.”

Sylvester Stalone


“There’s more to him than people think – he’s an actor, a writer, he’s a 
director – he’s an artist. He’s got the potential to be an amazing actor. He’s 
amazing in Cop Land. He’s brilliant in Stop! Or My Mom Will Shoot. It’s a piece 
of shit, terrible film. But he’s really good in it. You know, he broke his neck 
making The Expendables? And he could either go to hospital and lose the cast or 
work through it and get the film made on budget and on time. So he just did 
that.”

Cowboys

“I’ve got an obsession with cowboys. I’ve got cowboy boots and cowboy shirts. 
My living room has got cowboy paraphernalia all over it. It looks like a man 
not on the verge of, but in the midst of a breakdown. I’ve got two wagon wheel 
coffee tables. They’re different from each other, but they’re still both wagon 
wheel coffee tables. I’ve got a thimble with John Wayne’s face on it [see 
above]. [Stand-up is] like when Clint Eastwood walks into town and you don’t 
know what’s going to happen. It’s the same when I get off the train in 
Leicester with a guitar strapped to my back. I think that’s what being a 
stand-up is all about. I say that semi-ironically. I do have a level of 
self-awareness.”

Nick Helm’s Heavy Entertainment starts on 5 May, 10.30pm, BBC3 
 