
The former British middleweight champion Nick Blackwell was in a “stable 
condition” in hospital on Saturday night after he was taken ill having 
reportedly been involved in a sparring session.

Blackwell had retired from competitive boxing after recovering from being put 
into an induced coma followingMarch’s fight against Chris Eubank Jnr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jnr-hospital>
, where he collapsed shortly after being stopped.

The 26-year-old from Trowbridge was found to have suffered a bleed on the 
skull following that fight, but woke without requiring an operation and made 
encouraging progress.

Nick Blackwell taken to hospital after Chris Eubank Jr wins British title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/nick-blackwell-chris-eubank-jnr-hospital>
Although Blackwell had his boxer’s licence removed by the British Boxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Board of Control (BBBofC) after his 
ordeal, he retained a trainer’s licence.

The BBBofC general secretary, Robert Smith, confirmed on Saturday evening that 
Blackwell was in hospital. “We are investigating this matter and it will be 
fully looked into, but it is very early days,” he told the Daily Telegraph.

“We understand that Blackwell was sparring some time this week and he has 
undergone a procedure. We don’t know exactly what the procedure was yet. We 
have spoken to a number of people about this and we will be putting the full 
facts together.”

Smith added: “What we understand is that Nick Blackwell sparred, he was taken 
ill and taken to hospital where he is in a stable condition. He no longer has a 
boxer’s licence, but he does have a trainer’s licence, which is a completely 
different thing. He should not have been boxing.”

In April, Blackwell revealed he was resigned to retirement, saying he “cannot 
put my friends and family through that again”.

Blackwell won the vacant British title by stopping the promising John Ryder in 
2015, and twice successfully defended it before defeat by Eubank Jnr.

In announcing his decision to quit fighting, Blackwell wrote on Twitter: “No, 
that’s me done. I can’t put my friends and family and self through that again 
but I’ll still be involved (in the sport).”
 