
▶ 1. CHINA

Rosberg takes control

Lewis Hamilton arrived on the back foot in China following successive 
victories for Nico Rosberg in Australia and Bahrain. Misery ensued, with the 
Briton handed a five-place penalty following a gearbox change before an engine 
failure in qualifying sent him to the back of the grid. Hamilton lost his front 
wing in a first-corner incident and recovered to finish a poor seventh. Rosberg 
started from pole and, unchallenged,romped to his third consecutive win to take 
a commanding lead in the title race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/17/chinese-grand-prix-f1-nico-rosberg>
.

ROSBERG 75 HAMILTON 39

▶ 2. SPAIN

Collision after four corners

Another victory for Rosberg in Russia meant he headed to Spain with a 43-point 
lead over Hamilton. Rosberg, who was attempting to become the second driver in 
the modern era to claim eight straight wins, passed Hamilton on the run down to 
turn one, but he fluffed it: an engine setting, incorrectly deployed by the 
German, enabled Hamilton to narrow the gap to his team-mate at a greater speed. 
In defending his lead, Rosberg moved to block Hamilton who took to the grass, 
spun, and then sensationally collided with Rosberg.Both Mercedes cars were out 
of the race after four corners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-crash-out-f1-spanish-gp>
.

ROSBERG 100 HAMILTON 57

F1’s age of chivalry, when drivers gave up cars for others, is a distant dream 
| Richard Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/25/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-formula-one>
▶ 3. MONACO

Hamilton ends losing streak

Surprisingly, the fall-out from the Barcelona crash was rather amicable, with 
Hamilton, Rosberg and their Mercedes team prepared to consider the crash a 
racing incident. Monaco was up next andHamilton ended his eight-race losing 
streak after he pulled off a tactical masterstroke in the rain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/lewis-hamilton-formula-one-victory-monaco-grand-prix>
, as well as benefiting from a disastrous pit-stop mistake by Daniel 
Ricciardo’s Red Bull team. Rosberg was ordered by Mercedes to move out of 
Hamilton’s way in the opening phase of the race and could finished seventh.

ROSBERG 106 HAMILTON 82

▶ 4. AUSTRIA

Hamilton in command

Hamilton and Rosberg traded victories in Canada and Azerbaijan before heading 
to Austria for round nine. Rosberg appeared on course to extend his lead in the 
title race but crashed into Hamilton as the Briton attempted to pass him around 
the outside of turn two for the lead on the final lap.Hamilton emerged 
unscathed to win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/03/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-f1-austrian-grand-prix>
, but Rosberg, who was dealt a 10-second retrospective penalty for his part in 
the shunt, limped home in fourth. Hamilton then went on a stellar run, winning 
at Silverstone, Hungary and Germany to take a 19-point lead into the summer 
break.

HAMILTON 217 ROSBERG 198

▶ 5. MALAYSIA

Engine woes for Hamilton

Wins for Rosberg followed in Belgium (Hamilton started at the back after a 
grid penalty for an engine change) and Italy (a poor start by Hamilton) moved 
the German back into the championship lead. A crushing display over Hamilton in 
Singapore meant the title protagonists went to Malaysia with Rosberg leading by 
eight points. Hamilton appeared on course to take back control of the 
championship as he led in Malaysia,only for his engine to blow up with 15 laps 
left 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/daniel-ricciardo-wins-malaysian-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1>
.

ROSBERG 288 HAMILTON 265 

▶ 6. JAPAN

Rosberg goes 33 points clear

After hinting at foul play from within his own Mercedes team following his 
engine failure in Malaysia, Hamilton struggled, both on and off the track, in 
Japan. He fooled around on his phone during a televised press conference, 
before refusing to take questions from the written media, and then slumping to 
eighth on the opening lap after a terrible start. While he recovered to finish 
third,Rosberg led from start to finish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/hamiltons-troubles-continue-as-rosberg-wins-japanese-f1-grand-prix>
 to claim his ninth victory of the season to move 33 points clear.

ROSBERG 313 HAMILTON 280 

▶ 7. MEXICO

Hamilton’s hat-trick

Hamilton looked like a beaten man following his drubbing in Japan, but the 
Briton returned to his scintillating best at the ensuing double header in the 
United States andMexico to deliver two imperious victories over Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/lewis-hamilton-mexican-grand-prix-title-hopes-alive-nico-rosberg>
. Hamilton then turned ina wet-weather masterclass in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-brazilian-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-rain>
 to seal a third consecutive triumph. But Rosberg, despite finishing a distant 
second in all three of those races, arrived in Abu Dhabi knowing that a 
top-three finish will be enough to clinch the title.

ROSBERG 367 HAMILTON 355 
 