
The heat haze, an almost overwhelming sultriness that had layers of torrid air 
shimmering above the freshly laid asphalt at the Sepang International Circuit, 
was not wholly responsible for the moving picture here on Friday.

There is a growing perception – among experienced drivers no less – that Lewis 
Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton>, winner of three 
world championships and among the most naturally quick of all Formula One 
drivers, can actually be beaten to this year’s world championship by the 
perennial nearly man who is Nico Rosberg.

Lewis Hamilton tops Nico Rosberg during Malaysian Grand Prix practice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/lewis-hamilton-faster-than-nico-rosberg-during-malaysian-grand-prix-practice>
It is not the fact that the German leads the competition by eight points, for 
there are six races to go, starting with Sunday’s Malaysian Grand Prix; nor is 
it the alluring statistic that no driver has won eight races (as Rosberg has) 
and not won the championship. It is the swelling sense that Rosberg, so often 
the diligent and very able understudy, is now capable of stepping up and 
beating Hamilton in a straight fight to the line.

The sacrilegious whispers have become full-blown predictions. And on Friday 
one of Hamilton’s greatest admirers, Sky TV’s expert analyst Johnny Herbert, 
picked up on the notion when he told the Guardian: “Who will win the title? I 
just pick Nico. My heart would always say Lewis but the way things have gone I 
think Nico might just have the momentum to carry him through.”

Herbert was following the thinking of his colleague, another former British 
driver, Martin Brundle, who said: “For the first time I feel that Nico has the 
speed, ingredients and confidence to take this title in a straight fight but it 
could well go down to the wire.”

Meanwhile, Daniel Ricciardo said: “I’m going to throw a spanner in the works 
and say Rosberg. Before the summer break, when Lewis made up that deficit on 
Nico, I thought no one was going to touch Lewis, but Nico has come back.”

The ferociously focused Rosberg, who produced the best lap of his career to 
win pole in the last race in Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/nico-rosberg-pole-position-singapore-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1>
, is also looking more assured these days, even though he is saying much the 
same thing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ff1-malaysian-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-sepang-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%20Malaysian%20GP%20guide%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20Sepang%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ff1-malaysian-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-sepang-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%20Malaysian%20GP%20guide%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20Sepang%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Ff1-malaysian-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-sepang-video&media=>
F1 Malaysian GP guide: everything you need to know about Sepang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/sep/30/f1-malaysian-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-sepang-video>
“I’m aware of the situation,” he said. “I’m aware of the points and whatever 
else – that’s fine but I try and focus on the race weekend I have in front of 
me. That’s it. I want to win here in Sepang and I’m going to go for that.” We 
don’t approach Rosberg for jazzy quotes.

It’s not the fact that Rosberg has suddenly become faster than Hamilton. It’s 
more to do with the suspicion that the British driver may be in the grip of a 
malaise. Both Rosberg and Hamilton have won seven poles this year. But while 
Rosberg has won five of those races (71.43%) Hamilton has won only three (43%). 
And only twice on those seven occasions did he retain the lead at the end of 
the opening lap.

In 2016 Hamilton has made his most memorable bad starts in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/20/formula-one-grand-prix-season-opener-in-melbourne-live>
,Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/03/nico-rosberg-wins-f1-bahrain-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-sebastian-vettel>
,Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-canadian-grand-prix-close-gap-nico-rosberg>
 andfour weeks ago in Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/nico-rosberg-wins-italian-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton>
, where he dropped from pole to sixth by the first corner. He concedes that his 
unpromising beginnings could settle the championship. It’s become a mental 
issue.

We know that Hamilton has the mental resilience to come back hard from 
adversity, as he did earlier in the season when he turned a 43-point deficit 
into a 19-point lead. “I wouldn’t say it is any different to positions I have 
been in the past,” he said, without very much conviction. “I have had ups and 
downs, tough runs, good runs, and it is not particularly different to any of 
those. When you are behind you have less to lose, so the hunt is potentially 
more exciting [than leading from the front].”

But he looked doubtful and what worries his supporters is that his great rival 
has never looked as serene as this.

“Momentum does give you positivity and that’s exactly what Nico is driving 
with at the moment,” Herbert added. “He’s this confident person we don’t 
normally see. He’s bouncing around and looking different.

McLaren’s Jenson Button admits he is getting towards the end of the road in F1
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/mclaren-jenson-button-f1-malaysian-300th-grand-prix>
“Meanwhile, Lewis is a little down. He’s not sure what’s happened. He’s a 
little confused about the way things are. If you ask him whether he has the car 
to win the world championship there is bit of a delay in the answer.

“Give these drivers the same car, on the same day, and the same track, Lewis 
would probably have the edge. But the starts are going to be the key to this. 
And his starts look fragile.”

Hamilton, who has not won a race since July, is feeling the Sepang heat – 56C 
on track on Friday – more than anyone.
 