
Nico Rosberg’s first Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone>
 championship was a classic victory for the diligent, dogged competitor over a 
more gifted opponent. It was the triumph of the retriever over the greyhound, 
the tortoise over the hare.

Hamilton was complicit, in part, in his own downfall. He made five poor starts 
and there were other occasions when he was not quite “on it.” Rosberg also had 
more good fortune when it came to reliability.

Related: F1 title decider: Abu Dhabi GP – live! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/27/f1-title-decider-abu-dhabi-gp-live>

But Rosberg proved good and consistent enough to take advantage when Hamilton 
could not quite manage his A game.Up to and including the Brazilian Grand Prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-brazilian-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-rain>
 he had 23 wins, 56 podiums and 30 poles; no other driver has those figures 
without a title to his name.

Rosberg knows better than anyone else that Hamilton’s is the much superior 
talent. He also knew that Hamilton had achieved his life’s ambition in the US 
Grand Prix last year,when he won his third world title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/lewis-hamilton-overwhelmed-third-f1-world-championship>
 to equal the record of his idol, Ayrton Senna.

It might also be argued it was that race that toughened up Rosberg, who felt 
his team-mate had driven too aggressively. The German was never a pushover but 
it was after that that he started to get his elbows out.

There is also an all-round excellence to Rosberg’s game that is unusual. He 
has no important weakness, even if there is nothing very special either. And if 
ever anyone doubts his credentials he can point to the Singapore Grand Prix in 
September. It was his perfect weekend, and the weekend of a champion racing 
driver.

It all started last year. Rosberg won the last three races of 2015 and entered 
the current season with new levels of self-belief.

Related: Nico Rosberg wins Singapore Grand Prix to lead F1 world championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/nico-rosberg-singapore-grand-prix-formula-one>

When he won the first four races this year there was a growing sense in the 
Hamilton camp that theworld champion had forgotten how to win a car race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/26/lewis-hamilton-f1-partying-world-champion>
 and that he needed to plunder his memory banks as a matter or urgency.

Rosberg won the opener in Australia and then in Bahrain and there was a steely 
determination about Hamilton going into the third round in China. But there, 
Rosberg received the first of a number of lucky breaks. Hamilton was handed a 
five-place penalty following a gearbox change, and then an engine failure 
shunted him to he back of the grid. Rosberg won again.

When he won the fourth race in Russia he had opened up a 43-point lead in the 
title race and was contemplating becoming only the second driver in the modern 
era to win eight straight races following his surge at the end of the previous 
year. Hamilton had not won a race for more than six months.

Then, in Barcelona, as the circus came to Europe, we had an all too rare 
coming together 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/lewis-hamilton-nico-rosberg-crash-out-f1-spanish-gp>
 of the two Mercedes cars, and it ended badly for both of them.

Rosberg went past pole-sitter Hamilton at the start but then, coming out of 
the third corner and with the wrong engine setting, he slowed dramatically and 
Hamilton saw an opportunity to retake him. But when Rosberg blocked his path 
Hamilton went on to the grass, spun and collided with the German, to the 
consternation of the Mercedes pitwall. But the double DNF (did not finish) 
suited Rosberg much better.

Related: Lewis Hamilton under fire after fiddling on Snapchat in F1 press 
conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/lewis-hamilton-f1-under-fire-snapchat-bunny-app>

He had, however, lost some of his momentum. In the next race, a wet one in 
Monaco, he seemed very subdued and was even instructed to move over to let the 
quicker Hamilton through. He finished a tame seventh while Hamilton took the 
chequered flag to begin a summer spree of six wins in seven races.

Hamilton won again in Canada and although Rosberg was victorious in Baku he 
could not stop a revitalised world champion storming to wins in Austria, 
Silverstone, Hungaryand Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/31/lewis-hamilton-wins-german-grand-prix-f1-championship-lead-nico-rosberg>
.

In Austria the two again collided but Hamilton’s car was not badly damaged, 
while Rosberg was hit with a 10-second penalty and could manage only fourth; 
his lead was down to just one point. When Hamilton won the next three he led 
the title race by 19.

The summer break gave Rosberg the chance to take stock. He did not answer his 
mobile phone for two weeks. He revised his sleeping pattern. He refocused. 
Hamilton, on the other hand, appeared to lose his edge.

The Englishman was unlucky to start at the back of the grid in Belgium, the 
penalty for an engine change, but yet another poor start in Monza gifted 
another victory to Rosberg, who went back in front in the points table.

In the next race, in Singapore, Rosberg provided his most complete performance 
of the season, with a perfect qualifying lap followed by a carefully measured 
and well judged victory under pressure. If Hamilton did not realise he had a 
serious battle on his hands before this race, he knew now.

Hamilton responded as champions do, with a dominant display in Malaysia. He 
should have rounded it off with a win but his engine blew up with just 15 laps 
remaining.

After that, Hamilton appeared to lose some focus. In Japan he appeared 
distracted on and off the track.His behaviour in two pre-race press conferences 
was bizarre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/06/lewis-hamilton-f1-under-fire-snapchat-bunny-app>
 and after yet another poor start he finished third while Rosberg led from 
start to finish to open up a strong lead of 33 points.

But Rosberg could only look on as Hamilton regrouped once more to win in 
Austin, Mexico and Brazil. Rosberg’s lead had been whittled down to 12 but, 
knowing a podium finish was enough in Abu Dhabi, whatever Hamilton did, the 
German cruised to his first championship.
 