
The challenge of Singapore at night, a bumpy, relentless, unforgiving track 
that saps the energy through its gruelling 23 turns, puts every driver under 
the spotlight. It demands a pitch-perfect performance and under the harsh 
sodium glare it was Nico Rosberg who rose to the occasion, driving as well as 
he ever has to take the win and the lead in the world championship while his 
team-mate Lewis Hamilton was cast most firmly as a third-placed understudy in 
the German’s battle with Red Bull’sDaniel Ricciardo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/daniel-ricciardo> for the flag.

Rosberg and Ricciardo’s fight, which ignited in the last quarter of the race 
when a late-stopping Ricciardo charged after the German on fresh rubber but 
ultimately finished just 0.4 of a second behind after the 61st lap, would have 
given the sport’s new chairman, a smiling, Chase Carey, attending for the first 
timesince Liberty Media’s takeover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/f1-liberty-media-8bn-takeover-deal-agreed-bernie-ecclestone>
, just the encouragement needed that he has a genuinely exciting product to 
sell. But, in the on-track business, it is hard after this race not to consider 
that Rosberg is currently calling the shots. Indeed, the gap he enjoyed over 
his team-mate over the whole weekend was dominant to the level Hamilton was 
displaying when the Briton wrapped the title up with three races to go last 
year, a comparison the British driver will not enjoy.

Nico Rosberg praises Mercedes team after Singapore win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/nico-rosberg-praises-mercedes-singapore-win>
Having seen his 43-point early season advantage turned into a 19-point deficit 
before Spa and then two points after the last round in Italy, coming out of 
Singapore Rosberg has forced Hamilton into playing catch-up again and done so 
through two of the races at which the British driver has previously had the 
advantage. He now leads the championship again by eight points and has three 
wins on the trot over Hamilton, having taken the flag in Belgium and Monza and 
delivereda flawless performance in qualifying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/nico-rosberg-pole-position-singapore-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1>
 here that put his team-mate in the shade, sixth-tenths clear. The German is 
hugely reticent to publicly consider the idea of having the momentum or a 
psychological advantage over his rival but he is on a roll.

A subdued Hamilton admitted he had no answers as to why the shift had 
occurred. “I have no idea,” he said. “We’ve got six races left, so I’ve just 
got to keep pushing in those six races.”

“Winning the Singapore Grand Prix is awesome. The whole weekend went 
perfectly, so yes, today it’s a big deal,” was the contrasting reaction from an 
ecstatic Rosberg.

Pole had been crucial at a track where it is notoriously difficult to overtake 
and he made the most of it, with his eighth win of the season and the 22nd 
victory of his career marking his 200th grand prix start in a suitably 
memorable fashion and a making it a first for Singapore as well – since 2008 
only world champions have won this race: Sebastian Vettel four times, Hamilton 
and Fernando Alonso twice. Rosberg must be optimistic in the wake of this win 
that when the season concludes he will have joined their ranks. The numbers are 
adding up but they in turn bring their own pressure – no driver has previously 
won eight grands prix in a season and not gone on to win the title.

It was, however, a tale of two halves for his team. This was a huge turnaround 
for Mercedes, in Rosberg’s case at least. Although they have been utterly 
dominant this season, they had struggled at this track last year, unable to 
make the tyres work, and were well off the pace. Rosberg’s fourth last year to
Vettel’s win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/20/f1-sebastian-vettel-singapore-intruder-walks-on-to-track-lewis-hamilton>
 was a sobering moment for the team. His win proves Mercedes have excised one 
of the few weaknesses of the F1 W07 – circuits where both high downforce and 
mechanical grip required.

Unfortunately for Hamilton one of the others – that it does not perform nearly 
as well in the dirty air when following other cars – was also on display. The 
British driver had suffered a poor qualifying, struggling to find the right 
setup, which the team admitted had been hampered when he lost practice time due 
to a hydraulic problem on Friday. It never came together and he not only lacked 
race pace but struggled with brake wear and frustration at strategy calls 
throughout the long fight for third. He will take comfort in the team getting 
his final pit call right – an undercut that regained the place he had lost to 
Kimi Raikkonen, who had overtaken him when he locked up at turn 10. Ferrari 
could feasibly have held the place by leaving Raikkonen out but opted to pit 
him as well, which triggered Ricciardo’s stop and the consequent thrilling 
final laps.

Rosberg’s tyres were already 14 laps old when Ricciardo pitted and the 
Australian set off with gleeful abandon after him on his new boots. The gap 
came down relentlessly but as he closed in the final circuits he did not have 
quite enough and Rosberg held his nerve and his dying rubber together to 
squeeze his nose home.

Both Mercedes had been on the limit of their brakes throughout the race and 
Rosberg said he was managing his right up until the flag was waved. He did so 
to perfection, as he had to in virtually every aspect of a weekend that leaves 
his rival almost reeling. Hamilton must rebuild and come back in Malaysia. In a 
season thus far characterised by the advantage switching back and forth between 
the two Mercedes drivers, the bright lights of Marina Bay have prolonged the 
drama, making the finale increasingly difficult to script.

F1: Singapore Grand Prix – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/18/f1-singapore-grand-prix-live>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fnico-rosberg-singapore-grand-prix-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbab0c54b09eded828e7fa60ca885650b4d4ebf3f%2F0_366_2355_1413%2F2355.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nico%20Rosberg%20wins%20Singapore%20Grand%20Prix%20to%20lead%20F1%20world%20championship&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fnico-rosberg-singapore-grand-prix-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nico%20Rosberg%20wins%20Singapore%20Grand%20Prix%20to%20lead%20F1%20world%20championship&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fnico-rosberg-singapore-grand-prix-formula-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbab0c54b09eded828e7fa60ca885650b4d4ebf3f%2F0_366_2355_1413%2F2355.jpg>
 Nico Rosberg celebrates his third grand prix win in a row. Photograph: Lynn Bo 
Bo/EPA  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fnico-rosberg-singapore-grand-prix-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41f1e224788dee968feff24f710097e26e62ac64%2F0_84_1165_699%2F1165.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nico%20Rosberg%20wins%20Singapore%20Grand%20Prix%20to%20lead%20F1%20world%20championship&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fnico-rosberg-singapore-grand-prix-formula-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nico%20Rosberg%20wins%20Singapore%20Grand%20Prix%20to%20lead%20F1%20world%20championship&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fnico-rosberg-singapore-grand-prix-formula-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41f1e224788dee968feff24f710097e26e62ac64%2F0_84_1165_699%2F1165.jpg>
 Nico Hülkenberg was forced to retire. Photograph: Lynn Bo Bo/EPA  