
Nico Rosberg has said he is “not here to please everyone” after Bernie 
Ecclestone <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernie-ecclestone> claimed it 
would be bad for the sport should the German win Formula One’s world 
championship, something he can achieve this weekend at the Mexican Grand Prix.

Ecclestone was critical of Rosberg in 2015 telling him: “You are bad for my 
business.” He followed this up at the last round in Austin by saying: “If Nico 
won the title it would be good for him and good for Mercedes but it wouldn’t 
necessarily help the sport because there is nothing to write about him. Even in 
Germany it wouldn’t help.”

Mexican Grand Prix fans and passion lay foundations for long F1 future | Giles 
Richards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/mexican-grand-prix-fans-passion-foundation-f1-future>
Rosberg gave the comments short shrift before practice begins on Friday at the 
Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez. “I am here to win races, not to please everybody 
that’s out there,” he said. “There will always be people who have opinions that 
go against me in some way or another that’s the nature of the business. I like 
to focus on the people who really work with me.”

It was a single-minded response from a driver who is focused on winning his 
first championship, despite his insistence he was not thinking about it. With 
three races remaining if Rosberg wins here and Lewis Hamilton retires or fails 
to score a point, the German will have sealed the victory.

Rosberg leads his Mercedes team-mate by 26 points, enough to ensure he would 
still claim the title even if he finished second to the British driver in the 
remaining races. It is the strongest position he has been in at this stage of 
the season in his career but he said he was thinking solely on the race ahead.

“It has been a great season so far,” he said. “It is exciting to be in this 
championship battle with Lewis. We have been there before but for me, my way of 
achieving the best possible performance is focusing on things that are in my 
control and that is here in Mexico trying to win the race.

“In terms of the championship, it is not within my control if I get it this 
weekend. For me, it is just about doing the race.”

Rosberg was equally dismissive of comments Ecclestone made on Thursday 
suggesting that F1 should introduce walls on corners in order to make racing 
more exciting. “There are 10 other areas to look at to make the sport better 
than it is, before we start looking at turning back time on safety,” he said.

Bernie Ecclestone could remain key to F1’s future even if takeover goes ahead 
| Paul Weaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/05/bernie-ecclestone-remain-f1-takeover-liberty-media>
Rosberg was solidly beaten by Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-us-grand-prix-nico-rosberg-report>
 in Austin, where the three-times world champion led from start to finish in a 
flawless run in what was his first win in six races. Hamilton’s victory,his 50th
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/23/lewis-hamilton-us-grand-prix-schumacher-prost>
, and achieved in such dominant style, has bolstered his hopes. “I knew 
eventually the result would come,” he said. “The moment you give up is the 
moment you lose. I’ve never been one to give up and I don’t plan on starting 
now. There are still plenty of points available and anything is possible.”

The Mexican Grand Prix returned to the calendar after an absence of 23 years 
in 2015 and it was Rosberg who dominated the weekend then. He was quickest in 
two of the three practice sessions, took pole andwon the race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/01/nico-rosberg-wins-mexican-grand-prix-f1>
. It was a dead rubber however, with Hamilton having sealed the championship at 
the previous round in the US. The British driver said afterwards he believed 
the team, who brought him in for a pit stop that he thought was unnecessary, 
had favoured Rosberg in the wake of him losing the title.

This year a huge crowd, up on the 134,850 who came to the Autódromo Hermanos 
Rodríguez in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/26/mexican-grand-prix-fans-passion-foundation-f1-future>
, is again expected and this time they will be present at a race for which 
everything remains absolutely still at stake for both drivers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Ff1-mexico-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-autodromo-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=F1%20Mexico%20GP%20guide%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20the%20Aut%C3%B3dromo%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Ff1-mexico-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-autodromo-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=F1%20Mexico%20GP%20guide%3A%20everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20the%20Aut%C3%B3dromo%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Ff1-mexico-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-autodromo-video&media=>
F1 Mexico GP guide: everything you need to know about the Autódromo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/28/f1-mexico-gp-guide-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-autodromo-video> 