
Nico Rosberg has stunned Formula One by announcing his retirement, just five 
days after the31-year-old became the sport’s world champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/nico-rosberg-seals-first-f1-world-title-at-abu-dhabi-grand-prix>
.

He said he had “climbed my mountain”. Now he is going out at the peak. His 
Mercedes team-mate Lewis Hamilton, who won 10 races to Rosberg’s nine this year 
but was beaten by five points, said the move was not unexpected to him.

Related: Nico Rosberg has called quits on his F1 career at the right time | 
Richard Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/02/nico-rosberg-remained-modest-and-unaffected-through-11-year-f1-career>

The British driver said: “I’m probably one of the only people that it was not 
a surprise to. This is the first time he’s won a title in 18 years [though 
Rosberg was GP2 champion in 2005], hence why it was not a surprise that he 
decided to stop. He’s also got a family to focus on, and wants more children, 
andFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> takes so much of 
your time. Will I miss the rivalry? Of course.”

Interest will now focus on the driver Mercedes will choose to replace the 
world champion. Fernando Alonso (McLaren), Sebastian Vettel (Ferrari) and Max 
Verstappen and Daniel Ricciardo (both Red Bull) would be obvious targets, but 
all are contracted to their respective teams for 2017. Instead, Mercedes could 
make a short-term fix and opt for another German, Pascal Wehrlein, 22, a member 
of the team’s young driver programme. Wehrlein has deputised for both Hamilton 
and Rosberg in testing.

The watertightness of Alonso’s contract at McLaren is the subject of some 
conjecture and F1’s chief executive, Bernie Ecclestone, says the Spaniard would 
be his choice. “It’s possible I suppose, let’s see,” he said. “They’ve got new 
management now at McLaren. Maybe he’s fed up being there and they’re fed up 
having him.” But a shocked Mercedes said they would not rush into making an 
appointment. Rosberg, who claimed his maiden title in the deciding race in Abu 
Dhabi on Sunday, made his sensational revelation at a press conference in 
Vienna, saying that the championship had always been his dream and, having 
clinched it, he would walk away. He signed a new contract with Mercedes for 
2017 in the summer, worth £18.3m. Rosberg said he first started thinking about 
retiring when he won the Japanese Grand Prix in early October and realised the 
title was within his grasp. “From the moment when the destiny of the title was 
in my own hands, the big pressure started and I began to think about ending my 
racing career if I became world champion,” he wrote in a post on his Facebook 
page announcing his departure.

His mind was almost made up before his final, title-securing race on Sunday. 
He went into that race needing to finish in the top three and claimed that the 
process of considering his exit had cleared his head before the race.

Afterwards, he partied until the early hours before flying to Kuala Lumpur for 
a sponsors engagement on Monday. It was then that the German made his decision. 
“I didn’t know if I had the balls, and I took a bit of time,” he said.

The first people he told were his wife, Vivian, and manager, Georg Nolte, 
followed by the team’s head of motorsport, Toto Wolff. “Toto understood. He 
knew straight away that I was completely convinced and that reassured me. My 
proudest achievement in racing will always be to have won the world 
championship with this incredible team of people.”

He added on Facebook: “Since 25 years in racing, it has been my dream, my ‘one 
thing’ to become Formula One World Champion. Through the hard work, the pain, 
the sacrifices, this has been my target. And now I’ve made it. I have climbed 
my mountain, I am on the peak, so this feels right.”

Related: Nico Rosberg drew the best from himself before bowing out as a F1 
champion | Paul Weaver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/nico-rosberg-diligent-f1-champion>

His battle with Hamilton dominated the season, after he had lost the 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/23/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-title-nico-rosberg>
 and2015 world title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-world-title-third-time-us-grand-prix>
 races to the Briton. Hamilton overcame engine problems and pushed Rosberg 
right up to the final race but could not overhaul the German, who admitted the 
fight had taken a toll on his family life.

“This season, I tell you, it was so damn tough,” said Rosberg. “I pushed like 
crazy in every area after the disappointments of the last two years; they 
fuelled my motivation to levels I had never experienced before. And of course 
that had an impact on the ones I love, too – it was a whole family effort of 
sacrifice, putting everything behind our target.”

Wolff admitted that Rosberg’s decision was unexpected. “This is a brave 
decision and testament to his strength of character,” he said. “He has chosen 
to leave at the pinnacle of his career, as world champion, having achieved his 
childhood dream. The clarity of his judgement meant I accepted his decision 
straight away.” He added: “For the team, this is an unexpected situation but 
also an exciting one. We are going into a new era and there is a free Mercedes 
cockpit for the seasons ahead; we will take the necessary time to evaluate our 
options and then find the right path for our future.”

Hamilton has said he will not put pressure on Mercedes to pick a particular 
driver. “I have never been a driver to ever request,” Hamilton said. “I know a 
lot of the other drivers, like Sebastian and Fernando, make sure that is in 
their contract. I have just always asked to have equal rights. So as long as we 
are treated fairly then it doesn’t matter who is sitting alongside you. We have 
got great team bosses and I’m sure they will choose the right people to 
represent them.”
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Nico Rosberg seals Formula One championship title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/nov/27/nico-rosberg-seals-formula-one-championship-title-video>
.  