
 The recipe

Peel and cut 1kg of sweet potatoes into large chunks, then steam or boil for 
about 20 minutes until tender enough to crush. Drain and mash with 50g of 
butter and set aside to cool.

Put 120g of crisp, fine crumbs on a plate then grate 1 tsp of fine lemon zest 
and 1 tbsp of chopped tarragon into them and combine. Crack an egg into a 
shallow bowl and briefly beat with a fork to mix the white and yolks.

When the mash is cool, shape into four large balls then pat them, in floury 
hands, into a patty shape. Dip the patties first into the beaten egg then into 
the crumbs. Put them on a baking sheet and refrigerate for 30 minutes. Warm a 
little groundnut or vegetable oil in a nonstick frying pan, lower the cakes 
into the hot oil and leave to cook, without moving them, for 4 or 5 minutes 
until the underside is crisp and golden. Carefully, using a palette knife or 
fish slice, turn the cakes over and lightly crisp the other side. Serves 2 
generously.

The trick

Drain the potatoes very thoroughly before mashing. Let the mash cool before 
shaping into cakes. Let the cakes rest fully before cooking. If your mixture 
seems too soft to shape, stir in a 1 to 2 tbsp of flour. Once you have put the 
cakes into the hot oil, donâ€™t move them until the base has crisped, then turn 
them carefully over and let the other side become completely crisp before 
removing from the pan.

The twist

Serve them with a quick tomato and basil sauce. Chop 500g of tomatoes then 
cook them with 2 crushed cloves of garlic in 3 tbsp of olive oil for 15-20 
minutes, crushing them as you go. Season with salt, pepper and 10 shredded 
basil leaves. As soon as you have a rough, basil-scented sauce, serve with the 
sweet potato cakes.

Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk <mailto:nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>
 or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater 
<https://twitter.com/NigelSlater?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 