
I love that moment when everyone is sitting round the table, tucking into 
bowls of shellfish soup, a wreckage of empty shells, blue and gold and white 
scattered across the surface, and you come to the broth at the bottom of your 
bowl. This is where the essence of the soup lies, its heart and soul; the 
onions, herbs and shellfish juices, their flavours swirling deliciously 
together. It is only now that you appreciate the point of cooking the onion for 
those extra few minutes, and where you are rewarded for cooking the pancetta 
slowly, so its fat forms the backbone of the broth.

The onions, herbs and shellfish juices swirl deliciously together

You can feed two heartily from a 500g bag of clams or mussels, but we can also 
bolster the fish and juices to make them go further, turning a bowl of fish 
soup into a meal. The addition of grated carrots or a root of celeriac, some 
shredded leeks or sliced mushrooms softened in butter will turn a simple bowl 
of stock into a nourishing stew. My favourite trick is to cut ragged slices 
from a sourdough loaf and place them at the base of the bowl before I ladle in 
the hot soup. Soaked with the precious golden liquor, it is like finding a 
chest full of treasure at the bottom of the sea. Sometimes I toast the bread 
first.

It has been an abundant week for food shopping. There are some fine melons 
about, plenty of cantaloupe and some sweet watermelons, too. I look for 
orange-fleshed melons whose pale green skin is heavily netted with a fine web 
of rough skin. The more pronounced the netting, the riper the flesh it holds.

Such perfect fruit begs for something aromatic to accompany it. This week it 
was a sorbet I have enjoyed all summer, made simply by stirring a herb sugar 
into yogurt and freezing it. In this case a shining basil ice, its surface 
forked through to give the appearance of a glistening granita. Goodbye to 
summer, hello to autumn.

Haddock, clam and celeriac soup
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fnigel-slater-autumn-recipes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F617b2d51aab2a27edae0402001a4a77284caa640%2F0_2204_4882_2929%2F4882.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigel%20Slater%E2%80%99s%20autumn%20recipes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fnigel-slater-autumn-recipes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigel%20Slater%E2%80%99s%20autumn%20recipes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fnigel-slater-autumn-recipes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F617b2d51aab2a27edae0402001a4a77284caa640%2F0_2204_4882_2929%2F4882.jpg>
 ‘A chest full of treasure’: haddock, clam and celeriac soup. Photograph: 
Jonathan Lovekin for the Observer 
Avoid the temptation to stir the soup too much once the haddock has browned, 
as the fish is likely to break up. If you have any concern that the clams may 
contain grit, cook them in their own steam in a separate, tightly lidded pan 
for 2 or 3 minutes, then strain the resulting liquor through a fine sieve 
before adding the clams and juice to the soup.

Serves 2-4
celeriac 350g
lemon ½
pancetta 130g
banana shallot 1
thyme leaves 1 tbsp
haddock 450g
fish stock 800ml
clams 500g

Peel the celeriac, discarding the tangle of roots at the base. Coarsely grate 
the flesh then toss it in a little lemon juice to prevent it from discolouring.

Cube the pancetta, removing any tough skin as you go, then warm it in a 
heavy-based deep pot over a moderate heat, letting the fat turn gold. If it 
sticks, add a little oil. Once the pancetta is lightly toasted, stir in the 
grated celeriac. Peel, halve and roughly chop the onion then stir it in, 
together with the thyme leaves.

Continue cooking for a good 5-10 minutes till the onion, celeriac and pancetta 
are golden and aromatic. Trim the haddock into generous pieces, removing the 
grey skin as you go. Push the onion mixture to one side of the pan, then lower 
the haddock into the other side and leave it for a couple of minutes to colour. 
When the fish is golden on the underside, carefully turn it over with a palette 
knife, let it lightly colour then pour in the fish stock.

Bring the soup to the boil then immediately lower the heat so the liquor 
bubbles only gently, and leave for 5 minutes.

Scrub and check the clams, discarding any open ones that refuse to shut when 
tapped on the side of the sink. Introduce the clams to the pot and cover 
tightly with a lid. As soon as the clams have opened (a matter of 2 minutes or 
so) correct the seasoning with salt and black pepper (you may not need much 
salt) then ladle it into deep bowls.

Melon with basil and lemon sorbet

I mentioned this brilliantly easy sorbet in passing a few weeks ago, but feel 
it deserves more detail. I find the juice from unwaxed, organic lemons to be 
softer and more aromatic and worth the extra expense. No need for an ice-cream 
freezer – just a whisk and a plastic freezer box.

Serves 6
caster sugar 225g
basil leaves 50g
water 250ml
lemon juice 2 tbsp
natural yogurt 500ml
charentais or cantaloupe melon for 4
blackcurrants or blueberries 250g

Put the sugar into the bowl of a food processor and add half of the basil. 
Process until the sugar turns bright green. Transfer the herb sugar to a small, 
deep pan, pour in the water and warm it over a moderate heat until the sugar 
dissolves.

Fork through the surface of the sorbet to give the appearance of a glistening 
granita

Remove the basil syrup from the heat. Cool the syrup quickly, speeding matters 
up if you wish by pouring the syrup into a bowl and stirring it over ice. When 
the mixture is cool, tip the lemon juice and yogurt into a blender, add the 
reserved basil leaves and process until smooth and pale green. Stir into the 
basil syrup and combine thoroughly. Transfer to a shallow, plastic freezer box 
and freeze for 4 hours or overnight.

Halve the melon, scrape out the seeds and cut it into thick wedges. Remove the 
sorbet from the freezer and draw a fork through it to break it into small 
crystals. Spoon over the melon, add a few blackcurrants or blueberries and 
serve immediately.

Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk <mailto:nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>
 or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater 
<https://twitter.com/NigelSlater?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 