
Niki Lauda’s red baseball cap has become part of the man. It is one of the 
best known sights in the Formula One paddock, a beacon for straight-talking and 
it is difficult to imagine him without it. But now he lifts it – just a few 
inches – and blows out his cheeks as he recalls the unforgettableclimax to the 
1976 season <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f1muVw1h2UE> when James Hunt won 
his solitary F1 title in Japan, 40 years ago this month.

James Hunt v Niki Lauda: my summer of speed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/14/james-hunt-niki-lauda-summer-of-speed>
It is Lauda’s misfortune to be defined not by the three Formula One world 
championships he won but by the extraordinary events of that season,when he 
received the last rites from a priest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/02/niki-lauda-accident-german-grand-prix-1976>
 after being engulfed by flames at Nürburgring (that cap hides many of the 
scars) and then saw Hunt take the crown the Austrian had thought would be his 
in the shadow of Mount Fuji.

Not that Fuji created many shadows on 24 October 1976. Mario Andretti, who won 
that day, said: “They were the worst conditions I’d ever seen at the start of a 
motor race.” Lauda agrees. “The circuit was flooded, and the organisers said we 
couldn’t have the race in those conditions. We were sitting and waiting for the 
weather to improve when the clerk of the course came in the room and said we 
had to start the race in half an hour because of worldwide television rights, 
and Bernie Ecclestone was giving him pressure.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df1muVw1h2UE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df1muVw1h2UE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df1muVw1h2UE&media=>
“I was spokesman for the drivers then, and I stood up and said: ‘Are you guys 
fucking crazy? The rain has not stopped. It’s got worse. You cannot do this.’ 
But the guy insisted. For me it was ridiculous. Because of a stupid TV deal we 
had to go out there and risk our lives. No one could see anything. It was a 
disaster.

“So then I decided for myself that television was not a good enough reason for 
me to race.So I told Ferrari beforehand I would do one lap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/sep/29/motorsports.sport2>, which I 
did, and then I stopped. I have no regrets. I would do the same again. But I 
have to say that without my accident, maybe, I would have had the reserves to 
do it.”

Hunt went on to take third place and win the world championship by a point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/14/james-hunt-niki-lauda-summer-of-speed>
. Lauda did not hang around to watch the race. “I went to the airport. I told 
this Japanese taxi driver to listen to the radio and tell me who had won the 
title. And exactly when the end of the race came on the radio he drove through 
the tunnel of the airport and the radio stopped. And when we came out, it was 
over. Who won? I asked. ‘I don’t know,’ he said. But then, as we came up the 
ramp to the airport, there was a Ferrari man who wanted to say goodbye. And I 
looked at his face and I knew straight away. ‘Fuck,’ I thought. And he said, 
yes, Hunt was world champion. So I went home.”

The story of the battle between Hunt and Lauda that year – the yin and yang of 
Formula One, the handsome, womanising, extrovert Hunt (he had “Sex: Breakfast 
of Champions” emblazoned on a patch on his race suit), and the diligent paddock 
swot Lauda, who was nicknamed “The Rat” because of his prominent front teeth –
was made into a memorable film <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L_u3FODrenM>, 
Rush, by Ron Howard in 2013.

Formula one: The day Lauda wouldn't risk his life - and there was no stopping 
Hunt
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/sep/29/motorsports.sport2> 
The great rivalry is featured again in an insightful book on James Hunt by 
Maurice Hamilton <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/james-hunt-440756.html>. In 
it, Hunt describes the warmup to the race in Fuji. “It was ridiculous. 
Approaching the first corner, there was a huge puddle and you had to brake for 
the braking area. But the main concern was the spray. This, combined with the 
mist, meant you couldn’t see a thing. It was madness.”

At the end of the Japan race, Hunt added: “I feel really sorry for Niki. I 
feel sorry for everybody that the race had to be run in such ridiculous 
circumstances because the conditions were dangerous and I fully appreciate 
Niki’s decision. After an accident like he had, what else could he do? Quite 
honestly, I wanted to win the championship and I felt I deserved it. But I also 
felt Niki deserved to win the championship – and I just wish we could have 
shared it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fniki-lauda-james-hunt-f1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9663fae4c5e12c5fa6887cfb76e65c4b2cc1a6c8%2F0_271_3432_2059%2F3432.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Niki%20Lauda%3A%20%E2%80%98James%20Hunt%20would%20not%20push%20you%20off%20the%20road.%20We%20trusted%20each%20other%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fniki-lauda-james-hunt-f1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Niki%20Lauda%3A%20%E2%80%98James%20Hunt%20would%20not%20push%20you%20off%20the%20road.%20We%20trusted%20each%20other%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fniki-lauda-james-hunt-f1%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9663fae4c5e12c5fa6887cfb76e65c4b2cc1a6c8%2F0_271_3432_2059%2F3432.jpg>
 James Hunt drives through the rain in front of Mount Fuji. Photograph: Grand 
Prix Photo/Getty Images 
Looking back, Lauda says: “I remember James saying that. And it was the nicest 
comment I have ever heard. We had a respectful, nice relationship, going back 
to our days in Formula Three. We trusted each other. He would not push you off 
the road, which in those days was important.So that film, Rush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/sep/06/rush-james-hunt-niki-lauda>
, is good. It’s 80% correct, with a bit of Hollywood.

“Two things happened in 1976, before we got to Japan. First my accident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/oct/29/features.sportmonthly> and then 
McLaren did a big step forward with the development of the car after the 
summer. The Ferrari slowed down. James’s car was suddenly quicker and he 
performed outstandingly. He was really quick. No question. At the time, the 
best.”

Lauda’s decision to return to Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> only six weeks after the crash 
that almost took his life, and then finish fourth in the Italian Grand Prix at 
Monza, is considered to be one of the bravest in the sport’s history. “On the 
Friday I could not drive. I got out of the car because I was frightened,” he 
says in the book. “I went to the hotel and thought about it, took it easy on 
Saturday and then finally got going again.”

Hamilton’s book describes Hunt as a complex character who at the start of his 
life used to cry at night and have tantrums by day, and at the end of it, in 
1993, succumbed to a heart attack at 45. Hunt, when he wasn’t being charming, 
was often capable of causing considerable offence, such as the time he had a 
call of nature on a flight and urinated on a curtain separating the aircraft’s 
cabins.

Lauda, now 67, was champion in 1975, 1977 and 1984. He works as a TV 
commentator and is also non-executive chairman of the Mercedes formula one 
team. So if he drove again, what era would he choose? “Today,” he says. 
“Because they get 10 times the money and there’s no risk. Honestly, safer. At 
the same time it gets boring at some stage. So we want some of the lost 
excitement to come back.” Hunt certainly provided that.

• James Hunt by Maurice Hamilton 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/james-hunt-440756.html> is published by 
McLaren and Blink Publishing on 20 October
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fniki-lauda-james-hunt-f1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac16604ca6ffd531ee0a33a34ae3d25ac3b7a315%2F0_96_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Niki%20Lauda%3A%20%E2%80%98James%20Hunt%20would%20not%20push%20you%20off%20the%20road.%20We%20trusted%20each%20other%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fniki-lauda-james-hunt-f1%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Niki%20Lauda%3A%20%E2%80%98James%20Hunt%20would%20not%20push%20you%20off%20the%20road.%20We%20trusted%20each%20other%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fniki-lauda-james-hunt-f1%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac16604ca6ffd531ee0a33a34ae3d25ac3b7a315%2F0_96_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
 James Hunt in his McLaren (11) and Mario Andretti in his Lotus (5) on the 
starting grid at the Japanese Grand Prix in 1976. Photograph: PA 
Niki Lauda badly injured in German Grand Prix – archive, 2 Aug 1976
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/02/niki-lauda-accident-german-grand-prix-1976> 