
People often stop Nina Sosanya <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0815317/> in the 
street, recognising her as Kate, doomed wife of Sarah Lancashire’s character in
Last Tango in Halifax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/nov/20/last-tango-in-halifax-tv-review>
, or Lucy Freeman, the increasingly disillusioned head of diversity in the 
BBC-on-BBC satireW1A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/24/w1a-review-satire-jeremy-clarkson>
. “It’s interesting who comes up to you,” says Sosanya. “With W1A, it tends to 
be people who work in any kind of corporation. With Last Tango, the most 
incredibly different people – young, old, white, black, men, women – would want 
to talk to me, and there was something enchanting about how it seemed to speak 
to everyone.”

 Sosanya will be intrigued to see who stops for a chat after seeing her in 
Young Chekhov 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/young-chekhov-three-play-day>, the 
trilogy of early works (Platanov, Ivanov, The Seagull) by the Russian dramatist 
that is transferring to the National Theatre from Chichester. Both characters 
she plays in Young Chekhov are called Anna Petrovna – a widow in Platonov, a 
wife in Ivanov – although the latter was born Sarah Abramson, and has a speech, 
gut-wrenchingly delivered by Sosanya, in which she laments, in David Hare’s 
translation: “I gave up my religion, my family. I even gave up my name.”

I've always called myself mixed race. That's not correct any more – but to say 
black would be to deny my mother

 Through Sarah/Anna, who endures rural Russian antisemitism, Chekhov explores 
the tensions of identity, a question that, as the child of a white English 
mother and Nigerian father, Sosanya has presumably had to address. “Mmm. 
Growing up, I was always the minority in the room, even in my own immediate 
family, who were all white. So it became the norm for me to see white faces 
everywhere. I remember a young black woman once saying to me, ‘How do you see 
yourself?’ And I facetiously replied, ‘With a mirror.’ Understandably, she got 
quite angry. I’ve always referred to myself as ‘mixed race’, but apparently 
that’s not correct any more. But to call myself ‘black’ would be to deny my 
mother. There are so many boxes you can put yourself in and the part of the 
Venn diagram where they overlap is probably who you are.”

 Did she use that experience to portray her divided character in Ivanov? “No. 
No. Well, all right, maybe I do subconsciously ... No, look, thinking about it, 
yes, I must be drawing on my own experience of being the only one in the room. 
But she has it more overtly than anything I have had to deal with. I haven’t – 
touch wood – had to deal with overt racism much in my life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fnina-sosanya-young-chekhov-national-theatre-w1a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff27a37fd40d5b38f7ac0f098dc5a2b7e40746dbc%2F110_163_3908_2345%2F3908.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nina%20Sosanya%3A%20'I%20was%20always%20a%20minority%20%E2%80%93%20even%20in%20my%20own%20family'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fnina-sosanya-young-chekhov-national-theatre-w1a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nina%20Sosanya%3A%20%27I%20was%20always%20a%20minority%20%E2%80%93%20even%20in%20my%20own%20family%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fnina-sosanya-young-chekhov-national-theatre-w1a%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff27a37fd40d5b38f7ac0f098dc5a2b7e40746dbc%2F110_163_3908_2345%2F3908.jpg>
 ‘I even gave up my name’ … Sosanya as Anna Petrovna in Ivanov. Photograph: 
Tony Larkin/Rex Shutterstock 
 Perversely, the biggest moment of her TV career happened off-screen: the 
death in a car crash, reported without warning by another character – 
“Chekovian”, as she notes, in everything except the means of transportation – 
of Kate in Last Tango in Halifax. The writer Sally Wainwright has admitted to 
havingagonised about the character assassination 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/whats-on/arts-culture-news/sally-wainwright-regret-killing-kate-9318639>
 so much that she wrote alternative funereal and cheerful versions of the 
episode before green-lighting the death scene.

 “The producer gave me a call before the scripts arrived and warned me what 
was coming,” Sosanya recalls. “I wasn’t shocked, I was just sad. I knew that in 
a third series you need stuff to occur, but I was sad because I thought there 
was more to do with her. And, let’s be honest, as the actor you’re going: er, I 
haven’t got a job now. So it was upsetting.”

 She remains thrilled by the unusually wide demographic appeal of the series. 
Might this be due to its subject matter being love and families, which most 
people have some experience of? “Yes. Even if the characters didn’t look like 
them. I sometimes think we make too much of ‘representation’. You don’t 
necessarily need to see yourself on a screen for it to be interesting. For me, 
ideally ‘diversity’ would mean white audiences watching black shows and the 
other way round.”

 It might be seen as a sign of theatre’s increasing diversity that, even 
recently, it would have been hard to imagine two major Chekhov roles being cast 
non-white. “Yes. And yet, even in this [the original Chichester production], in 
a cast of more than 20, I’m the only non-white. And I’m playing two characters 
who are outsiders. And so there’s still a long way to go. With theAct for Change
 <http://www.act-for-change.com/> campaign, I think some people thought: 
‘Really? Still?’ And yes, still, because it actually started to get worse for 
diverse casting, especially on TV.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fnina-sosanya-young-chekhov-national-theatre-w1a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F244824f322f568930e8967fd8a132af58e6dbb7e%2F0_40_1364_818%2F1364.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nina%20Sosanya%3A%20'I%20was%20always%20a%20minority%20%E2%80%93%20even%20in%20my%20own%20family'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fnina-sosanya-young-chekhov-national-theatre-w1a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nina%20Sosanya%3A%20%27I%20was%20always%20a%20minority%20%E2%80%93%20even%20in%20my%20own%20family%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fnina-sosanya-young-chekhov-national-theatre-w1a%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F244824f322f568930e8967fd8a132af58e6dbb7e%2F0_40_1364_818%2F1364.jpg>
 ‘It was upsetting’ … Sosanya with Sarah Lancashire in Last Tango in Halifax, 
which she was written out of Photograph: Vishal Sharma/BBC/Red Productions 
 She attributes this slipping back to the plethora of historical costume 
dramas, co-production money from countries that are less committed to diverse 
casting, and a feeling that the battle had been won: “They thought they’d done 
it, but it turns out that you have to keep making the effort. I don’t think 
there’s any underlying malignancy in this country. It’s just that it’s easy to 
get lazy.”

 Although she briefly returned to Last Tango in Halifax as Kate’s ghost 
(“Possibly not my finest hour”), she does not expect to figure in any future 
episodes, although she has hopes for her other high-profile TV franchise. “I 
really want W1A to come back, but that depends on many things.” Presumably 
including whether the BBC survives the May government? “Yes. That would be the 
main one.”

• Young Chekhov is at the National Theatre, London 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/young-chekhov-three-play-day>, 14 
July to 8 October. Box office: 020-7452 3000.

• This article was amended on 12 July 2016 to clarify that when Nina Sosanya 
said she was the only non-white cast member of Young Chekhov, she was referring 
to the Chichester production, not the National Theatre’s.
 