
A staffer for government minister Christopher Pyne is reportedly among nine 
Australian men arrested in Malaysia after stripping duringSunday’s Formula 1 
Grand Prix race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/daniel-ricciardo-wins-malaysian-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1>
 to reveal underwear bearing a Malaysia-flag print.

Jack Walker, Pyne’s adviser on defence innovation, was one of the men pictured 
removing their clothes at the end of the grand prix,won by Australian Daniel 
Ricciardo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/daniel-ricciardo-wins-malaysian-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1>
, theAdelaide Advertiser reported 
<http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/news/world/aussies-arrested-for-stripping-in-malaysia-investigated-for-public-indecency/news-story/f004f6d809e8995a8256bae1b97f71f5>
.

The spectators were arrested around the time the race ended at the Sepang 
International Circuit on Sunday and were being investigated for “intentional 
insult with intent to provoke a breach of the peace” and public indecency, 
state news agency Bernama quoted police saying on Monday.

The nine men, aged between 25 and 29, would be held in remand for four days, 
Abdul Aziz Ali, the police chief of the town of Sepang, told Bernama.

Mercedes chief plays down Lewis Hamilton’s fury after Malaysian GP blow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/daniel-ricciardo-wins-malaysian-grand-prix-lewis-hamilton-f1>
Abdul Aziz said the Australians were tourists who had come to watch the 
Malaysian Grand Prix, held at the Sepang circuit outside the capital, Kuala 
Lumpur.
Nik Asyraaf (@nikasyraaf) 
Shame on those Aussies by doing this. So inappropriate #nochill 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/nochill?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/jm7xfCFOCP 
<https://t.co/jm7xfCFOCP>
 <https://twitter.com/nikasyraaf/status/782588907145666560> October 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nikasyraaf/status/782588907145666560> 
Photos of the men flaunting the country’s national colours went viral in 
Malaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> after the race, provoking 
angry comments from some social media users who accused them of insulting the 
country.

Displays of public indecency are not tolerated by authorities in 
Muslim-majority Malaysia, with foreign offenders typically given a fine before 
being deported.

The chief executive of the Sepang International Circuit, Datuk Razlan Razali, 
said the Australians deserved to be “locked up, investigated and taken action 
against”, theNew Straits Times reported 
<http://www.nst.com.my/news/2016/10/177761/stupid-behaviour-sic-chief-fumes-over-aussies-underwear-stunt>
.

“This shows a huge lack of respect to us as Malaysians; this is stupid 
behaviour from foreigners who have no sense of cultural sensitivity and 
respect,” Razlan said.

“It embarrasses their own country as well, it gives Australians a bad name. 

“I am glad that citizens reported on it and that we do not allow such unruly 
behaviour in our country, especially at the circuit withFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> being televised worldwide.”

A spokeswoman for Pyne said the matter was being “handled appropriately by the 
Australian high commissioner”.


“Until we have a clearer picture of the process at hand, it would be unwise to 
comment further,” she said.

Walker’s public profile on LinkedIn says he has worked in Pyne’s office for 
four months and had served four years in the army reserve. He describes himself 
as “confident, hard working and always open to new experiences”.

The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade confirmed it was providing 
consular assistance to a group of Australians arrested in Malaysia.

Speaking to 2GB radio on Tuesday, treasurer Scott Morrison said he could not 
confirm Walker was among those arrested, but said he was sure consular 
officials would assist the group.

He said the incident was “a timely reminder for young people when they travel 
overseas, know what the laws and rules are and respect them”.

“They’re their laws, their rules, they’re on their grounds so you’ve got to 
comply.”
 