
Nitin Sawhney has always loved writing music for dance, but he finds working 
with choreographers a very specific discipline – with very specific restraints. 
“You have to suspend your ego,” he laughs and mentions a particularly 
challenging moment during a collaboration with his good friendAkram Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/08/on-my-radar-akram-khan-kate-tempest-simon-mcburney-amy-winehouse-brad-mehldau>
. It was late and Sawhney was still recovering from the marathon of writing 
music for all eight episodes of the BBC seriesHuman Planet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/jan/27/tv-review-human-planet>. 
He admits he was not as his most receptive when the choreographer said to him: 
“Right Nitin, what I want here is 10 minutes of just banging.” As he recalls: 
“I was like, ‘What? What kind of banging?’ How is that going to work for me?”

However, once he’d worked out that Khan wanted something that “sounded very 
tribal, very primal”, he went on to write music unlike anything he’d ever 
composed before. “It was a ticking that gradually expanded into this huge 
pulse,” he says of his compositions for what became 2010’sVertical Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/sep/17/akram-khan-company-review>. “It 
sounded so epic, so strong – it was like the beginning of the universe. Working 
with someone else’s vision can be such a revelation. Once you start digging 
into their thoughts, you create something you would never have got to by 
yourself.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnitin-sawhney-composer-dance-sadlers-wells-no-body%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86b133f9d323ee1071a4cf232cf6dba317cc44e1%2F0_578_3719_1734%2F3719.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nitin%20Sawhney%3A%20how%20I%20wrote%20music%20for%20a%20dance%20without%20dancers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnitin-sawhney-composer-dance-sadlers-wells-no-body%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nitin%20Sawhney%3A%20how%20I%20wrote%20music%20for%20a%20dance%20without%20dancers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnitin-sawhney-composer-dance-sadlers-wells-no-body%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86b133f9d323ee1071a4cf232cf6dba317cc44e1%2F0_578_3719_1734%2F3719.jpg>
 Akram Khan’s Vertical Road with a score by Sawhney. Photograph: Richard 
Haughton 
You can hear music in every movement the body makes

He may be a DJ, a producer, a guitarist, and a composer who’s written for 
films, TV shows, video games and symphony orchestras, but dance has always been 
a force in Sawhney’s life. His mother trained as aBharata Natyam 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bharata_Natyam> dancer when she was a young 
woman in India; and, during his own teenage years in Kent, he became heavily 
involved in the local street dance scene. Seated in his Brixton studio, a 
magical hive crowded with instruments and recording equipment, he says: “I was 
a break-dancer when I was a kid. I was really into it.” Later, as a young 
composer, it was his study of classical Kathak music that led Sawhney to write 
his first scores for dance, working with British-based performers likeNahid 
Siddiqui <http://www.nahidsiddiqui.com/ABOUT.php>. 

Collaborating with Khan – a pairing that began with the 1999 solo Fix – has 
brought a wider involvement with the art form. He makes proud mention of a 
charity event at which he performed a solo choreographed byHofesh Shechter 
<http://www.hofesh.co.uk/the-company/people-involved/artistic-director> – “a 
rave dance with a glitterball” – and says he now attends dance performances 
regularly, and attentively. “It’s amazing to see how dance is put together. As 
a musician, it’s such a wonderful vocabulary. You can hear music in every 
movement the body makes. Even when there’s no movement, there’s a tension that 
is always exciting.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnitin-sawhney-composer-dance-sadlers-wells-no-body%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0a594255b8e3e18d8e5a5f98bd1726aedd3c4fc%2F0_0_5028_4096%2F5028.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nitin%20Sawhney%3A%20how%20I%20wrote%20music%20for%20a%20dance%20without%20dancers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnitin-sawhney-composer-dance-sadlers-wells-no-body%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nitin%20Sawhney%3A%20how%20I%20wrote%20music%20for%20a%20dance%20without%20dancers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnitin-sawhney-composer-dance-sadlers-wells-no-body%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0a594255b8e3e18d8e5a5f98bd1726aedd3c4fc%2F0_0_5028_4096%2F5028.jpg>
 Lighting designer Michael Hulls works on No Body. Photograph: Heathcliff 
O'Malley 
Sawhney has become such an integral part of the British dance scene, he’s been 
made an associate artist ofSadler’s Wells <http://www.sadlerswells.com/>, the 
UK’s premier dance house. He feels a deep affection for the London venue and 
his latest project is almost a love letter to it. The work is part ofNo Body 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/lucy-carter-michael-hulls-nitin-sawhney-no-body/>
, a series of multimedia installations designed for different parts of the 
building which, although inspired by dance, involve no live performance. 
Instead, the event is conceived as a choreography of light, imagery and sound, 
with creations by lighting designers Michael Hulls and Lucy Carter, and film by 
Siobhan Davies and Russell Maliphant.


At first, Sawhney wasn’t clear exactly why they should be ditching live 
performance. “To be honest, I couldn’t get my head around where it was coming 
from.” But, turning the idea over, he began to see it as a great opportunity to 
work in a new genre, and communicate something of what the theatre means to 
him. “I had the idea of an installation that would explore the history of the 
building – all the performers who’ve left their mark on the stage, all the 
heightened emotion that’s been contained here, and is still imprinted on it 
walls.”

I wanted to create the feeling that it rises from the depths of the past up 
into the light

Working with the video artist Nick Hillel 
<http://creativeconomy.britishcouncil.org/people/nick-hillel/>, Sawhney trawled 
through an archive of old photographs and playbills from the theatre, piecing 
together a history that dates back to the early 1800s, when comedians like 
Joseph Grimaldi <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Grimaldi> were its stars. 
This progresses to the 1930s, when Margot Fonteyn was its fledgling ballerina, 
before reaching the present day. Working with Hillel’s images, Sawhney composed 
his own impressionistic, aural recall of the theatre’s history, which the 
audience will to listen to through headphones as they walk through the 
installation.

The final crucial component of Indelible, as Sawhney has titled his creation, 
is the geography. Arranged over three floors, it will begin in the foyer then 
move upstairs until it ends in a rehearsal room where, he promises, “there will 
be some kind of revelation”. This physical ascent is Sawhney’s way of 
referencing the wells around which the first theatre on the site was built: “I 
wanted to create the feeling that the installation was rising from the depths 
of the past and up into the light.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnitin-sawhney-composer-dance-sadlers-wells-no-body%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c7462510f90a9eec3a1ab2ea9738c42fddd4a91%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nitin%20Sawhney%3A%20how%20I%20wrote%20music%20for%20a%20dance%20without%20dancers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnitin-sawhney-composer-dance-sadlers-wells-no-body%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nitin%20Sawhney%3A%20how%20I%20wrote%20music%20for%20a%20dance%20without%20dancers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fnitin-sawhney-composer-dance-sadlers-wells-no-body%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c7462510f90a9eec3a1ab2ea9738c42fddd4a91%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
 Aural history … Sawhney in London. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the 
Guardian 
 For his next dance project, another Sadler’s Wells co-production, Sawhney is 
very much in the physical here and now. It’s a staged concert of his album 
Dystopian Dream that will feature the hip-hop/contemporary dance duoWang and 
Ramirez <http://www.wangramirez.com/en>. During the writing of Dystopian Dream, 
Sawhney says he had an almost cinematic narrative running through his head, and 
he imagined that at some point the album could be turned into a fully 
choreographed piece. He worked with Wang and Ramirez at the album’s launch, 
where they performed to the track Redshift. “They captured everything I was 
hoping for. This album has lots of layers and they got that. They can work in 
ways that are symbolic but also deeply personal. They can go from something 
intimate to something quite epic.”

Sawnhey talks of feeling a visceral thrill whenever he watches his music take 
on an independent physical life. “When I conducted the London Symphony 
Orchestra, that was wonderful. A month earlier, I’d been imagining this music 
in my head. Now all these people were performing it.Dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance> is such a human, such a full-bodied 
form of expression, it’s always going to draw you in.”

 * No Body is at Sadler’s Wells, London, 7-12 June 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/lucy-carter-michael-hulls-nitin-sawhney-no-body/>
. Nitin Sawhney performsDystopian Dream with Wang and Ramirez at the Royal 
Albert Hall, London, 2 November 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2016/nitin-sawhney-with-wang-and-ramirez/>
.
 