
At 5pm on Sunday, the front-row chatter at London men’s fashion week wasn’t 
centred around the upcoming Christopher Raeburn show, a fantastical trend to 
channel next season or theGolden Globes red carpet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2017/jan/09/from-sleeves-to-frozen-five-trends-from-the-golden-globes-2017>
. Instead, it was something that everyone could relate to: the tube strike 
starting at 6pm. Sexy? No. Fashionable? Hell, yes.

This isn’t an anecdote to show how fashion people are just like you. Actually, 
it’s more a segue into the fact that mundanity is now a trend, where the memes 
of reality – what you see on your commute to work, in the supermarket, in the 
cupboard reserved for the camping stuff – are being mined by designers as 
inspiration. From Craig Green’s sleeping bags and carpet coats to Raeburn’s 
security-guard yellow, it was a proper, January-appropriate jolt back to 
reality on the catwalk. For the mood, think EastEnders market stall set rather 
than an episode of Keeping Up With the Kardashians.

Notably, none of these designers referenced anything on social media – this is 
very much about an IRL, no filter rather than #nofilter view. Christopher 
Shannon was inspired by what couriers and builders wear – hence dungarees, 
faded neon and clothes to survive a day on a London street. “I’m not in the 
mood to be a fantasist,” he said. “All I have seen is builders and couriers, so 
the clothes I see are hoodies and trackies and worn-out neons. Everything is a 
staple … I’m interested in clothes and not drama.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Flondon-fashion-week-no-drama-garms-how-menswear-came-down-to-earth-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e4e6b7a6b2cafb0f6ad4ac166fe4f9a7049663b%2F0_79_3696_2219%2F3696.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No-drama%20garms%20%E2%80%93%20how%20men's%20fashion%20came%20down%20to%20earth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Flondon-fashion-week-no-drama-garms-how-menswear-came-down-to-earth-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No-drama%20garms%20%E2%80%93%20how%20men%27s%20fashion%20came%20down%20to%20earth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Flondon-fashion-week-no-drama-garms-how-menswear-came-down-to-earth-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e4e6b7a6b2cafb0f6ad4ac166fe4f9a7049663b%2F0_79_3696_2219%2F3696.jpg>
 Craig Green’s show last week. Photograph: WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
Wales Bonner, designed by 26-year-old British designer Grace Wales Bonner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/apr/09/grace-wales-bonner-menswears-designer-fashion-chanel-blaxploitation>
, has quickly become a cult menswear name in London after only two shows. She 
focuses on the kind of ideas more often reserved for PhDs – blaxploitation and 
black male identity, Haile Selassie, Joseph Beuys – but manages to make clothes 
that win her prestigious prizes and high-end stockists such as Selfridges. Her 
show on Sunday was astonishing, largely due to models walking at a pace 
familiar to city dwellers late for work, around a stack of speakers borrowed 
from the Notting Hill carnival. The clothes were everyday staples with retro 
styling: smart trousers with rumbled shirts, a shirt untucked after work, a 
leather jacket slung over a summer dress.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Flondon-fashion-week-no-drama-garms-how-menswear-came-down-to-earth-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f7ab511e2bbbf7cb62d50620ce7e6d17a8535e4%2F0_34_3072_4570%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No-drama%20garms%20%E2%80%93%20how%20men's%20fashion%20came%20down%20to%20earth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Flondon-fashion-week-no-drama-garms-how-menswear-came-down-to-earth-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No-drama%20garms%20%E2%80%93%20how%20men%27s%20fashion%20came%20down%20to%20earth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Flondon-fashion-week-no-drama-garms-how-menswear-came-down-to-earth-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f7ab511e2bbbf7cb62d50620ce7e6d17a8535e4%2F0_34_3072_4570%2F3072.jpg>
 Wales Bonner on Sunday. Photograph: WWD/Rex/Shutterstock 
Vivienne Westwood's eco-punks close London men's fashion week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2017/jan/09/vivienne-westwoods-eco-punks-close-london-mens-fashion-week>
“This show was really about looking at the street and elevating it,” said the 
designer, “and bringing this sense of richness and depth to street language.” 
Wales Bonner’s inspirations were typically academic – Renaissance friars, 
street preachers – but the principal inspiration hung on the wall for all to 
see, a 2002 photograph by Patrick Cariou of boys in crumpled suits, patterned 
shirts and robes taken in Dakar, visited by Wales Bonner in 2016.

Martine Rose perhaps took the downbeat reality the furthest. Rose’s studio is 
in Tottenham, north London, and she had her show in nearby Seven Sisters Indoor 
Market, a place that has not come across the high-fashion crowd much before. 
Still, late on Sunday night, they sat, with barbers and food sellers around 
them, to watch the show. “I wanted people to have an experience as close to the 
real market as possible,” said Rose. Models with Phil Oakey-like hair wore 
ties, cagoules, suits, silk shirts and – notably – the kind of money belt that 
bus conductors used to have. “It was fun playing with male archetypes, like the 
banker but also the bus driver, estate agent,” said Rose. “It’s not like a 
certain amount of fantasy isn’t essential to fashion – it is – but it has to 
feel authentic, otherwise what’s the point? It has to be rooted in reality.” 
Something a bit retro, such as that Oakey haircut, adds a crucial element of 
“off” to make it clear this is actually fashion, not what might be found in 
your local Foxtons.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Flondon-fashion-week-no-drama-garms-how-menswear-came-down-to-earth-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F539832977060c36dd9441e13fa2567dcc3a78fc1%2F0_179_3749_4688%2F3749.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No-drama%20garms%20%E2%80%93%20how%20men's%20fashion%20came%20down%20to%20earth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Flondon-fashion-week-no-drama-garms-how-menswear-came-down-to-earth-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No-drama%20garms%20%E2%80%93%20how%20men%27s%20fashion%20came%20down%20to%20earth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Flondon-fashion-week-no-drama-garms-how-menswear-came-down-to-earth-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F539832977060c36dd9441e13fa2567dcc3a78fc1%2F0_179_3749_4688%2F3749.jpg>
 Christopher Shannon’s show. Photograph: Jeff Spicer/Getty Images 
Fashion traditionally flips between very expensive romance and fantasy – for 
example, Marc Jacobs’sLouis Vuitton train in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/mar/07/louis-vuitton-train-paris-fashion-week>
, which reportedly cost £6.58m – and cringey takes on reality (Mugatu’s 
homeless-inspiredDerelicte <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mVscQYjuq_s> in 
Zoolander comes close). However, in the past few years more authentic life 
beyond the catwalk has become a thing: at theautumn/winter 2014 Dior show, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/feb/28/dior-raf-simons-ready-to-wear-collection-paris-show>
 when Raf Simons had models sling their jackets over their arms as commuters 
might, and theDHL T-shirt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/19/dhl-t-shirt-vetements-fashion-paris-catwalk>
 that Vetements made fashion’s biggest thing last year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmVscQYjuq_s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmVscQYjuq_s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmVscQYjuq_s&media=>
The 2017 version isn’t just a bit of street for added authenticity. It’s more 
like coming down to earth and looking around – fashion’s response to a 
tumultuous 12 months. Both Wales Bonner and Rose emphasised the diversity of 
the city streets. Shannon – always a bit of a rabble rouser – made his 
collection explicitly a study in post-Brexit Britain, with models wearing 
shredded EU flags on their faces and one sweatshirt turning the Boss logo into 
Loss International. After the show, he said: “I was so proud of Liverpool being 
remain when the rest of the north wasn’t … I wanted it to feel inclusive, but 
also a tiny bit aggressive, and a bit pissed off.”
 