
Abortion laws in Queensland and New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> suck and right now 
is the time to change them. A survey this week found that Australians 
overwhelmingly believe that women should have unqualified access to abortion.

The Australian Electoral Study 
<http://theaustraliannationaluniversity.pr.co/140698-australian-electoral-study-shows-darkening-of-national-political-mood>
 has been taken each election since 1969 by the Australian National University 
and this year found, among other things,that 65% of Australians believe women 
should be able to obtain an abortion readily when they want one 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/334825770/Australian-Election-Study-Factsheet-Social-Issues>
, 26% believe women should be able to obtain an abortion only in special 
circumstances and 4% believe that a woman should not be able obtain an abortion 
under any circumstances.

There will never be a 'perfect time' to decriminalise abortion. It has to 
happen now | Mehreen Faruqi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/05/there-will-never-be-a-perfect-time-to-decriminalise-abortion-it-has-to-happen-now>
This is the highest level of support ever.

But despite that, access to the procedure is severely restricted for women in 
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> and New 
South Wales, particularly poor women and those living in rural areas.

Say you live in Queensland, but outside the south-east corner. Your options 
for a surgical abortion look like this (the clinics that provide surgical 
abortions are marked in red).
 Map based on Children by Choice’s list of Queensland abortion providers 
<https://www.childrenbychoice.org.au/forwomen/abortion/clinicsqld> 
As you can see, outside of the south-east corner of the state there are only 
two clinics that provide them. And to make matters worse, these clinics will
close in February due to a lack of funding 
<http://www.smh.com.au/lifestyle/news-and-views/news-features/10-barriers-to-abortion-in-queensland-20161031-gsefjw.html>
. This leaves women in central, far north or western Queensland having to 
travel hundreds, if not thousands, of kilometres to obtain an abortion, which 
can end up costing more than $1,000.

The situation is so dire in Queensland that one of the state’s leading 
pro-choice groups,Children by Choice, crowdfunds abortions 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/ginarushton/these-women-funded-their-abortions-with-facebook-donations?utm_term=.miLrbW81p#.co9vEQ6We>
. Last year the organisation raised more than $90,000 via grants, donations, 
and no-interest loans for clients who needed financial assistance. They also 
seek funds forindividual cases via their Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/childrenbychoice/posts/1366381570038815>.

In New South Wales, women face a similar lack of options, with abortion 
providers concentrated in coastal areas and procedures almost exclusively 
performed in private clinics.

This situation exists in large part because of both states’ antiquated, 
regressive and now patently out of touch abortion laws, which criminalise the 
procedure except under certain circumstances.

These laws do not prevent abortions from happening though. It is widely 
accepted that between 10,000 and 14,000 take place in Queensland every year. 
The laws merely make life more difficult for women, particularly for those who 
already face disadvantage due to where they live, their socio-economic status 
and what kind of relationship they are in.

 However, the wheels are in motion for things to change.

This victory on abortion has empowered Polish women. We’ll never be the same | 
Krystyna Kacpura
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/06/victory-abortion-rights-empowered-polish-women>
Currently there are bills before both the Queensland 
<https://www.facebook.com/pg/youngqld4therightochoose/> and NSW 
<http://www.end12.org.au/> parliaments that seek to decriminalise the 
procedure, and in the case of New South Wales, enforce exclusion zones around 
abortion clinics so that anti-choice protesters cannot accost people at their 
entrances.

There has been a lot of pushback against the two proposals. See the 
submissions to the inquiry 
<http://www.smh.com.au/lifestyle/news-and-views/opinion/eight-facepalmworthy-submissions-to-queenslands-abortion-law-reform-inquiry-20160804-gqlafj.html>
 into MP Rob Pyne’s abortion law reform bill in Queensland for a taste. But the 
proposed changes are not extreme. They would put Queensland and New South Wales 
abortion law in line with the rest of Australia and with most European 
countries.

And change is possible. In the past two decades abortion has been 
decriminalised in Tasmania, Victoria and the ACT and just this year in Poland a
popular protest prevented regressive abortion laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/05/polish-government-performs-u-turn-on-total-abortion-ban>
 from being enacted by the country’s conservative government.

Changing the current laws is a step towards affording women in Queensland and 
New South Wales the same dignity, respect and access to safe options that many 
women around Australia, and the world, already enjoy.

And if the wishes, health, safety and bodily autonomy of women seeking 
abortions are not enough, the changes would now also reflect the wishes of the
overwhelming majority of Australians. 
 