
A while ago Watford’s German-born Greek left-back José Holebas went into a 
tattoo studio, raised his fists and asked for the words “Don’t hate, care love” 
to be tattooed across his fingers. It is not easy to create a message of 
optimism and unity in a foreign language using no punctuation and while 
restricted to words that are four letters long – perhaps replacing “care” with 
“only”, “just” or even “make” would have been slightly better – but this was 
not a disastrous attempt.

The problem was that, despite being heavily tattooed across his torso, Holebas 
was not prepared for the pain involved in inking his fingers. For a while he 
suffered in silence but with the job only halfway through he decided he could 
bear no more, told the artist to lay down his needle and departed. And so it is 
that Holebas’s hands now carry the considerably less inspiring legend “don’t 
care”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-hotel-watford-chesterfield%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75a5aa4912e87c51cdc59d91f779b51535fd2756%2F597_221_1573_943%2F1573.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20room%20for%20half-measures%20in%20Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20gilded%20world%20of%20110%25%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-hotel-watford-chesterfield%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20room%20for%20half-measures%20in%20Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20gilded%20world%20of%20110%25%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-hotel-watford-chesterfield%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75a5aa4912e87c51cdc59d91f779b51535fd2756%2F597_221_1573_943%2F1573.jpg>
 José Holebas’s visit to the tattoo parlour did not go to plan for the Watford 
full-back. Photograph: Joe Toth/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
In sport, both on the field and off it, abandoning an enterprise when it 
remains incomplete can often prove embarrassing, as Chesterfield discovered to 
their very great humiliation this week, when they were profoundlyruffled by a 
half-run raffle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/20/chesterfield-fake-raffle-winner-farce>
. The club had offered as a competition prize a five-day trip with the team on 
their pre-season tour of Hungary, including lunch with the players and dinner 
with the manager (there were no breakfast-based pledges), only for so few 
people to buy the £20 tickets it was decided to quietly abandon the contest and 
award the prize to the entirely fictional “Surrey-based Spireite James Higgins”.

When real-life supporters in Hungary found no sign of Higgins, the club 
released a statement saying “illness prevented him from travelling” and that 
though he was “naturally very disappointed” he would instead be “treated to 
hospitality” at a future game. Finally they gave up on the pretence, sacked 
their marketing manager and apologised “unreservedly to the four fans who 
entered the competition”.

It is more than simply cliche that in sport it is best never to do things by 
halves. Success demands total commitment, the infamous 110%. “I always try to 
improve,”Cristiano Ronaldo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> once 
said, summing up the ideal attitude. “Tomorrow I will be better than today and 
next year will be better than this one. To be the best you can be, you have to 
be focused.”

What is true of footballers is also true of hoteliers, as Ronaldo should know, 
being both. Plenty of leading sportsmen have dabbled with hotels, largely 
seeing it either as a mildly diverting mid-career sideline or a method of 
funding a retirement of rural golfing bliss but Ronaldo has approached his with 
a familiar sense of complete self-obsession.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-hotel-watford-chesterfield%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5abbade94bedd3b42c294ba2a708d8ccd446b29%2F760_694_3240_1944%2F3240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20room%20for%20half-measures%20in%20Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20gilded%20world%20of%20110%25%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-hotel-watford-chesterfield%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20room%20for%20half-measures%20in%20Cristiano%20Ronaldo%E2%80%99s%20gilded%20world%20of%20110%25%20%7C%20Simon%20Burnton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fcristiano-ronaldo-hotel-watford-chesterfield%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5abbade94bedd3b42c294ba2a708d8ccd446b29%2F760_694_3240_1944%2F3240.jpg>
 Cristiano Ronaldo’s CR7 hotel in Madeira. Photograph: Octavio Passos/Getty 
Images 
When Andy Murray bought Cromlix House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/apr/01/andy-murray-cromlix-hotel-dunblane-albert-roux-scotland>
, the hotel near his childhood home in Dunblane which he reopened in 2014, he 
announced it would “attract new visitors to the area, create a number of jobs 
and focus on supporting other local businesses”; when Ronaldo revealed his move 
into the industry, he said: “I’ve always dreamed of having my own hotel. I’m 
sure this investment will be one of the best things I could do for my future.” 
His is a world like, and with, no other.

This is not a man who leaves dreams unrealised. “I always dreamed of becoming 
a father when I was 25,” he said, after becoming a father when he was 25. “I 
always dreamed of playing for Real Madrid,” he said, after signing for Real 
Madrid. “I’ve always dreamed of winning the Champions League with this club,” 
he said, shortly before winning the Champions League with that club. “Creating 
my own fragrance is something that I have always dreamed of doing,” he said, 
after creating his own fragrance. “I have always dreamed of winning for 
Portugal,” he said, after winning for Portugal, adding: “Dreaming is free, so 
let’s keep dreaming.”

Dreaming is not free when it happens in the CR7 hotel, which opened in Madeira 
a few weeks ago. According to the publicity material it is “powerful, exciting 
and unique”, offers “a sophisticated, smart casual feeling and the ultimate 
digital technology” and allows you to “open the doors to your room and to CR7’s 
lifestyle, like a true digital pioneer”. There are transparent saunas, in-room 
yoga mats and access to “Cristiano Ronaldo’s personalised training program”, as 
well as to the CR7 Museum, just around the corner. Residents are expected to 
end their day “with a glass of champagne and an unbelievably winning feeling”.

When launching his fragrance last September, Ronaldo said that “it’s important 
to me to give something that is 100% myself. It’s about creating a lasting 
impression and something that people remember you for.” Better swish hotels and 
fancy underpants than, say, knowing winks to his bench after helpingto get 
Wayne Rooney sent off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/oct/09/wayne-rooney-portugal-cristiano-ronaldo>
, an incident that defined him in Britain for some time after the 2006 World 
Cup and which he appears not to have entirely forgotten.

The CR7 hotel website features a gallery of photographs, to give the potential 
visitor an idea of what they may see when they arrive in Funchal. It appears 
that inside the £575-a-night suite there is a coffee table, on which there is a 
magazine. The magazine is called Wink. And so it is that the last thing a guest 
will be reminded of before grabbing 40 of his own, is one of the owner’s. And 
there is little doubt which of the two is going to end the transaction once 
again enjoying a – hard-fought, no-half-measures, 100% committed – unbelievably 
winning feeling.
 