
The news that Hull Truck theatre is to receive a further £250,000 in emergency 
funding 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2015/01/hull-truck-gets-250k-emergency-bailout-arts-council-england/>
 from Arts Council England (ACE) will have come as no surprise to anyone 
following the troubled venue, which has faced aseries of financial problems 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2014/04/hull-truck-theatre-given-400000-emergency-funding/>
 since moving into its £15m new premises in 2009 . Like so many arts 
organisations, from the Stephen Joseph in Scarborough to Northern Ballet in 
Leeds and the Curve in Leicester, the Hull Truck has found it difficult to make 
ends meet in its new building, where costs are higher and income lower than 
expected. Like many theatre organisations (particularly those out of London), 
it has been hit hard by the financial downturn resulting in lower income. It 
has also faced challenges in its leadership .

The bailout means that since 2011 Hull Truck has received emergency payments 
amounting to £1.75m. Despite this, artistic director Mark Babych has declared
there is “no crisis” 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2015/01/mark-babych-denies-crisis-hull-truck-1-75m-arts-council-intervention/>
 even though the emergency funds are intended only for NPOs at “immediate and 
serious financial risk”. As of April this year, Hull Truck will get a further 
£250,000 a year on top of its annual NPO funding in order to help it prepare as 
a significant venue for 2017, whenHull will be City of Culture 
<http://www.hullcc.gov.uk/2017hull>. That’s significant: in this instance, not 
bailing the theatre out was clearly not an option for the Arts Council.

Bristol arts scene is set to suffer ‘for a few extra thousand pounds a year’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jan/26/bristol-theatre-group-residence-arts-scene>
Even more significantly, ACE is being totally transparent about the fact that 
it’s riding to the rescue again, which has not always been the case. In the 
distant past such stabilisation or emergency payments were often surrounded by 
secrecy. Only last May, when ACE announced that it hadpaid out around £14m 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-27518118> to financially 
stretched arts organisations in the previous three years – including the Royal 
and Derngate in Northampton, the Royal Court, Battersea Arts Centre and the 
Young Vic – it refused to name more recipients for fear that it would frighten 
off other funders, sponsors and potential philanthropic donors. I understand 
the argument, but I think that total transparency in these circumstances is 
worth the risk. It’s public money: we should know where and why it’s being 
spent.

With Hull’s 2017 City of Culture stint looming, the payments to Hull Truck 
make strategic sense, and with a little bit of luck and a lot of good planning 
the venue should be able to capitalise on the wave of support and opportunities 
that 2017 will bring. But what’s interesting about these emergency payments is 
that, just like the much-criticisedSustain fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2009/sep/01/arts-council-sustain-fund>
 of old that favoured the well-funded, they often go into bigger organisations 
and their buildings.

Yet we keep on building theatre buildings and still fall back on the idea that 
it is the bricks and mortar rather than the art that must be saved at all 
costs. The reasons are obvious: the NT is always going to be supported, no 
matter what, because having it boarded up on the South Bank in full view of all 
the tourists is unthinkable. But it’s the work that goes on in a theatre that 
makes it a theatre, not the stage or the machinery and at last it’s starting to 
be recognised that what makes a truly great theatre is the activity going on 
beyond its four walls and how deeply it is rooted in thelocal community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2012/aug/30/major-theatre-institutions-die>
.

Lyn Gardner: We can’t afford not to pay our theatre artists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jan/08/we-cant-afford-not-to-pay-our-theatre-artists-stage-directors-uk>
All organisations sometimes face tricky circumstances and even those with the 
best will find that unexpected costs arise. But there does seem something odd 
about ACE’s long-standing tradition of hurling ever more money at buildings and 
organisations that lurch from crisis to crisis. There are plenty of small, 
nimble organisations with absolutely no desire to empire-build by adding 
another auditorium or indeed any auditorium at all, but who get by on very 
little funding; who with a little bit more, they could be real power houses, 
despite, or perhaps because of, their diminutive size. Theindependent sector 
<http://www.itc-arts.org/> of producers and theatre-makers are not only lean, 
they often have a level of creativity that extends across all aspects of their 
work and into their business models.

It just makes me wonder whether we’ve got the whole thing the wrong way round. 
While each case must be decided on its merits and context, what we should be 
doing is moving beyond the idea that some buildings are too big or too 
strategically placed to fail. Instead, we should accept that if some do go to 
the wall there may be stronger, more flexible, less institutionalised 
organisations far more in touch with their local community who could use the 
funding in ways that would be of greater benefit to artists and audiences. 
There will never be a genuine opportunity to reimagine the funding landscape 
and the many current inequalities in the funding system will continue. Just 
because a building is there, it doesn’t mean it has a right to continue to be 
there for ever.
 