
Noel Pearson <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/noel-pearson> has 
declared the “soft bigotry” of Australia’s progressive left in education, the 
environmental movement and media as “the most fundamental challenge to 
Indigenous reform in our country”.

The Aboriginal leader amplified his recent attack on the ABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/noel-pearson-says-abc-a-racist-broadcaster-that-is-willing-the-wretched-to-fail>
 with a sweeping indictment of “the left” generally over Indigenous policy 
failure, a critique he credited to an unlikely source, former US president 
George W Bush.

In a speech in Brisbane <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/brisbane>, 
Pearson said the low expectations of “false progressives” for Indigenous people 
and their habit of attacking policy geared towards their social and economic 
advancement had trapped reformers such as himself in a “zero-sum game”.

Noel Pearson says ABC is a racist broadcaster 'willing the wretched to fail'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/noel-pearson-says-abc-a-racist-broadcaster-that-is-willing-the-wretched-to-fail>
“We will die in the arms of the false progressives whom we mistakenly think 
are on our side, but they harbour a basic bigotry towards our humanity and 
oppose our dignity at too many turns,” he told an audience at an event 
organised by his organisation,Good to Great Schools Australia. 
<http://www.goodtogreatschools.org.au/>

Pearson’s public airing of this critique comes as his involvement in 
Queensland Indigenous schools hangs in the balance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/noel-pearson-at-odds-with-government-over-queensland-schools>
 amid efforts to limit the use of hisDirect Instruction (DI) curriculum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/27/aurukun-imported-syllabus-partly-to-blame-for-school-closure-says-former-principal>
.

It also follows his broadsides against the ABC, which themselves came on the 
heels of ABC reporting on issues linked to the use of DI in those schools, the 
role of Pearson’s organisation and accounts of abusive language used by him in 
exchanges with government figures.

Pearson said the left’s “soft bigotry” – which rejected the idea that social 
change was the product of individual agency, putting disadvantage down to “the 
structures of inequality” – was the “most important idea in race relations 
since the advent of civil rights”.

He said the “basic hypocrisy” of the left came from double standards such as 
“the greens who prioritise conservation over Indigenous development needs”.

Pearson said there was a “relativism” of the left towards “the poor 
generally”, a “class aspersion” where their expectations for people they wanted 
to help fell short of their expectations for themselves.

“The relativism appears to reflect an acceptance or sensitivity to ethnicity 
and culture, but in fact it cloaks double standards, where the progressive 
purveyors fail to ask themselves: what would I want for myself and my children 
if I was in the same circumstance,” Pearson said.

“The answer that you would like to participate in economic development, have 
jobs, not be on welfare and so on – is not a question the purveyors of this 
culture ask themselves.”

This prejudice was “even worse in its effects” than “hard bigotry” and 
confronting it had succeeded the fight against racial discrimination as “the 
most important development in the cause of human dignity” in the first half of 
the 21st century, he said. 

“Australia and the world needs to wake up to it. This form of prejudice wreaks 
a massive toll on the marginalised and perpetuates great social injustice,” he 
said.

Pearson said the vexed public reaction to this idea when he first raised it 
against the ABC last month showed it was “completely foreign to thinking 
people”.

He said the “strangest thing is that this profound insight came from George W 
Bush”, who was “such a notorious wrangler of the English language and someone 
many would rate such a poor president”.

Pearson said Bush’s grasp of the challenge of education for the disadvantaged, 
including that a reform agenda must “expect every child can learn” and “to blow 
the whistle on failure”, has “never been better put”.

He said Bush’s reforms were “doomed” when the all-consuming “war on terror” 
dawned after the 9/11 attacks. “One of the great ironies of 9/11 was that at 
the very time ‘Dubya’ was told of the terrorist strikes, he was in a classroom 
reading a small Direct Instruction booklet to young students called ‘The Pet 
Goat’. No kidding.”

Pearson criticised the Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> premier, Annastacia 
Palaszczuk, for her comment that Aurukun, when temporarily closed this year 
over teacher safety concerns, should look like “a normal state school”.

Pearson, who has since withdrawn his organisation from the Aurukun school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/11/noel-pearson-pulls-education-group-out-of-aurukun-school-in-queensland>
 after an impasse with the government over the role of DI, said: “What 
thoughtful person would think that ‘normal state schools’ have been serving 
children like those in Aurukun in decades past?”

“Normal state schools are routinely failing Aboriginal children. They are 
preparatory schools for too many Indigenous youth moving on to lives of welfare 
dependency and economic exclusion, and worse, juvenile detention and adult 
imprisonment.

“We want schools that cater to disadvantaged students, and that do not leave 
them behind with low expectations.”

Pearson said DI – which has been criticised by some educators as a rigid, 
expensive and culturally inappropriate remedial curriculum – was “precisely the 
approach to schooling that removes all excuses” based on a student’s 
disadvantage.

Noel Pearson at odds with government over Queensland schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/noel-pearson-at-odds-with-government-over-queensland-schools>
“The operating principle of Direct Instruction is: ‘If the student has not 
learned, the teacher has not taught’,” he said.

Pearson said there was “more insight in the reality television” of the SBS 
First Contact series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/01/first-contact-when-indigenous-australia-becomes-entertainment-everyone-loses>
produced by Perkins than in “the ABC’s investigative reporting on me and my 
schools work over the past two weeks”.

“When reality television is more truthful than current affairs journalism, 
then something is going on,” he said.

Pearson said people had “misapprehended my critique of soft bigotry” at the 
ABC, which he had described as a “miserable, racist national broadcaster” that 
was “willing the wretched to fail”.

He said he did not object to reporting that exposed problems in Indigenous 
communities, citing Four Corners’ recent Don Dale report and its 1990 report by 
David Marr on Aurukun’s “grog crisis” as important journalism.

“My problem lies with the journalism that deals with attempts to tackle the 
very problems about this journalism constantly reports,” he said. “Because it 
is in relation to the policy response that the culture of soft bigotry at the 
ABC, and other progressive media, comes to the fore.”

Having been “in this reform business for 25 years”, Pearson said he had 
repeatedly witnessed a media and political culture that “exposes attention to 
problems and then kills any response to these problems”. “Indigenous reform is 
a zero-sum game, as a result,” he said.

“This is why we have policies and initiatives that seek to reduce 
imprisonment, keep children with their parents, give hope to juveniles, get 
Indigenous children to succeed in schools, reduce ‘overrepresentation in the 
prison system’ – and yet a couple of decades later the numbers are worse, there 
are more people in prison and we are heading towards half of children in 
protection coming from 3% of the population.

He said there was a progressive media culture “allergic” to ideas like welfare 
reform, economic development and land rights that clashed with 
conservation-driven laws protecting rivers and vegetation.

Pearson complained that at the ABC there was “no evidence-favouring neutrality 
in this, except for iconoclasts like Chris Uhlmann taking a stand on freedom of 
religion”.
 