
Noel Pearson’s involvement in two remote Indigenous Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> schools has been 
cemented in a new deal with the state government after a rocky period of 
negotiations.

Pearson’s Good To Great Schools Australia, which pulled out of Aurukun school 
after a tumultuous dispute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/11/noel-pearson-pulls-education-group-out-of-aurukun-school-in-queensland>
 including the government’s attempts to limit the contentious Direct 
Instruction (DI) curriculum, has signed an in-principle agreement for jointly 
running the Coen and Hopevale schools.

The deal, which is expected to result in a formal contract by February, breaks 
an impasse over DI that was believed to have had GGSA on the brink of ending 
its involvement in the two schools.

Noel Pearson at odds with government over Queensland schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/noel-pearson-at-odds-with-government-over-queensland-schools>
It will also allow use of the DI model in kindergartens, which has been 
trialled in Coen, in both Cape York communities from 2018. GGSA and the 
education department announced the joint signing of a “partnership commitments 
and protocols statement” on Friday.

It follows months of controversy, including a departmental review that raised 
questions about shortcomings in DI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/05/aurukun-review-children-learn-more-about-us-than-australia-and-indigenous-culture>
 and misgivings among some teachers and community members in Aurukun about its 
delivery. The review pointed to transparency issues with the accounting of 
expenditure that prompted the suspension of payments to GGSA.

These were referred to the Queensland audit office, which was due to hand down 
findings by the end of 2016 about the oversight of finances at the schools 
jointly run by the department and GGSA. Pearson was alsoaccused of personal 
abuse by the education minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/noel-pearson-used-foul-abusive-language-says-queenslands-education-head>
, Kate Jones, and the head of the education department, who then absented 
himself from negotiations with GGSA.

Pearson rejected Jones’s account and in turn complained to the Crime and 
Corruption Commission aboutwhat he said was the leaking of a confidential 
departmental audit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/15/noel-pearson-says-release-of-confidential-school-audits-unlawful>
 into past school finances. But the government appears to have relented in 
attempts to limit the hours of school days devoted to the DI model.

Aurukun: pressure mounts for overhaul of Noel Pearson reforms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/09/aurukun-pressure-mounts-for-overhaul-of-noel-pearson-reforms>
Jones on Friday in a statement said the department and GGSA were “working 
together in good faith to reach an agreement” to enable “the best-possible 
education we can provide” to Coen and Hopevale children.

“The partnership commitments and protocols document details the aims of both 
parties and provides a strong basis for a formal agreement early in the New 
Year,” she said. “We now need to continue to work together in the interests of 
students in Coen and Hope Vale to ensure our partnership meets community 
expectations and delivers quality education.”

GGSA co-chair Liz O’Leary said the partnership delivered “certainty for the 
communities of Coen and Hope Vale and an opportunity to strengthen the role of 
Cape York communities in the reform of Indigenous education”. “The partnership 
with Education Queensland to date has achieved promising results in student 
learning across the academy schools and we look forward to further accelerating 
the progress of students,” she said.

The department would remain the operator of the schools and GGSA would 
implement its “5C education model” which has DI at its core and has been 
delivered in the schools since 2009. GGSA has cited improvements in Naplan 
results over time under DIbut educators remain divided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/27/aurukun-imported-syllabus-partly-to-blame-for-school-closure-says-former-principal>
 over the US-imported curriculum’s value, cultural appropriateness and 
cost-effectiveness.
 