
Noel Pearson <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/noel-pearson> has 
complained to the Queensland Crime and Corruption Commission about the 
“unlawful” release of confidential audits of his Cape York Academy by the state 
education department.

The Indigenous leader, who is negotiating with the department over his future 
involvement in Queensland schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/noel-pearson-at-odds-with-government-over-queensland-schools>
, claims the documents were released in breach of the Right To Information Act 
because his Good To Great Schools Australia organisation was not consulted.

But the department has said the documents, which raised questions around 
financial management of schools 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-11-11/confidential-audit-links-noel-pearson-schools-at/8015908>
 it jointly ran with GGSA, were released administratively, meaning GGSA did not 
need to be told.

Noel Pearson at odds with government over Queensland schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/noel-pearson-at-odds-with-government-over-queensland-schools>
Pearson wrote to the CCC on Tuesday to say the release was “unlawful; improper 
and an abuse of process” and GGSA should have been notified,the Australian 
reported 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/education/release-of-schools-audit-angers-noel-pearson/news-story/e94e3a4a13b2b3c408d0e5ac0965f919>
.

Pearson cited section 37 of the RTI Act, which he said mandated with “third 
parties (such as GGSA) who may be affected by the release of a document of an 
­agency”.

The complaint is directed at the department and its director-general Jim 
Watterson, whose letter taking Pearson to task overhis alleged personal abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/noel-pearson-used-foul-abusive-language-says-queenslands-education-head>
 of Watterson and his staff wasalso reported by the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-11-28/pearson-abuse-claims-'straining'-relations-with-qld-government/8057908>
.

A spokeswoman for the department told the Australian it “informally” released 
the audits to the ABC, which had sought access in an RTI application.

The education minister, Kate Jones, whose spokesman confirmed her account of 
Pearson personally abusing her in the past, has told parliament the audits were 
“released to the ABC under the right to information legislation”. Her spokesman 
said she stood by her statement.

Noel Pearson used abusive language, says Queensland's education head
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/noel-pearson-used-foul-abusive-language-says-queenslands-education-head>
It is understood the department decided to release the two audit reports – 
which were critical of its own accounting processes for the GGSA schools – 
after advising the ABC that the broad scope of its original RTI application 
would be time-consuming and costly to process.

Pearson said the release of the internal department audit of Cape York Academy 
“did or had the potential to prejudice” a current investigation by theQueensland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> audit office. That 
report was due by the end of 2016.

Watterson, in the wake of his reported exchanges with Pearson, has stepped 
aside from negotiations over terms of GGSA’s future involvement in the remote 
Indigenous schools of Coen and Hopevale.

They are now being handled by his deputy director-general, Patrea Walton. 
Pearson pulled GGSA out of its largest school, Aurukun, in response to the 
department’s move to limit the use of its contentious Direct Instruction 
curriculum.

Pearson in Brisbane last week complained there was “more insight in the 
reality television of [SBS’s] recent First Contact series than there has been 
in the ABC’s investigative reporting on me and my schools work over the past 
two weeks”. An ABC spokeswoman declined to comment.

Independent Cook MP Billy Gordon, whose seat covers Aurukun, told the 
Australian the release had “all the hallmarks of a leak designed to damage the 
work of Cape York Academy with little regard for the education opportunities 
for the children of ­ Aurukun”.

 