
The former Manchester City forward John Guidetti has tipped Nolito for success 
before theSpain winger’s proposed £13.8m move to the Etihad Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/manchester-city-nolito-close-signing-celta-vigo>
.

Nolito, who started all three of Spain’s group games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/croatia-spain-euro-2016-match-report>
 at Euro 2016,is set to become 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/manchester-city-nolito-close-signing-celta-vigo>
 Pep Guardiola’s second signing as City manager to follow thecapture of Ilkay 
Gündogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/manchester-city-confirm-signing-ilkay-gundogan-borussia-dortmund>
 earlier this month.

After handing Nolito his Barcelona debut in 2010, Guardiola is familiar with 
the 29-year-old’s ability and Guidetti is confident that hisCelta Vigo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtavigo> team-mate possesses the 
attributes required to deliver in the Premier League.

Ivan Perisic stunner for Croatia leaves Spain to face Italy in last 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/croatia-spain-euro-2016-match-report>
“He is an amazing footballer,” he said after Sweden’s defeat to Belgium on 
Wednesday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/22/sweden-belgium-euro-2016-match-report>
. “I played with him this year and for a striker to have someone like that 
playing on the wing for you, it is an absolute pleasure.

“He just brings the ball into you and he has great delivery, you can just see 
it in the way he has performed at the Euros. I am pleased for him as well 
because this was a big, big time for him and this is a big opportunity for him. 
He deserves it.”

The duo helped Os Célticos to a sixth-placed La Liga finish last season, 
securing Europa League football at Balaídos for the coming campaign with a 
possession-based style of playakin to that favoured by Guardiola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/05/pep-guardiola-major-surgery-manchester-city>
.

Guidetti added: “We had a great year at Celta with the way we performed 
against the big teams,the way we beat Barcelona at home 4-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/23/celta-vigo-barcelona-match-report>
, the way weknocked Atlético Madrid out of the cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/27/atletico-madrid-celta-vigo-copa-del-rey-quarter-final>
 and things like this. We showed that we are a very good team.

“The way we play football is very attractive. I think that helped him as well 
because then he got to see a lot of the ball. We keep a lot of possession, we 
want to play football and that’s the thing he likes.

“So even though he played for Celta Vigo, who are not classed as a big team, 
he still got to see a lot of the ball and they gave him the game he needs to 
shine. So I think that was very supportive for him.

“Eventually it [a big move] is going to come, if you are a good player 
eventually it will come to you.”
 