
Police investigating what happened to £10.25m Northampton Town borrowed from 
their local council in 2013-14 have been asked to widen the investigation to 
include payments made to the Conservative party constituency office of the 
council’s former leader, David Mackintosh, now the MP forNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/northampton> South. Howard Grossman, a 
north London property developer whose company, 1st Land Ltd, failed to complete 
a new east stand development at Sixfields Stadium with the council loan, paid 
£6,195 in November for tickets to a general election fundraising dinner for 
Mackintosh.

Three associates of Grossman’s also made donations of £10,000 to the 
Northampton South Conservative Association between April and June last year, 
while Mackintosh was the council leader. That represented a substantial sum for 
the local party,at least double any other donation by individuals in 2014 
<http://search.electoralcommission.org.uk/Search/Donations?currentPage=1&rows=10&query=northampton%20south%20&sort=AcceptedDate&order=desc&tab=1&et=pp&prePoll=false&postPoll=true>
. According to a BBC investigation, one £10,000 donation, by Gary Platt, 
formerly a director with Grossman in one of his companies, County Bideford 
Limited, was not declared as it should have been to the Electoral Commission.

Although Mackintosh himself has not responded to questions about the payments, 
a spokesman for his constituency office acknowledged that one of three £10,000 
donations was not declared, which it said was an administrative error.

Mary Markham, Mackintosh’s successor as leader of Northampton borough council, 
whomade a formal complaint to Northamptonshire police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/23/northampton-town-police-council-criminal-investigation>
 about the missing loan money, has now asked the police to also investigate the 
donations, including the failure to declare one of them.

Another of them was made by Leonard Western, who was a shareholder in County 
Cemetery Services; as was Howard Grossman’s son, Marcus; David Cardoza, the 
owner ofNorthampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> Town; 
and Cardoza’s father, Tony.

The Guardian was unable to contact Platt or Western to ask about the 
donations, and Grossman’s County Group did not pass on a request to make 
contact.

The other donation was made by Al Mayfield, a hypnotherapist who served with 
Howard Grossman and other members of the Grossman family on the organising 
committee of the Amy Winehouse Foundation ball in 2012. Mackintosh attended an 
Amy Winehouse Foundation dinner in November 2013, with his ticket provided by 
Grossman’s County group of companies,which Mackintosh declared to 
Northamptonshire county council as a gift 
<http://cmis.northamptonshire.gov.uk/cmis5live/MyCouncillor/tabid/62/ctl/ViewCMIS_Person/mid/480/id/712/ScreenMode/Party/Default.aspx>
. Mayfield did not respond to questions from the Guardian about his donation.

Individuals and companies are entitled to make donations to political parties, 
which have to be registered, and there is no evidence of impropriety about 
these payments.

In a response via his solicitor, Howard Grossman confirmed that he paid £6,195 
to the Conservative party fund-raising dinner for Mackintosh, explaining that 
he bought “a number of tickets”, with “numerous guests”. Grossman did not 
consider there to be any conflict of interest, the lawyer said, with his role 
in managing the Sixfields development using money from the Northampton borough 
council loan.

The east stand remains a shell at the stadium after the developer, Buckingham 
Group, left the site twice, having been paid only £442,000, and Markham has 
said Cardoza has failed to explain where the £10.25m is.

Both Cardoza and Grossman have denied wrongdoing; Grossman’s lawyer said: “Our 
client welcomes news of the [police] investigation as he feels that he will 
clear his name, following the negative press that he has received in recent 
weeks which has not been able to publicly defend due to confidentiality 
provisions.”

Both say they can explain what has happened to the £10.25m but are bound by 
confidentiality, apparently after litigation between themselves.

A takeover by Kelvin Thomas, a former Oxford United chairman, is proceeding, 
after the council agreed not to seek repayment from the club itself, and 
instead take over its legal rights to pursue Grossman’s and Cardoza’s companies.
 