
Chris Wilder spends almost every waking minute consumed by his job as 
Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> Town manager. It 
is an addiction that leaves him feeling the highest of highs and lowest of lows 
but few of his contemporaries will have endured the same extreme emotions he 
has this season.

While Wilder has been navigating Northampton to what may become their best 
campaign in three decades, chaos has reigned off the pitch. No one at the club 
will admit it, the fear of a jinx remains strong, but promotion fromLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> already looks a safe 
bet owing to a 13-point cushion to the fourth-placed team. It is a remarkable 
feat for a club that appeared doomed in October.

Back then, under the former chairman David Cardoza, the club faced a 
winding-up order 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/15/northampton-town-winding-up-hmrc>
. Days before a court hearing that might have spelled the end of a 119-year-old 
club, a deal was finallybrokered between Cardoza and Kelvin Thomas, the former 
Oxford United owner who hired Wilder at the Kassam Stadium in 2008.

Thomas paid a six-figure debt to Revenue & Customs, remunerated other 
creditors and remains in discussions with a construction company over the 
completion of a half-finished stand at their Sixfields Stadium. There are also 
early stage plans for a dedicated training ground to be built.Cardoza, 
meanwhile, was last month arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/26/david-cardoza-northampton-town-arrest>
 and bailed over allegations of misappropriation of funds from a council loan 
of £10.25m to build the stand. From narrowly averting that disaster a feelgood 
story has emerged.

An abandoned steel edifice looms over the ground as a reminder of what the 
club have been through but Wilder, happy to be focusing only on football again, 
has watched his team soar. “We had a big cloud hanging over us for a long 
time,” he says. “You try to focus on football but every press conference is 
turned into talk over the stand, non-payment of wages and the future of the 
club. We don’t live in a bunker, so no matter how you want to keep your mind on 
the football, talk always turns to problems off the pitch.”

In the face of uncertainty, the squad grew tighter and embarked on a run of 13 
wins from their past 15 in the league. Now Wilder talks of “finishing the job 
off” and, although he disagrees, the next three games appear defining.

Starting on Saturday at Leyton Orient, they face three teams with promotion 
aspirations, including Oxford, whom he guided back into the Football League, in 
the next 10 days, and a clean sweep would open up a near-unassailable gap clear 
of the play-off positions. Wilder remains keen to downplay the significance.

“There’ll be a lot of rubbish talked over the last third of the season by 
teams trying to put pressure on us,” he says. “We put enough pressure on 
ourselves to win games. We’re in a great position and the next three games are 
against teams that have to win, but nothing changes from our point of view.”

What does the Northampton Town case teach us about fans' role in football 
clubs?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2015/oct/16/northampton-town-supporters-trusts-football-clubs>
It is a surprise for the manager to see them so in such a promising position. 
“I always thought we could achieve. We had expectations but we feel we’re 
punching a little bit. But if you look at the players we’ve got, it’s good 
value that we have attracted them to the club.”

Wilder still commutes from his home in Sheffield on a daily basis, sharing the 
driving with his assistant, Alan Knill. It seems onerous but having lived in 
Oxford, Wilder has decided living away from the club suits him more. His 
passion for the job remains as powerful as ever. “I’m happy with it, because 
it’s a working commute. The job consumes you, it very rarely leaves you 
through. That journey is rarely spent talking about Big Brother or Donald 
Trump, it reverts around football.

“The job is always with you, 24/7. I played over 400 games as a player and the 
highs aren’t as high when you win and when you’re a player the low isn’t as low 
when you get beaten. It really spikes and dips as a manager. No matter how many 
years you’re in it, it’s still a terrible feeling when you don’t have a result. 
When you do have a result, I liken it to New Year’s Eve.”

It is hard not to notice the buzz around the club and an impregnable sense of 
community has been forged between players and supporters. This week the players 
had a whip-round for a lifelong supporter who has been paralysed from the neck 
down since two years of age and had his home burgled with tailor-made computer 
equipment stolen. He will meet the squad on Friday where they will give him 
money towards recovering what he has lost. A small gesture but worth noting for 
a group of players who have had their own share of problems.

There are more Vauxhalls than Porsches in the car park, another reminder they 
are far from being millionaires. Their wages in October were covered by the 
Professional Footballers’ Association and, without the union, mortgage payments 
and bills would have gone unpaid. 

“We have to work,” Wilder says. “Fortunately the players have a great 
organisation behind them that were kept in the loop regarding the situation. In 
times of crisis they step up to the plate and the players can be very thankful 
for that. We are working people and we had two choices: we lay down, let it 
affect us, or carry on and do the jobs to the best of our ability. 

“The players understood everything that was going on and managed to focus on 
doing their best as a team to keep the run going. The supporters saw the 
commitment of the players. There is a lot of crap spoken about footballers 
being nomads but when you get to a club and you create a spirit, there is no 
doubt players want to do well for their team-mates and club.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fnorthampton-town-promotion-chris-wilder-league-two-leaders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1ee8f87f4a0d179f91b0653aa4a3945dcacc60a%2F56_249_3817_2291%2F3817.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northampton%20Town%E2%80%99s%20Chris%20Wilder%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20had%20a%20dark%20cloud%20hanging%20over%20us%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fnorthampton-town-promotion-chris-wilder-league-two-leaders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northampton%20Town%E2%80%99s%20Chris%20Wilder%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20had%20a%20dark%20cloud%20hanging%20over%20us%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fnorthampton-town-promotion-chris-wilder-league-two-leaders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1ee8f87f4a0d179f91b0653aa4a3945dcacc60a%2F56_249_3817_2291%2F3817.jpg>
 Barry Lines of Northampton Town, right, follows the ball into the net but the 
‘goal’ was disallowed against Fulham in Division One at the County Ground, 
Northampton in 1966. Photograph: Popperfoto/Getty 
Wilder has won League Two’s manager of the month twice this season but keeps 
neither of the awards in his office. He has no interest in personal accolades, 
leaving them in the club’s main office. His focus is solely on finishing off 
what he has started and elevating the club to League One. “I’m not after a pat 
on the back about what I’ve done or this, that and the other.”

His success has led to numerous links with jobs in higher divisions, most 
recentlythe vacancy at Rotherham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/10/neil-warnock-rotherham-manager-on-course>
, a club he played for over 100 times in the mid-90s. But it would not make 
sense to leave an upwardly mobile club after surviving the tough times.

“I can’t stop people talking and linking me with teams I’ve played for,” he 
says, “but I didn’t see a lot of links when we were struggling a year ago and 
trying to reshape the club. It goes hand in hand when you’re winning games and 
as a manager you go through cycles. In winning cycles you’re linked with 
everything or if you lose a few games on the bounce there is talk of you going. 
I just put my head down and get on with it.”
 