
The home affairs committee aims to provide parliament with advice in order to 
legislate on subjects such as drugs and prostitution. Keith Vaz, who clearly 
knows first-hand about these things,has done “the right thing” and resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/06/keith-vaz-resigns-as-chair-of-home-affairs-select-committee>
. I sincerely hope that the other members of the committee have never had sex 
at all, let alone paid for it, nor ever taken drugs. Otherwise parliament might 
be in serious danger of receiving informed opinion – and, worse, of passing 
legislation that reflects human nature.
Susie Greaves
Nottingham

• You say Cold Feet “was even credited with gentrifying [Didsbury], as London 
professionals suddenly realised that Manchester had more to offer than just the 
grim estates of Shameless or the red brick terraces of Corrie” (Our old friends 
in the north 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/04/cold-feet-return-itv-fay-ripley-john-thompson>
, G2, 5 September). Didsbury has always been a middle-class suburb, inhabited 
by the well-off and professionals, and we are quite capable of gentrifying our 
own areas without the help of our old friends from the south.
Moira Sykes
Didsbury, Manchester

• I was advised early in my career with a famous lubricant manufacturer, 50 
years ago, that suede shoes, then very fashionable, would suggest sexual 
ambivalence and would be a bar to promotion (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/05/our-best-wishes-to-bishop-nick>, 
6 September). Later a senior manager would reject candidates who wore white 
socks, another fashion statement. At his retirement party, years later, I 
arranged for all attendees to wear white socks. He saw the joke and we are 
still good friends.
Richard Price
Brockenhurst, Hampshire

• We may be of “a certain age” (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/04/never-wear-a-cravat-with-brown-shoes>
, 5 September), but we still have milk delivered by a milkman, on what I would 
still describe as a milk float (although sadly diesel, I believe, and no longer 
electric).
Mike Ellwood
Abingdon, Oxfordshire

• Does Harry Kane suffer hay fever? If so, it may explain why he struggles to 
score early in the season (Sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/05/harry-kane-tottenham-england-golden-boot>
, 6 September).
Paul Ralph
Woodstock, Oxfordshire
 