
Iceland

Iceland offers some of the most wallet-friendly options for northern lights 
trips (apart from less-reliable Scotland). Short breaks toReykjavik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/apr/30/top-10-hotels-in-reykjavik>, 
the world’s most northerly capital, can be good value.Thomson 
<http://www.thomson.co.uk/destinations/europe/iceland/holidays-iceland.html> 
has a new three-night trip, with a northern lights tour and a Golden Circle 
excursion taking in some of the island’s most spectacular sights, from geysers 
to waterfalls, for the bargain price of £374pp B&B, including flights, 
departing 28 February. Because the lights are brightest in the remotest corners 
of the most expensive countries in Europe, aurora spotting rarely comes so 
cheap.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58d70030d3b40f6d2be78d1ccc36399d0d901602%2F0_80_3689_2214%2F3689.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58d70030d3b40f6d2be78d1ccc36399d0d901602%2F0_80_3689_2214%2F3689.jpg>
 Glacier hiking near Reykjavik, Iceland 
An exhilarating off-road super-Jeep aurora hunt, crossing a magical frozen 
landscape and glacial rivers, is included on a new three-night Reykjavik & the 
Northern Lights break withTaber Holidays 
<https://www.taberhols.co.uk/holiday/reykjavik-and-the-northern-lights>, with 
options of glacier hiking and snowmobile safaris, too, from £830pp including 
flights.

Photographers can learn how to capture the phenomenon on camera while staying 
at a new “travelling hotel” based atJökulsárlón glacier, with Tatra Photography 
<http://tatraphotographyworkshop.com/portfolio-items/northern-lights-special-weekend-iceland/>
. Guests are driven to the best locations by Super-Jeep and given tuition. A 
four-day full-board trip with flights and tuition costs from £1,395 – 
departures in January and March.

Wildlife fans can combine a trip to see killer whales with aurora hunting with 
Wildlife Worldwide 
<http://www.wildlifeworldwide.com/group-tours/orcas-and-northern-lights>. Its 
five-day Orcas and Northern Lights break, staying inGrundarfjordur, costs from 
£1,148pp, with flights and full-board.

Norway
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2ad1e727258caac3333c54a835bb8f67b220ea9%2F0_0_3543_2125%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2ad1e727258caac3333c54a835bb8f67b220ea9%2F0_0_3543_2125%2F3543.jpg>
 The converted oil tank at Skrova island, Norway 
Bathing in Arctic waters (in a flotation suit, of course), watching the 
northern lights from a remote lighthouse or mountain top and spotting local 
fauna on a wildlife safari by boat are available on a new trip withSunvil 
Discovery <https://www.sunvil.co.uk/holiday-ideas/northern-light-holidays>, 
which combines the beautiful island ofSenja and the city of Tromsø, with its 
historic wooden buildings. The six-day trip costs from £1,616pp, including 
flights and most meals. Or stay in the city and go whale-watching with a marine 
biologist on a new three-night itinerary withSimply Sweden 
<http://www.simplysweden.co.uk/holiday/whalewatching> from £950pp, including 
flights.

Norway’s Lofoten archipelago is particularly spellbinding in winter, and 
direct charter flights toEvenes in northern Norway make a short break with 
Inntravel 
<http://www.inntravel.co.uk/holidays/winter-snow-breaks/norway/lofotens-northern-lights>
quite doable. Guests stay in a traditional fisherman’s cottage on an island 
close to the Lofotens’ capital,Svolvaer, and explore the coast and wildlife by 
boat (spotting sea eagles, whales and porpoises) and snowshoe, then hunt for 
the aurora borealis by night. A four-night trip costs £1,185pp, with 
half-board, flights and car hire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b2dc39f7c35e44cf502cf5c7c235d1fac5a3ce6%2F0_0_3584_2151%2F3584.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b2dc39f7c35e44cf502cf5c7c235d1fac5a3ce6%2F0_0_3584_2151%2F3584.jpg>
 Reine, a town near the tip of the Lofoten archipelago, 80 miles west of 
Svolvaer 
For independent northern lights hunters, a quirky and surprisingly cosy 
converted oil tank onSkrova island, off Svolvaer, is available through 
cabinly.co.uk <http://cabinly.co.uk/> (sleeps seven, €1,470 a week). Inside 
it’s a modern retreat over three floors, with a new mirrored annex reflecting 
the snowy surrounds and a hammock on the roof for sky-watching. Or join the
Aurora Addicts <http://www.aurora-addicts.com/tours/>, a family of six – the 
aptly named Aurora, aged 12; Oceanna, 10; Lyrica, 5; and Caspian, 3; and their 
parents, Chris and Becki – to chase the lights along the north coast inSortland
. The company offers a variety of trips, which range from three- to seven-night 
stays. The three-night Green Eye Tour, the cheapest package, starts at £720.79 
half-board or £623.03 self-catering, excluding flights.

A husky safari, visit to a reindeer farm and trip on a spacecraft simulator at 
theAndoya Space Centre are on the itinerary with the Aurora Zone 
<https://www.theaurorazone.com/holidays/kirkenes-norways-northern-lights-frontier>
’s four-night trip – from £1,615, with meals and flights.

Inghams 
<https://www.inghams.co.uk/winter-inspirations/winter-breaks-in-northern-norway/northern-fjord-norway/narvik-polar-express-adventure>
 also has new trips to northern Norway, including the Narvik Polar Express 
Adventure, with a ride on the Polar Express train, husky sledding and a trip to 
thePolar Wildlife Park. Three nights cost £799pp, including flights and 
excursions.

Norwegian cruise operator Hurtigruten 
<https://www.hurtigruten.co.uk/travel-suggestions/norway/classic-voyage-north/#.VjIp_CrtlBc>
 is introducing new expedition-style voyages in January, with additional hikes 
and daily lectures on subjects from flora and fauna to polar history and 
climate offered on some ships. New excursions being offered on all ships 
include a “mountain hike with husky” inKirkenes (£80) to a reindeer sleighing 
trip with overnight stay in a Sami tent near Tromsø (£308). The company’s 
seven-day Classic Voyage North trip costs £689pp, full-board, excluding flights.

Sweden
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd23faee1471d89bee87183aff94cdbc7e0d794e8%2F0_81_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd23faee1471d89bee87183aff94cdbc7e0d794e8%2F0_81_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The northern lights seen from Jukkasjarvi. Photograph: Getty Images 
The original Icehotel <http://www.icehotel.com/> in the village of Jukkasjärvi
, 200km north of the Arctic Circle in Swedish Lapland, is 26 this year but has 
plenty of new experiences to offer. There will be artworks in the Art Suites 
(including a lifesize ice elephant and flying sheep), and a new three-hour 
traditional Swedish sauna and ice plunge, in a restored 18th-century sauna, 
followed by a dip in a frozen river. AWinter Survival Introduction 
<http://www.icehotel.com/adventure/new-at-icehotel-winter-survival-introduction/>
 covers nature navigation, flint fire-making, and a “clean eating” Arctic 
feast, with smoked reindeer consommé and cloudberry soup on the menu.Discover 
the World’s Arctic Living 
<https://www.discover-the-world.co.uk/destinations/sweden-holidays/arctic-living-at-the-icehotel>
 break includes all these experiences, plus cross-country skiing and options 
from a horseback northern lights tour to husky sledging – though it costs 
£1,533pp for three nights’ B&B, including flights.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cab28a9352f5dce8407a7c26f8911c0ecbb0d5c%2F0_0_2000_1324%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cab28a9352f5dce8407a7c26f8911c0ecbb0d5c%2F0_0_2000_1324%2F2000.jpg>
 One of the cabins at the Treehotel near the Aurora Safari Camp 
The Luleå archipelago is a beautiful place for a northern lights adventure, 
with theAurora Safari Camp <http://aurorasafaricamp.com/> offering luxury 
traditional lavvu tents with log-burners and Arctic sleeping bags to keep you 
warm. Explore by fatbike (mountain bikes with over-sized tyres), try ice 
go-karting or board a hovercraft around the frozen islands. Nearby is the 
Treehotel, with its incredible treehouse accommodation, including a Mirror Cube 
suspended above the ground, and horse-drawn sledge rides, Segway tours, 
treehouse saunas and photography lessons on offer.Discover the World 
<https://www.discover-the-world.co.uk/destinations/sweden-holidays/treehotel> 
features both options, with three nights in the archipelago, including a night 
at the Treehotel, from £1,289pp, with flights and most meals.

Boffins wanting to learn more about the science behind the lights should head 
to the first everAurora Festival <http://www.theaurorafestival.com/#!about/cfig>
 (15-17 January, prices tbc) inBjorkliden, northern Sweden, which will hold 
expert talks, experiments to recreate the phenomenon indoors, evening trips 
searching for the real deal and photography classes.Off the Map Travel 
<http://www.offthemaptravel.co.uk/> is running a three-day trip to the festival 
for £899pp, including full-board in four-star accommodation and activities but 
not flights. Other new experiences the company is offering in Bjorkliden this 
year include staying overnight in ice-fishing huts on a remote frozen lake.

Finland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc46b82bb10b17241a4ab1578c2b66ceb3eed9b22%2F0_0_3508_2105%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc46b82bb10b17241a4ab1578c2b66ceb3eed9b22%2F0_0_3508_2105%2F3508.jpg>
 View from an Aurora Dome at Lake Torassieppi, Finland. Photograph: Jarven 
Rannalla 
Glamping doesn’t get any cooler than in the new Aurora Dome 
<https://www.theaurorazone.com/aurora-dome>. The igloo-shaped tents, on the 
shores ofLake Torassieppi in Finnish Lapland, have one transparent wall facing 
north for prime sky-gazing. They come with a wood-burning stove, a double bed 
and space for two extra singles (toilets are 50 metres away, if you’re 
wondering). The tents are close to Torassieppi Winter Village, which was 
originally a reindeer farm but opened last year as a small snow and ice hotel 
and restaurant. This can be added to itineraries to Torassieppi,Harriniva or 
Jeris with Aurora Zone <https://www.theaurorazone.com/aurora-dome> (from 
£115pppn). A seven-nightLakeside Auroras 
<https://www.theaurorazone.com/holidays/Torassieppi-lakeside-auroras> trip to 
Torassieppi with sleigh ride, ice fishing, snowshoe hike and husky safari costs 
£1,490pp, including dome supplement.

Another fun new place to stay, from Magnetic North Travel 
<http://www.magneticnorthtravel.com/tour/details/aurora-mobile-cabin-break-on-lake-inari>
 is an Aurora Cabin on skis, which can be towed by snowmobile to the best spot 
to see the lights onLake Inari. The 3,000 sq km frozen lake, way up in the 
Arctic Circle, is a long way from any light pollution, so conditions are ideal 
for snuggling up and watching the sky through the glass roof, or keeping warm 
outdoors in a mobile hot tub and sauna. A three-night trip costs £845pp, 
including flights, two nights in Hotel Kultahovi in Inari village, one night in 
a cabin and most meals.

North America
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e3f4d3d83a5b7e22810bdbeec960aad7da68f0b%2F0_286_5137_3082%2F5137.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e3f4d3d83a5b7e22810bdbeec960aad7da68f0b%2F0_286_5137_3082%2F5137.jpg>
 Northern lights near Fairbanks, Alaska 
For long-haul aurora hunting, the Yukon in north-west Canada is among the best 
bets. Roughly the size of France, the territory is 80% wilderness, with little 
light pollution. TheNorthern Lights Resort and Spa 
<http://northernlightsyukon.com/> near the city of Whitehorse has a new 
seven-dayBest of Yukon’s Aurora 
<http://northernlightsyukon.com/packages/best-of-yukons-aurora/> trip, 
including five guided light hunts with photography tuition and a dog-sledding 
trip, plus optional activities from ice fishing to snowmobiling. It costs from 
£980pp, with accommodation and most meals but not flights.


Another favourite is Alaska. On Intrepid’s new eight-day Alaska Northern Lights
 <http://www.intrepidtravel.com/uk/united-states/alaska-northern-lights-94973>
trip fromAnchorage to Fairbanks, guests get to snowshoe through Denali national 
park to look for moose, wolves and bears (with an optional flight over Mount 
McKinley, the highest mountain in North America), walk among reindeer in 
Fairbanks and unwind in natural thermal waters at theChena hot springs. The 
hunt’s on for after-dark sky action, too, with snowcat tours into the wild. The 
trip costs £1,831pp, including most meals and activities, but not flights (this 
price includes a 10% discount for bookings made by 15 December to travel in 
2016).

Or just stay at home …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b70a3415f6359b11bee2b4cec51a3958ec559de%2F0_0_5620_3371%2F5620.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20lights%20holiday%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fnorthern-lights-guide-aurora-borealis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b70a3415f6359b11bee2b4cec51a3958ec559de%2F0_0_5620_3371%2F5620.jpg>
 Husky racing in the Cairngorms national park, Scotland. Photograph: Alamy 
Scotland is obviously the best place in the country for aurora gazing – the 
further north, the better. Good spots areShetland (598 miles north of London 
but just 400 miles south of the Arctic Circle), theCaithness coast and the 
Orkneys – and January is usually the best month to take a chance. With a heated 
campervan you can go lights chasing whenever activity is predicted.Aurora Watch 
UK <http://aurorawatch.lancs.ac.uk/> offers free text-message alerts. There are 
even huskies on show at the annualAviemore Sled Dog Rally 
<http://siberianhuskyclub.org.uk/2015-shcgb-aviemore-rally/> in January. With 
depots in Glasgow and Edinburgh,Bunk Campers <http://www.bunkcampers.com/> has 
vans with between two and six berths, which can be taken on ferries. Four days’ 
hire from £145.





 