
Alex Neil pointed to 15 minutes of lost concentration as the reason Norwich 
City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/norwichcity> threw away a two-goal 
lead and top spot in the Championship after drawing with Fulham. The Canaries 
were 2-0 up and seemingly strolling to a victory but Fulham surged back and 
claimed a 2-2 draw, leaving Neil frustrated and his players “angry with 
themselves”.

Norwich went ahead through a pair of Graham Dorrans penalties but second-half 
strikes from Stefan Johansen and Chris Martin meant they settled for a point 
and, thanks toNewcastle’s 2-0 win at Barnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/newcastle-united-championship-football-league-roundup>
, second place in the table. “I said at half-time: ‘Don’t sit back,’” Neil 
said, after watching them do just that. “And the strange thing is after we 
conceded the second goal we clicked back into gear and started to look 
threatening again.”

Football League roundup: Dwight Gayle double helps put Newcastle on top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/newcastle-united-championship-football-league-roundup>
Both teams went at each other rapidly from the off but Norwich were the first 
to break through, in the 18th minute. Jacob Murphy drove into the area, went 
down under the challenge of Scott Malone and the referee James Linington 
pointed to the spot. It looked generous but Malone offered no protest beyond 
perhaps wishing he had not got out of bed on Tuesday morning. Dorrans 
sidefooted the penalty down the middle of the goal with supreme nonchalance. 
Notably, theFulham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> manager, 
Slavisa Jokanovic, offered no complaints.

Fulham attacked gamely but with little sense of direction, as if they were 
windmilling their arms wildly while Norwich held them at bay with efficient 
jabs. All the while irritation grew in the stands, hardly surprising as the 
home fans haven’t seen a league win sincethe opening day of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/05/fulham-newcastle-united-championship-match-report>
 against Newcastle.

Then five minutes before the break, they redirected their frustration towards 
Linington, who awarded another penalty as Cameron Jerome fell somewhere near 
the hapless Malone. There may have been a slight tug of the shirt but not one 
convincing enough to quell the derision from the stands. This time Dorrans 
buried it to keeper David Button’s left.

At half-time a man proposed to his girlfriend via the PA announcer, but would 
the spirit of great romance spur Fulham on? Much like the proposee, the answer 
was yes, as the hosts were changed men in the second half. Jokanovic claimed he 
said “nothing special” at half-time but they certainly played like a team on 
the receiving end of a robust talking-to. Johansen skimmed the bar with a 
free-kick, then pulled a goal back in fortunate fashion, Martin’s shot 
deflecting home off the Norwegian’s shins.

The crowd now roused, Fulham moved with much more confidence and purpose, then 
in the 66th minute they equalised. Dorrans gave the ball away in midfield, 
Johansen slipped it to Martin in space on the left of the penalty area and he 
slotted home. After not scoring in his first six Fulham appearances, that was 
the Derby loanee’s second in successive matches.

Norwich came back into the game, but couldn’t force a win. Nevertheless, Neil 
was not overly concerned at dropping behind Newcastle. “As long as you’re in 
and about it around Christmas, you’ve still got a chance,” he said. One 
suspects this won’t be the first time those two favourites for promotion swap 
the lead.
 