
The Norwich City striker Kyle Lafferty has been fined £23,000 and warned over 
his future conductafter accepting a Football Association betting charge. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/29/norwich-kyle-lafferty-charged-fa-misconduct-betting>

The 28-year-old Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland> international broke FA 
rules by betting on a match in February. “Kyle Lafferty has been fined 23,000 
and warned as to his future conduct after he accepted an FA misconduct charge 
in relation to betting,” English football’s governing body said in a statement.

Nottingham Forest make bright start as Philippe Montanier gives youth a chance 
| Nick Miller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/08/montanier-nottingham-forest-championship-football-league>
“The Norwich City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/norwichcity> forward 
breached FA rule E8 in respect of a bet placed on the result, progress, conduct 
or any other aspect of, or occurrence in, a football match or competition on 20 
February 2016.”

Lafferty, who fell out of favour at Norwich last season and is expecting to 
move to another club later this summer, was an unused substitute intheir 4-1 
victory over Blackburn Rovers on Saturday. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/06/blackburn-rovers-norwich-city-championship-match-report>

He made only three appearances for Norwich last term and after being linked 
with a move to Leeds United among other clubs, joined Birmingham City on loan 
in March.

The former Burnley forward started in two of Northern Ireland’s matches at 
Euro 2016 in France in June and stepped off the bench in another as Michael 
O’Neill’s sidereached the knockout stages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/wales-northern-ireland-euro-2016-match-report>
. Lafferty started his career at Burnley and made more than 80 appearances 
before Rangers paid £3m for him in June 2008.

He spent four years at Rangers, scoring 38 goals, and had spells at Sion and 
Palermo before joining Norwich for an undisclosed fee in June 2014. He also 
spent time on loan at the Turkish club Rizespor at the end of the 2014-15 
season.
 