
If you listen, you may hear the sound of sleigh bells approaching. If you 
listen even closer you will realise you are wrong and that the ringing is 
coming from the tills in club shops.

’Tis the season to splash out on consumer durables and football clubs 
certainly aren’t about to miss out on the action. On Premier League websites 
you can find customised PlayStation cases at Bournemouth, Southampton’s special 
range of watches, Hull City’s tiger-inspired wrapping paper and, at Liverpool, 
a photo of Sadio Mané in Santa gear looking overwhelmed by a gift.

Some sites might simply plonk a crest on a reindeer-themed jumper and be done 
with it but others see an opportunity provided by digital platforms and a 
global fanbase. An example of a forward-thinking club areCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic>, who are seeking to turn 
themselves into the John Lewis of the SPL.

Recently the Scottish champions released their second annual Christmas advert. 
The premise involves an old man sharing a sofa with his young grandson. He is 
trying to get the wee ‘un interested in the glories of theLisbon Lions, whose 
50th anniversary falls next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/may/21/lisbon-lions-celtic-internazionale>
, but the kid isn’t having any of it, so distracted is he by a smartphone. 
Then, just as granddad is on the verge of giving up, Leigh Griffiths appears on 
the mantlepiece.

From The Vault: The Lisbon Lions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/may/21/lisbon-lions-celtic-internazionale>
He is a miniature Griffiths, dressed as an elf, here to bring joy and 
Celtic-branded presents to the household. Before you know it an imaginary Scott 
Brown has appeared in the stairwell. Finally, Brendan Rodgers turns up at the 
door too, his teeth as white as the falling snow. Truly, it’s a Christmas 
miracle.

Brown’s appearance is a cameo after he starred in the first Celtic Xmas ad as 
a small child’s only, invisible, friend. Posted on YouTube and shared via their 
various social channels, the video went viral and gave Celtic an idea.

“We realised it was an opportunity to show the lighter side to the club,” says 
Celtic’s commercial director, Adrian Filby. “That we’re a humorous brand, not 
just one with a great history. It was also a chance to engage supporters in a 
different way. Supporters want to get involved. They want to show their passion 
for the club and share the message wider. Effectively we’re a global club 
wrapped in a local market, but these adverts give us reach.”

Using digital video to connect with the fanbase is not new. It was used to 
striking, if slightly confusing effect by Manchester United in the summer when 
they, with the help of Adidas,announced the signing of Paul Pogba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-united-sign-paul-pogba-93-million-juventus>
 through a music video that featured the France international throwing an 
impressive collection of shapes.

But as well as entertaining the fanbase and encouraging them to identify 
further with the club in return, there is also cold, hard business logic behind 
Celtic’s Xmas strategy.

Football clubs in England’s top four tiers generated more than £4bn in 2014-15
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/01/football-clubs-england-top-four-divisions-4bn-2014-15-deloitte-premier-league-bundesliga>
“Of course the ad is retail-led,” Filby says. “The digital platform is key for 
us. Clubs are never going to be able to compete with the big boys who will 
dominate radio and TV with their adverts but the digital space is different. We 
can own that. We have brand stickiness and good engagement levels. A 
high-street shopper may have some loyalty but we’ve got a supporter base who 
are entirely loyal and this is an opportunity to get to the front of the queue.”

The consultancy firm Deloitte’s most recent survey of money in football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/01/football-clubs-england-top-four-divisions-4bn-2014-15-deloitte-premier-league-bundesliga>
 found that Premier League clubs’ commercial revenue (including, though not 
exclusively relating to, retail) has doubled between 2010 and 2015. As more 
retail business goes online and clubs continue to grow their social-media 
activity, that number will surely grow further. So expect Griffiths to get back 
in his green and white onesie before long.
 