
Notts County have appointed the former Crystal Palace midfielder Jamie 
Fullarton as the club’s new manager. The League Two club had been without a 
manager following thesacking of Ricardo Moniz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/29/notts-county-ricardo-moniz-sacked>
 on 30 December.

Notts County sack manager Ricardo Moniz and backroom staff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/29/notts-county-ricardo-moniz-sacked>
The 41-year-old had spent time this season in charge of the Championship side 
Nottingham Forest’s development squad, after leaving Bolton in 2014.

The Notts County <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty> chairman, 
Ray Trew, says he was impressed after holding talks with Fullarton.

“I don’t think I have ever been as impressed by someone at an interview as I 
was by Jamie,” said Trew. “He had us all captivated throughout what turned out 
to be a lengthy assessment of his suitability for the role.

“I’ve got to stress that we had an incredibly high standard of applicant for 
the vacancy, some of whom were unable to commit to the role to the level we 
were looking for and some who gave us plenty to think about when it came to 
conducting the interviews.

“However, when Jamie came in for his interview we all agreed that he stood out 
as the man that we wanted to take on this exciting challenge, with his 
meticulous attention to detail and his mix of self-awareness and self-assurance 
shining through.”

Fullarton will take charge of first team duties from Monday before taking his 
new side to Crawley Town on Saturday.

A former Scotland Under-21 international, Fullarton also had playing spells at 
St Mirren, Brentford and Southend.

Fullarton admits he is relishing the task of managing the world’s oldest 
Football League club. “I am delighted and excited by the prospect of managing 
such a great club as Notts County, laced with history and tradition,” said 
Fullarton.

“To manage a club which has in place an infrastructure, strategy and vision 
off the pitch that provides a genuine opportunity to be successful on the pitch 
is a fantastic foundation to build upon.”

The Magpies are currently 18th in League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> and without a win in 
their last four matches.
 