
Jamie Fullarton has been sacked by Notts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty> after just 69 days as 
manager.

The League Two side confirmed the news on Saturday night after a 4-1 home loss 
to Exeter, which left Notts 19th in the League Two table.

Fullarton took charge of just 12 games since being appointed to succeed 
Ricardo Moniz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/notts-county-appoint-jamie-fullarton-new-manager-moniz-sacking>
 on 10 January.

“Notts County have parted company with Manager Jamie Fullarton after 
Saturday’s 4-1 defeat at home to Exeter City inSky Bet League 2,” read a 
statement on the club’s website. 
<http://www.nottscountyfc.co.uk/news/article/club-statement-notts-county-part-company-with-jamie-fullarton-3016313.aspx>

Owner Ray Trew, who is in the process of selling the club to American 
investors, added: “Whilst it is well known that my position at the club has 
changed in recent weeks, I still have a responsibility to do what I feel is 
best for Notts County and that means acting when things aren’t going right on 
the pitch.

“I have to thank Jamie for his efforts over the past few weeks because he has 
had to face an incredibly difficult atmosphere, somewhat unfairly I feel, but 
has maintained an exceptional level of professionalism throughout and should be 
applauded for how he has conducted himself.

“There is no doubt in my mind that Jamie still has a very bright future in the 
game, but I acknowledge that what was already a tough challenge for him here at 
Meadow Lane was made all the more difficult through a number of factors that 
were beyond his control,” he added.

“We understand fans fears and frustrations, and the most important thing for 
Notts County is that this season does not dissolve into a disaster and a level 
of stability can be brought in to ensure that there is a strong platform to 
build from for the new owners, once a deal is completed to sell the club.”
 