
Ray Trew has stepped down as chairman of Notts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty> and put the League Two club 
up for sale, blaming “foul and mindless abuse” from fans.

County, 16th in League Two following relegation last season, were beaten 3-2 
at Accrington on Tuesday – that defeat coming days after a 1-0 home loss to 
Leyton Orient.

Fans turned on the manager Jamie Fullarton, who was appointed last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/notts-county-appoint-jamie-fullarton-new-manager-moniz-sacking>
, and the board during the defeat at Meadow Lane, with a small group staging a 
protest afterwards. That prompted Trew,who paid £1 to buy the club in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/feb/12/sven-goran-eriksson-notts-county-interview>
, to issue an open letteron the club’s website 
<http://www.nottscountyfc.co.uk/news/article/ray-trew-steps-down-as-chairman-of-notts-county-football-club-2972762.aspx>
.

Trew wrote: “It is with very mixed emotions that I announce the end of my 
tenure as chairman of Notts County Football Club, as I put the club up for 
sale, having re-evaluated my position in light of recent events.

“I must start by stressing that this is not me backing away from a challenge, 
I do not do that and, indeed, if I’d have wanted to I would have done so some 
time ago because it has been a difficult journey at times.

“However, when my family are subjected to the kind of foul, mindless abuse 
that they have been in recent days, both in person and courtesy of the oh so 
brave keyboard warriors, regardless of whether this is just the minority 
ruining it for the larger supporter base, I have to make changes.

“That said, whilst I have a somewhat bad taste in my mouth from the vitriol 
spouted by some, I do not walk away lingering on any negativity but instead 
will take with me the many happy memories that I have accrued from my time at 
Meadow Lane.”

Appointing Fullarton last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/notts-county-appoint-jamie-fullarton-new-manager-moniz-sacking>
, Trew had praised the 41-year-old former Crystal Palace midfielder’s passion 
for the role, saying: “He stood out as the man that we wanted to take on this 
exciting challenge, with his meticulous attention to detail and his mix of 
self-awareness and self-assurance shining through.”
 