
Barack Obama says reality will force Donald Trump to adjust his approach

Obama has warned the president-elect that he won’t be able to pursue many of 
his more controversial policies once he is in office. Speaking at the Apec 
meeting in Peru, Obama said he could not guarantee Trump would not try to 
implement controversial positions he took during campaign but he could 
guarantee “reality will force him to adjust” how he approaches the issues. In 
his final international speech before he leaves the White House in January, 
Obama offered a glimpse into how he envisions life after the presidency. He 
said he didn’t intend to become Trump’s constant critic, but reserved the right 
to speak out.

Barack Obama says reality will force Donald Trump to adjust his approach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/barack-obama-says-reality-will-force-donald-trump-to-adjust-his-approach>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fbarack-obama-says-he-wont-be-a-constant-critic-of-donald-trumps-presidency-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%20says%20he%20won't%20be%20a%20constant%20critic%20of%20Donald%20Trump's%20presidency%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fbarack-obama-says-he-wont-be-a-constant-critic-of-donald-trumps-presidency-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barack%20Obama%20says%20he%20won%27t%20be%20a%20constant%20critic%20of%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20presidency%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fbarack-obama-says-he-wont-be-a-constant-critic-of-donald-trumps-presidency-video&media=>
Barack Obama says he won’t be a constant critic of Donald Trump’s presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/21/barack-obama-says-he-wont-be-a-constant-critic-of-donald-trumps-presidency-video>
Trump attorney general pick accused of racial slur against black official in 
1981


As Donald Trump faces criticism of his business interests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/20/mike-pence-reince-priebus-trump-business-children>
 andtransition team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/20/donald-trump-nepotism-ivanka-jared-kushner-is-it-legal>
, his nomination of Senator Jeff Sessions for US attorney general has reopened 
a decades-long dispute over Sessions’ views on race. Sessions, who has been a 
senator since 1997, was once accused of calling a black official in Alabama a 
“nigger”, and then gave a false explanation to the US Senate when testifying 
about the allegation. In 1981, Sessions was said to have used the racist term 
to refer to Douglas Wicks, the first black man to be elected as a county 
commissioner in Mobile, where Sessions was a Republican party official and a 
federal prosecutor. When asked about the remark five years later during Senate 
confirmation hearings on his nomination for a federal judgeship, Sessions 
denied saying the remark and said there was not a black county commissioner at 
that time. However, records show Wicks was elected in September 1980 – more 
than a year before Sessions allegedly referred to him using the racist term. 
Sessions’ nomination to the southern Alabama judgeship was ultimately rejected 
by a Republican-controlled US Senate judiciary committee.

Trump attorney general pick accused of racial slur against black official in 
1981 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/jeff-sessions-trump-attorney-general-racial-slur>

‘Please I am out of options’: inside the world of DIY abortions

Self-induced abortions were supposed to have become a thing of the past, after 
the US supreme court established a right to a legal abortion in its landmark 
1973 Roe v Wade decision. But opponents of the law have since whittled those 
rights away, and nowDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has promised even more 
restrictions. Self-induced abortions are still a significant, if largely hidden 
phenomenon – one that even pro-abortion rights groups are only just beginning 
to grasp. In 2015 alone, a Dutch not-for-profit organization received more than 
600 emails from women in the United States seeking a way to end their own 
pregnancies. Molly Redden reviewed these emails and spoke to advocates, to 
doctors and to Martina, a woman from Texas who travelled to Mexico when she 
could not afford an abortion in the US.

‘Please I am out of options’: inside the murky world of DIY abortions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/home-abortions-emails-secret-world>

To vote, or not to vote? For many the answer is simply: why bother?

Millions of Americans didn’t vote in the US presidential election. Then on 9 
November, the day after the election, Trump declared victory over Hillary 
Clinton and the country was facing mass protests and questions about who turned 
out to vote. Some voters abstained as an act of rebellion. For others, voter 
registration deadlines or a feeling that nothing would change were to blame.

To vote, or not to vote? For many the answer is simply: why bother? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/us-election-non-voter-why-not-donald-trump-hillary-clinton>

Standing Rock protest: hundreds clash with police over Dakota Access pipeline

Law enforcement officials in North Dakota have deployed tear gas and water 
hoses against hundreds of activists protesting against theDakota Access pipeline
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dakota-access-pipeline> on Sunday night, 
in the latest clash between unarmed activists and police. Protesters also 
reported being hit with rubber bullets and percussion grenades on a bridge just 
north of the encampments established by indigenous and environmental activists 
in opposition to the controversial pipeline. One person was arrested, 167 were 
injured and seven were taken to the hospital.

Standing Rock protest: hundreds clash with police over Dakota Access Pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/standing-rock-protest-hundreds-clash-with-police-over-dakota-access-pipeline>

Support the Guardian’s fearless journalism

Never has America needed fearless independent media more 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b12582921e8c24a8bd1742ea936a2899be565fa57f54568cd44>
. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify 
underrepresented voices, and understand the forces behind this divisive 
election – and what happens next. Support the Guardian bybecoming a member 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b128f2234dac2a5837d533f2698192ef2caf3b853674fb0d8a1>
 or making acontribution 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b120d4724d9af6c4fe4c9ea0a020c3ef1bd2aa02d3c042741e0>
.

Dreams of undocumented young people start to crumble after Trump victory

Fears that a Trump presidency could force hundreds of thousands of 
undocumented immigrants back into the shadows have already started to 
materialize, as young Hispanics are giving up hope of acquiring legal status 
just days after the presidential election. Immigration lawyers are advising 
undocumented youths, known as “Dreamers”, to stop applying for temporary work 
permits through Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (Daca), a program 
introduced by Obama, on the grounds that it could expose them to potential 
deportation once Trump is in power. The president-elect has plans to scrap the 
scheme as one of his first acts in office.

Dreams of undocumented young people start to crumble after Trump victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/20/dreamers-daca-donald-trump-repeal-undocumented-immigration-obama>

India train crash: death toll rises as survival hopes fade

The death toll of Sunday’s train derailment in northern India rose to 138 as 
rescue workers said hopes were fading that they would find anyone else alive. 
The Indore-Patna express train swerved off the tracks near the village of Purwa 
at 3am on Sunday. Witnesses described being jolted awake as 14 carriages 
crumpled into one another, leaving hundreds of people trapped for hours on 
Sunday morning. Police said the cause of the crash was still unknown and would 
be announced only after a full investigation was completed.

India train crash: death toll rises as survival hopes fade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/india-train-crash-death-toll-rises-as-rescue-worker-says-survival-hopes-fading>

And finally: why was everyone was talking about Hamilton this weekend?

You probably heard that Vice-President-elect Mike Pence went to see Hamilton 
on Friday night. After a lead actor in the show read a statement from the 
stage, Trump criticized the hit broadway musical in a series of tweets. Experts 
say Trump’s decision to lash out was a distraction from his $25m Trump 
University settlement and transition troubles. While we’re on the subject of 
Hamilton, check outour profile of Lin-Manuel Miranda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/20/lin-manuel-miranda-musicals-hamilton-broadway-disney-hiphop>
, the creative mind behind the show, from the weekend.

Trump’s Hamilton baiting distracts from transition ‘scandals’, experts say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/20/hamilton-donald-trump-mike-pence>
 