
Barack Obama’s administration has ruled out drilling for oil and gas in the 
pristineArctic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> Ocean, throwing up a 
last-ditch barrier to the pro-fossil fuels agenda of incoming president Donald 
Trump.

 The US Department of the Interior said that the “fragile and unique” Arctic 
ecosystem would face “significant risks” if drilling were allowed in the 
Chukchi or Beaufort Seas, which lie off Alaska. It added that the high costs of 
exploration, combined with a low oil price, would probably deter fossil fuel 
companies anyway.

Global green movement prepares to fight Trump on climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/18/global-green-movement-prepares-to-fight-trump-on-climate-change>
 “The plan focuses lease sales in the best places – those with the highest 
resource potential, lowest conflict, and established infrastructure – and 
removes regions that are simply not right to lease,” said the interior 
secretary, Sally Jewell.

 “Given the unique and challenging Arctic environment and industry’s declining 
interest in the area, forgoing lease sales in the Arctic is the right path 
forward.”

 The move, announced as part of the federal government’s land and ocean 
leasing program <https://www.boem.gov/Five-Year-Program/> that will run from 
2017 to 2022, has been cheered by environmentalists who called for the Arctic 
to be put off limits for drilling to help slow climate change and avoid a 
catastrophic oil spill.

 “Today’s announcement demonstrates a commitment to prioritizing common sense, 
economics and science ahead of industry favoritism and politics as usual,” said 
Jacqueline Savitz, Oceana’s senior vice-president for the United States.

 “The decades-long push to drill in the Arctic has put this unique and diverse 
ecosystem at risk, cost tens of billions of dollars and created significant 
controversy without providing the promised benefits. We now have the 
opportunity to put the old arguments behind us and work together toward a 
sustainable future for the Arctic region.”

 The removal of the Arctic Ocean from federal leasing runs contrary to Trump’s 
vow 
<https://assets.donaldjtrump.com/_landings/contract/O-TRU-102316-Contractv02.pdf>
 to “lift the Obama-Clinton roadblocks” to large fossil fuel projects and throw 
open vast areas of land and water to drilling. But even if Trump reverses the 
Arctic ban, the economics are still unfavorable for offshore drilling in the 
region.

 Shell spent more than $7bn on its attempt to exploit oil and gas reserves in 
the Arctic after being allowed to do so by the US government despite ahigh 
predicted risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/12/arctic-drilling-shell-oil-spills-infrastructure>
 of an oil spill in the frigid ecosystem. The Anglo-Dutch companyabandoned its 
drilling operation in September last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/28/shell-ceases-alaska-arctic-drilling-exploratory-well-oil-gas-disappoints>
, having faced huge costs and fierce opposition from green groups.

 Fossil fuel interests have eyed the Arctic as a huge new frontier for oil and 
gas riches, with rapidly melting sea ice making areas of the Arctic Ocean more 
accessible for drilling rigs. The Arcticholds 
<http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=4650> about 90bn barrels of 
undiscovered oil and 30% of the world’s untapped natural gas.

 However, the International Energy Agency has warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/18/arctic-oil-not-for-today-or-tomorrow-says-iea-chief-fatih-birol>
 that the drilling in the Arctic is not yet commercially viable, while 
environmental groups have warned that opening up new fossil fuel development 
will push the planet over the precipice into catastrophic climate change.

 The Arctic is at the forefront of global warming, with the region heating up 
at twice the rate of the rest of the planet. This summer,Arctic sea ice shrank 
to its second smallest extent ever recorded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/16/arctic-sea-ice-shrinks-to-second-lowest-level-ever-recorded>
, with the annual winter regrowth occurring at a “sluggish” rate,according 
<https://nsidc.org/arcticseaicenews/> to the National Snow and Ice Data Center. 
On current trends, ice is returning at a slower rate than the record low 
experienced in 2012.

 The new federal leasing plan also makes the Atlantic off-limits to drilling, 
another success for environmentalists and coastal communities that fought 
initial plans to lease areas to fossil fuel firms. But the plan does include 10 
new sales in the Gulf of Mexico, the epicenter of US offshore drilling.

The federal government, through the Bureau of Ocean Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Management, currently manages 
around 3,400 active oil and gas leases in federal waters, covering an area 
spanning 18m acres.

 “Today’s decision is a victory for the Arctic and demonstrates the growing 
strength of the movement to keep fossil fuels in the ground. But we also need 
to protect communities along the Gulf of Mexico,” said Marissa Knodel, a 
campaigner at Friends of the Earth.

 “Unfortunately, Donald Trump has made it clear that he wants to return to the 
days of ‘drill baby drill’. That’s why President Obama must use his remaining 
days in office to permanently keep as much of our lands and waters from Trump 
and his oil cronies as possible.”

 The Obama administration has pushed through a number of climate-related 
measures since the election of Trump, who denies climate change exists and has 
promised to withdraw the US from the international effort to tackle it. The 
president-elect also proposes cutting all funding for clean energy and to 
dismantle Obama’s Clean Power Plan, the main policy designed to cut emissions.

 This week, the department of the interior unveiled regulations 
<https://www.doi.gov/pressreleases/interior-department-announces-final-rule-reduce-methane-emissions-wasted-gas-public>
 to slash fugitive emissions of methane, a potent greenhouse gas, from natural 
gas operations. The US was also the first nation to submit to the United 
Nations a plan on how it will reduce emissions, with the Obama administration 
setting a goal of an 80% reduction by 2050.

 John Kerry, the secretary of state, said this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/16/john-kerry-we-will-fight-to-keep-us-in-the-paris-climate-deal>
 that climate change is “bigger than one person, one president” and that 
international progress on the issue was unstoppable, despite the threat of US 
withdrawal from the Paris climate agreement.

Businesses have also stated their support <http://www.lowcarbonusa.org/> for 
the international climate effort, with more than 360 companies, including 
Levi’s, Kellogg’s and Nike, urging Trump to keep up American efforts to ward 
off dangerous global warming.
 