 Adrian Henri, who has died aged 68, was perhaps best known as a poet, though 
he was primarily a painter, as evidenced in a recent retrospective at 
Liverpool's Walker Art Gallery. But it was as a communicator, in the broadest 
sense of the word, that he made his greatest impact, both on those around him 
and on the cultural scene generally.
Born in Birkenhead, Henri grew up through the war years in Rhyl. He was 
educated at St Asaph grammar school, in north Wales, before studying fine art, 
from 1951 to 1955, at King's College, Newcastle, where tutors included Lawrence 
Gowring, Roger de Gray and, later, Richard Hamilton. The influence of the 
abstract expressionists, and then the newly-emergent pop painters, was evident 
in his work by the early 1960s, but already it had a personal signature to it, 
an affection for the urban landscapes and icons of popular culture of his 
immediate surroundings.

Jasper Johns's American Flag gave way to Omo packets, and Alfred Jarry's Père 
Ubu was pictured strolling down Lime Street. In a homage to James Ensor, The 
Entry Of Christ Into Brussels became The Entry Of Christ Into Liverpool - with 
all of the Henri heroes and friends crowding the foreground, and Jesus on a 
donkey at the rear. Adrian was a confirmed atheist.

It was at this time that I first met him. To a 16-year-old discovering jazz, 
modern art and the beat generation writers, his enormous enthusiasm acted as a 
catalyst in my own development - as it did for many others. It was directly as 
a result of this meeting - I was working two stalls down from him in a summer 
vacation job on Rhyl fairground - that I got involved in the increasingly 
populist bohemia emerging in Liverpool. He helped organise various multi-media 
events and happenings that, as well as being extensions to his paintings 
inspired by the New York artist Allan Kaprow, also triggered his 
performance-driven poetry.

Alongside that of the other so-called Liverpool poets, this resulted in the 
Liverpool Scene anthology, edited by Edward Lucie-Smith, then (with Roger 
McGough and Brian Patten) the Penguin Modern Poets' Mersey Sound, which remains 
one of the best-selling poetry collections of all time.

Adrian's poems were very much those of a painter; he wrote what he saw, as 
much as what he felt, though what he described was often expressed with such 
passion that even the most simplistic listings of people or places were lit 
with an emotional glow. "I want to paint/ Pictures worth their weight in money/ 
Pictures that tramps can live in/ Pictures that children would find in their 
stocking on Christmas morning/ Pictures that teenage lovers can send each 
other/ I want to paint/ pictures."

Despite the media attention spotlighting his poetry activity, and an 
increasingly hectic working life as a performer - not least as frontman with 
the touring rock/ poetry band, the Liverpool Scene (with whom I played 
saxophone) - Adrian never stopped painting throughout the 1960s, a period that 
culminated in his winning a major prize at the John Moores Liverpool Exhibition 
of 1972.

The prizewinning work was one of the last of a celebrated series of "Meat 
Paintings", which marked a turning point in both his art and personal life. 
After a heart attack, he had adopted a more relaxed lifestyle and an 
increasingly lyrical approach in his painting, with rural landscapes and 
hedgerows taking over from the hard edges of pop art and photorealism.

Of course, Adrian's role as communicator had never been restricted to words 
and canvases; from his post-student days he had taught at schools, colleges of 
further education and, most notably, at Liverpool College of Art. Through the 
1970s and 1980s, he enjoyed lectureships at polytechnics around the country, 
writers' tours for the Arts Council and a number of writer-in-residence 
appointments.

Meanwhile, the one-man exhibitions continued, and the poetry books 
proliferated. His art and poetry became known worldwide, and exhibition 
openings and reading tours took him across the globe, from America to South 
Africa, each place becoming a source of inspiration for paint and words, be it 
Monet's garden at Giverny or the white-walled suburbs of Los Angeles. His 
energies extended to stage plays, children's books and television plays.

In all this activity, it was Adrian's character that others warmed to. He was 
eclectic, tolerant and generous of spirit, and happy to mention influences as 
diverse as James Ensor, Nicholas de Staël, Jasper Johns and Mark Rothko in the 
same breath - or, in the case of Me, in the same poem. And he could be just as 
excited about the work of those around him, whose paintings, poetry or whatever 
he would promote with an enthusiasm sometimes bordering on the evangelical.

Nearly two years ago Adrian suffered a severe stroke from which he would never 
properly recover, despite a dogged determination to walk, talk and paint again 
- aided, in no small way, by his partner of the last 15 years, Catherine 
Marcangeli. He did indeed start drawing again. There was the Walker Gallery 
retrospective and, only last week, an exhibition of paintings opened in Rhyl. 
The night before his death, Liverpool city council conferred the freedom of the 
city on him.

Catherine survives him. 

Nell Dunn writes: Adrian Henri was a free spirit in the tradition of Byron and 
Shelley. He gave himself no limits, and so inspired others towards a greater 
freedom in their own work and life. I once said to him, "I spend so much time 
trying to stop things happening to me," and Adrian said, "I want everything to 
happen."

He told me how, after a gig, he had gone back to a girl's room in some 
desolate seaside town and lost his wallet. Forced to leave before breakfast in 
the morning, he walked by the grey waves and, hearing a seagull, looked up - 
and a piece of bread dropped into his open mouth.

We once did an Arts Council tour together, driving through the west country in 
a VW beetle. Adrian could neither drive nor map-read, and I got very cross 
having to do both. But he paid no attention to criticism. The sun shone and he 
had a huge appetite for pleasure of the sweetest kind ... sitting in the 
buttercups by the river eating bread and cheese ... discovering the stuffed 
alligator in the bed and breakfast in Liskeard ... falling asleep, his head on 
the table in some down-and-out nightclub in Manchester.

Nothing daunted him. He continued to be fascinated by everything, heaped 
encouragement on other poets and painters, and was absolutely loyal to his 
friends. Once you were loved by Adrian, you were always loved. The last few 
years he spent very happily with Catherine. Adrian knew himself to be a lucky 
man.

 Adrian Henri, painter and poet, born April 10 1932; died December 20 2000 

Interviews and work online

 Interview 
<http://www.varsity.cam.ac.uk/spark/archive/issue6/critics_behind.htm>

Interview and poem: Je me souviens. Georges Perec 
<http://www.dur.ac.uk/~dcm0www/DF/henri.htm>

Poem: Tonight at Noon <http://www.jy-muggeridge.freeserve.co.uk/henri.htm>

Poem: Sea Challenge <http://www.ldra.com/mss/mchall99/poetry.htm>

Poem: Love is <http://www.heatheranne.freeservers.com/famous/LoveIs.htm>
 