
Millipedes, four-letter capital cities beginning with L, and carburettors 
caused problems last month. On 18 January (Cryptic No 26,160 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/prize/26160>, 14 down) Picaroon had 
'Philosopher espied larks about to get insects (10)' for MILLIPEDES [MILL + 
ESPIED (anag)]. What a howler, they cried. Everyone should know that all 
members of the Insecta have six legs and one or two pairs of wings.

Zoologically speaking, that is right, but again we are dealing with a word 
that has both a specialised and a general meaning. Chambers, in fact, gives as 
its first definition 'a word loosely used for a small invertebrate creature, 
esp. one with a body divided into sections, and only as its second 'a member of 
the Insecta'.

So OK on that one, but not so good on the other two. The Saturday prize 
Cryptic for 25 January (No 26,166 by Otterden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/prize/26166>) required you to fit the 
names 12 capital cities (not defined in the clues) around the edge of the grid. 
I failed to spot that there were two possible answers that fitted the first 
part of 8 down (L*M*), namely Lima and Lom√©. Please be assured that the 
capitals of either Peru or Togo were accepted as correct. Then, worse, in the 
Quick for 31 January (No 13,644, 5 down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quick/13644>) the original clue had 
vaporised fuel being ignited in the carburettor of a petrol engine. This would 
have been very dangerous indeed and, on the website now, it is just petrol and 
air that is mixed in that part of the engine.
_____

Late in life Araucaria (John Graham) took to setting bespoke puzzles for 
people who wanted some event or anniversary celebrated in a personalised way. 
This became so popular that he set up a website through which people could 
place orders, giving half his fee to his local church at Somersham in 
Cambridgeshire. In the end he became somewhat overwhelmed by the volume of 
orders he was getting, though he much enjoyed the process of being able to give 
pleasure to others. It must have been one of the rarer examples of a 
nonagenarian setting up a highly successful e-business from scratch with no 
previous e-commerce experience! That website has been continued by Araucaria's 
'webmaster', Hamish Symington, and a team of setters led by three Guardian 
regulars. It is open for business athttp://customcrypticcrosswords.com 
<http://customcrypticcrosswords.com>. A part of the fees charged is donated to 
Brookfield Care Home in Somersham, where John was wonderfully cared for in his 
final weeks.
_____

It is clear that many would-be Genius puzzle solvers have been having 
difficulty getting the puzzle onto their screens and/or in submitting their 
solutions. You may have been getting messages like 'puzzle not available' or 
'application blocked by security settings'. The problem seems to lie with the 
latest upgraded version(s) of the Java plug-in that you may deliberately have 
chosen to accept, or which may have upgraded automatically without your 
knowing. In order to protect your computer from contamination by malicious 
outsiders, the latest Java versions have upped the level of their security 
settings, which consequently reject stuff from sites it does not recognise as 
safe. You need, via your program control panel, to open Java and add
http://www.theguardian.com <https://www.theguardian.com/international> to the 
'exceptions' list in the Java security settings box.

A solver, Brian R., has kindly sent me a list of links to three documents that 
could help you fix your Java plug-in, if you are computer-minded:
http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/jweb/manifest.html  
<http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/jweb/manifest.html>
http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/security/  
<http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/security/>
http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/security/  
<http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/security/>

Alternatively, please ask the User Help desk for advice on what to do, telling 
them what kind of computer you are using, with what operating system and with 
what browser(s). Or you could even go back to an earlier version of Java, 
accepting its slightly higher risk of infection!
_____

If it has not yet come to your attention, you may like to know that the 
Guardian's tablet edition for the iPad now also gives you the daily Cryptic and 
Quick puzzles, plus the Observer's Speedy and Everyman on Sunday. On Android, 
you can get the weekday puzzles, but not as yet the Saturday and Sunday ones. 
More details are to be had at:
http://www.theguardian.com/mobile/ipad-edition-faqs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/mobile/ipad-edition-faqs>.
_____

The January Genius (No 127 by Tramp) produced no fewer than 51 correct entries 
on the first day, the first in being from 'psc' in Australia at 02:31, followed 
by 'm1fe' at 02:51. Due to a major change in the Guardian's Google mail system, 
combined with a hard drive failure on my personal computer, I am unable to give 
you further details of the January Genius but I hope that normal service can be 
resumed next month.

Congratulations to Gordon Roy of Connecticut, USA, who is the winner of the 
January Genius puzzle.
_____

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>. For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 