
'Post-truth' named word of the year by Oxford Dictionaries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/post-truth-named-word-of-the-year-by-oxford-dictionaries>
Last month, Collins Dictionary published its top 10 words of the year. 
Alongside the mic drops, Brexits and hygges was JOMO, short for Joy Of Missing 
Out and defined by Collins as “pleasure gained from enjoying one’s current 
activities without worrying that other people are having more fun”. It’s a 
concept that owes much of its popularity to big-name Instagram accounts such as
@fuckjerry <https://www.instagram.com/fuckjerry/?hl=en> and @thefatjewish 
<https://www.instagram.com/thefatjewish/?hl=en>. Both post memes that have as 
their MO an urge towards almost total apathy that manifests itself in a dread 
of social engagements, a love of sleeping and eating too much junk food, and a 
fetishisation of the state of arrested development (talking to people you don’t 
want to talk to is, after all, a problem only adults face). Although it’s 
arguable whether the acronym JOMO is actually that widely used, as a concept it 
doesn’t get much more zeitgeisty; there are without a doubt more people 
luxuriating in a Netflix dependency than are dropping microphones or 
cultivating cosy Danish ambiences.

Yet the Collins definition is perhaps too simplified, suggesting the trend 
relates to a serene appreciation of your own company. Instead, JOMO comes from 
a place just as anxiety-ridden as its counterpart FOMO (Fear Of Missing Out). 
It’s a small rebellion against the world of social media, where people try to 
make out they are having fun at social events all the time, and a rejection of 
the pressures faced by the generation that came of age during the 00s 
recession, who were told there was no time for laziness or messing about if 
they ever wanted to become financially independent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-month-in-memes-evil-kermit-and-jolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54d91005eb50f8feb3a34e432d782f48535402cf%2F0_0_632_623%2F632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Of%20Muppets%20and%20millennials%3A%20Evil%20Kermit%20speaks%20for%20a%20generation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-month-in-memes-evil-kermit-and-jolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Of%20Muppets%20and%20millennials%3A%20Evil%20Kermit%20speaks%20for%20a%20generation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-month-in-memes-evil-kermit-and-jolo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54d91005eb50f8feb3a34e432d782f48535402cf%2F0_0_632_623%2F632.jpg>
 A typical Evil Kermit meme. Photograph: Twitter 
Evil Kermit: the perfect meme for terrible times
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/30/evil-kermit-perfect-meme-terrible-times>
It’s this same cathartic airing of the conflict between desires and duties 
that helped fuel one of the month’s big memes. You may remember Kermit The Frog 
from such memetic content as But That’s None Of My Business and #tealizard; now 
you can add Evil Kermit to that list. This month, a screengrab of a moment in 
the film Muppets Most Wanted when he meets his evil twin was turned into meme 
shorthand for the internal conflict between what one should do (as spoken by 
normal Kermit) and what one secretly wants to do (as articulated by evil 
Kermit). It’s a meme for this era of dark impulse indulgence, that’s for sure, 
but as many iterations of the meme proved – such as Twitter user@FreddyAmazin 
<https://twitter.com/FreddyAmazin?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
’s version, who captioned his with “Me: I’m not even that hungry. Plus, I need 
to save money, I’m broke. Me to me: You’re starving” – it’s also another way 
for millennials to air their ambivalence towards the oppressively perfectionist 
world of social media with their banal and very human follies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-month-in-memes-evil-kermit-and-jolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff48a352b3b9715c568690a7144b47d7a1aca9cb1%2F0_0_630_698%2F630.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Of%20Muppets%20and%20millennials%3A%20Evil%20Kermit%20speaks%20for%20a%20generation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-month-in-memes-evil-kermit-and-jolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Of%20Muppets%20and%20millennials%3A%20Evil%20Kermit%20speaks%20for%20a%20generation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-month-in-memes-evil-kermit-and-jolo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff48a352b3b9715c568690a7144b47d7a1aca9cb1%2F0_0_630_698%2F630.jpg>
 Photograph: Twitter 
US politics continues to spawn meme after meme, but while Trump has gone from 
punchline to president-elect, American broadcaster Glenn Beck looks set to 
remain the former. After a career spent sowing the sort of rightwing rhetoric 
that informed this election – he called Obama “racist” and stoked Islamophobia 
– he changed tack last month, coming out in opposition to Trump and revealing 
that “Obama made me a better man”. A photo of Beck sporting a trendy new look 
to match his newly liberal credentials spawned the Woke Glenn Beck meme, which 
cast the firebrand as a man trying to infiltrate hipster life. Captions mocking 
both the clothes and views he had belatedly donned proliferated on Twitter 
(“*listens to Father John Misty once*”, went one). Another drew parallels to 
the “how do you do, fellow kids” meme, which shows a scene from 30 Rock where 
Steve Buscemi is a cop badly attempting to infiltrate a high-school student 
body. All of which left Democrats asking the question: who is Glenn Beck and 
what does he want?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-month-in-memes-evil-kermit-and-jolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F319ed237bfeb4d45d4c6003f8438670c92e11da3%2F0_0_633_700%2F633.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Of%20Muppets%20and%20millennials%3A%20Evil%20Kermit%20speaks%20for%20a%20generation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-month-in-memes-evil-kermit-and-jolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Of%20Muppets%20and%20millennials%3A%20Evil%20Kermit%20speaks%20for%20a%20generation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-month-in-memes-evil-kermit-and-jolo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F319ed237bfeb4d45d4c6003f8438670c92e11da3%2F0_0_633_700%2F633.jpg>
 Photograph: Twitter 
The Daily Mail has claimed to have invented the “misguided narcissism” genre 
of clickbait in 2012 when it published Samantha Brick’s infamous work There Are 
Downsides To Looking This Pretty: Why Women Hate Me For Being Beautiful. This 
month, the Mail continued this trend by running a story askingIs THIS Britain’s 
best-looking couple? 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3977928/Is-Britain-s-best-looking-couple-Glamorous-pair-scoop-prizes-fitness-contest-claim-stopped-street-beautiful.html>
, in reference to reasonably attractive twentysomethings Mel and James from 
Essex. This weak excuse for journalism was meme manna from heaven. Soon, there 
were all sorts of other duos vying for the newspaper’s best-looking couple in 
Britain title on Twitter, from Jeremy Corbyn and a marrow to two orange traffic 
cones. Any opportunity for a comfortingly cathartic joke about the sad, grey 
and grotty British aesthetic should be pounced upon, even when it comes from 
the saddest, greyist, grottiest publication around.
 