
Environmentalists have criticised the offshore oil regulator for appointing a 
recent head of the Australian arm of a major oil company to a senior position, 
saying the move is “like putting the fox in charge of the henhouse”.

Derrick O’Keeffe spent the past four years as country manager in Australia for 
Murphy Oil, which under his watch entered into a joint-venture with Santos to
explore for oil in the Great Australian Bight 
<https://www.google.com.au/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=10&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiGkY6q8PTQAhVEJJQKHfO7AH0QFghPMAk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fgreens-push-to-outlaw-all-mining-in-great-australian-bight&usg=AFQjCNEllKaC609onjdRmR-HZO1pjierRA&sig2=4ArkeB7tWqOz53W_qPrqHw&bvm=bv.141536425,d.dGo>
.

This week the National offshore petroleum safety and environmental management 
authority (Nopsema)announced he had been appointed 
<https://www.nopsema.gov.au/news-and-media/nopsema-appoints-derrick-okeeffe-as-head-of-division-safety-and-integrity/>
 to the position of Head of Division, Safety and Integrity, whichreports 
directly to the chief executive 
<https://www.nopsema.gov.au/assets/Corporate/A408741.pdf>.

The role includes the assessment of safety cases and well operations 
management plans, such as those that Nopsemacontroversially approved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/12/call-to-halt-great-australian-bight-oil-drilling-amid-faulty-equipment-fears>
 for BP to drill for oil in the Great Australian Bight.

Greens push to outlaw all mining in Great Australian Bight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/greens-push-to-outlaw-all-mining-in-great-australian-bight>
O’Keeffe’s LinkedIn profile boasts of expanding Murphy Oil’s number of 
offshore oil permits from three to 10.

Murphy Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/oil> has had its 
environmental plans approved by Nopsema to explore for oil in the Great 
Australian Bight, and is expected to submit drilling safety cases and well 
operation management plans to Nopsema in the near future, which would now be 
assessed by O’Keeffe.

“When the company he worked for has an active permit, putting an oil advocate 
in charge of regulating oil spill risk is like putting the fox in charge of the 
henhouse,” said Greenpeace campaigner Jonathan Moylan.

“The revolving door syndrome that tarnishes Australian fossil fuel politics 
has undermined public trust and continues to hold back energy and environment 
policy,” said Moylan. “It is disturbing that the person responsible for safety 
and integrity of offshore drilling has a career primarily focussed on 
increasing oil production, rather than process safety.”

Nopsema recently rejected a freedom of information request 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/02/great-australian-bight-oil-drilling-plans-too-technical-for-foi-release-says-regulator>
 by Greenpeace for BP’s well operation management plan, which Nopsema approved, 
for its now-abandoned plans to drill for oil in the Great Australian Bight.

One of the reasons Nopsema gave was that the documents might be used by groups 
opposed to the drilling activity.

“Nopsema has already shown it is willing to put oil companies’ business 
interests before the public interest, and this move will cement that 
reputation,” Moylan said.

“After the controversy over the lack of transparency surrounding BP’s failed 
Great Australian Bight approval process, you’d expect Nopsema to make an effort 
to win back public confidence. Instead they appear to be digging a deeper 
hole,” said Moylan.

O’Keeffe also headed an oil spill safety exercise in 2015 
<https://www.amsa.gov.au/forms-and-publications/Publications/Westwind_Report.pdf>
, simulating a spill similar to that seen in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010.

A spokeswoman for Nopsema said: “Mr O’Keefe has actively advocated for 
enhancements to the industry, primarily to the health, safety and environment 
field.”

“Mr O’Keeffe’s extensive Australian and international experience in the 
offshore oil and gas industry, throughout the last three decades, ensures he 
has a well-developed appreciation of the challenging environment in which the 
offshore workforce operates, and the well integrity matters that must be 
addressed by industry.

“Mr O’Keeffe possesses a comprehensive understanding of Australia’s 
objective-based regulatory regime, having worked for a diverse range of oil and 
gas companies in Australia. These include Murphy Oil (country manager), Strike
Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> (chief operating 
officer), and Woodside (business manager). A recent example of Mr O’Keeffe’s 
expertise in this field was his success rolling out global safety standards at 
Murphy Oil.”

O’Keeffe declined to comment, referring inquiries to Nopsema.
 