
Gordon Ker feels a bit guilty about Blacklock <http://theblacklock.com/>’s OFM 
gong, and no wonder. “To be honest, when we started in spring 2015, we never 
intended to open on Sundays,” he admits. “We’re a small team, and Soho is dead 
on a Sunday.”

What a difference a year and a half makes: Blacklock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/08/blacklock-restaurant-review-jay-rayner>
 is now a Soho Sunday institution, with 300-plus sitting down to a proper roast 
dinner each week. “The dream was to do a roast like you get at home,” says Ker, 
31. “Nothing beats your mum’s Sunday dinner, so we aim to be the next best 
thing.” Ker is ex-Hawksmoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/nov/18/jay-rayner-restaurant-hawksmoor-air-street>
, so it almost goes without saying that this is a slick operation.

The Sunday menu is gratifyingly to the point, and served family-style: just a 
couple of starters (bone marrow on sourdough, maybe, or roast scallops), 
followed by a choice of roast beef, pork or lamb (or a daunting plateful of all 
three), with all the traditional roast spud, carrot, greens, Yorkshire and 
gravy trimmings. There’s a touch of theatre about it, too, with the joints 
slow-roasted whole over open coals, which is perhaps not the way home cooks do 
it. For pudding: “It’s cheesecake.” Portion control is similar to Mum’s, too – 
you won’t be wanting an evening meal after this little lot.

It’s also one of the best Sunday deals in town: that vast mixed platter with 
sides is £20 all-in. “It’s all about value,” Ker says. “We do cocktails from a 
fiver, we use top-quality meat at a middle-end price point [all Blacklock’s 
carcasses come from one of the godfathers of British butchery, Philip Warren in 
north Cornwall], and extra sides are £4 a pop.”

It’s enough to make competitors weep. Dave Strauss, operations manager for the 
group that runsGoodman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/mar/08/goodman-restaurant-london>
 and Burger & Lobster, says they trialled a Sunday roast atZelman Meats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/10/zelman-meats-restaurant-review-jay-rayner>
 earlier this year, only to jack it in after a month or so. “There’s no way we 
could match Blacklock, so we’re sticking with Sunday steaks. What’s the point 
in even trying to compete? Have you tried their gravy? It’s ridiculous.”

Ker agrees. “Our gravy is off the scale,” he laughs. “We did a catering gig 
recently where our sauces were accidentally poured down the drain, so we called 
up the restaurant, had a batch of gravy sent over, and served it with 
Yorkshires. It couldn’t have gone down better if we’d planned it that way.”

Blacklock, 24 Great Windmill St, London W1
 