
Olivier Giroud believes he was unfortunate to be sent off against Paris 
Saint-Germain on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/psg-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 night, blaming instead the antics of Paris Saint-Germain’s Marco Verratti for 
an unedifying altercation towards the end that led to both men receiving a 
second yellow card. It is the second time in two seasons Giroud has been sent 
off in Arsenal’s opening Champions League fixture away from home, having picked 
up astraight red against Dinamo Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/16/dinamo-zagreb-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 last year. Arsenal’s first-choice centre-forward will now miss the home tie 
against Basel.

Same old Arsenal, but Arsène Wenger’s team in transition earn a useful point | 
Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/13/same-old-arsenal-but-arsene-wengers-team-in-transition-earn-a-useful-point>
“I’d already been booked so didn’t want to make trouble,” Giroud said. “I made 
a small challenge on Verratti but he threw himself on to the ground. I didn’t 
understand, so I asked him: ‘What are you doing?’ Then he got up quickly and 
Marquinhos pushed me from behind. I don’t know how Verratti fell over a second 
time. I didn’t go looking for trouble so it’s frustrating. I think that the 
referee was tricked. Verratti was also on a yellow, so I was surprised by his 
behaviour.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwenger-pleased-with-point-arsenal-psg-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wenger%20pleased%20with%20a%20point%20for%20Arsenal%20at%20PSG%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwenger-pleased-with-point-arsenal-psg-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wenger%20pleased%20with%20a%20point%20for%20Arsenal%20at%20PSG%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwenger-pleased-with-point-arsenal-psg-video&media=>
Wenger pleased with a point for Arsenal at PSG – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/14/wenger-pleased-with-point-arsenal-psg-video>
Giroud had a curious night in Paris, coming on midway through the second half 
and leading Arsenal’s attack with some conviction as Alexis Sánchez equalised, 
before picking up two yellows in the dying minutes. With Lucas Pérez, Sánchez 
and Theo Walcott candidates to play up front,Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> will miss Giroud’s power and 
heading ability for a home fixture that might have suited his strengths against 
a deep-lying defence.

The absence of Verratti for PSG’s next game, against Ludogorets, is a also a 
significant blow, the Italian’s passing providing a vital note of craft in an 
otherwise muscular midfield. If Giroud had a night to echo his worst memories 
of last year’s campaign, David Ospina will have gone some way towards burying 
the memories of hishigh-profile howler against Olympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/30/arsene-wenger-david-ospina-arsenal-defeat-farce-olympiakos>
 at the Emirates last season with a perky,asse
rtive performance in goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/david-ospina-arsenal-champions-league>
.
 