
Whether it's down the altar with Elizabeth Taylor or across the lawn to that 
non-firing firework in a milk bottle, the rules state you should never go back, 
no matter how tempted you are. Sequels, say the Spanish, are never as good as 
the original. Tucker's Luck just wasn't Grange Hill and as for the Phantom 
Menace we could be here all week what with the "younglings" and the "acting" 
but why bother when four little words will do: Jar Jar bloody Binks. Above all, 
though, you should never go back to the football club where you once made your 
name. And no matter how good you are, you should definitely never go back if 
that football club isReal Betis <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realbetis>
 Balompié. Rafael Gordillo and Luis del Sol are probably the two greatest 
players in Betis' history and when they went back, they went down.

That, though, is just the start. Because you should never go back to Betis if 
the last time you were there they didn't pay you, if the last time you played 
for them you tore your knee ligaments to shreds and if you departed the club in 
a huff, vowing never to return while the owner vowed revenge if you ever tried. 
You should never go back when the owner in question isManuel Ruiz de Lopera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/sep/17/europeanfootball.sport1> – 
Andalucía's very own Prince of Darkness, a bundle of emotions more than capable 
of ensuring his threats are anything but empty. And you certainly shouldn't go 
back with the team sunk, the manager on the verge of the sack, the fans on your 
back, relegation looming and an un-winnable game coming up. Five days after the 
president publicly announced he didn't want you anyway because your "knee is 
screwed".

But for every Phantom Menace there's a Godfather Part II and that is exactly 
what Ricardo Oliveira did this week. And, amazingly, it worked. In a weekend in 
whichOsasuna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/nov/10/osasuna-la-liga-jose-antonio-camacho>
 climbed out of the relegation zone at last, Villarreal actually managed to 
win, saluting soldierSalva Ballesta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/dec/06/europeanfootball.sport1> shot 
marvellous Málaga into seventh, Real Madrid bored their way to another 1-0 and 
Barcelona tore another team apart, leaving their coach mumbling: "We tried to 
scare them but we were the ones that got scared; 99% of teams leave the Camp 
Nou with their bums broken," it was Oliveira who was the star.

When Oliveira left Betis, he had been the side's top scorer in a team that had 
finished fourth inLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball>
, qualifying for the Champions League for the time in their history. They had 
only ever finished higher twice – when they were third in 1963-64 and when an 
Irish coach who tried to bribe their final-day opponents led them to the 
1934-35 league title. They had just won the Copa del Rey – their third ever 
major trophy. And they had beaten José Mourinho's Chelsea. Sadly for Oliveira 
that day – 1 November 2005 – was also when he tore his knee ligaments. He never 
played for Betis again: his registration unilaterally withdrawn by the club, 
jilted, he joined São Paulo on loan and then signed for Milan, before going to 
Real Zaragoza.

For Betis, without Oliveira and Joaquín, who'd left for Valencia, the slide 
really took hold. Betis finished 14th and coach Llorenç Serra Ferrer departed.
Javier Irureta headed south for the first time and failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/nov/06/europeanfootball.sport1>, so 
didLuis Fernández 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/apr/16/europeanfootball.realbetis>, 
and then B team boss Paco Chaparro was brought in on the final day of the 
season to rescue them, Betis finishing 16th. The following season Héctor Cúper, 
the man who if there were a competition for coming second would still come 
second, took over and carried Betis to second bottom. Chaparro again came in, 
copy of Art of War under his arm, suspiciously luscious locks on his head, and
steered the team clear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/jan/07/europeanfootball.realbetis>. 
Still the fans weren't happy; it was hardly the good old days. Betis didn't 
score enough goals, fans started chanting against Lopera so he left, refusing 
to return. Puppet president Pedro León was in charge and Lopera started talking 
about selling to buyers that never properly materialised and probably never 
really existed.

This season, though, was supposed to be better: Betis bought Mehmet Aurélio, 
Achille Emaná and Sergio García, there was Mark González to return, and Lopera 
announced that they had the best squad in their entire history. But amid 
injuries and poor form, plus the lack of a real No9 or any genuine 
organisation, Betis were struggling. Five points from a possible 27 left 
Chaparro on the brink. Only a penalty save from Ricardo last week kept him in a 
job. Graffiti attacking the players and the club appeared at the training 
ground. So did abuse-spitting supporters. Ahead lay Sevilla at the Sanchez 
Pizjuán – a game that Betis had not won for 13 years – followed by Barcelona, 
Madrid andVillarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal>. Just 
behind, too close for comfort, lay the relegation zone. "I don't like the 
direction we're heading," admitted Chaparro as he made his latest plea for a 
striker.

This time, Lopera listened. Making great play of the fact that he had "opened 
a bank on a Saturday", which makes a change from pulling the cash from the 
black bin bags he carries round or refusing to pay for players' operations, he 
found almost €10m. Never mind León's claim five days earlier that the deal 
would not and should not happen, Oliveira was back.

There were 25 minutes to go until the window slammed shut; barely a week 
before a Seville derby that had everything except any decent football – 
screaming tackles and death defying rolls, pre-match stirring with Chaparro 
accusing Sevilla's Diego Capel of being a cheat and a diver (which he is), 
Manolo Jiménez accusing him back, post-match sniping when the pair refused to 
shake hands, a game-turning red card, some choice repartee from theSevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> fans who chanted "Chaparro's a 
car-park attendant", thanks to a costume that was part maitre d', part hotel 
doorman and part snooker referee, and a furious final whistle "sleeve cutter" 
from the Betis boss.

It was a gesture of rage and relief; one that could yet land Chaparro in big 
trouble. If it was foolish, it was also understandable – which is more than can 
be said for his accent – because this weekend García got the first and Oliveira 
got the second as Betis won the derby 2-1 and Chaparro a stay of execution. 
When the Brazilian broke the rules and went back in mid-week, Oliveira 
insisted: "I'm not Betis's saviour." Few believed him then. Even fewer believe 
him now. Maybe sequels are not so bad after all.

Results: Barcelona 3-1 Sporting Gijon, Getafe 1-1 Espanyol, Málaga 3-2 
Almería, Mallorca 1-1 Deportivo La Coruña, Osasuna 1-0 Valencia, Recreativo 
Huelva 0-3 Atlético Madrid, Valladolid 2-1 Athletic Bilbao, Villarreal 2-1 
Numancia, Real Madrid 1-0 Racing Santander, Sevilla 1-2 Real Betis.Latest La 
Liga table 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=29>
 