
In June I asked for your views on whether the Guardian cryptics were getting 
harder or not. Some of you felt they were, but the clear majority were of the 
opinion that they had not changed much over the last decade and some even 
thought that they were easier. One solver, who thought that they were slightly 
more difficult, said that this was a good thing, as she liked to be challenged. 
Several pleaded that the puzzles should not be dumbed down.

It is not easy to interpret this response as there is a clear perception in 
some quarters that the puzzles have become more difficult. Those who replied 
are, by definition, not a representative sample of all Guardian solvers, 
because they are sufficiently obsessed to think it worth taking out a Â£25 
annual subscription to the service, have bothered to read what I have written 
and have found time to reply. In my view a surprisingly large number of the 
replies were from abroad, from non-Brits as well as expats. Also, it is a fact 
that with time you become familiar with a setter's style and foibles. Bunthorne 
did get easier the more you wrestled with him. By contrast, the two new setters 
(Brummie and Brendan) strike people as hard.

As I have written before, Araucaria and Rufus between them produce roughly 100 
puzzles a year, almost one third of the 312 puzzles published each year. There 
is no reason to suppose that their puzzles have become objectively more 
difficult. Roughly another third of the total is now provided by Arachne, 
Audreus, Auster, Chifonie, Janus, Logodaedalus, Orlando, Quantum and Rover. I 
can detect no change in difficulty there. So the spotlight must be on the 
remaining 100 or so puzzles a year, set by the more "difficult" members of our 
stable.

Here, a comment from JB may be hitting the mark. "At 41 years old I shouldn't 
be waning too much, yet I feel less regularly capable of finishing [the 
puzzles] than a few years back. It appears to me that a higher proportion of 
setters are throwing in words that no reasonably educated person could be 
expected to know ... I feel that most Guardian solvers prefer not to require 
extensive dictionary use."

Now what a "reasonably educated person can be expected to know" is a pretty 
fluid category. Did JB's person's education include some advanced maths, the 
sciences, a bit of medicine, basic botany - or does "reasonably educated" still 
imply a bias towards the innumerate, anti-technological, liberal arts 
experience that has dominated the British education and social system since the 
1860s?

My assumption has been that most Guardian solvers like the odd clue that leads 
them, via dictionaries, other reference books and, increasingly, Google, to 
discover words and facts of which they were previously unaware. Not too many, 
of course, and perhaps not too many on a weekday. But then 52 of the 100 or so 
"harder" puzzles each year appear on Saturday in any case. However, I have made 
a mental note to try during the rest of the week, only to let through words 
that JB would need to check in a dictionary if the clue takes the solver gently 
and fairly by the hand towards the correct answer.

_____

I made reference in June to a series of notes that I had been writing each 
Monday in the Guardian on "how to solve crosswords". Several people have asked 
whether it would be possible to read them. The answer is yes: go to
theguardian.com <https://www.theguardian.com/international> and type "Hugh 
Stephenson" into the "search this site" facility. They are all there in reverse 
order, from the first on January 2 to the last on May 29. (Alternatively, you 
could buy my book Secrets of the setters: how to solve the Guardian crossword, 
available online fromguardianbookshop.co.uk <http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk> 
or second-hand fromamazon.co.uk <http://www.amazon.co.uk>)

_____

While I am in book-plugging mode, it may interest some of you to know that 
Chambers is giving a party next month to launch an entirely revised edition of 
the Chambers Crossword Manual by Don Manley (Pasquale to you and me). It is at 
7pm on Thursday October 19 at Blackwell's Bookshop on Broad Street in Oxford. 
Colin Dexter (of Inspector Morse) is expected to do the honours. The party is 
open to the public so you can just turn up, though it may be a bit crowded.

_____

May I end by repeating my plea that, if you have questions or complaints of a 
technical nature, or relating to your subscription, you should direct them to
subshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com> and not to me [
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>]. I am not being unfriendly, 
but "subshelp" should know the answer, which I will not. And as I am frequently 
away for long periods you are likely to get a quicker response.
 