
Berlin’s local newspapers have painted it either as a melodrama about 
globalisation fears or a tragedy of local heroes fighting against a big bad 
government. Yet until this week, the drama at the German capital’sVolksbühne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/volksbuhne> theatre had taken place mainly 
offstage.

On Monday, 180 directors, actors and stage designers associated with the 
Volksbühne published an open letter in which they expressed “deep concerns” 
about plans for the future of the legendary avant garde theatre, which is due 
to be headed by Tate Modern’s outgoing director Chris Dercon from early 2017.

“This is not a friendly takeover,” they write. “It is an irreversible turning 
point and a break in the recent history of the theatre. This change represents 
historical levelling and razing of identity. The artistic processing of social 
conflict is displaced in favour of a globally extended consensus culture with 
uniform presentation and sales patterns.”

In another open letter 
<http://nachtkritik.de/images/stories/pdf/OffenerBriefPeymann210616.pdf>, the 
director of the nearby Berliner Ensemble theatre called on the city’s mayor to 
pay off Dercon and cancel his contract. Politicians from Berlin’s Green and 
Left parties have indicated that they will make the future of the theatre one 
of their key campaigning issues for the upcoming state election in September.

The Volksbühne, conceived in the early 20th century as a place where 
working-class theatre could meet avant garde art, holds a status in Berlin’s 
cultural landscape comparable to that of the legendary Berghain nightclub.


Known for its rowdy, disjointed and often overtly political performances 
located somewhere between traditional spoken-word theatre and surrealist 
variety shows, and frequented by spectators who are encouraged to bring their 
own beer, the Volksbühne has at least as many detractors as admirers. Few, 
however, question that it has played a key role in building the city’s unkempt 
and bedraggled charm.

Yet with Berlin’s senate increasingly aware of its pulling power as a cultural 
capital, there are fears that the city’s arts scene could become the victim of 
its own success.

Questions about the theatre’s new direction had first been raised when Dercon 
was announced as the replacement for Frank Castorf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/24/tate-modern-boss-chris-dercon-berlin-volksbuhne-theatre>
 in April 2015. Dercon has headed up galleries in Brussels, Rotterdam, London, 
New York and Munich, but has little experience on the stage. His critics voiced 
fears that the Volksbühne would cut ties with a century-long tradition of 
political theatre and become a more generic and commercialised event space.

Specifically, the signatories to the open letter said they were taken aback by 
the idea that introducing multidisciplinary practices to their theatre 
represented a radical change of direction – summed up in the proposed name 
change from Volksbühne to “Volksbühne plus”.

Thomas Martin, one of the organisers of the letter, said the theatre had 
experimented with film and music for over 90 years, ranging from projections by 
artist George Grosz to concerts by the Pogues.

Martin denied criticism that his protest mirrored the same anti-globalisation 
fears that have elsewhere surfaced in thePegida protest movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/pegida-germany-anti-immigrant-group-polarising-dresden>
 and therise of Germany’s anti-immigration party Alternative für Deutschland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/19/frauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview>
. “We are not afraid of the new. In fact, we were one of the first theatres in 
Germany to put debates around globalisation on the stage.” Earlier this year, 
the theatrehosted the launch of former Greek finance minister Yanis 
Varoufakis’s new pan-European leftwing movement DiEM25 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/10/yanis-varoufakis-launches-pan-european-leftwing-movement-diem25>
.

Yanis Varoufakis launches pan-European leftwing movement DiEM25
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/10/yanis-varoufakis-launches-pan-european-leftwing-movement-diem25>
Berlin’s senate and Dercon have published a statement in response to the open 
letter in which they insist that staff fears were unfounded. Dercon has said he 
is keen to continue working with many of the artists currently working at the 
theatre. The theatre would continue to work with a set ensemble of actors, as 
well as visiting performers who would be announced at a later stage.

“We are planning a programme that builds a bridge between the present and the 
history of theatre and the history of the Volksbühne,” Dercon said. “In every 
generation, this theatre has put a revolution on the stage – and every time the 
circumstances were more flexible afterwards than they were before.”

Germany’s commissioner for culture and media, Monika Grütters, who is thought 
to have played a part not just in recruiting Dercon but also in convincing 
former British Museum directorNeil MacGregor to head up Berlin’s Humboldt Forum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/10/appointment-of-neil-macgregor-as-head-of-humboldt-forum-silences-critics>
, tried to play down the row, saying that the unrest at the theatre was “not 
unproblematic but not unusual either”.

But staff at the theatre remain in a boisterous mood. Asked what he and the 
other signatories would do if their concerns were not addressed, Martin said: 
“We always find creative solutions. Remember that this theatre has a 
revolutionary history.”
 