
More Australians oppose the idea of funding infrastructure for the Carmichael 
coalmine <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/carmichael-coalmine> than 
support it, although Queenslanders are more evenly split, a new poll has found.

The Research Now poll commissioned by the Australia Institute, released on 
Tuesday, found that 41% opposed funding construction of infrastructure to help 
the Adani coalmine, compared with 26% who supported it and 33% who were 
undecided.

But Queenslanders were 42% opposed to the infrastructure for Adani and 33% in 
support.

Australia dubbed 'fossil of the day' after lobbying for coal mine at climate 
talks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/17/australia-dubbed-fossil-of-the-day-after-lobbying-for-coal-mine-at-climate-talks>
Matt Canavan, the minister for northern Australia, confirmed on Monday that 
the federal government was considering lending $1bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/adani-protest-hundreds-rally-against-proposed-1bn-loan-to-mining-company>
 for the construction of a 310km rail line from the proposed coalmine in the 
Galilee Basin to the port.

The poll of 1,442 people asked how the $5bn Northern Australia infrastructure 
facility should be spent by asking them to vote for five priorities.

Of the 11 options, the most popular were hospitals and health infrastructure 
(chosen by 75% of respondents), schools and universities (54%) and large-scale 
renewable energy projects (51%).

Rail lines for coal trains (11%) and ports for coal export (7%) were the least 
popular options.

When given a direct choice between the two, 75% of respondents opted for 
renewables and 11% picked infrastructure for coal companies, with 15% not sure.

The Australia Institute is highly critical of the fund, noting in a statement 
it would pay for “infrastructure that is unable to attract commercial 
financing, which could include subsidising the controversial Adani Carmichael 
coalmine”.

Respondents were sceptical of the benefits of investing in northern Australia, 
with 45% saying the region should not be singled out for funding compared with 
35% who said it should. Just over a third (34%) said northern Australia was the 
biggest priority for infrastructure, and 41% disagreed.

Ben Oquist, the Australia Institute executive director, said: “Australians do 
not want to see their funds misdirected towards uncommercial infrastructure for 
coal and gas companies.

“That is money we can’t spend on things like public services where people live 
now, or in renewable energy,” he said.

“Australian governments have spent billions of public money subsidising mining 
infrastructure, while critical urban infrastructure has struggled to cope with 
surging populations.”

The poll found 47% of respondents thought that the southern parts of Australia 
needed at least as much infrastructure spending as northern Australia, while 
32% felt the north needed more.

“Australians are right to doubt $5bn is better spent developing the north or 
fixing critical infrastructure issues in their cities and towns,” Oquist said.

News that the government was considering a $1bn loan to Adani for a rail line 
sparked a protest in Melbourne before an expected meeting in the city between 
Malcolm Turnbull and the head ofthe Indian mining company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/03/adani-coal-mine-green-groups-fume-over-plan-for-1b-federal-loan>
, Gautam Adani.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fanti-coal-protesters-rally-in-melbourne-against-adani-loan-proposal-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anti-coal%20protesters%20rally%20%20in%20Melbourne%20against%20Adani%20loan%20proposal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fanti-coal-protesters-rally-in-melbourne-against-adani-loan-proposal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anti-coal%20protesters%20rally%20%20in%20Melbourne%20against%20Adani%20loan%20proposal%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fanti-coal-protesters-rally-in-melbourne-against-adani-loan-proposal-video&media=>
Anti-coal protesters rally in Melbourne against Adani loan proposal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/dec/05/anti-coal-protesters-rally-in-melbourne-against-adani-loan-proposal-video>
 The chief Nationals whip, George Christensen, gave strong backing for the 
idea, describing it on Facebook as a means to “open up jobs and economic 
opportunity far beyond” the Adani mine.
   Facebook post by George Christensen on 5 December, 2016 about rail line for 
Adani coal mine  