
ORLAN's best photograph: a striptease in the style of Botticelli
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/07/orlan-best-photograph-birth-of-venus-striptease-with-trousseau>
Just up from the Place de la République in Paris, where there are still 
candles, bouquets of flowers and a steel fence in front of the cafe hit during 
November’s terror attacks, there is a white door stencilled with red letters 
that read “ORLAN”.

Inside the two-storey building, the walls are lined with bubble wrapped 
self-portraits. A 3D-printed skull sits on a table; a recent copy ofCharlie 
Hebdo <https://www.theguardian.com/media/charlie-hebdo> lies on a paper-strewn 
desk; and a giant fern stands beside a wheel covered in blue Christmas lights. 
ORLAN’s studio is a jungle.

“It’s a casino,” the artist corrects me, her trademark black and white hair 
standing on end, gleaming subdermal implants tucked above her round owl-like 
spectacles. “This studio is too small,” she says, rolling her eyes.

ORLAN has been making art for half a century, but her work is soon to return 
to the limelight as part of theBotticelli Reimagined 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/exhibition-botticelli-reimagined/about-the-exhibition/>
 exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. She also performs 
alongside art rockersChicks on Speed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/oct/17/germany.politicalbooks> at the 
Volksbühne <https://www.volksbuehne-berlin.de/> in Berlin later this month and 
opens a career retrospective at theSungkok Art Museum 
<http://sungkokmuseum.org/> in Seoul in June.

She is 69 but doesn’t look it. A plastic surgery pioneer, she has had nine 
operations in the name of her art. And it’s not the only thing she has 
modified. Born Mireille Porte inSaint-Étienne 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saint-%C3%89tienne> in 1947, she changed her 
name when she was 15. “I’m like Raphael or Cézanne, it’s my artistic name,” she 
says. “I have changed my name on my front door, my bank card and my medical 
card.” But not on her passport, she says, where it’s impossible to have only 
one name. Can I see it? ORLAN shakes her head. “You’re not the police.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Forlan-i-walked-a-long-way-for-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6418ded571a85f19c0dd7f900f880eb4e25d6624%2F0_0_7087_5188%2F7087.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ORLAN%3A%20%20'I%20walked%20a%20long%20way%20for%20women'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Forlan-i-walked-a-long-way-for-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ORLAN%3A%20%20%27I%20walked%20a%20long%20way%20for%20women%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Forlan-i-walked-a-long-way-for-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6418ded571a85f19c0dd7f900f880eb4e25d6624%2F0_0_7087_5188%2F7087.jpg>
 Incidental Strip-tease Using Sheets by ORLAN. Photograph: Handout 
The V&A exhibition will showcase a number of her early works including 
Incidental Strip-tease Using Sheets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/07/orlan-best-photograph-birth-of-venus-striptease-with-trousseau>
 from 1974-75. This sequential black and white photo series shows the artist 
stripping off, removing a set of sperm-covered wedding sheets and posing as 
Venus from Botticelli’s 15th-century masterpiece. “When a woman strips,” she 
says, “she will never be completely naked. There are so many prejudices and 
stereotypes still on her.”

ORLAN puts clothes on in the name of art, too. In 1971, she dressed in baroque 
garments, baptised herself as Saint-Orlan, charged gallery-goers for kisses 
with tongue, and gussied herself up as an antichrist superstar with one nipple 
exposed. Two decades later, in the The Reincarnation of Saint-Orlan, she 
dressed as a rainbow-hued harlequin and pranced around a hospital operating 
theatre. Her nip-and-tucks were broadcast live to art institutions worldwide on 
a satellite network, which was expensive. “Now we have webcams, it’s easy.”

She stayed awake for all her surgeries, reading philosophical essays like a 
storyteller until she could no longer talk (the surgeon worked for free, she 
says, in exchange for the art). Flicking through a colour catalogue of 
photographs, she is taken back to when she lay on the operating table with 
dotted lines covering her untouched face. “I didn’t have surgeries to be 
beautiful but really for art, to project new images of beauty,” she explains. 
“The real goal was to take off the mask you were born with and reinvent it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Forlan-i-walked-a-long-way-for-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F547d598146ab432a3f037e57a0c9ece62a5a01f7%2F0_0_2896_1736%2F2896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ORLAN%3A%20%20'I%20walked%20a%20long%20way%20for%20women'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Forlan-i-walked-a-long-way-for-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ORLAN%3A%20%20%27I%20walked%20a%20long%20way%20for%20women%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Forlan-i-walked-a-long-way-for-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F547d598146ab432a3f037e57a0c9ece62a5a01f7%2F0_0_2896_1736%2F2896.jpg>
 ORLAN before the cosmetic surgery operation she broadcast to galleries 
worldwide.
 Photograph: Sipa Press/REX/Shutterstock 
Don’t ask if her plastic surgery was designed to make her look like an old 
masters painting – many have said she has the chin of Botticelli’s Venus, the 
lips of Boucher’s Europa and the forehead of Da Vinci’s Mona Lisa, among other 
classic references. ORLAN rolls her eyes again. “It’s absolutely wrong,” she 
says, sitting up straight. “All my work is against the standard of beauty.”

Carnal art, as defined by ORLAN, is classical self-portraiture made through 
today’s technology, with the body as a “modified ready-made”. In contrast to 
body art, pleasure – not pain – is its focus. “Vive la morphine!” as she writes
on her website <http://www.orlan.eu/bibliography/carnal-art/>.

This philosophy has been influential. Just last week, ORLAN reopened her 
$31.7m (£23m) plagiarism lawsuit 
<http://pagesix.com/2016/01/07/lady-gaga-plagiarism-lawsuit-coming-to-new-york/>
 against Lady Gaga. She plans to subpoena Gaga’s creative team, fashion 
director Nicola Formichetti and makeup artist Billy Brasfield, for Gaga’s Born 
This Way cover art and video, which she argues veer too close to her own work. 
ORLAN’s New York law team are appealing for 7.5% of album sales from a pop star 
said tobe worth $250m 
<http://www.statisticbrain.com/lady-gaga-career-statistics/>.

Sipping tea, she declines to talk about the lawsuit (last year she told Paris 
Match <http://www.parismatch.com/Culture/Art/ORLAN-tombe-les-masques-599032> 
she is acting as a spokesperson for other artists), but says of her art: “I am 
a pioneer and I never make compromises.”

While her recent work has embraced technology – 3D animations, augmented 
reality and apps – she doesn’t see herself jumping on any trends. “The aim is 
to be contemporary but with a critical distance when using technology,” she 
says. “Many times with new tech art, it’s almost only that – showing the tech 
before the idea.”

Her app, AUGMENT <http://www.augmentedev.com/portfolio-items/orlan/>, allows 
anyone who sees herPeking opera-inspired mask series 
<http://www.orlan.eu/works/photo-2/> – whether in a gallery, book, or on screen 
– to take a virtual selfie with the artist. Scans the work with your smartphone 
(much like a QR code), and out pops a 3D-animated avatar of ORLAN, performing 
acrobatics similar to those in a Peking opera performance. “Stage time was 
denied to women in Beijing in the past,” says ORLAN. “As an artist, I am 
playing with this.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Forlan-i-walked-a-long-way-for-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F814aaba1fd65c2445c9f14dd8e376140c7d7eb5c%2F0_0_2500_1499%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ORLAN%3A%20%20'I%20walked%20a%20long%20way%20for%20women'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Forlan-i-walked-a-long-way-for-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ORLAN%3A%20%20%27I%20walked%20a%20long%20way%20for%20women%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Forlan-i-walked-a-long-way-for-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F814aaba1fd65c2445c9f14dd8e376140c7d7eb5c%2F0_0_2500_1499%2F2500.jpg>
 ORLAN, photographed in front of her surgery-inspired self-portraits in 1999. 
Photograph: Joel Robine/AFP 
Feminism is a line through all her work, she says. Her surgical performances 
were oddly prompted by anectopic pregnancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/jul/01/orlan-performance-artist-carnal-art>
 in 1978, which saw her rushed to the emergency room. She would have had an 
abortion anyway, she insists. In fact, she has had several and calls her 
outlook on motherhood “radical”.

“The COP21 UN climate change conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/cop-21-un-climate-change-conference-paris>
 spoke about pollution, not about women who give birth and pollute the planet,” 
she says. “As a mother, you have to stay in the house and you need to have no 
personal life,” says ORLAN. “You have to stop your development.”

Orlan's art of sex and surgery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/jul/01/orlan-performance-artist-carnal-art>
ORLAN was one of only six women artists included in the Centre Pompidou’s 2012 
book100 Masterpieces of the Twentieth Century 
<https://boutique.centrepompidou.fr/fr/monographie-et-mouvements-artistiques/100-chefs-doeuvres-du-xxeme-siecle/137.html>
 “I was one of two women artists who were alive, four were dead,” she says, 
holding up the book in her studio. In art school, 75% of students are women, 
she says, yet only 6% end up exhibiting. “I don’t understand why. It’s a 
sickness ... I walked a long way for women.”

Still active after most of her peers have retired, ORLAN has climbed to the 
top of a competitive art world. Does she have a strong work ethic, or a special 
talent for business? She laughs, sitting down at her desk to answer emails on a 
Friday night (replying in all caps, just like her name). “I work all the time. 
I am very creative but it’s still very difficult – if I were a man, I would be 
more recognised.”

 * Botticelli Reimagined 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/exhibition-botticelli-reimagined/about-the-exhibition/>
 is at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, from 5 March to 3 July  