
Is there a single dance talent that hasn’t gravitated towards Sadler’s Wells 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com> in the last decade? Maybe a few, but the 
theatre’s list of associate artists and companies is nonetheless heading 
towards world domination. At theWells’s annual press conference today 
<http://www.whatsonstage.com/london-theatre/news/natalia-osipova-sadlers-wells_39078.html>
, artistic director Alistair Spalding announced that he’d not only signed up
Rosas <http://www.rosas.be/en/rosas> and Tanztheater Wuppertal 
<http://www.pina-bausch.de/en/dancetheatre/> as new international associates, 
but that his theatre would be involved in a new co-production with the stellar
Russian ballerina Natalia Osipova <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/natalia-osipova>
.

Ballet stars Osipova and Polunin confirm show … and relationship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/05/ballet-stars-osipova-and-polunin-confirm-show-and-relationship>
Osipova will be dancing in a triple bill of new contemporary dance works by 
Russell Maliphant <http://www.russellmaliphant.com>, Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui 
<http://www.east-man.be/en/35/Sidi-Larbi-Cherkaoui> and Arthur Pita 
<http://www.arthurpita.com> and as an additional headline, her new partner 
Sergei Polunin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sergei_Polunin> will be dancing 
alongside her in two of the three works.

Both dancers were at the conference today, fielding questions about their 
relationship (yes it is “romantic”) and speaking of their shared determination 
to experience new choreography while still at the physical peak of their 
careers. To be accurate, this Wells programme is not Osipova’s first venture 
into modern dance, nor is it her first encounter with Pita and Cherkaoui, since 
both choreographers contributed works to theSolo for Two programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/07/solo-for-two-review-vasiliev-osipova-ballet>
, which she danced with Ivan Vasiliev at London’s Coliseum in 2014.

Even so, there is plenty for dance fans to get excited about. Aside from the 
interest factor of Polunin, who has hardly been seen on a UK stage since his
sudden exit from the Royal Ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jan/25/royal-ballet-sergei-polunin-quits>
, this programme promises to show off new and very different facets of their 
combined talent.

Osipova, as we already know 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/03/natalia-osipova-ivan-vasiliev-interview>
, has an instinct for the subtle sensuality of Cherkaoui’s choreography and in 
Pita’s previous work Facada, she was darkly, mordantly funny. Russell 
Maliphant’s new duet for her and Polunin may hopefully be as revelatory for the 
two dancers as his creations proved to be for Sylvie Guillem, and the new work 
that Pita has planned for them, a “dance prequel” to Tennessee Williams’s A 
Streetcar Named Desire, sounds rich in all manner of deviant dramatic potential.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fosipova-polunin-sadlers-wells-2016-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa40a3ef14ea1009be265c4739fbb9dd0bf3d28d3%2F244_685_2203_3492%2F2203.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Osipova%20and%20Polunin%3A%20another%20coup%20for%20Sadler's%20Wells%20in%20glitzy%202016%20lineup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fosipova-polunin-sadlers-wells-2016-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Osipova%20and%20Polunin%3A%20another%20coup%20for%20Sadler%27s%20Wells%20in%20glitzy%202016%20lineup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fosipova-polunin-sadlers-wells-2016-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa40a3ef14ea1009be265c4739fbb9dd0bf3d28d3%2F244_685_2203_3492%2F2203.jpg>
 Natalia Osipova in Romeo and Juliet at the Coliseum in London in 2011. The 
Sadler’s Wells performances add another major commitment to her already busy 
career Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
It’s important for Polunin and Osipova to give this project whatever 
preparation and rehearsal time it needs for it to become a genuine creative 
collaboration. But one obvious concern, regarding Osipova in particular, is 
that it adds another major commitment to her already busy career. Alongside her 
current contract with the Royal, the ballerina has been dancing withABT 
<http://www.abt.org/default.aspx> during the past year, guesting at La Scala 
and she has just been announced as a guest with the Bolshoi. This season she’s 
missed a chunk of performances at the Royal due to injury and illness – and 
spreading her energies even more thinly could be an issue both for her, and for 
her loyal, patient fans.

Back to the Wells, however, where the rest of the 2016 season may be less 
newsy but is full of interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/feb/21/bartabas-zingaro-dance-horses-interview>
. There’s a recent work byBartabas, the French horse whisperer of dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/feb/21/bartabas-zingaro-dance-horses-interview>
, which comes with a cast of four donkeys, a horse and a flamenco dancer. A new 
piece by Javier de Frutos for Ballet Boyz promises a spiky, sexy chemistry;
English National Ballet make a kind of history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/17/the-tamara-rojo-revolution-english-national-ballet>
 with their programme of all-female choreographers; the excellent Crystal Pite 
presents the UK premiere of her work Betroffenheit and the two geniuses of 
British lighting design,Lucy Carter and Michael Hulls  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/04/lighting-design-technology-transforming-dance>
combine with composerNitin Sawhney <http://www.nitinsawhney.com/> to create an 
“immersive” dance event, with no actual dancers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fosipova-polunin-sadlers-wells-2016-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffef374884edf5812a6e0008b5b74197ef3339584%2F0_180_3326_1995%2F3326.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Osipova%20and%20Polunin%3A%20another%20coup%20for%20Sadler's%20Wells%20in%20glitzy%202016%20lineup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fosipova-polunin-sadlers-wells-2016-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Osipova%20and%20Polunin%3A%20another%20coup%20for%20Sadler%27s%20Wells%20in%20glitzy%202016%20lineup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fosipova-polunin-sadlers-wells-2016-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffef374884edf5812a6e0008b5b74197ef3339584%2F0_180_3326_1995%2F3326.jpg>
 A 2009 rehearsal of Darshan, directed by Bartabas, founder of the French 
equestrian theatre Zingaro. Photograph: Bertrand Guay/AFP/Getty Images 
This is a glitzy roster, but it’s good to see that the Wells remain mindful of 
their duty to the independent sector. Their Wild Card series, in which guest 
artists are invited to programme new work, stays in place, as does their 
mentorship project, the Summer University. A new production has been 
commissioned from the theatre’s new wave associateAlexander Whitley 
<http://www.alexanderwhitley.com/#home> – although this scheme to nurture 
emerging artists could, I think, be made a more visible and broader plank of 
the theatre’s activities.

When Spalding first laid out his stall as artistic director in 2005, there 
were plenty who doubted his ability to sustain a year-round programme of dance 
in a theatre the size of the Wells. But the numbers have been impressive. With 
just 10% of its annual revenue coming from Arts Council England, the Wells has 
commissioned or produced 21 new works during the last year and has reached an 
audience of over 470,000.

Of course, London benefits most, and smaller venues can feel as though the 
Wells is sucking up more than its fair share of talent and oxygen. Yet a 
proportion of the works shown on the Sadler’s Wells stage do tour elsewhere: 
last year 15 productions went to 78 cities in the UK and abroad and it’s 
because the theatre is so ambitious an organisation that it generates a 
powerful buzz for the art from. Back in the days before Spalding, press 
conferences about modern dance were almost never considered news.
 