
1) Gone spearfishin
 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/21/sports/gone-spearfishin.html?ref=sports&_r=0>

It’s stating the obvious, but not enough websites are like the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/pages/sports/index.html>. While so many other 
publications are busychasing each other’s tales 
<http://www.newsnow.co.uk/h/Sport/Football?JavaScript=1&searchheadlines=&search=manchester+united>
 in a race to the bottom, the Times go a little off-piste and dig out 
interesting and fresh stories. Last week they gave usa short film about the 
greatest bowling story ever told 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/20/favourite-things-this-week-football-cartoons-mike-tyson-quotes>
 and this week they have brought us a picture gallery about spearfishing.

Every year a group of fishermen in Wisconsin take to the water with their 
five-prong spears hoping to nab a sturgeon, a species of fish that has been 
swimming in those waters since the dinosaurs walked the earth. In the picture 
below, local fisherman Steve Krueger shows off his catch of the day.

Jeffrey Furticella (@jefurticella) 
If you're fishing for dinosaurs, a rod won't cut it. You're going to want a 
spear. Photos:http://t.co/o4aCajJcj1 <http://t.co/o4aCajJcj1> 
pic.twitter.com/I3Nkip0hAr <http://t.co/I3Nkip0hAr>
 <https://twitter.com/jefurticella/status/579000469026156544> March 20, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/jefurticella/status/579000469026156544> 
2) This Is Eibar <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yuS82pCBUas>

Eibar are the smallest club in La Liga. They have the smallest budget, the 
smallest stadium and are based in a town that is home to just 28,000 people. To 
put that in some context, the Camp Nou can hold 99,354 fans. Barcelona exist in 
a different stratosphere, but the two clubs met at Eibar’s stadium, the 
5,250-capacity Estadio Municipal de Ipurua, last week. To mark the occasion
Copa90 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yuS82pCBUas> produced this short film 
charting the unlikely rise of Spain’s newest and most loveable underdogs.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyuS82pCBUas&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyuS82pCBUas>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyuS82pCBUas&media=>
3) How Portsmouth FC came back from the brink 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nRFDMC5ibJk>

And, in a similar vein, this is Portsmouth:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnRFDMC5ibJk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnRFDMC5ibJk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnRFDMC5ibJk&media=>
4) It’s time to reward rugby’s risk-takers 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/sport/rugby/international/matt-williams-it-s-time-to-reward-rugby-risk-takers-with-bonus-points-1.2148968>

A lot of people took last Saturday’s remarkable Six Nations finale as proof 
that the format of the competition is in fine health and should not be changed.
Matt Williams <https://twitter.com/MattRCNM>, the Australian rugby coach and 
Second Captains 
<https://soundcloud.com/secondcaptains-it-com/irelands-trophy-feast-rugby-goes-mad-european-glitter>
 contributor, sees things differently. Throughout the tournament Williams 
argued that, if the northern hemisphere teams want to win the Rugby World Cup 
later this year, they are going to have to beat New Zealand or South Africa, 
and to do so they will have to play running rugby and score some tries. But the 
Six Nations tournament does not encourage teams to play with the ball in hand.

In the first four rounds of Six Nations fixtures coaches played it safe, 
prioritising their defences, as they had no incentive to run up a lot of tries. 
Last Saturday’s unique situation, with Wales, Ireland and England having to 
chase their games, gave the teams a proper reason to pick up the ball, pass it 
around at pace and test themselves as attacking entities.

The teams were given a taste of what they will face against the southern 
hemisphere sides at the World Cup and Williams thinks it should nudge the Six 
Nations organisers towards introducing bonus points for tries in future 
competitions:

The points-scoring system of the Six Nations has not changed since the 1800s, 
so in previous rounds there were only two points on offer. The coaches had 
little to gain from playing attacking rugby, so they risked very little. On 
Saturday, with the trophy up for grabs, the two competition points were 
irrelevant. Scoring points was essential. In Rome, London and Edinburgh, there 
was the proof that running rugby in Six Nations games can be wonderful to 
behold. The style of rugby played was equal to anything in the south. To all of 
those who have been haranguing me with their excuses on why in Six Nations 
rugby you cannot possibly play running rugby – because of the weather, the 
tradition, the games are too tense, the referees are different – the weekend’s 
games proved that those excuses are a crock of lies. So all of you burdened and 
weighed down, with those ancient feelings of northern hemisphere guilt and 
inhibition, you are now free to cast off your yoke of a kicking game. Brothers 
and sisters of the northern hemisphere, you are saved. You are free to love the 
running game. Go forth and spread the good news about the game they play in 
heaven.

5) Where are the PFA young players of the 1990s now? 
<http://8by8mag.com/pfa-young-player-1990-2000/>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F31%2Four-favourite-things-this-week-la-liga-eibar-portsmouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F30%2F1427725138633%2F4a1aa9af-d9a5-4481-a11c-0e917fc777db-900x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20favourite%20things%20this%20week%3A%20from%20La%20Liga's%20smallest%20club%20to%20prehistoric%20fishing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F31%2Four-favourite-things-this-week-la-liga-eibar-portsmouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20favourite%20things%20this%20week%3A%20from%20La%20Liga%27s%20smallest%20club%20to%20prehistoric%20fishing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmar%2F31%2Four-favourite-things-this-week-la-liga-eibar-portsmouth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F30%2F1427725138633%2F4a1aa9af-d9a5-4481-a11c-0e917fc777db-900x2040.jpeg>
 Lee Sharpe playing for Manchester United in 1990. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Getty 
Images 
The PFA honoured eight burgeoning footballers with their Young Player of the 
Year award in the 1990s. Three of them played for Manchester United; two played 
for Liverpool; one played for Newcastle; one played for Arsenal; and one played 
for Leeds United.Sam Dunning <https://twitter.com/oneslypanda> of Eight by Eight
 <http://8by8mag.com/pfa-young-player-1990-2000/> magazine has the details.

6) Spartak Moscow help their oldest fan 
<http://rt.com/news/244897-spartak-moscow-help-veteran/>

When Spartak Moscow heard that Otto Fischer, their 102-year-old fan, had been 
robbed of his life savings, they organised a whip-round to help him out. The 
pensioner, who had been saving up his money for his great-granddaughter, was 
the victim of a particularly cruel crime. A man pretending to be a local social 
worker knocked on his door and asked to come in. Fischer welcomed the stranger 
into his house, from where he stole 730,000 rubles (£8,500). When the club and 
other fans heard about Fischer’s troubles, they started fundraising. “We 
immediately called the person looking after Otto Fischer and asked him for his 
bank account number,” said Oleg Semyonov, head of Spartak’s fan club. “Then we 
published it on various football fan sites, and supporters – not just of 
Spartak – were invited to take part.”
Григорий Дроздов (@DrozdovGrigoriy) 
102-летний болельщик московского *Спартака* Отто Фишер. 
pic.twitter.com/BZeBsqDtDF <http://t.co/BZeBsqDtDF>
 <https://twitter.com/DrozdovGrigoriy/status/579440990638981120> March 22, 2015
 <https://twitter.com/DrozdovGrigoriy/status/579440990638981120> 
7) Inside the weird, noble world of autograph collectors 
<https://sports.vice.com/article/inside-the-weird-noble-world-of-autograph-collectors>

If videos were supposed to have killed radio stars, then surely selfies will 
spell the end for autographs. Thatlogic might appeal to Shane Warne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/29/shane-warne-selfies-killed-autograph>
 but collectors are not fond of being rebuffed.John Stillman 
<https://twitter.com/free_buck> met a few of them for Vice Sports 
<https://sports.vice.com/article/inside-the-weird-noble-world-of-autograph-collectors>
. They are an intriguing bunch. By way of introduction, here is his first 
paragraph:

Brian Flam has spent a good part of the last 30 years sending letters to 
relative nobodies and toting cartons of baseball cards from his Maryland home 
to cities up and down the eastern seaboard in pursuit of scrawls legible only 
to a select few. By all relevant accounts, Flam is a master of the craft of 
autograph seeking, known within the field as graphing. The roughly 150,000 
signed cards, filed into 5,000-count boxes that line the walls of his home 
office, testify to this distinction. Aspiring graphers seek his counsel on 
topics such as his preferred pen (the Staedtler Lumocolor, fine-point, blue) 
and canvas (ideally an officially-issued trading card, but the 3.5” by 2.5” 
“Autograph Card” of Flam’s own engineering works in extenuating circumstances). 
Flam focuses on Minor League Baseball but not to the exclusion of the big 
leagues. He collects the signatures of Hall of Famers on two separate balls, 
one for “real Hall of Famers” and another for “scrub Hall of Famers,” a 
material distinction he explains by posing the question: “Do you really want 
Bruce Sutter touching the same ball that Mickey Mantle signed?”

8) Lost Destinations 
<http://www.wearedorothy.com/shop/category/lost-destination>

These might look good on your walls.
 Highbury. Design by Dorothy 
<http://www.wearedorothy.com/shop/category/lost-destination>. 
9) Vox in the box <http://thesetpieces.com/interviews/vox-box-sid-lowe>


Sid Lowe talks to The Set Pieces <https://twitter.com/thesetpieces> about 
football journalism, academia and how having a PhD in history can be useful.


10) Ireland’s greatest sportsman has retired 
<http://www.rte.ie/sport/gaa/2015/0326/689867-tomas-mulcahy-henry-shefflin-kilkenny/>

A few years ago Brian O’Driscoll was asked if he is Ireland’s greatest ever 
sportsman. His reply probably confused the gathered press: “That would be the 
hurler Henry Shefflin,” said O’Driscoll. “This guy has been an absolute 
phenomenon for the last 12 or 13 years. He’s won nine All-Ireland championships 
with his county and they’re not easy to come by.” Shefflin now has 10 
All-Irelands. AsTomás Mulcahy <https://twitter.com/tomas_mulcahy> puts it in 
this piece forRTE 
<http://www.rte.ie/sport/gaa/2015/0326/689867-tomas-mulcahy-henry-shefflin-kilkenny/>
, his greatest attribute was that he had it all.

11) Where sport meets climate change 
<https://sports.vice.com/video/will-gadd-climbed-niagara-falls-now-hes-tackling-climate-change>

Regular Guardian readers will have seen our new keep it in the ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/series/keep-it-in-the-ground> 
campaign. Climate change is not the most accessible topic but the professional 
ice climber Will Gadd makes a very simple and effective case about how the 
planet is suffering in this sitdown chat withVice Sports 
<https://sports.vice.com/video/will-gadd-climbed-niagara-falls-now-hes-tackling-climate-change>
:

“Everywhere I go in the world, it’s warmer. People say: ‘We used to have six 
months of winter but now we have three.’ I was in Ilulissat, Greenland, where 
they are building a skateboard ramp for the kids because now they get five 
months of skateboard weather in Greenland, where they used to get two. I don’t 
need reams of scientific research; I can just look. In my world it’s dead clear 
that things are radically changing.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnmOUrqYB7JE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnmOUrqYB7JE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnmOUrqYB7JE&media=>
 A sitdown with Will Gadd  