
The stories leaving no one behind

This year, we wanted to use our site as a platform for campaigners whose 
voices are rarely heard in mainstream media. In February, for our#LGBTChange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/lgbt-change>
 series, we asked you to nominateyour LGBT heroes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/14/fighting-for-the-right-to-love-your-lgbtchange-heroes>
 and we looked at thedeveloping countries making the most progress on LGBT 
issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/10/lgbt-rights-six-countries-progress>
. These stories inspired other members of our network to share their own 
experiences, including the vast differences in protection available to 
international and national aid workers in countries where homosexuals are 
persecuted. “I regret not speaking out for my LGBT colleagues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/03/secret-aid-worker-regret-not-speaking-out-lgbt-colleagues>
,” said one writer.

In June, we focused on disability rights around the world and spoke to 10 
leading disability activists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/22/10-activists-changing-lives-disabled-people-around-world>
 about the challenges they face. We learned thatRussia and the US have the 
worst employment gaps for disabled people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/23/russia-and-the-us-have-the-worst-employment-gaps-for-disabled-people>
. Our interactive timeline ofglobal disability rights from 1944 to present day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/ng-interactive/2016/jun/22/disability-rights-around-the-world-from-1944-to-the-present-day>
 marked the big achievements for this community, but showed that the world has 
a long way to go.Out of sight: the orphanages where disabled children are 
abandoned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/26/orphanage-locked-up-disabled-children-lumos-dri-human-rights>
 is a case in point.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F408ca136864c19b3d89053ed234446834a19d39f%2F0_0_1664_928%2F1664.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F408ca136864c19b3d89053ed234446834a19d39f%2F0_0_1664_928%2F1664.png>
 Disability rights around the world from 1944 to the present day. Photograph: 
Guardian 
Both these topics reflect the sustainable development goals’ promise to be 
fully inclusive. Thejury may still be out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/ng-interactive/2016/feb/04/sustainable-development-goals-marginalised-people-leave-no-one-behind>
 on the feasibility of “leaving no one behind”, but we still talked about 
inclusivity a great deal this year, asking experts aboutsupporting the rights 
of indigenous people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/01/nine-ways-to-support-the-rights-of-indigenous-people>
 and following one of our readers as hedecided to be a woman for a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/22/woman-for-a-week-salve-international-gender-inequality>
 to raise awareness of what life is like for women in Uganda. In a year when 
Donald Trump was elected US president, Leyla Hussein’sletter to my daughter: 
what is it like to be a girl in 2016? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/03/letter-to-my-daughter-what-is-it-like-to-be-a-girl-in-2016>
 from February feels poignant.

No one type of refugee
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F376ed975ad3b9d40b876bfab3adaaa7197a6b2b8%2F0_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F376ed975ad3b9d40b876bfab3adaaa7197a6b2b8%2F0_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Syrian artist Mahmoud Hariri creates a model of Palmyra using clay and wooden 
kebab skewers. Photograph: Christopher Herwig/UNHCR 
Syrian refugees continued to be the big story of this year, and we tried to 
highlight stories that showed different perspectives to the crisis and that 
portrayed refugees’ resilience. One of our favourite stories washow art is 
helping Syrian refugees keep their culture alive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/02/art-helping-syrian-refugees-keep-culture-alive>
. Another was a piece by Kujiek Ruot Kuajien, a refugee turned Oxfam aid worker 
who told us about returning home to South Sudan:“I want to see opportunities 
for all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/01/my-return-to-south-sudan-i-want-to-see-opportunities-for-all>
,” he said.

When one secret aid worker wrote to tell us about how Greece has exposed the 
aid community’s failures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/13/secret-aid-worker-greece-has-exposed-the-aid-communitys-failures>
 to adequately respond to the refugee crisis,your letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/21/aid-agencies-have-failed-in-greece-your-responses>
 started pouring in. You told us how aid agencies had taken an out-of-sight, 
out-of-mind approach to housing refugees; about a weak local government; and 
how accountability is absent at every level. You sent yourdrawings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/sep/08/seven-sketches-inspired-by-athens-refugee-squats-in-pictures>
 too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01dfe542c54e2854c40ec2bad8c6537b53ab4de1%2F244_0_1467_880%2F1467.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01dfe542c54e2854c40ec2bad8c6537b53ab4de1%2F244_0_1467_880%2F1467.jpg>
 ‘When you’re desperate and dependent, with no rights and no resources, you 
spend a lot of time queuing’ - from seven sketches inspired by Athens’s refugee 
squats. Illustration: Ella Baron 
With so much focus on how the Syrian refugee crisis was affecting Europe, it’s 
easy for many other vulnerable people to be overlooked. Melissa Fleming of 
UNHCR wrote aboutthe women on the run from Central America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/16/the-other-refugee-crisis-women-on-the-run-from-central-america>
 and we looked at Dadaab: the city you cannot leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/01/dadaab-somalia-home-cannot-leave-refugees>
.


 On the former, reader Cathy Rozel 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/66856395> wrote: 

Thanks for this excellent article. It’s vital to pull out the distinctively 
gendered aspects of refugee crises everywhere in the world, whether in Central 
America Syria, and the receiving countries – whether Germany or the USA. There 
is almost no coverage of this: what drives women to leave, what forces them to 
stay in conditions men may be able to flee from, what life is like on their 
long journeys on the road, and the reception they get in their host countries.

NGOs – should they exist?

How aid should be delivered around the world was a popular topical of 
discussion this year, particularly with theWorld Humanitarian Summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/24/new-deal-on-humanitarian-financing-signed-at-summit-in-istanbul>
 in May. Aid consultant Deborah Doane said it was time for international NGOsto 
ask some difficult questions about what power they need to devolve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/13/do-international-ngos-still-have-the-right-to-exist>
, and we publishedfive ways to make aid locally sourced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/01/the-aid-localisation-debate-five-issues-for-the-world-humanitarian-summit>
.

We also analysed the UN’s  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/06/where-does-8bn-un-peacekeeping-budget-go>
$8bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/06/where-does-8bn-un-peacekeeping-budget-go>
 peacekeeping budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/06/where-does-8bn-un-peacekeeping-budget-go>
 while Ben Jackson, responded to tabloid headlines calling for cuts to aid by 
listingsix reasons taxpayers can be proud of UK aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/30/six-reasons-taxpayers-can-be-proud-of-uk-aid>
. And, individual aid workers continued to inspire us as nominations forNGO 
heroes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/dec/22/the-most-inspiring-person-ive-ever-met-your-aid-worker-heroes-of-2016>
 filled our inbox for a second year in a row.

One Zimbabwean aid worker, however, offered up a more pessimistic take on the 
sector in his poem,Aid work: an insult to the poor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/19/the-ngo-sector-an-insult-to-the-poor-poetry>

Decades ago, I heard life was simple and it was so

Where there was need, a hand would help

Where there was a tear, a heart would ache

Willing hands and hearts would meet the lack

Charity they called it, for it was so

Now an industry of sorts – an insult to the poor




Now in my day I see things do change

Experts have risen who have not been poor

Whose studies and surveys bring no change

Whose experiments and pilots insult the poor

Whose terms and concepts, tools always change

An industry of sorts – an insult to the poor




What greater insult could there be

When a fellow man calls me just a beneficiary

When our pictures of desperation are used for marketing

When our dignity is insulted just for fundraising

When trainings and awareness are imposed on us

When the life of another is planned by another

When the gift we got is never disclosed

When overheads are deducted before we know

When we smile for pictures we never see

When our children seek to change our ways

When we waste our lives responding to assessments

Indeed an industry sorts – an insult to the poor

Aid worker wellbeing

Following on from our stories on aid worker mental health and sexual harassment
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/aid-worker-wellbeing>
 in 2015, we continued to raise the issue of how employers can better support 
their staff, some who work in incredibly dangerous contexts. ICRC surgeon Nick 
Kling wrote about his experiences of delivering healthcare in Afghanistan:
Doctors are threatened at gunpoint, even by civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/05/healthcare-afghanistan-doctors-threatened-gunpoint-civilians>
.

The aid community was particularly shaken in July when the Terrain compound in 
South Sudan was stormed by soldiers; NGO staff were assaulted and raped and one 
local journalist was killed. We looked at theimplications of the attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/17/attack-on-aid-workers-in-south-sudan-there-was-incredible-naivety>
 for the aid sector, accused of “systematic failures” for not rescuing the aid 
workers. One survivorwrote an incredibly moving account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/15/attack-terrain-south-sudan-to-attacks-on-humanitarians>
 about their fears of what would happen to the perpetrators if caught, saying 
“causing suffering in others does not alleviate my suffering”.

A different topic in our secret aid worker series also struck a chord with 
humanitarians worldwide, when a national aid worker in an east African country 
wrote in to ask “Why do expats earn more than the rest of us? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/29/secret-aid-worker-why-do-expats-earn-more-than-the-rest-of-us>
” The piece was shared by more than 28,000 people and here are justa few of the 
responses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/04/expat-pay-in-the-aid-sector-your-responses>
 we received.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1403dd6f85a8f4f705eabfbd33d2d9541fb17fa%2F0_201_4933_2960%2F4933.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1403dd6f85a8f4f705eabfbd33d2d9541fb17fa%2F0_201_4933_2960%2F4933.jpg>
 ‘Aid agencies are all about empowering the communities they serve, but 
overlook equal treatment of staff in their own organisations.’ Photograph: Alamy
Pieces to make you think

The topics you wanted to write about this year were diverse and fascinating. 
Jason Hickel, an anthropologist at the London School of Economics, declared 
that “our best shot at cooling the planet might be right under our feet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/10/soil-our-best-shot-at-cooling-the-planet-might-be-right-under-our-feet>
”, describing how we need to turn away from industrial farming to beat climate 
change. Meanwhile, Bisola Onajin-Obembe, an anaesthesiologist in Nigeria, 
tackled a major global health issue – access to drugs – in her comment piece:
Not just a party drug: no ketamine means no surgery in some developing countries
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/03/not-just-a-party-drug-no-ketamine-means-no-surgery-in-some-developing-countries>
.

 Reader Chris the Gasman 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/69841050> responded to 
the article:

This is not just a phenomenon in developing countries. As a UK intensive care 
and air ambulance doctor, I use Ketamine every day. It is the safest option for 
the care of the sickest patients. If we lose it, more people will die in every 
country on earth, including yours.



Galleries to make you gawp
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1197d6291bd8c58c03f3b9c84112a4da8f5df794%2F76_0_1732_1040%2F1732.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1197d6291bd8c58c03f3b9c84112a4da8f5df794%2F76_0_1732_1040%2F1732.png>
A girl s view of the 17 sustainable development goals - in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/jul/07/a-girls-view-of-the-17-sustainable-development-goals-in-pictures>
 Photograph: Guardian  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F773bc4dc24930b98b0cc93d820d832c4120a83ba%2F0_0_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F773bc4dc24930b98b0cc93d820d832c4120a83ba%2F0_0_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
A pilot’s view of Bangladesh – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/aug/26/pilots-aerial-view-bangladesh-in-pictures>
 Photograph: Shamim Shorif Susom  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46b4c71abbbae3c1e747e82eba3fc603bf9fc5c0%2F0_0_1760_2199%2F1760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20favourite%20global%20development%20stories%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffavourite-global-development-stories-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46b4c71abbbae3c1e747e82eba3fc603bf9fc5c0%2F0_0_1760_2199%2F1760.jpg>
The Ghanaian villages destroyed by climate change – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/oct/07/ghana-villages-destroyed-climate-change-in-pictures>
 Photograph: Nyani Quarmyne/Panos Pictures 
Articles to impress at work

 * The top 10 sources of data for international development research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/16/the-top-10-sources-of-data-for-international-development-research>

 * ‘It’s like trying to hit a football field from the top of Everest’ – why 
aid airdrops just don’t work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/20/airdrop-effective-syria-humanitarian-government>
 * Six of the best sex education programmes around the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/20/six-best-sex-education-programmes-around-the-world>
 * How to ensure NGO staff feel safe during an evacuation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/09/ngo-staff-emergency-evacuation-process-safety-abroad>
And finally...

 * Eleven rules to live by if you want to make it to the top at the UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/29/eleven-rules-to-live-by-if-you-want-to-make-it-to-the-top-at-the-un>

 * Five things every aid worker can learn from Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/17/game-of-thrones-lessons-for-aid-workers>

 * 29 tips on how to be a horrible boss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/27/29-tips-on-how-to-be-a-horrible-boss>
The stories above are only from our site but what was your favourite 
development story this year? And what would you like to see us write about in 
2017? Comment below.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 