
The first subtle hints of cognitive decline may reveal themselves in an 
artist’s brush strokes many years before dementia is diagnosed, researchers 
believe.

The controversial claim is made by psychologists who studied renowned artists, 
from the founder of French impressionism, Claude Monet, to the abstract 
expressionistWillem de Kooning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/nov/21/willem-dekooning-mylifeinart-art>
.


While Monet aged without obvious mental decline, de Kooning was diagnosed with 
Alzheimer’s disease more than a decade before his death in 1997.


Strobe lighting provides a flicker of hope in the fight against Alzheimer’s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/07/strobe-lighting-provides-a-flicker-of-hope-in-the-fight-against-alzheimers>
Alex Forsythe at the University of Liverpool analysed more than 2,000 
paintings from seven famous artists and found what she believes are progressive 
changes in the works of those who went on to develop Alzheimer’s. The changes 
became noticeable when the artists were in their 40s.


Though intriguing, the small number of artists involved in the study means the 
findings are highly tentative. While Forsythe said the work does not point to 
an early test for dementia, she hopes it may open up fresh avenues for 
investigating the disease.


“I don’t believe this will be a tool for diagnosis, but I do think it will 
trigger people to consider new directions for research into dementia,” she said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpaintings-reveal-early-signs-of-cognitive-decline-claims-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe938a95b28826d3bd9198e6010ae4ba91450cc4%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paintings%20reveal%20early%20signs%20of%20cognitive%20decline%2C%20claims%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpaintings-reveal-early-signs-of-cognitive-decline-claims-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paintings%20reveal%20early%20signs%20of%20cognitive%20decline%2C%20claims%20study&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpaintings-reveal-early-signs-of-cognitive-decline-claims-study%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe938a95b28826d3bd9198e6010ae4ba91450cc4%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 William de Kooning’s Woman 1, 1950 and Untitled XXVIII, 1983. Composite: Alamy 
The research provoked mixed reactions from other scientists. Richard Taylor, a 
physicist at the University of Oregon, described the work as a “magnificent 
demonstration of art and science coming together”. But Kate Brown, a physicist 
at Hamilton College in New York, was less enthusiastic and dismissed the 
research as “complete and utter nonsense”.


Forsythe and her colleagues used digital imaging software to calculate how a 
mathematical feature called fractal density varied in artists’ paintings over 
their careers. The seven artists included Monet, Pablo Picasso and Marc 
Chagall, who all aged without obvious brain disease; Salvador Dali and Norval 
Morrisseau, who developed Parkinson’s; and de Kooning and James Brooks, another 
abstract expressionist who was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s in 1985, seven years 
before his death.


Fractals are geometric patterns that repeat themselves at different size 
scales. They are seen in nature in the branching of trees and rivers, and in 
the craggy contours of coastlines. In paintings, fractals appear when patterns 
made by the tiniest brush strokes repeat on larger scales. The fractal 
dimension is a measure of fractal complexity, where an artwork with a large 
fractal dimension has a high ratio of fine to coarse fractal patterns.


Forsythe found that paintings varied in their fractal dimensions over an 
artist’s career, but in the case of de Kooning and Brooks, the measure changed 
dramatically and fell sharply as the artists aged. “The information seems to be 
like a footprint that artists leave in their art,” Forsythe said. “They paint 
within a normal range, but when something is happening the brain, it starts to 
change quite radically.”


Writing in the journal Neuropsychology <http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/neu0000303>, 
the scientists claim that the fractal dimensions of paintings by Monet, Picasso 
and Chagall tended to rise as they aged. For Dali and Morrisseau’s work, the 
fractal dimension followed an upside-down U-shape over time, at first rising 
and then falling. The most stark result was seen in the works of de Kooning and 
Brooks, where the fractal dimension started high and dropped rapidly from the 
age of 40.


Words fail us: dementia and the arts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/19/dementia-and-the-arts-fiction-films-drama-poetry-painting>
The work has echoes of previous studies that revealed early signs of dementia 
in the language used by the former US president Ronald Reagan, and the novelist 
and philosopher Iris Murdoch. Telltale hints of future dementia have also been 
spotted in autobiographical essays written by nuns in their 20s.


Taylor pioneered the use of fractals to study and even authenticate drip 
paintings <http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v399/n6735/full/399422a0.html> 
by the late US artist Jackson Pollock. He believes Forsythe’s research could do 
the same for other artists and save museums from being conned into buying fake 
artworks. But he also saw more important applications. “This work could 
hopefully be used to learn more about conditions such as dementia,” he said.


“To me, the most inspiring message to come out of this work is that beautiful 
artworks can result from pathological conditions,” he said. When de Kooning was 
diagnosed with Alzheimer’s, some critics argued that he should stop painting, 
but as he slipped into dementia, his artwork changed and became more simple, 
Taylor said.

“To me, these more simple works conveyed a peacefulness that wasn’t present in 
his nurture-dominated earlier work. It all goes to show that sometimes you can 
think too much about art. Sometimes you just need to tune into your inner self, 
the ‘nature’ part,” he said.


But Brown disagreed. In 2006, she co-authored a paper in Nature 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v444/n7119/full/nature05398.html> that 
disputed Taylor’s research. She said that sketches dashed out on her computer 
had the same fractal dimensions as a Pollock drip painting and might be 
authenticated as the real thing.

“The whole premise of ‘fractal expressionism’ is completely false,” Brown 
said. “Since our work came out, claims of fractals in Pollock’s work have 
largely disappeared from peer-reviewed physics journals. But it seems that the 
fractal zealots have managed to exert some influence in psychology.”

 