
Stadium: Stadio Renzo Barbera, 1932, capacity 36,349

Built during the height of fascism in Italy, Palermo’s stadium was finished in 
1932. It endured gradual renovations and three name changes before settling 
into the grand structure it is today. The most recent of these was whenPalermo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> was chosen as the only city in 
Sicily to host World Cup matches in 1990.

The stadium was given a complete facelift, which lowered its capacity and made 
it an all-seater. The structure was known as the Stadio La Favorita until 2002, 
before being renamed after a former club president, Renzo Barbera. Sicilian 
fans are passionate and Palermo’s stadium always boasts a large crowd.

One of the most colourful grounds to visit in the league (and not just because 
of the pink kit), the Stadio Renzo Barbera is always awash with flags, flares 
and banners. The ultras are always out in support, although they have been 
prone to violence on some occasions, most notably when they play rivals 
Catania. Sicily is a beautiful island and Palermo’s stadium encapsulates the 
beauty, passion and sometimes dark side of the local culture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpalermo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415367538012%2F8236b2bd-d2bf-47a7-a2f3-ec5c0ea376a9-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palermo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpalermo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palermo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpalermo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415367538012%2F8236b2bd-d2bf-47a7-a2f3-ec5c0ea376a9-2060x1371.jpeg>
 Palermo fans in the Stadio Renzo Barbera in May 2014. Photograph: Tullio M. 
Puglia/Getty Images 
The ultras

Key ultra groups: Commandos Aquile, Warriors Ultras Palermo 1980, Ultras 
Palermo 1900,Brigate Rosanero.

Other ultra groups: Angeli della Nord e Arenella Meridiano Zero, Teste Rasate, 
Sezioni WarriorsBorgo Vecchio Sisma, Ultras Curva Nord-Nolp, Fusi Rosanero, 
Eagles Carini, Rosanero Girls,Trabia c’è, Cuori Emigrati, I Fedelissimi, Gruppo 
Arenella 1983, Boys Zen (1985), Supporters Filiciuzza, Eagles Korps, Commandos 
Girls,Vecchia Guardia, Indians Ultras, Commando Ultrà Curva Nord, Swarm, 
Hooligans,Club Tigrotti, Club Dragoni Rosanero, Fedayn, I Falchi, Legione 
Rosanero, Ultras Falange, Albatros, Eagles Supporters, Meridiano Zero, Fossa 
delle Aquile, Guerrieri, Lions, Teste Rasate, Armata, Teschio, South Boys, 
Fronte d’Azione, Morbio Group, Fedelissimi Bulldog, Tradizione Palermo, Sciame 
Selvaggio, Panthers, Gioventù, Nucleo, Gladiatori, Bad Boys Villatasca, Ultras 
di Quartiere, Quelli di Agrigento, Ultras Piazza Magione, Gruppo Papponi, 
Gruppo Abusivo, Ultras Oreto Nuova, Dna Rosanero, Aquile d’Assalto.

In April 2014, a young Palermo fan called Jose sat in the Stadio Renzo 
Barbera’sCurva Nord Inferiore for the first time. While many young Italians 
dream of hearing their name chanted in the stadium, Jose’s ambition was to be 
part of the comradery formed on the terraces. The ultras embraced him as one of 
their own, sitting him next to thelancicori, the leader of the chants, and 
giving him the responsibility of beating the drum.


This is no small task. Incessantly hammering a drum, waving a huge flag or 
screaming over a microphone for 90 minutes leaves little time to enjoy the 
aesthetics on the field. However, these roles are central to the spectacle 
created by these groups. That this young Palermo fan has Down’s Syndrome serves 
to illustrate some inherent contradictions in the Italian ultras. Throughout 
this series, altruism is not a word that has come to be associated with the 
fangroups. All too often, incidents of violence, coercion and discrimination 
have cast a dark shadow over the more positive aspects of these fanatical 
supporters. Yet, although their world and attitudes can bewilder, it is not all 
chants, flares, fireworks and violence.

The city of Palermo offers myriad styles and flavours, from exotic Arabic 
cupolas and exuberant baroque facades to archaic crumblingpalazzi. The 
architecture speaks for the cultural diversity of Sicily’s regional capital. 
This is in large part due to Palermo’s quilted history, and its strategic 
position at the heart of the Mediterranean has brought wave upon wave of 
invaders, including the Carthaginians, Greeks, Romans, Saracen Arabs, French 
and Spanish.


As such, there is no homogenous style in Palermo; there never has been and 
there never will be. However, in this urban melting pot, there is one outlet 
that provides a source of collective identity: U.S. Città di Palermo. Support 
for theRosanero often comes hand in hand with a sense of belonging to Sicily, 
hence the regular appearance of Sicilian flags in the stands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpalermo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415364654229%2Ffdb0984c-de6c-4823-a946-ba6414b087bb-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palermo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpalermo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palermo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpalermo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415364654229%2Ffdb0984c-de6c-4823-a946-ba6414b087bb-2060x1371.jpeg>
 Palermo fans show their support during their Serie A match against Chievo 
Verona at the Stadio Renzo Barbera in October 2014. Photograph: Tullio M. 
Puglia/Getty Images 
Palermo’s pioneering ultra group were formed in 1977 and adopted the name 
Commandos Aquile after drawing inspiration from Roma’s Commando Ultra Curva Sud.
As usual in Italian ultra culture,Commandos Aquile did not separate football 
from politics. Throughout their existence they maintained a strong affiliation 
to the left. With the formation of new groups, however, this political ideology 
would shift drastically.

1980 saw the birth of Brigate Rosanero and Warriors Ultras Palermo, two groups 
that became the vanguard of the club’s organised support.Brigate were founded 
by a group of youngsters from the Olivella zone in Palermo and they immediately 
concerned themselves with creating a more vibrant support.Warriors became 
notorious for their far-right political sympathies, which would eventually cause
Commandos Aquileto disband.

Palermo have struggled to cement a place among the elite clubs in Italian 
football, oscillating between the country’s top three leagues. The journey of 
their ultras has mirrored the team’s; as results have improved, the numbers on 
the Curva have burgeoned. That said, even when the club were expelled to Serie 
C2 in 1987 due to financial irregularities, the ultras never abandoned their 
boys in pink.

Since the early 2000s, under the tenure of their capricious owner Maurizio 
Zamparini, also known asMangiaallenatori (manager eater), the supporters have 
tasted ample success. This has included European football, a fifth-place finish 
inSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> and a run to 
the Coppa Italia final. Throughout this more prosperous period, both theBrigate 
andWarriors became renowned for their substantial presence during away games, 
despite the often gruelling journeys they were forced to travel across the 
mainland.

Such was the Warriors’ popularity that new sections of the group were created 
byPalermitani in other regions of Italy, including Lombardy, Emiglia Romagna 
and Lazio. Historically, Palermo’sCurva Nord has been the flag bearer of the 
ultras movement, but in recent years a small group of supporters have taken up 
residence in theCurva Sud, renowned as the “silent” section of the ground. This 
season, riding the wave of success following the club’s return to Serie A, the 
Stadio Renzo Barbera has seen a re-styling of support. In an attempt to provide 
a more cohesive and united front, groups from both the upper and lower sections 
of theCurva Nord fused to create Ultras Palermo 1900.

Curiously, Palermo ultras are said to have a close friendship with Padova fans.
For those educated in Italy’s political landscape this might come as a 
surprise. Especially given that the Veneto region in which Padova is located 
has a reputation for being a hotbed of anti-southern sentiment (the regionalist 
party Lega Nord gained 60.2% of the local vote in 2010). Indeed the motto of 
the fans’ twinning acknowledges this North-South schism: “Nessuna secessione 
potrà fermare la nostra unione!” (“No secession can break our union”). 


It is said this friendship was born in the early 1980s after a group of 
Padovaniwho were on holiday in Sicily found themselves in gregarious 
conversation with Palermo ultras. Friendly exchanges were continued during the 
teams’ next meeting in 1983 and this nascent alliance was reinforced further by 
their shared right-wing ideology. Despite the distance that separates them, the 
ultras have maintained their twinning to this day and they have been known to 
attend each other’s games.

Palermo’s biggest rivals are their Sicilian counterparts, Catania. The 
animosity that surrounds theDerby di Sicilia is vehement and poisonous. 
Graffiti reading “Forza Etna” can often be seen sprawled across walls in 
Palermo, a grotesque plea to the volcano to eviscerate Catania, which lies 
mercilessly in its shadows. John Foot, author ofCalcio: A History of Italian 
Football <http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1264376.Calcio> has described the 
rivalry between Sicily’s two biggest clubs as a “political battle” in which the 
two cities are left “fighting for resources in one of Italy’s poorest and most 
corrupt of regions.”


This antipathy was brutally exhibited back in February 2007 after violent 
clashes between opposition fans culminated in the death of police officer 
Fillippo Raciti. However, both sets of fans have more in common than their 
pride would allow them to admit. They both have an ardent sense of pride for 
their island and a large proportion feel more Sicilian than Italian. Sicilian 
flags are visible at both clubs’ fixtures.

Upon taking a photo of his son immersed in the heart of the Curva Nord 
Inferiore,Jose’s father remarked: “When my son is with you all he is 
overjoyed.” One of the Palermo ultras described the day as a “beautiful moment 
for theRosanero support, one of those moments which fills you with pride.” 
Being a part of these groups gives thousands of Italians a sense of belonging 
and identity.


It’s not easy to square the circle between an altruistic gesture and the more 
egregious examples of mindless thuggery, but this young boy’s story illustrates 
that, while it is easy to fixate on the negatives, positives do exist. In a 
city that has been fractured by poverty, countless invasions and 
discrimination, Palermo offers a nexus around which the people can rally. The 
ultras see themselves as defenders of this tradition.


Classic player: Fabrizio Miccoli
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpalermo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415363608048%2Fdac2f679-8302-434c-90ed-7a82145f4de7-2060x1949.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palermo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpalermo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palermo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpalermo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415363608048%2Fdac2f679-8302-434c-90ed-7a82145f4de7-2060x1949.jpeg>
 Fabrizio Miccoli kisses the Palermo badge. Photograph: Maurizio Lagana/Getty 
Images 
Serie A is home to many ageing players who still perform at the highest level. 
Antonio di Natale, Franceso Totti and Luca Toni are just some of the division’s 
evergreen Peter Pans. These players play an integral part in their club’s 
success and are sadly missed when they eventually retire. However, less was 
made of Fabrizio Miccoli’s sudden departure from Palermo to Lecce in the summer 
of 2013. Miccoli was no less significant to his club than Luca Toni or Di 
Natale, but he did not leave to great fanfare.

The pocket-sized striker shot to fame in 2002, when he sealed a lucrative move 
to Juventus after impressing at Ternana. His time is Turin was not as 
successful as he would have liked and, despite loan spells at Perugia, 
Fiorentina and Benfica, he never seemed to settle. That was until 2007, when he 
moved to Sicily. He did not know it yet but it was to be the start of a love 
affair in which he would become one of the most iconic players to wear the pink 
shirt of Palermo.

He started slowly in his first season (scoring only eight goals), but his 
overall work ethic and willingness to sacrifice for the team made him popular 
with fans. He soon became vice-captain, and then eventually captain in 2009. 
His goalscoring also gathered pace and in the following the three campaigns he 
scored 42 times and provided 22 assists. He had found his spiritual home.

Under the tyrannical reign of Maurizio Zamparini, who seemed to sack as many 
managers as Miccoli scored goals, he was a constant in the team. The little 
magician gave 100% for every coach and remains the lasting memory of the era 
when so many players passed through on their way elsewhere.

Miccoli became Palermo’s all-time top goalscorer in 2012, when he scored a 
hat-trick against Internazionale in a 4-4 draw at the San Siro, but his goals 
could not keep the club in the top flight and they were relegated at the end of 
the 2012-13 season. Even with Miccoli’s strong ties to the Sicilian club, it 
would have been no surprise if he had left to join a Serie A club.

Despite interest from Melbourne Victory, Miccoli wanted to stay with Palermo. 
He was only 34 and had a lot to offer. But he seemed to just fall off the radar 
and disappear into the night. He was released by the club but there was no 
grand fanfare. Where were the all tributes that were festooned on Alessandro 
del Piero when he left Juventus?

Miccoli left the club quietly because of his connection to the the local 
Mafia. He was accused of buying telephone SIM cards for Mauro Lauricella, son 
of alleged Mafia boss Antonino Lauricella, and was interrogated by the police. 
Miccoli apologised to the people of Palermo, saying: “In the last few years, I 
wanted not just to be the captain of Palermo, but to be available to everyone. 
I hung around with people who I thought would be real friends, but I was wrong.”


“What happened to Miccoli is the proof it’s best he leaves Palermo,” said 
Zamparini. “Now he needs a change of air. I don’t know the situation well, but 
unfortunately he couldn’t have known that his friend was the son of a Mafioso.”

With Miccoli now without a club, it seemed that Italian football was ready to 
turn its back on him, but Lecce, who play in the third tier of Italian 
football, signed the striker last July. This being Italy, the romance had not 
died quite yet and here was Miccoli now returning home to his boyhood club.

Small in stature, huge in personality and a giant on the pitch, Miccoli has 
played with some of the greats of the game. He is still scoring goals for 
Lecce. They may not be his best finishes or his most important goals, and they 
may not be in his beloved pink of Palermo, but he is home and can look back 
fondly over the legacy he left in Sicily.

• This blog first appeared on Richard Hall’s The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://thegentlemanultra.tumblr.com/>
• Follow Richard Hall on Twitter <https://twitter.com/Gentleman_Ultra>
• Follow Guardian Football on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>
 