
Moth orchid

You’ll not find it mentioned in carols or pictured on cards, but phalaenopsis 
<http://www.thejoyofplants.co.uk/phalaenopsis> orchids fly off the shelves in 
supermarkets, big box DIY shops and chic florists alike in December. This 
obsession is not new, nor is it limited to Christmas: we have been coveting 
orchids since the first plant hunters were sent across the globe in the 
eighteenth century to track down specimens at great expense, and often at the 
cost of their lives.

To trace this orchidelirium back through history, I recommend reading The 
Orchid Thief by Susan Orlean 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/228345.The_Orchid_Thief>. It is not a 
pretty story, in places. Orlean writes: “Because orchid hunters hated the 
thought of another hunter’s finding any plants they might have missed, they 
would ‘collect out’ an area, and then they would burn the place down.” 
Unfortunately an illegal trade in orchids ripped from the wildcontinues today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/sep/28/lets-put-endangered-plants-in-the-spotlight>
, although the vast majority of commercially-available moth orchids are hybrids 
mass produced via tissue culture techniques developed in the 1970s. You can 
watch a video of a UK orchid greenhouse in productionhere 
<http://loveorchids.co.uk/production/>. Referring back to my previous post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/dec/15/mistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas>
 on mistletoe, it’s worth noting that moth orchids are not parasites or even 
hemiparasites, but epiphytes - they use trees as an anchor point, but gain no 
sustenance from them.

Phalaenopsis make great gifts, and for about the same price as a hand-tied 
bouquet, they should last far longer, provided if you follow some simplerules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/nov/30/houseplants-orchids>. If 
you find it hard to keep moth orchids alive, or simply want to try something 
different, try a cape primrose, akastreptocarpus 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?pid=831>. They are available from many 
garden centres, andDibleys Nursery 
<http://www.dibleys.com/dibleys-shop/Large-plant-of-a-Streptocarpus-Polka-Dot-Purple---PRICE-INCLUDES-CARRIAGE---4090--1242.html#SID=68>
 in Wales provide a mail order gift service for these easygoing houseplants.

Poinsettia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpaperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25f3e5722f3f09b958067f63b74c1cd142575e93%2F0_2_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paperwhites%2C%20moth%20orchids%20and%20poinsettias%3A%20the%20houseplants%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpaperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paperwhites%2C%20moth%20orchids%20and%20poinsettias%3A%20the%20houseplants%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpaperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25f3e5722f3f09b958067f63b74c1cd142575e93%2F0_2_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Thousands of poinsettia plants ready to find a new home for Christmas. 
Photograph: Jane Barlow/PA Wire 
This is the bit where I try to find something positive to say about 
poinsettias as a houseplant, and fail. I must be in a minority in my unalloyed 
hatred of this plant*, as they are still hugely popular. I write “as a 
houseplant”, because look at pictures of growing in their native Mexico and 
other parts of the world where the climate is right, and they are rather 
charming shrubs (or in some cases, trees).

But indoors, my problem with them is twofold: they are hard to keep alive in 
the average house, and then people will insist on treating them as permanent 
residents. You can try to keep your poinsettia until next Christmas so it can 
rebloom, but you will have to look at an ugly plant all year and you’ll still 
fail, most likely. In his still unsurpassed bookThe Houseplant Expert 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/784996.The_House_Plant_Expert>, Dr DG 
Hessayon explains an important distinction between flowering pot plants and 
houseplants: about the former he writes: “Don’t choose a flowering pot plant if 
you want something which will permanently adorn your living room.”

Nevertheless, like many iconic plants, poinsettia (Euphorbia pulcherrima) has 
an interesting backstory if you care to look: theAztecs 
<http://www.apsnet.org/publications/apsnetfeatures/pages/poinsettiaflower.aspx> 
called itcuetlaxochitl (brilliant flower), made a purple dye from its bracts 
and a fever medicine from its sap.Joel Roberts Poinsett 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ragmUuH88ws>, US ambassador to Mexico, brought 
it home from his travels in 1825. Just as for moth orchids, plant breeders in 
the 1960s worked hard to make the poinsettia more colourful, compact and 
floriferous, making it the blockbuster Christmas plant it is today.

If you have bought one of these and want to keep it alive at least until the 
new year, it requires humidity - achieved by grouping plants together and/or 
standing the pot on a tray filled with pebbles and water - careful watering 
(let the compost dry out between applications) and bright light but not direct 
sunlight. If you still want rush out and buy a poinsettia, at least consider 
plant miles - look for theHome Grown logo 
<https://www.nfuonline.com/back-british-farming/news-channel/picking-a-poinsettia-buy-british/>
 which indicates the plant was grown in the UK.

*No, the white ones aren’t any better.

Christmas cactus
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpaperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b0ebbf1cab632bdf05c34a2d8cdea353e575ddf%2F0_0_1550_1937%2F1550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paperwhites%2C%20moth%20orchids%20and%20poinsettias%3A%20the%20houseplants%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpaperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paperwhites%2C%20moth%20orchids%20and%20poinsettias%3A%20the%20houseplants%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpaperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b0ebbf1cab632bdf05c34a2d8cdea353e575ddf%2F0_0_1550_1937%2F1550.jpg>
 Schlumbergera: try saying that after a few glasses of Baileys this Christmas. 
Photograph: Chad Kleitsch/Getty Images/Science Faction 
Given the current craze for cacti, I’d hoped for a revival in the fate of the 
Schlumbergera <https://www.rhs.org.uk/advice/profile?pid=840>, a plant you 
probably last saw in a basket pot on your grandmother’s console table circa 
1979. The Christmas cactus (close relativesSchlumbergera truncata and S. × 
buckleyiare both referred to by this common name) is, like the moth orchid, 
aother epiphyte, hanging around in the shade of the tropical rainforests of 
Brazil, being pollinated by hummingbirds.

I can’t find who first described their flowers as resembling leaping shrimps, 
but they were absolutely right. The blooms come in all possible shades of pink, 
white and purple, although new orange and yellow cultivars are being developed 
by breeders.

For a wonderfully geeky post about Schlumbergera breeding and all things 
Christmas cactus-related, visit the houseplant blogPlants Are The Strangest 
People 
<http://plantsarethestrangestpeople.blogspot.co.uk/2010/08/tease-schlumbergera-truncata-cvv.html>
. For a shorter read, there’s care advice in thispiece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/19/alys-fowler-christmas-cactus-houseplants-poinsettia>
 by Alys Fowler.

Paperwhites
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpaperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35ae62dde1bf76e86569fea1bc4c6043c7f7de60%2F0_296_5319_3191%2F5319.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paperwhites%2C%20moth%20orchids%20and%20poinsettias%3A%20the%20houseplants%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpaperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paperwhites%2C%20moth%20orchids%20and%20poinsettias%3A%20the%20houseplants%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpaperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35ae62dde1bf76e86569fea1bc4c6043c7f7de60%2F0_296_5319_3191%2F5319.jpg>
 Narcissus ‘Paperwhite’: fragrant, or stinky? Only your nose can tell you. 
Photograph: John Glover / Alamy/Alamy 
If you are looking for knockout scent to fill your house this Christmas, this 
is the flowering bulb you need. Tazetta daffodil types - usually the paperwhite 
narcissusN. ‘Ziva’ - is specially prepared to flower in time for December 25. 
It’s too late to plant now, but seek out pre-planted arrangements. There’s a 
secret to stopping them from growing too leggy and flopping over, and it 
involves vodka.Seriously 
<http://www.hort.cornell.edu/miller/bulb/Pickling_your_Paperwhites.pdf>.

One word of warning: not everyone loves the perfume of paperwhites. As 
Fragrant Earth (a self-described “olfactory blog”)explains 
<https://fragrantearth.wordpress.com/2014/03/04/those-little-cloying-things/>, 
one component of the paperwhites’ unmistakeable scent isindole 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indole>, and some people’s noses find this adds 
a fetid edge that’s really rather unpleasant. So you may want to sniff before 
you try.

Amaryllis
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpaperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25cbea2f1a746c738cf7ba6960eb9d6d18404e71%2F0_494_3587_4483%2F3587.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paperwhites%2C%20moth%20orchids%20and%20poinsettias%3A%20the%20houseplants%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpaperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paperwhites%2C%20moth%20orchids%20and%20poinsettias%3A%20the%20houseplants%20of%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpaperwhites-moth-orchids-and-poinsettias-the-houseplants-of-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25cbea2f1a746c738cf7ba6960eb9d6d18404e71%2F0_494_3587_4483%2F3587.jpg>
 Hippeastrum ‘Papilio’ ‘opening out into a huge funnel like the horn on a 
wind-up gramophone’, as Monty Don put it Photograph: Alamy 
Before we go any further, let’s just get the nomenclature issue out of the 
way. The popular name is amaryllis, but despite anongoing debate 
<http://www.funnyhowflowersdothat.co.uk/hippeastrum-or-amaryllis-what%E2%80%99s-difference>
, hippeastrum is generally accepted as being correct.

Naming is the most boring aspect of a truly mindboggling plant. There is 
something monstrous and wonderful about the hippeastrum. I don’t think anyone 
has put it better than Monty Don, who oncewrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/1999/dec/26/gardens> in the Observer: 
“The flower stem develops as a phallic joke before opening out into a huge 
funnel like the horn on a wind-up gramophone.” Sounds like fun, doesn’t it?

Hippeastrum, like any popular houseplant, have been bred into a variety of 
degrees of gaudiness; although as Alys Fowler points out in thiscolumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/05/alys-fowler-amaryllis-hippeastrum>
 from last year, there are members of the clan that are more subtle - stylish 
even. Personally, I’d buy the brashiest, brightest hippeastrum you can find: 
they just make me chuckle with glee. I know this contradicts my previous 
statements about brash poinsettias, but plant love never was logical.

You may be keeping watch on a hippeastrum bud right now, wondering if it will 
break open in time for Christmas. Or may receive a “bulb kit” as a gift. If you 
fancy investing in a plant to cheer up your spring, Laidback Gardener has an 
excellentblogpost <https://laidbackgardener.wordpress.com/tag/hippeastrum/> on 
the drawbacks of those “everything you need” growing kits and how to choose a 
bare bulb.

 * Jane Perrone is writing a three-part series on the plants of Christmas. 
Read the first part in this series - on festive foliage plants -here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/dec/15/mistletoe-ivy-sage-foliage-christmas>
.  