
Paris Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> 
celebrated their second consecutive Ligue 1 title – achieved with two games to 
spare – despite suffering their first home league defeat of the season – a 2-1 
loss to Rennes.

Laurent Blanc's team secured the title shortly before kick-off as the 
second-placed Monaco were held to a 1-1 draw byGuingamp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/guingamp>. The result left PSG, on 83 
points, with an unassailable seven-point lead.

PSG, who also won the League Cup this season, needed Guingamp to snatch at 
least a point at Monaco to be crowned champions without kicking a ball. Dimitar 
Berbatov headed home from point-blank range to open the scoring forMonaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> in the 77th minute, only for 
Fatih Atik to equalise five minutes from time.

The result triggered scenes of celebration at the Parc des Princes a few 
minutes before the start of theRennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rennes> game.

Guingamp, who beat Rennes in the French Cup final last Saturday, are 16th in 
the standings, two points above safety.

PSG, who, as last year, were knocked out in the Champions League quarter-finals
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/08/chelsea-paris-st-germain-champions-league-match-report>
, first led the table in October after thrashing Bastia 4-0 and never 
surrendered it. Monaco will finish second while Lille and St Etienne will 
battle it out for third place in the last two rounds of matches.

Last night there were a few boos at half-time at the Parc des Princes after 
goals by Foued Kadir and Paul-Georges Ntep gave Rennes a 2-1 lead. PSG's 
Ezequiel Lavezzi had opened the scoring in the third minute after being set up 
by Edinson Cavani. Kadir beat Salvatore Sirigu with a low cross shot in the 
23rd minute and Ntep's free-kick sailed past the Italian keeper.

There was pure joy when Zlatan Ibrahimovic made his comeback from a five-week 
injury layoff – coming on for Lavezzi in the 56th minute. The Swede forced 
Benoît Costil into a spectacular save with a 40-yard effort but he failed to 
add to his 30 league goals this season.

The PSG defender Alex had the best chance to equalise in stoppage time but his 
header crashed against the bar.

The result means that Rennes, now 13th with a six-point lead over 18th-placed 
Sochaux, have virtually secured their place in the top flight thanks to a 
comfortable goal difference.
 