
Paris’s Châtelet theatre, celebrated for its range of cultural events 
including English-language Broadway musicals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/13/broadway-france-boulevards-paris-musicals-jean-luc-choplin>
, is expected to name Briton Ruth Mackenzie as its new artistic director.

Mackenzie was chosen from a shortlist of candidates to take over from Jean-Luc 
Choplin, Paris city hall said on Tuesday. Her appointment is supported by the 
capital’s mayor, Anne Hidalgo.

Mackenzie, 59, is currently artistic director of the Holland festival. Her 
appointment needs the approval of the theatre’s administrative board, which 
meets on 11 January.

A city hall spokesperson said the final decision would be made “in the weeks 
to come”, but that it was unlikely that Mackenzie’s nomination would be 
overturned.

Mackenzie, CBE, was director of the Cultural Olympiad in 2012, and has 
previously been drama officer for the Arts Council, dramatic director of the 
Vienna festival, general director of the Manchester international festival and 
the Scottish opera and a special adviser to the UK department of culture.

Bruno Julliard, deputy mayor in charge of culture, said Mackenzie had proposed 
a “programme of events open to all musical genres, innovative and 
multi-disciplined productions”. Julliard indicated she was chosen for also 
stressing the importance of digital arts, which he said would take the theatre 
into “as yet unexplored territory”.

Broadway mélodies: Kiss Me Kate at the Châtelet in Paris – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2016/feb/02/kiss-me-kate-chatelet-in-paris-in-pictures>
The Châtelet will close in March for a €31.5m (£26.7m) facelift – €5m of which 
has been raised by public donations – which is expected to take 28 months. But 
the theatre is already planning events at outside venues. The first to be 
announced is a new 47-show run of its hit musical production,Singin’ in the Rain
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/16/singin-in-the-rain-theatre-du-chatelet-paris-review>
, under the glass nave of the city’s Grand Palais in November this year.

Choplin, a self-confessed devotee of classic American musicals, directed the 
Châtelet for a decade before standing down last year, and oversaw classic 
productions of My Fair Lady,Kiss Me Kate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/02/kiss-me-kate-paris-cole-porter-chatelet>
, A Little Night Music, Sweeney Todd and 42nd Street.The shows were usually 
sell-outs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/13/broadway-france-boulevards-paris-musicals-jean-luc-choplin>
 with most of the audiences made up of French theatregoers.

An appeal for candidates to replace Choplin was launched last summer. The jury 
set up to select a successor said on Tuesday it had interviewed “several 
candidates of a very high quality”.
 