
Anyone in their right mind would want to move out. Among other problems, the 
property has leaking roofs, hidden pockets of asbestos, clear fire risks, 
vulnerability to flooding, and mice. The annual repair bill runs to around 
£50m. It is also routinely overheated, chintzily furnished and home to an aroma 
that often suggests last week’s school dinners. Small wonder that, since 2012, 
some of the Palace of Westminster’s occupants have been loudly fretting about 
the place’s upkeep.

Cost of moving MPs out of parliament for repairs could exceed £4bn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/08/mps-must-leave-houses-of-parliament-4bn-repairs>
On Thursday, a parliamentary committee published a long-awaited report 
<http://www.restorationandrenewal.parliament.uk/major-programme-of-works-to-palace-of-westminster.html>
 on its future, and everything became that bit clearer. The parliamentarians 
concerned have recommended that both the Commons and Lords should leave their 
current home between 2022 and 2028, while parliament’s physical fabric is 
fixed, at a projected cost of up to £3.9bn. Downing Street has let it be known 
that – fancy that! – Theresa May has yet to take a view. MPs and peers will 
have to approve the plan, and they could conceivably opt instead for a
decades-long process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/18/palace-of-westminster-renovation-options-report>
, whereby they stay put and work goes on around them. But in all likelihood, 
the first plan will be approved.

On the face of it, this might have been seen as an opportunity: to finally 
vacate a Commons chamber that does not have room for 219 MPs; have a close look 
at parliament’s absurd voting procedures; think about the wildly unequal 
provision of office space; and do something drastic. Reading a submission from 
the SNP – who now have some claim to being the UK’s only modern political party 
– you get a sense of what that might mean. It says that the Commons and Lords’ 
current home is an “expensive, impractical and archaic building” and points to 
the possibility of a “new-build parliament”. It also says that now is “the 
ideal opportunity to carry out a full-scale review of practices and procedures, 
including the possibility of replacing theHouse of Lords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> with an elected second chamber and 
introducing electronic voting”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fparliament-falling-down-move-it-to-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8995ec2d376b657bd77c0ee79c4a852bb4d6181c%2F0_133_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parliament%20is%20falling%20down.%20Let%E2%80%99s%20move%20it%20to%20Birmingham%20%7C%20John%20Harris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fparliament-falling-down-move-it-to-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parliament%20is%20falling%20down.%20Let%E2%80%99s%20move%20it%20to%20Birmingham%20%7C%20John%20Harris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fparliament-falling-down-move-it-to-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8995ec2d376b657bd77c0ee79c4a852bb4d6181c%2F0_133_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 ‘Britain being Britain, the palace’s icky, 19th-century approximation of what 
we would now call ‘heritage’ has long blurred into the 11th-century origins of 
Westminster Hall and convinced people of the specious idea that the whole place 
represents something sacred.’ Photograph: Daniel Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
But no: Britain being Britain, the palace’s icky, 19th-century approximation 
of what we would now call “heritage” has long blurred into the 11th-century 
origins of Westminster Hall and convinced people of the specious idea that the 
whole place represents something sacred. So the official proposals are 
depressingly conservative: the unrestorable will somehow be restored, while MPs 
spend six years round the corner, in the building currently used by the 
Department of Health (with, possibly, a new construction to house the Commons 
chamber). Peers, meanwhile, are envisaged doing their thing at the nearby Queen 
Elizabeth II Conference Centre. Then, come 2028, everyone will move back.

In terms of fulfilling its basic purpose, – which, let’s not forget, is a 
matter of democracy as well as functionality – the Palace of Westminster is a 
joke. For as long as our politics is played out there, it will surely remain 
locked into the arcane rituals – the lobbies, gowns and wigs, the awful hoopla 
around the opening of parliament – that have long since curdled into utter 
stupidity, but are somehow frozen into the place’s fixtures and fittings. 
Compared to many of the homes of legislative assemblies around the world, its 
architectural symbolism is awful: decision-making encased in neogothic walls 
and fake heritage, thus sustaining the idea that both governing and holding the 
powerful to account are a matter of almost mystical rites. They’re not: they’re 
the most basic requirements of any modern society, and it’s time their location 
reflected it.

I know: sketching this out in a political culture as cautious as ours 
threatens to take one close to La-La land

And then there is the bigger picture. “There are superficial attractions to 
parliament sitting outside London,” says the report, before dismissing them – 
but the argument for complete relocation runs much deeper than that. If the big 
ruptures of the last five years –Scotland’s estrangement from England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/25/scotland-eu-leave-uk-european>
, thevote for Brexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> – 
have been partly due to a rising resentment about London’s domination of just 
about everything, there is an obvious case for moving at least some of our key 
institutions out of the capital. And imagine the benefits: a drastic drop in 
parliamentarians’ living expenses, a clear signal that the political class had 
at last learned something, the prospect of a physical distancing between big 
economic interests and the peers and MPs to whom they are often far too close.

It would be a monumental project, but it would answer fundamental issues. 
Parliament wholly separated from government would obviously be a non-starter – 
so over time, you would aim at the relocation of just about all of the main 
institutions of politics and the state: Downing Street, government departments, 
the HQs of the main political parties. In a fit of blue-skies thinking, the 
sociologistDanny Dorling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/07/should-parliament-move-out-of-london>
 has proposed orienting such a project around HS2, and reducing the latter’s 
cost by putting in the funds from the selling of all that government real 
estate. Time was, we could have probably got some money for all this from the 
EU, though if Brexit has the effect of re-focusing our attention on the 
English-speaking world, it might have the fringe benefit of reminding us of the 
work that goes on away from much bigger cities, in Canberra, Ottawa and 
Wellington.

PMQs verdict: has Theresa May got a new gag writer?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/07/pmqs-verdict-theresa-may-new-gag-writer>
I know, I know: sketching all this out in a political culture as cautious as 
ours threatens to take one dangerously close to La-La land. But we could start 
with a modest but significant proposal. Four years ago, the Labour peerAndrew 
Adonis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/apr/19/move-house-lords-london-adonis>
 suggested that the House Of Lords should find a new home, well away from the 
capital. “Half of our national politicians would then assemble well away from 
‘Planet London’,” he wrote. “And yes, yours truly – a Londoner and proud of it 
– would be happy to lead the way, if by then I am still a member.”

Many of us might think of the upper house as all of parliament’s failings 
incarnate – but at the same time, for as long as it is around, moving it to 
another city would at least couch what it does in some sense of modernity. 
Doing so in tandem with its transformation into an elected chamber, needless to 
say, would be a huge step forward. But where to put it? Manchester is the 
English city closest to my heart, and would be perfect. But in a spirit of 
generosity and geographical good sense, I’d favourBirmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham>, a splendid place in need of an 
uplift to restore its claim to being the country’s second city. The Tories, I 
see, will this month be once again pitching up there for their conference, with 
return visits planned for 2018 and 2020. If the city meets even their lofty 
requirements, why not?
 