
Times were tumultuous in post-Soviet eastern Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> when Alexander Chekmenev started 
out as a young photographer in his home city. “Like the whole country, Luhansk 
in the mid-1990s was suffering from economic collapse and the rise of crime. 
Those times were called the ‘evil 90s’,” he says.


But amid the turmoil there were opportunities, and not just for the criminals. 
“In 1994, all old passports from the Soviet Union had to be changed to new 
Ukrainian passports,” he says. “People were lining up at photo studios. 
Photographers could earn a car in a season.”


But, unlike many, Chekmenev wasn’t interested only in money, and he was 
attracted to an out-of-the-ordinary passport assignment. “I got an offer – 
which was refused by all others because it was for very little pay – to go to 
the homes of lonely and sick people who could not walk on their own,” he 
explains. “When I saw the first person, and the surroundings in which that old 
lady was living out the end of her life, I was ready to shoot for free. Their 
houses had no amenities: no water, no gas, no toilet, no phone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpassport-photograph-elderly-ukraine-alexander-chekmenev%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1044f3a48ad28aaeeb426800552f3d580e71573%2F0_0_2000_1334%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Passport%20to%20eternity%3A%20photographing%20the%20forgotten%20elderly%20of%20Ukraine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpassport-photograph-elderly-ukraine-alexander-chekmenev%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Passport%20to%20eternity%3A%20photographing%20the%20forgotten%20elderly%20of%20Ukraine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpassport-photograph-elderly-ukraine-alexander-chekmenev%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1044f3a48ad28aaeeb426800552f3d580e71573%2F0_0_2000_1334%2F2000.jpg>
 Luhansk, Ukraine, from Passport by Alexander Chekmenev (1994-5). Photograph: 
Alexander Chekmenev 
“An old woman who lived in one particular house had prepared a coffin for 
herself. She lived in one room, while the coffin inhabited the other one. She 
was basically ready to leave for the other world at any moment,” he says. “I 
also took photos of people with mental disorders. They did not know what was 
going on, why they were being seated or why I was taking pictures of them. 
There was one bed-stricken person who had to be lifted from his bed. Two social 
workers were holding him in an upright position, and the other two were holding 
the backdrop.”

When visiting these people, Chekmenev wanted to capture much more than bland 
black-and-white head-and-shoulders passport portraits: he wanted to create a 
wide-angle, full-colour view of their dire circumstances. “The small frames of 
passport photos were like the small frame of Soviet television, which showed 
propaganda of happy living,” he says. “But I saw that the real lives of people 
were not nearly as happy as the press described. Beyond the frame of the 
passport photo a true reality – without retouching and censorship – was 
concealed.”

But to record his subjects’ lives as he wanted, Chekmenev faced obstacles. 
“Generally speaking, I seldom had any money back then,” he says. “For this job 
I was provided with enough black and white film, which I had in one camera with 
a portrait lens.” But as this would be useless for photographing the wider 
scenes in tiny rooms in colour as he wanted, he needed an alternative – and 
costly – solution. “In my other camera with a wide-angle lens I had C-41 colour 
film, which was equivalent to gold to me back then. So I shot almost no 
duplicates. There was no money for colour film.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpassport-photograph-elderly-ukraine-alexander-chekmenev%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59ba2bfa679407900e488c78daccf088d6206bcd%2F0_0_2000_1334%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Passport%20to%20eternity%3A%20photographing%20the%20forgotten%20elderly%20of%20Ukraine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpassport-photograph-elderly-ukraine-alexander-chekmenev%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Passport%20to%20eternity%3A%20photographing%20the%20forgotten%20elderly%20of%20Ukraine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fpassport-photograph-elderly-ukraine-alexander-chekmenev%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59ba2bfa679407900e488c78daccf088d6206bcd%2F0_0_2000_1334%2F2000.jpg>
 Luhansk, Ukraine, from Passport by Alexander Chekmenev (1994-5). Photograph: 
Alexander Chekmenev 
“I did not count how many people I photographed with black and white film,” he 
continues. “There was one day when I photographed almost 60 people.” But over 
the many months he spent shooting the monochrome passport headshots, he slowly 
and carefully selected the wider scenes he really wanted to show, 
parsimoniously taking just a single colour shot of each one.

By the end of Chekmenev’s passport assignment, he had shot just one roll of 
colour film: 36 images. “I came to an understanding that they would never be 
published and that nobody would ever know how these old people lived what was 
left of their lives.”

This pessimism about the fate of his photographs was born out of the cold 
reality of circumstances. “I realised that for the pictures to live I’d have to 
publish a book,” he says. “Back then I didn’t dare to dream of a book. I just 
wanted to become a real photographer.” So in 1997, Chekmenev moved to Kiev and 
pursued a career in photojournalism, which in recent years has seen his images 
published by the likes of the New Yorker. And eventually, over 20 years on, he 
has realised his dream:Passport, a book of his powerful and deeply affecting 
colour pictures <http://www.dewilewis.com/products/passport> from 1990s 
Luhansk, is about to be published.

Reeperbahn rendezvous: the glorious dive bar photos of Anders Petersen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/21/anders-petersen-photographer-cafe-lehmitz-hamburg>
Things never got any better for the elderly in Luhansk, and – with the ongoing 
conflict in eastern Ukraine – they are now even worse. But just as he had the 
breadth of vision to create a bigger picture of people’s lives in 1994, 
Chekmenev sees the timeless and wider relevance his harrowing photographs still 
have today. “The theme of old age and loneliness is one for the whole world, no 
matter what language or country,” he says. “The important thing is how each 
country is treating its retirees. It indicates the quality of life in that 
country. For me, this is the true passport of a country. There is no future for 
the countries where millions of old people live in poverty. Passport is like a 
reminder or an appeal to all that there are people who need our help, our 
attention and our psychological support. And they can be living right next to 
us, just behind the wall of a neighbouring apartment or house.”

• Passport by Alexander Chekmenev is published by Dewi Lewis 
<http://www.dewilewis.com/products/passport>.
 