
Patrick Roberts said he has no regrets’ about joining Celtic on loan after an 
outstanding performance in the1-1 Champions League draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/manchester-city-celtic-champions-league-match-report>
 with his parent club Manchester City and is determined to show he is capable 
of starring for Pep Guardiola’s side.

The England youth international, who moved to City from Fulham in July 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/19/manchester-city-sign-patrick-roberts-fulham>
 for an undisclosed fee believed to be around £11m, was only permitted to play 
at the Etihad Stadium because his father, Neil, insisted he should be allowed 
to play if the two clubs were drawn against each other. That proved to be 
Celtic’s gain as the 19-year-old scored a brilliant individual goal in the 
fourth minute that was cancelled out by Kelechi Iheanacho.

Patrick Roberts goal earns Celtic a draw at lacklustre Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/manchester-city-celtic-champions-league-match-report>
Roberts was asked whether he feels he can make an impact at City when his 
18-month loan expires. “I always believe in myself and my ability and will show 
it whenever I get the chance,” he said. “I want to finish the season strongly 
withCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> and see where it goes 
from there. I know what I am capable of. It is about what you do on the pitch, 
not how much you cost.”

Signed from AFC Wimbledon at the age of 13, Roberts shone in Fulham’s youth 
sides and has been a regular for England at every age group since under-16s. 
Despite making three appearances for City, which included a four-minute Premier 
League debut in the4-1 defeat at Tottenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/26/tottenham-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 in September 2015, Tuesday night was the first time he had played at the 
Etihad Stadium but it did not take long for him to feel at home. His 
performance certainly caught the eye of Guardiola, who saw his young side 
struggle to break down a stubborn Celtic defence to end with their second draw 
against the Scottish champions in the group stages. “He just said well done and 
keep it going. That was nice,” Roberts said. “[City are in touch with me] all 
the time. They call me, text me. I saw someone yesterday and they sat down with 
me for a while. Someone comes to see me play. I keep in touch all the time. 
They have been great with me while I have been away.

“I am sure the manager gets reports. Matches are on TV as well. That is the 
luxury of being at a club like Celtic. The games are always on TV so you know 
people can watch.”

After six goals in only 11 SPL appearances last season, Roberts has been used 
sparingly in the league by Brendan Rodgers but has made nine Champions League 
appearances this season after Celtic came through two qualifying rounds. He 
believes experience and the similar tactics employed by Rodgers and Guardiola 
will stand him in good stead.

“The manager has indicated what he wants from the team. Every game he wants us 
to press high and win the ball back as quickly as we can, go on the 
counter-attack and be very positive in the final third,” Roberts said. “At 
times we have been this season and it showed in some of the performances. We 
have scored a lot of goals and we have put some good performances together 
against top sides like Barcelona and City and Borussia Mönchengladbach.

“Celtic have high expectations,” he added. “They have to be winning every 
game. Like City they are a team everyone wants to beat. You have to have the 
mentality to overcome that. When teams try to stop you playing, you need a good 
mindset for how to break that down. That is the glory of going away to Celtic. 
They have high expectations and they want to win every game.”
 