
The Merchant of Venice and I go back a long way. I first encountered it at 
school, at the age of 12. Our English teacher, Cecil Worman, handed out copies 
of the play and told us to turn toact four, scene one 
<http://shakespeare.mit.edu/merchant/merchant.4.1.html>. The trial scene. He 
said: “Stewart, you’re Shylock. Start reading.” So I did.

I don’t think I came across it again until much later, at Bristol Old Vic. 
Again it was Shylock. I was in my mid-20s, ridiculously young for the part. It 
was an awful experience – everyone else was very good, but I knew I was wrongly 
cast.I went for melodrama <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7UOdMHW7J2Q>. If 
there was rage, I raged like a tempest; if Shylock was mean, I was pure evil. 
Terrible, looking back. I should have been arrested for overacting. If not for 
racism.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7UOdMHW7J2Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7UOdMHW7J2Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7UOdMHW7J2Q&media=>
 Stewart discusses his 1978 performance of Shylock. 
In a way, that’s the difficulty with the role – what you make of Shylock’s 
Jewishness, particularly if, like me, you don’t happen to be Jewish. When I 
played him again,at the RSC in 1978 
<https://www.rsc.org.uk/the-merchant-of-venice/past-productions/john-barton-1981-production>
, I remember John Barton, the director, saying: “He’s a bad man, and a bad 
Jew.” In a way, that’s true: he insults his caste and his faith.

But one of the most powerful things in the play is the way that, even though 
Shylock isn’t particularly sympathetic, you end up sympathising with him. He 
wants his revenge on the Christians, sure, but he’s driven to it. Shakespeare 
lets you create a sense of the man’s history, the stress under which his life 
has been lived, his dependence on his daughter Jessica, who abandons him. He’s 
terribly lonely, I think. One of the most poignant bits of writing in the play 
is when he realises that Jessica has gone, and that she has taken a turquoise 
ring that had been given to him by his wife.“I had it of Leah when I was a 
bachelor,” 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=1zMofz4P_8sC&pg=PA68&lpg=PA68&dq=shylock+wife+leah&source=bl&ots=lAiDfow5Pg&sig=o4PZy8_StfMsGlku2E4PVWn0WoQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjqjOPVg4LOAhVDB8AKHVRvDPAQ6AEIbDAO#v=onepage&q=shylock%20wife%20leah&f=false>
 he says. It’s the only time we hear about Leah, and we have no idea where she 
is or what has happened to her. Mothers are always disappearing in 
Shakespeare’s plays.

Then, one day in the early 2000s, I was talking to the screenwriter and 
playwright John Logan 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2012/03/john-logan-interview> on the set 
of the Star Trek films. The Merchant came up. He was saying how he hated the 
play and never wanted to see it again; I was saying I thought it was a 
masterpiece. The following Monday, he came in and admitted he had spent the 
weekend rereading it, had become totally obsessed and was thinking of doing a 
film treatment; did I want to play Shylock?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fpatrick-stewart-i-should-have-been-arrested-for-overacting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2677d7d1c283ce0bded5300742d13b222649e6a7%2F0_0_4719_3703%2F4719.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20Stewart%20on%20Shylock%3A%20'I%20should%20have%20been%20arrested%20for%20overacting'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fpatrick-stewart-i-should-have-been-arrested-for-overacting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20Stewart%20on%20Shylock%3A%20%27I%20should%20have%20been%20arrested%20for%20overacting%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fpatrick-stewart-i-should-have-been-arrested-for-overacting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2677d7d1c283ce0bded5300742d13b222649e6a7%2F0_0_4719_3703%2F4719.jpg>
 Reprising the role of Shylock in John Barton’s version of the play at the 
Gulbenkian Studio, Newcastle upon Tyne, in 1979. Photograph: Heritage Image 
Partnership Ltd/Alamy 
Three weeks later, a script turned up. It was a brilliant concept: the play 
was set in contemporary Las Vegas. The language was intact, but everything else 
was updated. The opening shot would feature a Venetian gondola working its way 
up a canal, but then the camera would pull back and you would realise it’s the 
famous hotel in Vegas – completely fake. It was wonderful. You realise how much 
the play is about money: everything has a price, even love. Bassanio, who woos 
Portia, is a complete opportunist; he calls her “a lady richly left”, which 
says it all. Shylock was an elegantly dressed businessman, witty and urbane; 
the story was partly about how this charming, civilised man could tear himself 
apart. There was a terrific emotional arc.

We got within about two weeks of filming – it was all cast, the locations were 
set, everything was there. Then the funding disappeared. It happens, but it’s 
exhausting. We were so close.

I assumed that would be that, but then I was doing The Tempest with Rupert 
Goold at the Royal Shakespeare Company in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/aug/10/theatre.rsc> and we got talking 
about it. I mentioned John’s script; he loved the idea, and with John’s 
permission we worked on it. A lot of things changed, it developed into 
something else, but the core idea remained the same. That’s howElvis Presley 
found his way on to the stage of the RSC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/20/merchant-of-venice-review-rsc>. 

People sometimes say to me: “Oh, isn’t the play antisemitic?” I hear that, on 
some campuses in the US, it’s regarded as too sensitive to teach. That’s really 
sad, I think. Othello contains racist characters, but it’s not a racist play. 
Likewise, The Merchant contains antisemitism – terrible antisemitism – but it’s 
not attacking Jews. “Hath not a Jew eyes?” is one of the great humanistic 
lines. Shakespeare is making a comment about prejudice. You can come into that 
play as a racist, but it’s hard to leave it thinking the same way.
 