
Williams have announced that Paul Di Resta will join the team as official 
reserve driver for the newFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> season which gets under way in 
Melbourne this weekend.

The 29-year-old former Force India driver takes on the role behind drivers 
Valtteri Bottas and Felipe Massa and he will initially spend time getting fully 
accustomed to the controls and procedures of theWilliams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/williams> Mercedes FW38.

Nico Rosberg’s new-found self-belief should be a concern for Lewis Hamilton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/nico-rosberg-lewis-hamilton-mercedes-f1-grand-prix>
He told williamsf1.com: “I am delighted to be joining Williams as reserve 
driver and look forward to the2016 season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/19/williams-unveil-2016-f1-car>.”

The Scot enjoyed three seasons at Force India from 2011-2013, amassing 121 
world championship points from 58 starts.

Di Resta lost his seat the following season so rejoined the Deutsche 
Tourenwagen Masters (DTM) touring car racing series, where he raced early in 
his career, competing for Mercedes, and he hopes to combine his role there with 
the new one at Williams.

He added: “It will be a busy year combining both driving in DTM with Mercedes 
AMG, and attending the Formula One Grands Prix in my new reserve driver role. I 
will be giving my full support to both and look forward to the exciting 
possibilities the year has ahead. I would like to thank [deputy team principal] 
Claire [Williams] and Williams for the opportunity to be part of the team.”

The 2006 European Formula 3 champion joins the British team, who have enjoyed 
two third-place finishes in the constructors’ standings over the past two 
seasons, before Sunday’s Australian Grand Prix.

Claire Williams said: “We are delighted to welcome someone with Paul’s 
experience to the team. Having competed in 58 Formula One races throughout his 
career Paul’s racing knowledge will be invaluable.

“We are also confident that given his recent Formula One and current DTM 
experience Paul will be able to confidently step into the FW38 and assist with 
our 2016 campaign.”
 