
Paul Cook’s praise of Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> is nothing short of effusive 
and, while the Portsmouth manager admitted he is attempting to emulate the rise 
of Eddie Howe’s squad from the doldrums to the Premier League, Cook believes in 
many aspects his team remain a bigger club.

Colchester’s Darren Ambrose: ‘I’m good enough to get back where I want to be’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/28/darren-ambrose-colchester-tottenham>
The 2008 FA Cup winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/may/18/facup.portsmouth> play host 
to Bournemouth in the fourth round on Saturday with Pompey’s opponents now 
operating several levels above their south-coast neighbours despite meeting in 
League One only three years ago. Fifty-seven places separate them and the 
achievements of the traditionally smaller club is an inspiration.

“I think if you look at our fanbase and support the reality is we probably are 
bigger,” Cook said. “If you look at history, the likelihood is that we probably 
are. But if you look at where we sit today, we are definitely not. There is an 
argument for both sides.

“You have to take your hats off to not just Eddie but the people who took them 
from a dark place to where they are now. When you drop an anchor and can’t go 
lower or get worse, for the majority of clubs the future is bright.”

That is certainly the case at Portsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth>. They presently reside in the 
League Two play-off places, seven points off an automatic promotion spot but 
with games in hand. The team are settled and recently strengthened while off 
the field they are back on a solid footing. “Our dark days are definitely 
behind us,” he added.

“Our support has not wavered in any shape or form. Without getting into the 
past too much, we are on a forward curve now. How quickly we go forward remains 
to be seen.” As for Howe’s example, Cook said: “I’m struggling to get out of 
League Two at the moment, I’m not even thinking about following him.”

But it is easy to draw parallels between the two managers. Both are wedded to 
similar playing philosophies and refuse to divert from them no matter the 
calibre of opposition. Cook has some decisions to make over his starting XI but 
promises whoever gets the call to play will stick to the side’s attacking 
principles. It could make for a thrilling spectacle.

Smaller clubs toppling Premier League elite – we may have to get used to it | 
Jonathan Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/28/premier-league-leicester-manchester-united-city-chelsea-arsenal>
“We have the exact same belief in terms of playing style here,” he said. 
“Bournemouth will find we won’t park the bus. We didn’t at Ipswich [in the 
previous round], and we have very similar beliefs in how the game should be 
played. If you get beat, you move on and that’s one of things that stands out 
for me about them – how they manage disappointment. They never wallow in it, 
they move on.”

Fratton Park will be sold out for the third time in 11 days, following the 
third-round replay win against Ipswich Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/portsmouth-ipswich-town-fa-cup-third-round-replay-match-report>
 and last Saturday’s 1-0 League Two defeat to Oxford United. For Cook this is a 
testament to the club’s unwavering supporters.

“It’s great credit to the people of Portsmouth that the last three games have 
been sold out coming to the end of January when money is tight,” said the 
48-year-old. “The ticket office has had people turning up every day.”

Naturally there has been plenty of big-game excitement around the city this 
week, but Cook conceded one eye is already trained on Tuesday’s long trip to 
Morecambe.

“The likelihood is the Bournemouth game will take care of itself but the 
Morecambe game will be a lot more difficult fixture in terms of the mental side 
of the game,” he said.

“If we can give a good account of ourselves and get our fans off their seats 
we’ll go home happy.”
 