
Paulo Dybala proved a more than able deputy for the rested Gonzalo Higuaín by 
scoring one goal and creating another in Juventus’s 3-2 win overAtalanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> in the Italian Cup on 
Wednesday. It booked a quarter-final place against Milan or Torino who play on 
Thursday.

Mario Mandzukic struck a post early for Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> before, midway through the 
first half, Dybala scored with a volley from outside the area following a touch 
from the Croatia international. Before half-time Dybala threaded a pass through 
to Mandzukic, who made it 2-0 with an angled shot.

Atalanta captain Papu Gómez leads by example as his club let young talent go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/serie-a-atalanta-papu-gomez-leads-by-example>
After Dybala was taken off, the final 20 minutes proved nervous for Juventus. 
Abdoulay Konko pulled one back for Atalanta in the 72nd minute, firing in a 
shot off the inside of the post from the edge of the area.

Three minutes later, Miralem Pjanic restored Juventus’ two-goal lead with a 
penalty after Stephan Lichtsteiner was fouled. However in the 81st minute, 
Atalanta’s 18-year-old Ivory Coast forward Emmanuel Latte Lath beat 
Lichtsteiner to divert a cross in and make it 3-2.

Juventus had not conceded two goals at home since drawing 2-2 with Bayern 
Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/23/juventus-bayern-munich-champions-league-match-report>
 in the Champions League nearly a year ago and their defender Andrea Barzagli 
said: “We knew it would be a tough match. We really risked a lot.”

Fiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina>, meanwhile, 
defeated Chievo Verona 1-0 thanks to a penalty from Federico Bernardeschi who 
also hit the crossbar.

Bernardeschi had been fouled by the former Fiorentina full-back Massimo Gobbi 
and the 22-year-old Italy international drilled his penalty into the corner.

Both teams ended the game with 10 men. The Chievo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo> midfielder Ivan Radovanovic was 
shown his second yellow in first-half added time and Bernardeschi hit the 
woodwork with the resulting free-kick. Fiorentina’s Mauro Zárate was shown a 
straight red midway through the second half for a foul on Samuel Bastien.
 