
Paul Scholes was singing and dancing to the sounds of Rick Astley in the 
Salford City dressing room after they dumpedNotts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty> out of the FA Cup on a 
historic and euphoric night at Moor Lane.

Salford embraced the opportunity to shine on their maiden appearance in the 
first round of theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>. Danny 
Webber and Richie Allen scored to give the Northern Premier League side a 
thrilling 2-0 win over their League Two opponents in front of the TV cameras.

Non-league Salford City stun Notts County with second-half double
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/06/salford-city-notts-county-fa-cup-match-report>
Scholes, who part-owns the club along with Gary and Phil Neville, Nicky Butt 
and Ryan Giggs, ignored pleas to stay off the grass and stormed on to the pitch 
after the final whistle, along with many of the 1,400 Salford fans inside the 
ground.

The former Manchester United midfielder, who bought the club along with his 
four friends last year, continued to celebrate after the game had ended.

“When the final whistle went, you had Gary Neville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-neville> and Nicky Butt part of the 
pitch invasion like normal fans and Scholesy is dancing and singing in the 
changing room – I’m sure it was Rick Astley he was singing in there,” said 
Anthony Johnson, who manages the first team along with Bernard Morley.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpaul-scholes-joins-party-salford-notts-county%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd73e310aac9cb673f1a23ea02b31a6f31faf2d6f%2F160_126_2415_1449%2F2415.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Scholes%20joins%20the%20party%20after%20Salford%20City%20shock%20Notts%20County%20in%20the%20FA%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpaul-scholes-joins-party-salford-notts-county%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Scholes%20joins%20the%20party%20after%20Salford%20City%20shock%20Notts%20County%20in%20the%20FA%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpaul-scholes-joins-party-salford-notts-county%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd73e310aac9cb673f1a23ea02b31a6f31faf2d6f%2F160_126_2415_1449%2F2415.jpg>
 Gary Neville and Paul Scholes celebrate Salford City’s historic FA Cup 
victory. Photograph: Matt West/BPI/Rex Shutterstock 
“It matters to them like it does to normal fans. We’re under no illusions that 
we’ve got to win games but we’re enjoying it and working for five of the best 
players this country has ever produced.

“But I thought for 90 per cent of the game we dominated it. I don’t want that 
to sound arrogant or brash but we felt we were the better side.”

Unlike his brother Phil, who could not attend due to his work commitments with 
Valencia, where he is a coach, Gary Neville was there to experience the shock 
first hand.

The former Manchester United captain won 20 competitions during his long and 
illustrious career at Old Trafford, but on Friday night he experienced his 
first major high as a co-owner of the Evo-Stik Premier League club.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpaul-scholes-joins-party-salford-notts-county%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33bb5b692cfb0149007e3c5883fab9cb3631aa34%2F658_303_2557_1534%2F2557.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Scholes%20joins%20the%20party%20after%20Salford%20City%20shock%20Notts%20County%20in%20the%20FA%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpaul-scholes-joins-party-salford-notts-county%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Scholes%20joins%20the%20party%20after%20Salford%20City%20shock%20Notts%20County%20in%20the%20FA%20Cup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F07%2Fpaul-scholes-joins-party-salford-notts-county%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33bb5b692cfb0149007e3c5883fab9cb3631aa34%2F658_303_2557_1534%2F2557.jpg>
 Neville, Scholes and Nicky Butt watch the FA Cup first round match from the 
terraces at Moor Lane. Photograph: Chris Brunskill/Getty Images 
“It is an absolutely unbelievable night,” the England coach said. “You never 
get too excited at football anymore because you’re working in a professional 
capacity but when we come down here it’s an escape for us and it makes us love 
football more.

“Sometimes in the last 18 months you think there’s a lot to do here but this 
just makes it all worthwhile.

“Tonight was for all those people who work there. I’ve not felt like that for 
a long time in football and that’s not over-egging it. I felt like a kid again 
in a football ground. I’ve never seen Scholesy jump so high in celebration in 
my life.”

Johnson led Salford to promotion after being appointed co-manager along with 
Morley in January. With the backing of the Class of ‘92 stars, he feels the sky 
is the limit for Salford.

“I don’t think there’s a ceiling on where this club can go,” said Johnson, who 
sprinted down the touchline to celebrate with his players after Allen scored 
the final goal. “As a one-off, I’ve never felt like that in football.”
 