
Paul Scholes led the chorus of criticism over Manchester United’s latest 
underwhelming display, when they took 70 minutes to register a goal attempt on 
targetagainst Sheffield United of League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/manchester-united-sheffield-united-fa-cup-match-report>
 and needed a Wayne Rooney penalty in stoppage time to reach the next round of 
the FA Cup. Louis van Gaal attempted to suggest that the only thing that 
mattered was Manchester United’s presence in the draw for the fourth round but 
Scholes and a number of fans begged to differ.

“It’s not good enough in my eyes,” the former midfielder, now working as a 
pundit for BT Sport, said. “They didn’t create a chance and winning a game 
against a League One side with a 94th-minute penalty was not a great 
performance, but we haven’t seen anything different for the last six months.

“There are too many square pegs in round holes and you see too much boring, 
negative football. The players looked bored, there’s no spirit, nobody having a 
go at each other, no entertainment. I think even Van Gaal on the bench looks 
bored, but he’ll come out and say he was happy.”

The Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 
manager did not quite do that, though he did try to claim some of the criticism 
was unfair. “Sheffield United did not create any chances either, but no one 
talks about that,” he said, showing a fine disregard for the unwritten rules of 
Cup football against lower league opponents. “They played with 10 men behind 
the ball and that is the most difficult situation to overcome in football, it 
is easier to defend than it is to attack.

“In a cup game the most important thing is always to win, and at least we did 
that. We are in the next round and that is all that really matters, but I could 
not be so happy with the performance. We moved the ball too slowly and we 
needed to play with wingers to make the pitch as big as possible. Juan Mata is 
a very good player but he is not a right-winger and that is why I brought him 
off and put Memphis Depay and Jesse Lingard on.”

The substitutions did make a difference – it was Depay who won the last-gasp 
penalty – but before that his directness and willingness to go for goal had the 
Old Trafford crowd clapping and cheering with exaggerated enthusiasm to let Van 
Gaal know he should have been on all along. “As Manchester United manager I 
have to deal with that, just as the players do,” Van Gaal said. “But I know we 
have to improve, we have to be quicker and much better.

“I don’t think we will be doing any business in January but we need creative 
players, we don’t have too many. But in the end we are in the next round and we 
kept a clean sheet.”

Wayne Rooney saves Manchester United’s blushes against Sheffield United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/manchester-united-sheffield-united-fa-cup-match-report>
Arsenal’s mettle faces test in Premier League’s hectic January schedule
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/premier-league-arsenal-january-schedule> 