
Nowhere illustrates how rapidly clubs can plummet quite like Portsmouth but 
Paul Cook, the League Two team’s manager, has saidthe 2008 FA Cup winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/may/18/facup.portsmouth> cannot live 
on past glories and must focus on moving their way up the ladder again.

Harry Arter: ‘Every single game now I go out to play for her’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/29/harry-arter-bournemouth-interview-loss-daughter>
Pompey face Bournemouth in the FA Cup fourth round on Saturday, six years 
after they were a Premier League club in the final of this competition and 
three years after both teams were playing in League One. There have beenthree 
relegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/apr/21/portsmouth-coventry-relegated-championship>
,two administrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/feb/26/portsmouth-premierleague> 
and, crucially, onesupporters’ trust takeover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/10/portsmouth-future-fratton-park-ownership>
 along the way. Now they are on an upward curve.

However, Cook is weary of the club revelling in old successes. “So many clubs, 
not to be disrespectful, look back to the glory days,” he said. “Look at 
Nottingham Forest for example – plenty of clubs have pictures up of them 
lifting trophies but aren’t successful anymore.

“History deems that every club will go through successful times and our job is 
to bring smiles back to people’s faces. We cannot guarantee success, but the 
best feeling we can give our fans is for them to look forward to going to the 
game.”

There are, it should be noted, pictures of the Cup finals dotted around 
Fratton Park and Cook believes this is the same club that waswelcoming Milan 
and Ronaldinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/nov/28/uefa-portsmouth> to Fratton 
Park less than a decade ago. “I don’t think it’s a different Portsmouth, but 
the majority of teams have had bad periods and good periods. You only have to 
look atBolton at the minute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/30/bolton-first-team-players-yet-to-receive-wages-for-november>
 to see how quickly clubs can find themselves in financial trouble. We’ve 
certainly had our issues, but we are rising back to where we want to be.”

Portsmouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> are owned by the 
supporters, who took control of the club in April 2013 and announced they had 
paid all existing creditors by September 2014. They are debt-free and their 
biggest concern is ascending the divisions.

“From the trust’s point of view, the initial thing was to make sure we had a 
club, but now we have one we can be proud of,” Cook said. “We are well run and 
the decisions made are for the benefit of the club.”

Oxford United: inside story of a club on the rise and targeting more FA Cup 
glory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/29/oxford-united-fa-cup-blackburn-rovers-swansea>
Few expect Portsmouth to avoid defeat against a Bournemouth team 57 places 
above them, but Cook said there is no shortage of belief among fans and players.
Ipswich sent out a weakened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/portsmouth-ipswich-town-fa-cup-third-round-replay-match-report>
 side in their third-round replay, but Cook noted his team still came up 
against distinguished players. Bournemouth are likely to rotate too, but the 
game is not an easy one to predict.

“It is quite funny in that when we played Ipswich in the replay, people 
believed we were going to win,” Cook said. “The reality was Ipswich’s team had 
[Luke] Varney and [Brett] Pitman – they had very good players.

“A lot of our supporters, staff and players expect to get something out of the 
game, but we have great respect forBournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> as a club. We’re not stupid 
to know that if they fire on Saturday, we will certainly have our hands full. 
But it will be a good match between two teams that want to play football. We 
will do our best to win by playing how we believe it should be played.”

Cook, who has yet to have “any type of great success” as a manager in the 
competition from spells at Southport, Accrington and Chesterfield, has to make 
a decision over which goalkeeper to start. Ryan Fulton, signed on loan from 
Liverpool last week until the end of the season, impressed on debut against 
Oxford with Brian Murphy sidelined because of concussion. Murphy is in 
contention for selection again, but may not come straight back into the team.
 