
If Paul Lambert <https://www.theguardian.com/football/paul-lambert> turns 
around Wolves’ fortunes to the extent his employers expect then the club’s 
supporters may come to laugh at the moment, after 32 minutes of torment at 
Derby County’s hands, when João Teixeira made his way from the pitch. Moments, 
perhaps, as there were quite a few of them. Teixeira was chosen from 10 
plausible candidates to make way as the interim manager, Rob Edwards, sought to 
find a route back from 2-0 down but instead of hurrying to let George Saville 
have a go at sparking their comeback he lumbered slowly towards the touchline, 
his discontent evident while the Molineux crowd, close to apoplexy, made theirs 
felt in another way.

Ince double lifts Derby as Wolves look ragged for new manager Paul Lambert
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/wolverhampton-wanderers-derby-county-championship-match-report>
Regardless of intention it was not a good look and Lambert, whose appointment 
as head coach was confirmed late on Saturday, would doubtless have had some 
Glaswegian wisdom at hand for the Portuguese midfielder had he been available 
to impart it a few hours sooner. Teixeira’s demeanour was, at this point, 
perfect shorthand for the wider mood: dejection and lethargy on the pitch, 
distrust and utter distaste off it.

Edwards could not wait to talk some sense into his players at half-time and a 
spirited recovery, with goals from Hélder Costa and David Edwards, which might, 
on another day, have brought a draw rather thana 3-2 defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/wolverhampton-wanderers-derby-county-championship-match-report>
 said plenty for the ability of this bright 33-year-old coach to influence a 
dressing room.

Those in Molineux’s corridors of power might have sympathised with his wish to 
make good a situation that had quickly become messy. That Lambert is a decent 
manager who, given a stable environment, has a record of success at this level 
is beyond doubt; the question for Fosun International, the group of Chinese 
investorswho took over Wolves in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/21/wolves-takeover-sale-chinese-group-fosun-international>
, is why they waited so long to listen to the right people. It has been a 
wasted three months for Wolves, who could have been told by any reasonably 
informed observer thatthe recruitment of Walter Zenga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/30/wolves-appoint-walter-zenga-new-head-coach-kenny-jackett>
 to lead their promotion bid looked ill-starred from the outset: at this level, 
resources tend to mean little without the correct leadership and the speed at 
which an expensively assembled squad’s fortunes began to unravel after a 
promising start spoke of the Fosun era’s fuzzy early thinking.

It is, as the midfielder Conor Coady put it afterwards, a squad that “needs a 
bit of guidance”. Lambert must find the right blend between Zenga’s six foreign 
signings and the mostly British core of a squad that, by and large, performed 
admirably under Kenny Jackett. Twenty-five players have already made first-team 
appearances this season and clarity is required quickly to arrest a slump that 
has brought seven games without a win and 19th place in the division.

There was encouragement to be found in a second half in which the best 
attacking player was Wolves’ forward Ivan Cavaleiro. The former Benfica and 
Monaco winger, brought in for what was reportedly a club record £7m fee, was a 
menace from his perch on the left and created Edwards’s goal with an 
undefendable right-footed delivery. He might have won a penalty and was 
certainly unlucky to concede one, being adjudged to have fouled Tom Ince and 
seeing his counterpart score to effectively put the game beyond Wolves. The raw 
materials are here – only a few weeks have passed since the sullen Teixeira’s 
performances were being lauded – and you sense Wolves simply need someone who 
can set and raise the tone.

Derby County’s improvement since the return of Steve McClaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/12/steve-mcclaren-set-for-shock-derby-county-return-manager>
 might provide an example of how fortunes can reverse in the right hands. It 
has taken something for the Rams to appear the more stable club under Mel 
Morris’s stewardship but it was they who performed with lucidity and strength 
at Molineux, drawing praise from a manager whose post-match words were 
accompanied by the beam that is never far away when the going gets good.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwolves-rob-edwards-paul-lambert-manager-derby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07398fc47463214cb3c1757a4d9c7b4db379c7fb%2F273_209_3223_1934%2F3223.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Lambert%20sees%20good%20and%20bad%20sides%20of%20Wolves%20after%20agreeing%20to%20take%20over%20%7C%20Nick%20Ames&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwolves-rob-edwards-paul-lambert-manager-derby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Lambert%20sees%20good%20and%20bad%20sides%20of%20Wolves%20after%20agreeing%20to%20take%20over%20%7C%20Nick%20Ames&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwolves-rob-edwards-paul-lambert-manager-derby%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07398fc47463214cb3c1757a4d9c7b4db379c7fb%2F273_209_3223_1934%2F3223.jpg>
 Tom Ince celebrates scoring. Photograph: Ryan Browne/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
“The first half, that’s the kind of football we want to see – that’s the level 
and now we’ve got to maintain it,” McClaren said, referring to a spell in which 
Ince scored a simple opener before Darren Bent volleyed a picture-book goal 
from Will Hughes’s scooped pass. “That’s what we are capable of doing and 
that’s what we have to keep in our minds, nice and positive.”

They could have scored five or six in those 45 minutes, so inept had Wolves 
been from the start. Before proceedings began, the author Frederick Forsyth had 
been brought on to the pitch to recite a specially written poem for Remembrance 
Day. Lambert might not need his players to resemble dogs of war but surely the 
first thing he will demand from his players in his opening game at Preston on 
19 November is that they give themselves a fighting chance from the off.

Talking points

• Norwich City know how good life can be under Lambert and those days take on 
an even rosier hue now. The knives were already out for the incumbent, Alex 
Neil, before Saturday’s visit of Leeds butRonaldo Vieira’s injury-time winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/norwich-city-leeds-united-championship-match-report>
 – which came just after the once-outcast Kyle Lafferty seemed to have salvaged 
things for the Canaries – made for a third successive defeat in the 
Championship and the cries for change are growing louder. If it seems premature 
to jump on Neil after the season’s first poor run of form, the opposite view is 
that fifth-placed Norwich, who are now seven points behind second-placed 
Brighton & Hove Albion, should simply not be this far off the pace.

They have spent, give or take, £30m in the past 12 months and even though 
Nathan Redmond is sorely missed the figures do not stack up well. “Now you have 
to raise your game, show some desire and bollocks, basically,” said Neil of 
Norwich’s predicament. Despite audible unrest at Carrow Road it is likely that 
he will be given time to instil those minerals into his team.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwolves-rob-edwards-paul-lambert-manager-derby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb59a4badb86f501777cbbe153e338904660539b1%2F717_246_2051_1586%2F2051.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Lambert%20sees%20good%20and%20bad%20sides%20of%20Wolves%20after%20agreeing%20to%20take%20over%20%7C%20Nick%20Ames&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwolves-rob-edwards-paul-lambert-manager-derby%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Lambert%20sees%20good%20and%20bad%20sides%20of%20Wolves%20after%20agreeing%20to%20take%20over%20%7C%20Nick%20Ames&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fwolves-rob-edwards-paul-lambert-manager-derby%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb59a4badb86f501777cbbe153e338904660539b1%2F717_246_2051_1586%2F2051.jpg>
 Pontus Jansson celebrates after scoring during Leeds’ win at Norwich. 
Photograph: Richard Calver/Rex/Shutterstock 
• Then again, the benefits of change may seem more obvious if Norwich fall 
short in their next game. They visit Loftus Road and the QPR team they face 
will be the first since last December not to be selected by Jimmy Floyd 
Hasselbaink. A 1-1 draw at Nottingham Forest on Saturday was respectable on its 
own butnot enough to save Hasselbaink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-sacked-qpr-after-draw>
, who had wanted time to develop his team. A record of 14 wins from his 47 
games suggests there was some way to go but then Shepherd’s Bush is hardly the 
place to set long-term plans in motion. Whoever replaces Hasselbaink – and Tim 
Sherwood’s name has been mentioned – will be QPR’s sixth manager in the past 
five years.

• The Championship’s longest-serving manager has slightly less to worry about 
this week. Mick McCarthy celebrated his fourth anniversary at Ipswich Town on 
Tuesday and had to defend a tenure that, in the past 12 months, has threatened 
to turn sour. A 2-1 win at Sheffield Wednesday, another place where discontent 
is beginning to ferment in what is an unhappy division this year, was the 
perfect reminder of his gifts. Luke Chambers’ late winner and a Tom Lawrence 
solo effort did the job; Ipswich remain outsiders but are five points off the 
play-offs and McCarthy hopes the return of some of his more creative players 
from injury will help change minds.

• Such ambitions are currently little concern for Newcastle United and 
Brighton, who have begun to pull away at the top. Neil Warnock was never going 
to come away from St James’ Park without a battle and Cardiff City made the 
leaders work for their 2-1 win. Brighton caught the eye more with their fourth 
win in a row, a 2-0 success at Bristol City, and in so doing provided the 
moment of the weekend. Steve Sidwell is now 33 but still shows the range of a 
top-flight player at times: his astonishing strike from five yards inside the 
home side’s half set Brighton on their way and is required viewing if it had 
passed you by up until now.
 