
The celebrated scriptwriter Paul Abbott, creator of Channel 4’s Shameless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/may/29/shameless-finale-viewers> and No 
Offence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/15/paul-abbott-dont-need-damage-to-be-good-writer-no-offence-shameless>
 and BBC1’sState of Play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/apr/24/state-of-play-boxset-review>, 
is a skittish presence in person. There’s a frenetic energy to even his most 
casual actions, so that making a cup of coffee or smoking a cigarette can seem 
like a mischievous act of escapism.

His conversation comes in torrents of half-realised sentences, jokes, profane 
anecdotes and rat-a-tat laughter. Short in height and teenager-thin, he has 
burning blue eyes that appear troublingly at odds with the rest of his face, as 
if they’re seeing something that has nothing to do with what he happens to be 
talking about.

I meet him at his writer’s studio in that posh part of Cheshire where Premier 
League footballers tend to live. He has just completed a writer’s meeting for a 
new project he’s started working on about thePendle witches 
<http://www.pendlewitches.co.uk/>, the infamous 17th-century witch trials in 
Lancashire, and he’s still buzzing.

“This thing’s only two days in but it’s as clear as a bell,” he says. “It’s 
just stunning for me, a really exciting sexy route in. I tried writing it other 
ways before, but there’s only one way to tell it… and it’s come out. Fantastic. 
Two days!”

Abbott is now 56, with a distinguished 30-year career in television, but he 
retains the enthusiasm – and physique – of a man half his age. Which is no mean 
achievement, given the life he has led.

Every writer is engaged in what John Updike called unpacking his own bag, but 
some have more baggage to attend to than others. With Abbott, it’s an airport 
carousel full, a massive load of experience that would have crushed most 
people, and very nearly put paid to him before he reached adulthood.

The bare bones of his biography have been laid out before, but they are hard 
to skip over. The second youngest of nine children, he was nine when his mother 
left the family home in Burnley. He didn’t know where she had gone, although it 
turned out that she had moved in with a man who had a son around Abbott’s own 
age.

His feckless father abandoned the family two years later, leaving Abbott’s 
eldest sister to raise the children in dire poverty. Abbott was raped by a 
stranger at 13 – some reports put his age at 11 – and tried to kill himself by 
jumping off a multistorey car park, but managed only to break his leg. At 15 he 
had a nervous breakdown, made another suicide attempt and was sectioned.

Afterwards he was placed with a foster family, started writing for magazines, 
won a short-story competition, began a psychology degree at Manchester 
University – but quit two years in, after he got Alan Bennett to sponsor a 
radio play he’d written – and then landed a job, at 24, onCoronation Street’s 
main writing team. By his late 20s he was earning £200,000 a year. And that was 
before he became really successful.

To complicate matters, Abbott is bipolar and has struggled with depression and 
periods of hyper-creativity. In2008 he told an interviewer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jul/12/television> that he had 
consulted a hypnotist to help him stop having ideas for TV shows, because he 
found the endless flow debilitating. He also said he was seeing four different 
psychiatrists and psychotherapists a week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fpaul-abbott-no-offence-channel-4-shameless-state-of-play%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F455d603cf13cc176402c5251fa4c9582e64d2072%2F242_7_1818_1091%2F1818.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Abbott%3A%20%E2%80%98Shameless%20became%20too%20hysterical.%20I%20was%20glad%20to%20see%20it%20off%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fpaul-abbott-no-offence-channel-4-shameless-state-of-play%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Abbott%3A%20%E2%80%98Shameless%20became%20too%20hysterical.%20I%20was%20glad%20to%20see%20it%20off%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fpaul-abbott-no-offence-channel-4-shameless-state-of-play%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F455d603cf13cc176402c5251fa4c9582e64d2072%2F242_7_1818_1091%2F1818.jpg>
 The Gallagher family in Paul Abbott’s Shameless. Photograph: Channel 4 
Television <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> is a medium that 
rewards success with pressing demands for more success. If someone is on a 
winning streak, then the work offers keep coming thick and fast. It’s why you 
see certain presenters or actors go through “hot” spells in which they appear 
to be in everything. And it’s why some TV screenwriters – Abi Morgan and Andrew 
Davies come to mind – can seem to have monopoly agreements on vast areas of 
drama.

Back in the 90s and 00s, it was Abbott who was at the top of every 
commissioning editor’s Christmas card list. For about 10 years from 1995, when 
he was writing Jimmy McGovern’sCracker, Abbott was to scriptwriting what the 
fairytale goose was to golden eggs. In one four-year stint, he producedClocking 
Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/02/clocking-off-paul-abbott-infidelity-rape-racism>
 – the acclaimed series of stories set in a factory – the comedy seriesLinda 
Green <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2001/oct/31/broadcasting>, the 
stand-out conspiracy thrillerState of Play, and the first two series of 
Shameless, his scabrously autobiographical soap opera about life on the lowest 
rung of society.

He was garlanded with awards by the industry, Hollywood came calling, and here 
in Britain he was viewed as a kind of hero of social mobility, someone who was 
born into poverty and chaos and through sheer strength of character and talent 
not only propelled himself upwards but also retained the humanity to celebrate 
and satirise his difficult past.

He became a visiting professor at Salford University, he was named the fifth 
most powerful person in television in an industry poll, and was rumoured to be 
the highest-paid writer in British television. He set up his own production 
company and was said to be writing a follow-up to the hugely successfulState of 
Play.

But it never came. He was also supposed to be writing a 13-part series for the 
BBC set in the foreign office: it never materialised. There was aHollywood 
adaptation ofState of Play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/apr/26/state-of-play-review> starring 
Russell Crowe, which Abbott was asked to write. He turned it down.

“I wish I had written it,” he says now, “because I could have written it three 
times better. But I got paid a lot on that, anyway.”

The truth is that Abbott has written very little, by his own once prolific 
standards, that has come to the screen in the last decade. There have 
essentially been two shows:Hit & Miss, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/may/27/hit-miss-chloe-sevigny-review>
 a six-part Sky TV series about a transgender contract killer, andNo Offence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/06/no-offence-review-paul-abbotts-rude-but-not-crude-un-pc-cop-show>
, an eight-part comic police procedural drama, which he began writing 10 years 
ago.

Both were well received by critics, but neither quite captured the public 
imagination in the way that Abbott’s earlier work had done. Now thesecond 
series ofNo Offence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/23/no-offence-return-channel-4-paul-abbott>
, which stars Joanna Scanlan as a plain-speaking and hard-living detective 
inspector, is about to be broadcast.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ8IhM2IHgdM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ8IhM2IHgdM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ8IhM2IHgdM&media=>
Watch the trailer for season 2 of No Offence 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z8IhM2IHgdM>. 
The first series was a strange confection, a kind of genre mashup, which 
attempted to ram together some conventional aspects of crime drama with broad 
comic characterisations and what Abbott refers to as “jet-black” humour. The 
disparate aspects didn’t always gel convincingly, but it possessed a brio and 
breakneck daring that carried the audience along. Abbott himself is enormously 
pleased with the result.

“When I pitched No Offence, it was a really hard thing to pitch,” he recalls, 
as we sit down in one of the studio’s several large rooms. “I couldn’t find my 
funny bone. I found what I wanted to say, but saying it to someone else 
industrially for money, it’s really hard. But I just went for it. I bounced off 
the wall so it was the most lunatic presentation, but that was the personality 
of the piece. They loved it and I don’t think they believed they’d get the 
script that matched the pitch, but we matched it. We really did.”

Abbott works with a team of writers in the American model. It’s something that 
enables him to cultivate talent, as well as offset the workload. Unlike many 
established writers, he’s excited and generous about the next generation of 
writers making its way.

“There’s brilliant stuff coming through, stuff like Fleabag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/05/fleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives>
, which shouldn’t have been made with all this [TV executive] scrutiny. Oh 
we’ve been waiting for that for a long time. Comedy always shows the way for 
drama at times like these when drama gets a little bit cake-mix.”

But the problem for him and his team in writing No Offence was where to place 
the comedy. In the first drafts of the first series they found themselves 
yo-yoing between comic lines and police procedure, until Abbott realised that 
comedy had to be implicit in the drama.

The setup of the show – a tough female boss, with two female sidekicks working 
as Manchester detectives – bore more than a trace of similarity toScott & Bailey
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/mar/13/scott-and-bailey>, 
written by his formerCoronation Street colleague, Sally Wainwright. Did that 
bother him?

“Well, no,” he says, “because I was the first on paper, by five years. I’ve 
done this as a writer, when you’ve got really hot for an idea and they announce 
on Radio 4 that something’s coming up and you’re ‘Oh, it’s pointless.’ It’s so 
not. That means the vibe’s on for that subject. That’s when you should get in 
and write yours.”

Abbott is fiercely passionate about his work and says that he has often 
declined to sell something even when there were keen buyers. “Sometimes if you 
go into a pitch and everyone just loves it but they weren’t quite listening, I 
won’t sell that. Because if they don’t know what they’re buying, we’ll get the 
money but we won’t be supported. It’s cost us a lot of money.”

He tells me how pitching has changed down the years, and recalls being asked 
by one executive why he wanted to write about a younger man getting together 
with an older woman, as he did in his 1997 romantic dramaReckless.

“Because I was married to someone who was 11 years older than me, but actually 
it turned out after the divorce to be 13,” he says to me, in answer to that 
unnamed executive’s question. “Isn’t that pointless? Fucking pointless,’ he 
adds, switching focus now to his ex-wife. “And when I started to work on
Coronation Street, [she’d say] ‘Who did you see at work today?’ Oh I wasn’t 
allowed to mention females. And then she’d ask me why I didn’t mention females 
– because she taught me how not to – and that drove me round the bend and 
that’s what split us up: her insistence that I would look for somebody younger. 
Well, I said, I wouldn’t look for anybody older, and the minute I said that, I 
knew it was over.”

His conversation is littered with these kinds of dramatic asides. With some 
writers there is a natural impulse to ask where their ideas come from. With 
Abbott you can almost see his subconscious bubbling away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fpaul-abbott-no-offence-channel-4-shameless-state-of-play%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc54b4a7d017df5bff8cccb8b76d48af21904e76e%2F211_101_1828_1097%2F1828.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Abbott%3A%20%E2%80%98Shameless%20became%20too%20hysterical.%20I%20was%20glad%20to%20see%20it%20off%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fpaul-abbott-no-offence-channel-4-shameless-state-of-play%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Abbott%3A%20%E2%80%98Shameless%20became%20too%20hysterical.%20I%20was%20glad%20to%20see%20it%20off%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fpaul-abbott-no-offence-channel-4-shameless-state-of-play%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc54b4a7d017df5bff8cccb8b76d48af21904e76e%2F211_101_1828_1097%2F1828.jpg>
 David Morrissey and John Simm in State of Play. Photograph: Joss 
Barratt/BBC/Staystill 
The older woman was his second marriage, following a short-lived teenage 
relationship. He then married a script editor, Saskia Downes, with whom he had 
two children. And he’s now married to his fourth wife, an American with whom he 
has a young son. He divides his time between Manchester, London, Los Angeles 
and a house in France.Shameless, which ran for nine years, helped make him a 
very wealthy man. He stopped writing for it after the fourth series, and lost 
patience with the direction it took.

“It should have stayed less hysterical, more like a saga,” he says. “If it 
followed that, it would have had a more gentle longevity. It started irritating 
me the amount of hysteria that had to crack in to keep it going. I got weary. I 
didn’t really watch it after a while. I didn’t resent it, because it paid us a 
fortune. But I was glad to see it off.”

While he often refers approvingly to earning money, Abbott has never been a 
writer in thrall to cash. Had he been, he would not have left the sinecure of 
script editor atCoronation Street. He had been on the show for almost nine 
years and was materially very comfortable, living in a large house with no 
mortgage and a steady and substantial income.

He recalls the moment he decided to leave the world’s longest-running soap. He 
was going off on holiday with Downes and their two children when their car 
broke down. So he decided to stay and write aCoronation Street script to pay 
for another car.

“That genuinely felt wrong,” he says. “You can’t buy a car for a week’s work, 
and it’s the wrong kind of week’s work. That was the point.”

He says his colleagues at Corrie were hooked on the money, embittered about 
their thwarted ambitions, but unwilling to leave. “Soaps are great,” he later 
said. “They teach you how to write a lot, but that’s it. It’s opposed to 
writing. It’s a succubus.”

At first, Abbott took a 75% pay cut to write original drama. But it was the 
beginning of a remarkable run of writing that seemed to spring, with barely any 
research, straight from his imagination.State of Play, the gripping 2003 drama 
that starred John Simm as an investigative reporter, Bill Nighy as his editor, 
and David Morrissey as an MP whose researcher is killed managed to capture the 
atmosphere and workings of a newspaper without Abbott ever having set foot 
inside a newspaper office.

He wrote it first and then sought technical advice from journalists. The late 
Simon Hoggart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/06/simon-hoggart-obituary> of this 
parish told him that it was “ridiculous” there was no subeditor in the 
newsroom, so Abbott wrote one in.

But for him, such details are secondary. The most important thing is to make 
the world he creates seem real, rather than be led by reality. It’s why he 
ignored the paediatrician employed to advise him onChildren’s Ward, one of his 
early writing jobs, and simply made up illnesses and the drugs to treat them. 
“Nobody complained,” he laughs.

He took the same approach on No Offence – a project he rediscovered in his 
garage drawer – of coming up with the stories first and then making them fit. 
His original idea centred on a police station in which the detectives and 
uniformed officers worked together. But his police adviser told him that 
detectives don’t work with uniformed police.

“That was the whole premise of the show. So I said: ‘What else have you got?’ 
Oh, he said, unless it’s an integrated policing unit. There you go, but that 
took about five hours to find out.”

No Offence: why female coppers are the making of Paul Abbott's drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jun/01/no-offence-strong-female-characters-paul-abbott-drama>
He does a lot of his writing out of the country, in France and in Los Angeles, 
a city he enjoys because he doesn’t feel caught up in the film business.

“I don’t really operate at that agency level,” he says. “I shouldn’t say it, 
but I don’t really want an agent because you’ve only got to go out to dinner 
with them and tell them lies about what you’re not doing. I don’t want to be as 
desperate as they make you feel.”

A few weeks later in London, I watch a screening of the first episode of the 
second series ofNo Offence. It seems tighter than the first series, a little 
less intrusively jokey. Afterwards, Abbott takes part in a Q&A with some cast 
members, includingJoanna Scanlan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/oct/12/joanna-scanlan-cultural-highlights-oriel-tegfryn-barbara-hepworth>
 andWill Mellor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/dec/16/will-mellor-greatest-mistake>. 
He tells the audience about his struggle to locate the tone for the show second 
time round. “I thought it would be easier on the second series, but it was a 
narrow bandwidth to find again.”

He says he’s very proud of its originality. It is unmistakably the work of 
Abbott, with all his trademark riotous dialogue and jackknife turns. But I’d 
still love to see him return to the politics and media nexus he explored so 
memorably inState of Play. Those twin worlds, and our world along with it, have 
changed beyond recognition in the past 14 years, and it would be fascinating to 
see Abbott set his dynamic vision on them once more.

In a way, 2011’s three-part series Exile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/apr/18/paul-abbott-danny-brocklehurst-exile>
, which Abbott co-created but did not write, was a return of sorts. It featured 
John Simm again, this time as a disillusioned journalist who loses his job and 
goes back home to his father, who’s suffering from Alzheimer’s. It wasn’t, 
though, theState of Play 2 that Abbott has referred to on and off for many 
years. I ask him if he still intends to see that job through.

He gives me a wary look. “We’ve talked about that,” he says, eyes down. “It’s 
dead sexy. It’s just apportioning the next projects. It’s a prospect.”

That’s all he’ll say on the subject. But he looks up and those penetrating 
blue eyes stare off into the distance, as if catching sight of a vivid scene he 
hasn’t yet written.

“I feel as energetic as ever,” he says. Commissioning editors, stay tuned – 
and don’t forget to listen.

No Offence returns to Channel 4 on Wednesday at 9pm
 