
PepsiCo has announced 
<http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/pepsico-and-the-nature-conservancy-announce-water-for-the-planet-a-water-replenishing-strategy-for-latin-america-300363528.html>
 it will restore and protect a handful of watersheds in Latin American 
countries in which it operates, including Mexico, Brazil, Colombia and 
Guatemala.


The company announced plans 
<http://www.pepsico.com/live/pressrelease/pepsico-launches-2025-sustainability-agenda-designed-to-meet-changing-consumer-a10172016>
 to “replenish” all the water used during manufacturing in high water risk 
areas by returning it to the watershed from which it was taken.

It’s biggest competitor, Coca-Cola, was criticised 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/coca-cola-environmental_us_55dbd255e4b0a40aa3ac0091>
 last year for its use of the term “replenish” afterclaiming 
<http://www.coca-colacompany.com/stories/waterreplenishment2016> it had 
returned nearly 192bn litres of water to the environment and local communities 
in 2015. It turned out Coca-Cola wasn’t returning the water directly back to 
the areas in which it operates. Rather, the company measured its results by the 
amount of water restored through its nearly 250 water conservation projects in 
high-risk areas around the world.

Coca-Cola acknowledged 
<http://www.coca-colacompany.com/collaborating-to-replenish-the-water-we-use> 
it wasn’t replacing the water in the exact location from which it was taken, 
but said all its plants were focused on sustainable production, and that 
damaging the surrounding environment wouldn’t be in the company’s “best 
business interest”.

It had already faced criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/18/indian-officals-coca-cola-plant-water-mehdiganj>
 for extracting too much groundwater and exceeding pollutant limits at a 
bottling plant in India.

PepsiCo is taking a different tack, and plans to replace the water at the 
source from where it was extracted. The company’s plan includes planting native 
trees, bushes and shrubs to reduce soil erosion, restoring and protecting 
riverbanks, and putting up fencing to stop cattle from getting into 
environmentally vulnerable areas.

Why water matters to PepsiCo

Global demand for fresh water is expected to outpace sustainable supply by 40% 
in 2030, according to areport 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability-and-resource-productivity/our-insights/charting-our-water-future>
 from the 2030 Water Resources Group, a World Bank backed public-private 
consortium. Climate change is exacerbating natural disasters such as droughts, 
depleting water sources around the world that are already being drained by an 
increasing population.

For companies, the impact is already significant, with droughts, water 
scarcity, pollution and other water risks costing businesses $14bn (£11bn) this 
year, up from $2.6bn in 2015.

What will happen if world's biggest companies don't take water seriously?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/13/worlds-biggest-companies-water-drought-shortages>
PepsiCo says it used 92.7m cubic meters of water globally in 2015, but has not 
faced the same levels of criticism as Coca-Cola for its water conservation 
efforts (although, likeCoca-Cola <https://www.theguardian.com/business/cocacola>
, the company has long been criticised for marketing sugary drinks to children 
and adults alike).

As part of the new Latin America plan, PepsiCo, with the help of non-profit 
The Nature Conservancy, mapped its operations and identified the areas most 
vulnerable to threats, such as forests being converted into agricultural land, 
soil degradation, and urbanisation.

The company donated $3m to restore and protect five watersheds in cities 
including Sao Paulo, Bogota and Mexico City over the next seven years. PepsiCo 
hopes to return nearly 600k cubic meters of water back to watersheds in these 
areas by 2023.

“All these cities need a clean, consistent water supply to thrive,” says 
Laxman Narasinhan, chief executive officer of PepsiCo Latin America. “However, 
many drinking water sources are severely degraded.”

Latin America has 31% of the world’s fresh water, the largest 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2013/03/22/world-water-day-latin-america-achievements-challenges>
 of any region. Since fresh water appeared to be plentiful, up until recently 
governments hadn’t focused on freshwater conservation or investment in water 
infrastructure, and communities weren’t educated about how to protect their 
water supply, says Tensie Whelan, director of New York University’s Center for 
Sustainable Business.

But that’s changed as climate change-related weather events, such as increased 
droughts 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2015/10/12/climate-change-could-triple-amazon-drought-study-finds/?utm_term=.7357d25666f3>
 in the Amazon, have affected water supplies. In addition, the population in 
urban areas isexpected 
<http://www.atlanticcouncil.org/publications/articles/urbanization-in-latin-america>
 to grow from 260 million to 315 million by 2025, driving up demand for a 
reliable source of clean water.

One project will plant trees near a Pepsi bottling plant in Guatemala City in 
Guatemala. Workers will clear away dead vegetation and prepare the soil to make 
way for the new flora.

The project, which will cost a little over $140,000 over a year, aims to 
provide enough vegetation to make it easier for water to be absorbed into the 
soil, rather than run off barren ground. Biologists will monitor the area to 
make sure the trees are flourishing and to replace any that have died.

Is PepsiCo’s plan greenwash?

Companies risk their reputations if they justify draining water in one aquifer 
by promising to improve water conditions in another, says Brooke Barton, senior 
director of water and food programs at sustainable business consortium Ceres.

While agreeing companies should invest at the source, Whelan says it’s not 
necessarily a bad thing for them to help protect water in other high-risk 
areas, especially where they are operating in an area with a low water risk. 
Not all the water Coca-Cola uses, for example, comes from areas vulnerable to 
water issues, she says.

“If you are sourcing from high-risk areas, you should absolutely work to 
invest there,” she says. “But if you source from low-risk areas, your 
investment might be better used in a high-risk water area, especially if you’re 
a company like Coca-Cola that sells to those places.”

However, others have accused PepsiCo and Coca-Cola of greenwash. Until big 
corporations are fully transparent about their carbon impact and how and where 
they are emitting greenhouse gases, there will always be an element of 
greenwashing to any of their sustainability claims, says Daniel Kammen, 
director of the renewable and appropriate energy laboratory at the University 
of California-Berkeley.

“Pepsi and Coke are companies that are highly water intensive, and a great 
deal of their energy use goes to transporting and purifying water. You have to 
do both – replenish water and be transparent about your carbon,” he says.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 