
For the first time in Peru’s history, a national news broadcast has been aired 
entirely in Quechua, the indigenous language of the Inca empire, which is still 
spoken by 4 million Peruvians.

Called Ñuqanchik – which means “all of us” in Quechua – the daily news 
programme that launched this week targets speakers of the language some 
historians trace back to Peru’s earliest civilizations 5,000 years ago.

For co-presenter Marisol Mena, Monday’s debut broadcast was a “historic 
achievement”, symbolically ending centuries of marginalisation. “We’ve 
struggled for a long time to see this initiative, and now we are broadcasting 
information to our Quechua brothers and sisters,” she said.

About 13% of Peruvians speak Quechua fluently, but usage as dwindled over 
generations as many parents deliberately did not teach the language to their 
children, fearing they would be rejected or mocked for using it.

Peru's royal pedigree: direct descendants trace roots to Incan emperor and kin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/peru-royal-pedigree-inca-empire-history>
Yet with around 8 million speakers in the parts of Peru, Ecuador, Bolivia, 
Colombia, Argentina and Chile once dominated by the Incas, Quechua – in all its 
regional varieties – remains the most widely spoken indigenous language in the
Americas <https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas>.

In Peru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru>, studies indicate while 4 
million people speak Quechua fluently, up to 10 million – around a third of 
Peruvians – understand some of the language.

But the language that gave us words such as puma, condor, llama and alpaca is 
rarely – if ever – heard on national television or radio stations.

Even though it became one of Peru’s official languages in 1975, “Quechua was 
synonymous with social rejection – and thus became synonymous with 
discrimination,” said Hugo Coya,director of Peru’s television and radio 
institute <http://www.irtp.com.pe/> and a driving force behind the initiative.

“Why was this [a Quechua news broadcast] not done before? I’m ashamed that I 
have to answer that question,” he said.


“Speakers often didn’t want to admit they spoke Quechua in order to be 
accepted by Spanish-speaking society,” he said.


Quechua speakers are disproportionately represented among the country’s poor: 
of Peruvians without access to health services, 60% speak Quechua,according to 
a 2014 World Bank study 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2014/04/16/discriminados-por-hablar-su-idioma-natal-peru-quechua>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fperu-nuqanchik-quechua-broadcast-inca-empire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb58d5eb3fd912acccbc44de507cd6b67846a45c%2F0_936_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peru%20airs%20news%20in%20Quechua%2C%20indigenous%20language%20of%20Inca%20empire%2C%20for%20first%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fperu-nuqanchik-quechua-broadcast-inca-empire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peru%20airs%20news%20in%20Quechua%2C%20indigenous%20language%20of%20Inca%20empire%2C%20for%20first%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fperu-nuqanchik-quechua-broadcast-inca-empire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb58d5eb3fd912acccbc44de507cd6b67846a45c%2F0_936_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
 Children watch the broadcast in Loreto, Peru. Photograph: Alamy 
Peru has seen robust economic growth over the past decade – but the boom in 
mining and extractive activities has also seen a rapid rise in land conflicts 
with indigenous or peasant communities over the past decade. In October alone, 
the country’s human rights ombudsmanlogged 212 such disputes 
<http://www.defensoria.gob.pe/conflictos-sociales/home.php>.

Ñuqanchik is an attempt to broach the economic and cultural gap between the 
Quechua and Spanish-speaking worlds, said prime minister Fernando Zavala at the 
programme’s inaugural broadcast.

“This, we believe, will transform the relationship between the government, the 
state, and those people who speak a language different from Spanish,” he said.


Produced and written by journalists who speak Quechua as their mother tongue, 
Ñuqanchik aims to transmit the news from the perspective of a Quechua speaker – 
complete with the Andean “cosmovision” – said Alfredo Luna, Peru’s 
vice-minister of intercultural affairs.


“Conflicts arise when there’s no dialogue; understanding each other we will be 
able to resolve these misunderstandings,” Luna said.


Against a bright orange and yellow backdrop reminiscent of the Inti or symbol 
of the sun worshipped by the Incas, the programme’s presenters simultaneously 
translate a Spanish autocue feed into Quechua, as many words in the indigenous 
language are too long to fit on the screens. The programme is simultaneously on 
state television and radio.

Luna said that news broadcasts are planned in other languages, including 
Aymara – spoken in Peru and Bolivia – as well as the principal languages of the 
Peruvian Amazon such as Ashaninka and Awajun.


Peru has 47 indigenous languages, and its culture ministry has been working 
since 2011 to provide bilingual education as a public service.


“Peru has to make sure its people can access public services and be citizens 
in their own languages,” says Agustin Panizo, director of indigenous languages 
at Peru’s culture ministry.
 