
Last month I expressed surprise that the use of the word "pet" to mean a 
tantrum in a September Quick puzzle had caused so much difficulty. "A curious 
blind spot" among averagely intelligent, Guardian-reading persons was the 
phrase I unwisely used. I was at once taken to task by John A, who was brought 
up in Newcastle (where "pet" is a term of affection), for displaying acute 
symptoms of that unpleasant condition, southern regionalism. "Pet", he told me, 
is used with this meaning only in the south of England, insinuating that the 
Guardian was clearly losing touch with its Manchester roots. None of my 
one-volume dictionaries, which include the excellent Oxford Dictionary of 
English, mark this meaning of the word "pet" as a Home Counties affectation, 
but John A invited me to check out the full Oxford English Dictionary. So I 
went online and did so.

There I found "pet" described as now being "esp. a childish sulk", without any 
hint of this being an exclusively southern meaning. On the contrary, the OED 
also gives "pet-lip" (meaning the sulky protrusion of the lower lip) as a 
northern regional word. And it has the late Kenneth Tynan writing in 
old-fogeyish tones in a letter at the age of 17: "In a pet (for it much 
displeases me to be disturbed as I eat) I brusquely ripped open the envelope." 
For the moment the last word goes to Phil K. "For the record, the ONLY place I 
have encountered the word "pet" in the sense of "tantrum" is in crosswords, 
although, having done them for years, I've known this for years."

_____

Janus, our oldest surviving setter, died last month at the age of 94. His 
first puzzle appeared in the Guardian in 1968 and his last one only three years 
ago. He started to set puzzles in 1941 to amuse those serving with him in the 
Royal Artillery in the Eighth Army in north Africa, where he was involved in 
the Battle of El Alamein, and continued to do so after the war when working as 
a civilian in the Army Pay Office in Chester and later in his retirement in 
County Durham. His clues were concise and always fair. Two of my favourites 
are: Eleven city cars (9,6) for BLACKBURN ROVERS; tree that old Iberians might 
have found funny? (7,8) for SPANISH CHESTNUT _____

Charity news: Araucaria would like to thank all those who sponsored his 
September "riding and striding" efforts on behalf of the historic churches of 
Cambridgeshire. Not having a car, his range was limited by the rural bus 
timetables and how far he could walk in the allotted time. He managed 19 
churches and raised Â£1,800. Of course, his total of hits could have been 
higher, if he had simply caught the bus into Cambridge itself and walked round 
the city. But he thought that would be a cheat and, in any case, he finds it 
more pleasant to walk in the country than in town.

Arachne also survived her Marine Corps 10K run in Washington DC on 25 October, 
finishing in 49 minutes. She was 445th out of the total of 5,370 finishers and 
6th out of the 205 over-50-year-old women. What a fit lot Guardian setters are! 
On a chauvinistic note, in the Marine Corps Marathon run on the same day, the 
Royal Navy team beat the US Marines.

_____

You seem to have found Araucaria's October Genius puzzle tougher than other 
recent ones as there were only 163 correct entries, more than a hundred down on 
the previous month. Once again the first one in was from Peter S of Montville, 
Queensland, but he, too, must have found it harder (unless he overslept that 
day) as it did not arrive until 11:23, 6 hrs 32 mins later than his entry the 
previous month. The first domestic solution was again also from Alan H in York 
at 12:08, just over 4 hrs slower than he was in September. In all there were 11 
correct entries on the first Monday.
 