
John Dexter 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/theatre-the-whipping-boy-is-miss-rigg-the-director-john-dexter-who-died-in-1989-had-a-formidable-1492957.html>
’s extraordinary productions ofArnold Wesker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/13/sir-arnold-wesker-obituary>’s 
five early plays, including those best known, articulated, and in some cases 
developed, still unformed aspects of Wesker’s work, to a degree that no other 
director of new plays has managed before or since. Lindsay Anderson’s 
productions of David Storey’s plays perhaps come nearest.

I had a tiny part in the Sunday night “try-out” of The Kitchen (1959), and 
could witness Dexter’s dynamism at first hand. I remember him firing up the two 
weeks’ rehearsal, in the parish hall off Sloane Square, where all early Royal 
Court productions were created, from his point of command – standing on a chair 
with a referee’s whistle hanging round his neck. He wasn’t a great one for 
table work. While it would be wrong to infer from this any lack of sensibility, 
he was certainly a product of the repertory movement rather than of university, 
and in this he was unlike most of the other directors of the time. At the Court,
George Devine 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/about-us/artistic-directors/george-devine-1910-1966/>
 andLindsay Anderson, <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/dec/05/film> for 
example, had served in the army as officers; Dexter had been an NCO, which was 
certainly evident in aspects of his directorial method.

He had a particular gift for managing time. It was said that Anderson, who 
tutored Wesker at theLondon Film School <http://lfs.org.uk/> and was 
instrumental in his introduction to the Court, did not direct his early work 
because, while Anderson said he could rehearse Chicken Soup with Barley at the 
Belgrade in Coventry in three weeks, Dexter said he could do it in two.

But what I remember most vividly of Dexter’s productions of Wesker’s plays are 
not the celebrated set pieces, such as the stealing of the coal in Chips With 
Everything or the service section in The Kitchen, but the first scene of Roots 
(1959), which takes place in an isolated farm labourer’s cottage in rural 
Norfolk in the 1950s, at that time of day when afternoon becomes evening, when 
the baby has been put to bed but is not asleep and the husband is not yet in 
and the lamp is still to be lit. It was an image hauntingly realised by the 
designerJocelyn Herbert  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/may/08/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries1>
and Dexter, and brought to vivid life by Joan Plowright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/oct/07/biography.features1> as the 
idealistic Beattie andPatsy Byrne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jun/23/patsy-byrne> as her 
unquestioning sister. It remains to me one of the most marvellously achieved 
pieces of poetic realism I have ever seen.
 