
Peter Stevens, who has died aged 83, more or less fell into his eventual 
career in British theatre administration by accident in his early 30s after a 
varied previous life. That variety was possibly a key factor in the development 
of the formidable negotiating and organisational skills that would prove so 
vital in his role as general administrator of theNational Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre> during Peter Hall’s years 
as its director.

Hall and Stevens made a redoubtable team – later with Michael Birkett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/18/lord-birkett-obituary> as deputy 
director – throughout most of the 1970s. Theirs became a turbulent era in an 
often mean-spirited decade, for a time bedevilled by industrial action – 
Stevens had to spend long hours in tough negotiations with union heads. There 
was also a surprisingly hostile section of the media that aimed fire both at 
the NT generally and Hall in particular.

To some, Stevens was stamped as part of a mafia-like inner cabal around Hall 
as the NT inevitably changed from its informal incarnation at the Old Vic. The 
company ethic gave way to a more efficiency-driven (detractors said more 
commercial) operation but then, with three theatres to run, in a period of 
changing attitudes to state subsidy, this was only part of a pattern, as 
theatre throughout Britain was altering rapidly.

Stevens’s job, in his own eyes, was essentially to support Hall; he admired 
him as a classical director and, despite their occasional differences of 
opinion (Stevens was never convinced by Hall’s determination to stage the 
ill-fated premiere of the musical Jean Seberg), their relationship was one of 
strong mutual trust. It was perhaps, despite all the problems and challenges, 
his happiest working period; he even found time to collaborate with the 
director Michael Bogdanov on one of the NT’s dramatisations of epic poems for 
mainly younger audiences when he adapted Sir Gawain and the Green Knight (1977) 
with a muscularity heightened by sequences of sword-dancing.

Son of Joseph, a publican, and his wife, Gwen, Stevens was born in 
Barrow-in-Furness, Cumbria, and educated at the grammar school there. He 
graduated in English fromNottingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/nottingham> 
University, taking up regular places in both the university First XV and its 
dance orchestra. Stevens never lost a certain laconic, even on occasion 
pugnacious, streak alongside a decided charm. After graduation he spent time 
commissioned by the RAF in Suez and Aden, and then as an education officer to 
schools for the children of service personnel. When he returned to his alma 
mater in 1959 as associate registrar in the applied science faculty, Stevens 
could have gone on to a successful career in university administration, but 
instead left after a year to join the British Council in northern Nigeria.

In 1963 John Neville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/21/john-neville> and Judi Dench 
headed a Nottingham Playhouse company on a British Council-sponsored west 
African tour, which almost immediately faced a crisis when the company manager 
fell seriously ill. Stevens was delighted to help out by taking over and 
guiding the company through the rest of the tour. As artistic director, Neville 
had no qualms whatsoever in inviting him to join the team to run the new 
Nottingham Playhouse in Peter Moro’s revolutionary drum-shaped building 
<http://www.c20society.org.uk/botm/nottingham-playhouse/>.

Stevens was successful from the outset and for the next five years an 
essential player in what must be seen as a last great flowering of the British 
repertory movement, as he created a nexus of vibrant new northern houses – the 
Newcastle Playhouse included – which made a heavy workload even for one so 
committed to regional theatre. Nottingham flourished, with several transfers to 
theWest End <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/westend>, while a regenerated 
Newcastle came up with some pioneering work.

Possibly the production there closest to Stevens’s heart was the 1968 triumph 
of Close the Coalhouse Door, an exuberant piece on the history of the local 
coal industry, a collaboration betweenAlan Plater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jun/25/alan-plater-obituary> (based on 
Sid Chaplin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/the-northerner/2011/sep/09/sid-chaplin-guardian>
’s writing) andAlex Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/may/17/guardianobituaries1>, who wrote 
the songs; this was a robust, funny and moving landmark piece of popular 
theatre.

Neville left Nottingham for Canada after more than a few tussles with his 
board, while Stevens went to work for Granada Television, not only producing 
the weekly local live On Site programme but also commissioning and leading the 
opening of the relatively shortlived but hugely influential Stables Theatre 
Club near the Granada studios in Manchester. It was a lively hub for staff and 
writers such asHenry Livings 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/12304764.Henry_Livings/> and Jack Rosenthal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/may/31/guardianobituaries.broadcasting>
, as well as a thriving theatre space, which saw early performances from actors 
includingMaureen Lipman <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/maureen-lipman>.

At all these new ventures Stevens had absorbed an essential lesson – “To 
finish a theatre it is first necessary to open it.” He “activated” the 
buildings with public performances before completion, primarily to hurry out 
the builders. His advice was to prove priceless to Hall when, after taking over 
the NT fromLaurence Olivier 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1989/07/12/obituaries/olivier-is-dead-after-6-decade-acting-career.html?pagewanted=all>
 in 1973, Hall found the move from the Old Vic toDenys Lasdun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jan/12/guardianobituaries>’s South Bank 
concrete complex faced a nightmare period of delays and obstacles. By 1975, of 
the building’s three spaces, only the Lyttelton auditorium was proceeding well 
and Hall listened to Stevens; after successful outdoor performances on the NT 
terraces he decided to start regular Lyttelton productions in early 1976 
despite opposition from his chairman,Max Rayne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/oct/14/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
, and contractors alike.

Stevens had joined the NT as Hall’s administrative assistant in 1973 and then 
was made general administrator of all three theatres within the organisation, 
as well as acting as executive producer on several transfers to the West End or 
Broadway, includingPeter Shaffer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/06/sir-peter-shaffer-obituary>’s 
Equus (1975),Harold Pinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/dec/27/harold-pinter-obituary-playwright-politics>
’s No Man’s Land (1975) and Alan Ayckbourn’s Bedroom Farce (1977). It was 
Stevens who was the first from the NT to catchRichard Eyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/richardeyre>’s production of Trevor 
Griffiths’s Comedians in 1975 at his old stamping-ground, the Nottingham 
Playhouse; he urged Hall to see it also and the play subsequently played the 
West End and Broadway after its NT run.

As the Hall years ended on the South Bank, Stevens’s life also underwent a 
change. In 1955, he had married Dolly Price. After their divorce, in 1979 
Stevens married Rochelle Levine, who had been his PA at the NT, and later 
became a literary agent. For a time they were based in Manhattan, New York, 
where Stevens became a vice-president of the mightyShubert Organization 
<http://www.shubertorganization.com/>, his role primarily to administer 
transfers from London (Shaffer’s 1979 play Amadeus, with which Stevens was 
heavily involved, continued the Shubert’s connection with the NT) and to expand 
the empire’s range of productions. Also for the Shuberts, he produced the West 
End version of their Broadway success The Gin Game (Lyric, 1979).

More suited to Stevens’s temperament, perhaps, was the chance to become 
executive director of the Shakespeare festival at Stratford, Ontario, in 1980, 
but his time there was shortlived. He arrived to find an organisation in 
disarray; its director,Robin Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/30/robin-phillips>, had departed 
and Stevens encouraged his former NT colleagueJohn Dexter 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/03/27/obituaries/john-dexter-64-english-director-of-both-theater-and-opera-dies.html>
 to apply, but there was widespread opposition to the notion of “another Brit” 
at the helm, and when Dexter’s appointment fell through the Stevenses decided 
to return home.

Initially involved in extensive consultancy work, Stevens then enjoyed his 
spell (1982-84) as chief executive of the London Tourist Board, radically 
restructuring the organisation. Under the aegis of his own company, Umbrella 
Productions, he worked once again for GranadaTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television>, taking on as executive 
producer the ambitious series Man and Music, a social history of music.

He had a happy return to the theatre in the early 90s when he was appointed 
managing director of Chichester Festival theatre, working harmoniously with its 
director,Patrick Garland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/apr/22/patrick-garland>, and in 1994 
leaving the organisation in sound financial strength.

After many years in Islington, north London, he and Rochelle latterly happily 
returned to his first and favourite London patch, Peckham. Even when he was 
over 80 the theatre continued to absorb him; he cut a striking figure, still 
lively in conversation and with some pungent anecdotes, when he joined the 
guests on the South Bank for the NT’s 50th in 2013.

Stevens’s eldest son, Max, predeceased him. He is survived by Rochelle, by 
three children, Deborah, Joe and Miriam, from his first marriage, and by his 
sister, Patricia, and brother, John.

• Joseph Peter Stevens, theatre administrator, born 17 October 1932; died 3 
June 2016

• This article was amended on 14 July 2016. Alan Ayckbourn’s Bedroom Farce 
opened at the NationalTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> in 
March 1977, rather than in 1976, as previously stated.
 