
Peter Taylor has been confirmed as Gillingham's permanent manager until the 
end of the season. Taylor took control at the Sky BetLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> club on an interim 
basis following Martin Allen's sacking last month. He had won two and lost two 
of his four league games prior to Saturday's 1-1 draw at home to non-league 
Brackley in the first round of the FA Cup but the chairman, Paul Scally, has 
seen enough to call off his search and appoint Taylor on a full-time basis 
until May at least.

"The players and I are delighted that Peter has agreed to stay on at the club 
and we wish him every success in his ongoing efforts to push the team up the 
table," Scally said. The Gills are currently 18th in League One, two points 
above the drop zone, thanks to the six points they have taken from Taylor's 
four games at the helm.

It is one place lower than when Allen was dismissed in mid-October, although 
he had claimed just nine points from the club's opening 11 games, coming after 
he led the Kent outfit to the League Two title last season.

Taylor, who guided the Gills to promotion himself during one season at 
Priestfield in 1999/00, most recently took short-term charge of England's 
Under-20 side during what was a failed World Cup tournament in Turkey earlier 
this summer.

Taylor famously enjoyed a one-match caretaker spell in charge of England's 
senior side against Italy in November 2000 for which he handed David Beckham 
the captain's armband for the first time.

The 60-year-old has also twice managed England's Under-21 team as well as 
Leicester, Brighton, Hull and Crystal Palace at club level, while he also led 
Bahrain's national team between July 2011 and October 2012.
 