
Valencia landed in Las Palmas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laspalmas> 
on Friday night without their assistant coach Phil Neville.

The absence of Neville, whose brother Gary was sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/30/gary-neville-leaves-valencia-immediate-effect>
 as first-team coach on Wednesday, had not been announced in advance despite 
the new coach, Pako Ayestarán, holding a press conference the day before. It 
came as a surprise when he was not among the travelling party, casting doubt on 
his future at the club.

Neville joined Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> as 
assistant coach in the summer and had been an integral part of the technical 
staff under his brother and his predecessor Nuno Espírito Santo, taking up his 
place on the bench for every game. He is not expected to sit in the dugout 
again this season. He will continue to work with the first team day to day at 
the club’s Paterna training ground and his mid-term future at the club, 
contractually, is secure – for now, at least, and he has no intention of 
walking away.

Gary Neville left Valencia in ignominy – but at least he bit the bullet| Barry 
Glendenning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/apr/01/gary-neville-valencia-ignominy-analyst>
Gary Neville’s other assistant coach, Miguel Ángel Angulo, was also sacked on 
Wednesday but his brother continued at the club. Phil Neville arrived at 
Valencia beforeGary Neville <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-neville> 
and there was no direct indication that his role would change after his 
brother’s departure.

Ayestarán noted that Neville had a “long-term contract” at the club and said 
he had “no problem” with him. But the next day Neville was left out of the trip 
to Las Palmas. Jose Viela and David Caneda, Ayestarán’s newly appointed 
assistants, who had been expected to work with Neville rather than in place of 
him, did travel.

Neville’s absence retrospectively brought into focus a comment made by 
Ayestarán at his presentation, which had not originally been interpreted as a 
threat to the Englishman. He had said: “We have come to realise that we do not 
need a large technical staff. It is good to bring together [varied] opinions 
but we need to pick a path and be clear.”

On Thursday neither Ayestarán nor the club’s president, Layhoon Chan, had said 
Phil Neville would not travel with the team nor given any indication that his 
role would change.
 