
Phil Brown is a leading contender to replace Neil Lennon as Bolton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/boltonwanderers> manager after the 
Northern Irishman left the Championship club by mutual consent.

Brown, the Southend <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> United 
manager, could become the first appointment under the new ownership at Bolton 
following Lennon’s departure on Tuesday. The 56-year-old played for the club 
for six years between 1988 and 1994 and spent six years there as an assistant 
to Sam Allardyce.

The decision to part company with Lennon – who took control in October 2014 – 
was of little surprise, given thetakeover by Dean Holdsworth’s Sports Shield 
consortium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/10/bolton-wanderers-takeover-completed-sports-shield-consortium-dean-holdsworth>
 last week. The academy coach Jimmy Phillips will take the first-team reins for 
the foreseeable future.

Brown told the Essex Echo 
<http://www.echo-news.co.uk/sport/14345168.Brown_focused_on_Blues_despite_Bolton_speculation/>
: “I’m happy as manager of Southend United but I am ambitious and I want to get 
back to the highest possible level. I want to have another crack at the Premier 
League but I have a big job on my hands with Southend and that’s all I’m 
focusing on at the moment.”

Bolton are bottom of the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> and seem destined for 
relegation to League One, being 11 points from safety with nine games 
remaining. Southend are 10th in the third tier and could still finish in the 
play-off positions.

Wanderers thanked Lennon for his work during a period when the club – 
relegated from the Premier League in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/may/13/stoke-city-bolton-wanderers-premier-league>
 – have struggled to overcome severe financial problems. Sports Shield 
completed its buyout last Thursday with Holdsworth becoming the chief executive 
and the former owner Eddie Davies writing off around £175m of debt owed to him, 
following a protracted takeover.
 