
After almost two hours being interrogated on everything from the details of 
Sam Allardyce’s contract to homophobia at October’s culture, media and sport 
select committee inquiry, question 90 was the curveball the Football 
Association chairman Greg Clarke certainly wasn’t expecting.

Switching his attention to ownership of football clubs, Chris Matheson, the MP 
for Chester and an Everton season ticket holder,asked Clarke if he had ever 
heard of Vibrac Corporation 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/culture-media-and-sport-committee/the-governance-of-football/oral/41531.html>
. Between 2011 and 2013 the companydescribed by Bloomberg 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-09-29/soccer-transfers-fueled-by-secretive-loans-beat-uefa-clampdown>
 as a “closely held lender” based in the British Virgin Islands was allowed to 
make millions of pounds in loans to Everton, West Ham, Fulham, Reading and 
Southampton despite the mystery surrounding who actually owned the company.

Everton’s Farhad Moshiri to visit two sites for proposed new stadium
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/everton-farhad-moshiri-proposed-sites-new-stadium>
Admitting he had not heard of Vibrac or BCR Sports – another company 
registered at the same address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/vanterpool-plaza-bvi-address-mourinho-ronaldo-vibrac>
, Vanterpool Plaza, Wickhams Cay 1, Road Town, Tortola, as entities linked to 
José Mourinho and Cristiano Ronaldo, and owned by the former Everton director 
Robert Earl – Clarke could not confirm the estimation that 57% of English 
league clubs are owned or receive finance from offshore entities. But he did 
acknowledge “we need to make sure we know who they are, that they are people of 
standing and do not have disproportionate influence over football clubs”.

Matheson then attempted to find out whether rumours that have been swirling 
around the blue half of Merseyside for more than a decade were actually true.

“I understand that Sir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> had something of a role as 
a shadow director at Everton, including having [the accountancy firm] PWC 
conducting an audit of the club and summoning the chief exec and the team 
manager to BHS headquarters to discuss transfer budgets,” he said. “Now, if 
somebody has paid for some shares through somebody else and through an entity 
in the British Virgin Islands but is not declared as a director, would that be 
a problem?”

Shuffling in his chair, Clarke acknowledged he was “no expert” on the Premier 
League and said he “would be happy to have that debate with them”. The man who 
was Football League chairman from 2010 to 2016 having previously served in the 
same role at Leicester City did not waste any time – last month,the Premier 
League confirmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/premier-league-offshore-loans-ban>
 that from the 2018–19 season that “any assignments of central funds can be 
made only to FCA registered lenders”, although, according to sources with 
knowledge of Vibrac and other similar companies, the process had been in the 
pipeline for much longer.

The news may not have made many headlines ahead of another busy weekend of 
action on the pitch but it was the culmination of a long story that has been 
chronicled in minute detail by a disaffected group ofEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> fans.

Green’s alleged links to Everton stretch back to 1999, when Bill Kenwright 
successfully bought the club from Peter Johnson.According to an interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2003/jan/12/highstreetretailers.observerbusiness>
 with the Observer in 2003, the multi-billionaire “wrote a £30m letter” for 
Kenwright to help secure funding from The Bank of Scotland because “I like him”.

Last September, an article with the headline 
<http://evertonviral.com/who-is-the-main-player-in-the-everton-show/>, “Who is 
the main player in the Everton show?” was published on the website Everton 
Viral. Written by an anonymous author, @watchedtoffee, it described the 
complicated process that saw Kenwright’s consortium, True Blue Holdings, 
purchase a majority shareholding that year thanks to a substantial loan from 
BCR Sports – a family investment set up by Earl, the founder of Planet 
Hollywood and a long-term friend and business associate of Green.

According to the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/2891553/Green-comes-to-the-rescue-of-Evertons-chairman.html>
, Kenwright was given advice from the owner of BHS and Arcadia “by telephone on 
an hourly basis” as they sought to see off a challenge from Paul Gregg – an 
entertainment impresario known for establishing Apollo Leisure Group who had 
formed the original consortium with Kenwright, his interest being the proposed 
stadium move to King’s Dock.

The same 23% stake sold by Gregg to BCR Sports was part of the deal that 
brought the new majority owner Farhad Moshiri to the club in March. According 
to @watchedtoffee, that was the culmination of more than 15 years in which 
Green has exerted his influence over the club via a series of mysterious 
offshore companies.

In 2008, the CEO Keith Wyness resigned from Everton on a matter of principal, 
reportedly citing Sir Philip Green’s control over the club 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/sport/football/clubs/everton/article2300868.ece>.

“After Wyness submitted employment tribunal papers, it was reported in The 
Times that Sir Philip Green and Robert Earl raced across the Mediterranean in 
Green’s powerful yacht, Lionheart, to meet with Wyness and reach a mutually 
agreeable compensation package,” claimed @watchedtoffee. “This included the 
signing of a confidentiality agreement, one which has been adhered to by 
Wyness.”

Despite Everton Viral’s attempts to link Green to the club, Everton have 
always strenuously denied he has any financial involvement at Goodison Park. 
“He’s not interested,”Kenwright told the Guardian in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/aug/18/everton-finances-chairman-bill-kenwright>
. “He would say to me [adopts a mockney accent]: ‘Bill, Bill, Bill, if I put 
facking money into Everton Football Club you think Liverpool fans would buy 
from Topshop?’ He’s not interested. He’s a total genius when it comes to money, 
he’s like Mozart is to music. He’s an adviser.”

However, the plot was about to thicken significantly. By the start of the 
2011–12 season, Everton had debts of more than £40m and faced the prospect of 
having to sell some of their better players to balance the books. With banks 
unwilling to lend in the wake of the financial crash, Kenwright turned to 
Vibrac to arrange a deal worth £14m a year, although they were to take out more 
than £80m in loans over the next four years. Fulham also borrowed £16m, while
Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> took out a £11.7m loan 
for which they were later fined £30,000 for contravening Football League rules.

The £5.14bn deal for domestic television rights and more favourable relations 
with regulated lenders have reduced the Premier League clubs’ reliance on 
mysterious offshore funding in recent years. Yet Everton and West Ham – who 
took out a £27.8m loan with Vibrac in 2013 – borrowed an as yet unspecified 
amount from a company called JG Funding in August 2015. A few days earlier,in 
an article for The Sun 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/archives/football/221609/karren-bradys-football-diary-27/>
, the club’s vice-chairman Karren Brady had defended Kenwright, who she met at 
a dinner party at the home of the former prime minister Gordon Brown, against 
criticism from Everton fans. Brady is also listed as a director of Taveta 
Investments, ranked as the second-largest operator in the UK clothing retail 
market, and registered in Monaco under the name of Green’s wife, Tina.

As well as Green, two other names are consistently linked to the complicated 
web of companies. The first – Graham Shear, a lawyer at the London-based Berwin 
Leighton Paisner who was involved in Carlos Tevez’s move to Manchester United 
from West Ham in 2007 and wasalso briefly a vice-president  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/10/deportivo-maldonado-stars-never-play-calleri-riulli-agents>
of the mysterious Uruguayan Second Division club Deportivo Maldonado – acted 
for Vibrac, JG Funding and a number of Isle of Man investment vehicles. When 
contacted by the Guardian, he denied previously representing Green but welcomed 
the introduction of the new Premier League regulations.

The other is Simon Groom, a British lawyer based in Monaco who represented 
offshore companies registered in Panama, Geneva, Monaco, British Virgin Islands 
and the Isle of Man. He previously was a director of a company called Balzane 
Services SA, which was used by Vibrac as a vehicleto transfer “movable assets” 
<https://www.moneyhouse.ch/en/company/balzane-services-sa-11394126531> through 
Switzerland between 2011 and 2014 before making loans to football clubs.Balzane 
was also the intermediary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/dec/13/mitchells-butlers-tabor-smith>
 in the buyout of substantial blocks of shares in the pub company Mitchells & 
Butlers in 2009, which involved the racehorse magnates Michael Tabor, Derrick 
Smith, JP McManus and John Magnier, as well as the Tottenham owner Joe Lewis.

Groom also signed off loans from two entities based in the Isle of Man to 
Rights and Media Funds Limited on the same days as the loans with West Ham (10 
August 2015) and Everton (14 August 2015) were charged. Kirkton Investments and 
Carroch Holdings both give the same London address as Shear’s law firm, Berwin 
Leighton Paisner, while documents show that they and JG Funding listed the same 
permitted third party security: another entity registered in the British Virgin 
Islands called Mousehole Limited.

That has previously funded Atlético Madrid, Espanyol, Getafe and Valencia, 
among others, and is also registered at Vanterpool Plaza, as is Powsfield 
Limited, a company dissolved in 2009 that held 95% of the shares of Selkan 
Limited – owned by Gareth Bale’s agent Jonathan Barnett – which appointed Simon 
Groom as company secretary on 26 July 2005. Selkan were involved in the 
purchasing of players’ economic rights, including the former Brazil striker 
Luís Fabiano, and receiving a percentage of the transfer fee when the players 
were sold.

At Everton’s AGM in November 2015, the CEO Robert Elstone castigated 
shareholders who asked questions about Green’s potential involvement before 
revealing that the club’s net debt had increased from £28.1m in 2013–14 to 
£31.3m in 2014–15, despite announcing a record turnover and bumper new TV 
deal.“We have three sources of lending,” he said. “We have a long-term loan 
with the Prudential that expires in 2026, an overdraft with Barclays that is 
not enough to manage the day-to-day cash flow of the football club and, to 
address that, we borrow from JG Funding (a private company) against the TV 
money. It is all fully disclosed in our accounts, is approved by the Premier 
League and paid back at the end of the year.”

Less than six months after the loan with JG Funding was taken out, Moshiri 
paid £87.5m for his 49.9% share, valuing the club at £175m.The publication of 
Everton’s 2015-16 accounts 
<http://www.evertonfc.com/news/2016/12/16/annual-accounts-record-turnover> last 
week revealed the Iranian businessman has also provided an interest-free loan 
of £80m “with no agreed repayment date. This funding has been used post 
year-end to reduce the club’s long-term debt by repaying the entire other loans 
balance of £54.8m at 31 May 2016.”

Despite that, Everton’s accounts show that another loan was taken out on 26 
August 2016. This time, it was registered to a company called Rights and Media 
Funding Limited, which had changed its name from JG Funding at the end of 2015, 
and, just as before, the company’s only listed director was Jonathan McMorrow. 
Born in Sligo, Ireland, he is now a registered accountant married to Claire 
Usher, who he met while dancing in Riverdance on Broadway. According to 
McMorrow’s Linkedin page <https://ie.linkedin.com/in/jonathan-mcmorrow-7573361b>
, he joined the James Grant Group – a management agencydescribed as a “one-stop 
talent shop” 
<http://www.hoovers.com/company-information/cs/marketing-lists.James_Grant_Group_Ltd.3932aed5610eff45.html>
 – in 2008 before becoming director of its subsidiary JG Funding.

The only other name on the charge documents is Fiona McPadden, who is also 
listed as an accountant and has signed off the loan on behalf of JG Funding. 
After digging a little deeper, @watchedtoffee claims she is the sister of 
McMorrow and works at a BMW dealership in Sligo, having married a local 
builder, Vincent McPadden.

“A multi-million pound loan has been taken out by Everton Football Club and 
has been signed off by an ex-Riverdance dancer and his sister, who is an office 
worker at a BMW dealership in Sligo,” he wrote. “Unbelievable isn’t it?”

The Premier League has insisted it is aware of the identity of the investor 
behind Vibrac and its associated companies. But as the riches associated with 
modern football continue to increase, it appears the murky world of offshore 
funding in the game is still alive and well.

 * This article was amended on 30 December 2016. An earlier version said 
incorrectly that Daniel Levy was once chairman of James Grant Group.  