
Fleabag, this year’s breakout TV anti-heroine, is returning to the theatre 
where she was first introduced in a warts-and-all one-woman show. The writer 
and performerPhoebe Waller-Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/16/phoebe-waller-bridge-sex-laughs-wotsits>
 is bringing the porn-addicted, conflicted character back toSoho theatre 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/> for a two-week run in December. 

Waller-Bridge has won huge acclaim for the TV version of Fleabag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/05/fleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives>
, which aired first on BBC3 and then moved to BBC2 this summer. The dark comedy 
series was described as a “really bleak version of Miranda” and “a gloriously 
rude update of Bridget Jones”.

Soho theatre hosted the first previews of Waller-Bridge’s Fleabag monologue 
after a successful sketch night of her earlier work. The comic storytelling 
show then had itsEdinburgh festival premiere in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/21/fleabag-edinburgh-festival-2013-review>
, winning a Fringe First award. The Guardian’s Lyn Gardner wrote that it “makes 
you both laugh and choke at the same time”. The show then had two sold-out Soho 
theatre runs, with Waller-Bridge picking up further awards for performing and 
writing the show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-to-return-to-soho-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bddb59f8b54a02319d13c78d221986f7e355291%2F0_140_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Phoebe%20Waller-Bridge's%20Fleabag%20to%20return%20to%20Soho%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-to-return-to-soho-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Phoebe%20Waller-Bridge%27s%20Fleabag%20to%20return%20to%20Soho%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fphoebe-waller-bridge-fleabag-to-return-to-soho-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bddb59f8b54a02319d13c78d221986f7e355291%2F0_140_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Phoebe Waller-Bridge performs Fleabag at Soho theatre in 2013. Photograph: 
Jane Hobson/Rex 
Earlier this year, Waller-Bridge told Soho theatre’s artistic director, Steve 
Marmion: “It’s impossible to get anything in front of an audience in this city 
without selling a limb. Soho theatre gave me my acting [Roaring Trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jan/14/review-roaring-trade-soho-theatre>
] and my writing debut: the first collection of short plays I ever wrote was 
put on here and it felt like a really safe place for Fleabag to try out all her 
inappropriateness.”

The production will be once again directed by her frequent collaborator Vicky 
Jones <http://unitedagents.co.uk/vicky-jones>, with whom she founded the 
theatre companyDryWrite <https://www.facebook.com/Drywrite>. It runs from 5 to 
16 December.
 