
Wellington Phoenix <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wellington-phoenix> 
have extended their unbeaten A-League streak to four games, but interim coach 
Chris Greenacre has been left lamenting the lack of a killer instinct in their 
scoreless draw with Adelaide United in Wellington. Back on home turf at Westpac 
Stadium for the first time in eight weeks, Wellington created enough 
opportunities to secure a win on Sunday but just couldn’t find the finishing 
touch.

Wellington managed 13 shots in appalling conditions, with eight on target, 
while defending champions Adelaide recorded nine with none troubling Phoenix 
keeper Glen Moss. Strong swirling winds and blustery rain made for treacherous 
slippery conditions and the game grew increasingly scrappy, referee Matthew 
Conger dishing out nine yellow cards.

What lies ahead in 2017: the major highlights in Australian sport
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/01/2017-preview-major-highlights-australian-sport>
Greenacre, who took over with Des Buckingham on an interim basis following 
coach Ernie Merrick’s resignation last month, said the game had been there for 
the Phoenix’s taking. “We played some good stuff in patches, but I think it’s 
clear to everyone that we just didn’t take our opportunities,” he said. “When 
you create that many chances, you have to take them and you have to be ruthless 
and we weren’t.”

In front of a 5,548-strong crowd, both teams struggled to maintain possession, 
with Adelaide’s best chance coming 30 minutes into the first half when Nikola 
Mileusnic blasted a Sergio Cirio cross over the bar. Kosta Barbarouses looked 
threatening on occasion for Wellington, while former Melbourne victory teammate 
Gui Finkler provided the Phoenix’s best chances deep into stoppage time.

However, Adelaide keeper Eugene Galekovic capped an outstanding display with 
two superb saves from back-to-back free kicks. Reds coach Guillermo Amor was 
low-key in his assessment of the match, but said it was pleasing to keep a 
clean sheet after last week’s 4-0 loss to league leaders Sydney FC.

“That was very important because the last games were very difficult for us,” 
Amor said afterwards. “But we want to win, always. Today, we drew, and this is 
one step forward.”

Adelaide remain 10th on the ladder to Wellington’s eighth, and must prepare to 
host second-placed Melbourne Victory on Saturday while the Phoenix travel to 
Perth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fphoenix-extend-unbeaten-a-league-run-with-draw-against-adelaide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbba4900dfa619048f17eff688d973a0e98dfc85%2F0_637_4083_2445%2F4083.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Phoenix%20extend%20unbeaten%20A-League%20run%20with%20draw%20against%20Adelaide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fphoenix-extend-unbeaten-a-league-run-with-draw-against-adelaide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Phoenix%20extend%20unbeaten%20A-League%20run%20with%20draw%20against%20Adelaide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fphoenix-extend-unbeaten-a-league-run-with-draw-against-adelaide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbba4900dfa619048f17eff688d973a0e98dfc85%2F0_637_4083_2445%2F4083.jpg>
 Jaushua Sotirio scored for the Wanderers during their 1-1 draw with Perth at 
ANZ Stadium. Photograph: Brendan Esposito/AAP 
In Sunday’s other game, Jaushua Sotirio’s first goal of the A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> season secured a valuable point 
for Western Sydney, who held Perth to a 1-1 New Year’s Day draw. Adam Taggart 
opened the Glory’s account in the 14th minute at ANZ Stadium, before 
quick-footed substitute Sotirio netted just minutes after his introduction on 
the hour mark to lift the Wanderers back into sixth spot.

Perth had a golden opportunity to take all three points when captain Rostyn 
Griffiths missed a 90th-minute sitter, although Kenny Lowe’s men still, at 
least temporarily, climb to fifth. More concerningly for the Wanderers is their 
eighth draw this season, with just two wins, and they are yet to taste victory 
at home.

Sunday night was the first Wanderers game overseen by referee Jarred Gillett 
since coach Tony Popovic was fined for taking aim at the official following his 
team’s round-six 3-0 loss to Melbourne Victory. And Popovic might feel slightly 
aggrieved at the manner of Perth’s opening goal – well executed though it was. 
Taggart was marginally offside when Chris Harold slipped him a superb through 
ball, releasing the Socceroo to outrun Aritz Borda and beat Jerrad Tyson at his 
near post.

Possession figures said the Wanderers dominated – they had 65 per cent of the 
ball. Actual play told another story, one of sluggish transition and 
final-third extravagance not helped by Popovic’s only available striker being 
the raw 19-year-old Lachlan Scott.

Jumpei Kusukami was the most-frequent offender but he wasn’t the one who 
spurned the biggest chance to equalise. The Japanese winger’s cutback to Nico 
Martinez just before the half-hour mark was quality but the Argentine skied a 
point-blank tap-in.

The red and black would certainly have gone into the break with the scores 
level had Perth’s in-form veteran goalkeeper Liam Reddy not parried away Mitch 
Nichols’ on-target stab from distance. In a dour second half, Perth finally 
copped a piece of their own medicine as Sotirio beat the offside trap and made 
a smart angled run onto Kearyn Baccus’ ball.

Popovic bemoaned the Wanderers’ wastefulness with the ball but was 
particularly upset by Taggart’s goal. “I’m still baffled by that goal, how the 
linesman can give that,” Popovic said. “Five metres in front of him, it’s 
clearly offside, and those things cost you.”

Lowe thought Taggart was “half a body” offside but would take it anyway. 
“Technically, is it offside if half your body is in front of the other guy? 
Maybe so,” Lowe said. “But there was no gap or whatever, and the linesman has 
to make a split-second decision.”
 