
A photographer has captured images of an uncontacted Amazonian tribe after his 
helicopter flight took a detour to avoid a rainstorm and happened to fly over 
their longhouse.

Sighting of uncontacted Amazonian tribe – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/dec/22/sighting-of-uncontacted-amazonian-tribe-in-pictures>
“I took the camera and started photographing,” said Brazilian photographer 
Ricardo Stuckert. “I didn’t have much time to imagine what was happening.”

It was a moment of luck for Stuckert. He spotted the building while in Acre, a 
state in north-westBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> near the 
Peruvian border, on his way to photograph a contacted indigenous group for a 
book he is working on.

On the return flight, on 18 December, he was able to grab more images that 
provide tantalising clues to the lives of uncontacted tribes. Brazil has about 
80 such groups but their existence is increasingly threatened by illegal 
loggers, miners and drug traffickers.

He was impressed with the body paint on one of the men, which he saw as 
camouflage. “When it is cold we put clothes on. They put that paint to protect 
themselves,” he said. “I thought, ‘You have to photograph this, it has to be 
preserved’.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fphotographer-shows-first-images-of-uncontacted-amazon-tribe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f4632033e1291b4c82dba80eb2430b2e07d3b18%2F695_414_4474_2684%2F4474.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Photographer%20captures%20images%20of%20uncontacted%20Amazon%20tribe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fphotographer-shows-first-images-of-uncontacted-amazon-tribe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Photographer%20captures%20images%20of%20uncontacted%20Amazon%20tribe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fphotographer-shows-first-images-of-uncontacted-amazon-tribe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f4632033e1291b4c82dba80eb2430b2e07d3b18%2F695_414_4474_2684%2F4474.jpg>
 The pictures appear to show a small group of people, one armed with a bow. 
Photograph: Ricardo Stuckert 
Three isolated groups live in Acre state, said José Carlos Meirelles, an 
expert in Brazil’s indigenous peoples who was also on the flight.

“At times a little detail could reveal a lot, and as the photos have wonderful 
definition we can get closer to the details,” he said.

More members of Amazonian tribe seek help from Brazil
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/14/amazonian-tribe-brazil-peru> 
In 2014, a fourth isolated tribe from Acre state, the Txapanawa, made contact. 
Some of them told Meirelles – who has 40 years of experience with indigenous 
peoples and now works for the Acre state government – they thought helicopters 
were something magical, or a huge bird, and had no idea people were inside 
until he told them.

Meirelles first saw signs of the tribe that Stuckert photographed on 
expeditions in 1988, and was on a BBC flight in 2010 that took high altitude 
footage of them.

“They use axes, machetes, pans, they do know our world but they know very 
little of it. They don’t have any idea of the confusion that we are,” Meirelles 
said.

He believes there are around 300 people in the tribe, who farm bananas, sweet 
potato, manioc and peanuts, as well as hunting and fishing. He was pleased to 
see them looking healthy, despite concerns in recent years about threats to 
other groups in the area, especially on the Peruvian side of the border. He 
said no one knows the tribe’s name.

 “We call them the Indians of the headwaters of the river Humaita,” Meirelles 
said. “They never made contact with anyone, we have no idea what language they 
talk and who they are. Fortunately we don’t know. The day we find out they will 
start to have problems.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fphotographer-shows-first-images-of-uncontacted-amazon-tribe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25626fb6d4836a222e5465a7fc5a8425256073bf%2F0_0_2568_3209%2F2568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Photographer%20captures%20images%20of%20uncontacted%20Amazon%20tribe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fphotographer-shows-first-images-of-uncontacted-amazon-tribe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Photographer%20captures%20images%20of%20uncontacted%20Amazon%20tribe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fphotographer-shows-first-images-of-uncontacted-amazon-tribe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25626fb6d4836a222e5465a7fc5a8425256073bf%2F0_0_2568_3209%2F2568.jpg>
 Stuckert spotted the tribe on his way to photograph another group which had 
been contacted. Photograph: Ricardo Stuckert  