
When Phyllida Lloyd <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/phyllida-lloyd> took on 
Shakespeare, it was never going to be a conventional production. This is the 
woman who had leapt from the rarefied world of opera to the West End and then 
to movies when she steered the Abba musical Mamma Mia! to global domination, 
and whose stage dramas were bold and innovative.

In 2012, some critics were sniffy about her all-female production of Julius 
Caesar, dismissing it as gimmicky. Lloyd stuck to her idea and this week, four 
years on, her third all-woman Shakespeare production completed the trilogy – 
this time to several five-star reviews. Last week the trilogy became 
joint-winner of the Longford prize, awarded by the prison reform charity the 
Longford Trust – Lloyd worked with the the arts charity Clean Break in 
developing the plays, which are set in a women’s prison.

The idea for a trilogy of all-female Shakespeare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/23/shakespeare-trilogy-five-star-review-donmar-kings-cross-harriet-walter>
 performances came out of a conversation with Lloyd, says the actor Harriet 
Walter, who stars in all three productions at King’s Cross theatre.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d6e0041f322ec07b8ab6d5752b07d480efea7a6%2F39_858_2857_3572%2F2857.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Phyllida%20Lloyd%3A%20a%20director%20who's%20determined%20to%20put%20women%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Phyllida%20Lloyd%3A%20a%20director%20who%27s%20determined%20to%20put%20women%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d6e0041f322ec07b8ab6d5752b07d480efea7a6%2F39_858_2857_3572%2F2857.jpg>
 Harriet Walter as Prospero in Phyllida Lloyd’s all-female production of The 
Tempest at King’s Cross theatre. Photograph: Helen Maybanks 
It was a conversation “that is being had amongst women in the theatre, about 
the dearth of great roles for women over a certain age, and also [how] job 
opportunities are much narrower for women who are of unconventional size, 
shape, accent, ethnic origin, whatever”. Lloyd wanted to stage Shakespeare with 
a solely female cast. “It isn’t that women haven’t played Shakespeare men 
before – they have. But to actually make this bigger gesture, nobody had really 
done so in such a public way,” says Walter.

Walter played Brutus in Julius Caesar and the title role in 2014’s Henry IV. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/11/henry-iv-review-all-female-shakespeare-thrills-frustrates>
 Performances of the final play in Lloyd’s series, The Tempest (Walter is 
Prospero), opened in September at the Donmar Warehouse’s specially commissioned 
pop-up theatre in London. This week it opened as part of the trilogy. The 
Guardian critic Lyn Gardner described seeing the three plays back to back, 
which audiences can do on certain trilogy days, as“utterly extraordinary” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/23/shakespeare-trilogy-five-star-review-donmar-kings-cross-harriet-walter>
.

Walter, who had worked with Lloyd in 2005 (she played Elizabeth I in Mary 
Stuart), had doubts she could do it. “I’m not unusual among women, feeling 
slightly do I have the right to take over this territory? At first I was 
thinking, who needs me to play this part other than me?” Lloyd convinced her. 
“What she has above all is courage. I would say that’s her top quality. I think 
courage is commensurate with your fear – if you lack imagination and you’re 
fearless, that’s not courage to me. She has all the imagination and knows what 
she’s up against and still does it, and that’s real courage.”

Shakespeare Trilogy review – Donmar's phenomenal all-female triumph
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/23/shakespeare-trilogy-five-star-review-donmar-kings-cross-harriet-walter>
Lloyd’s work is broad – she has done everything from little-known plays to 
Brecht, became a successful opera director and then went into musicals, 
directing Mamma Mia! as well as its film version, which has become one of the
most successful British films of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/dec/17/mamma-mia-uk-highest-grossing-film>
. She has been praised for her ability to re-imagine traditional works for 
modern audiences, but what her works in recent years seem to have most in 
common is a desire to put women centre stage. She explores their lives, as in 
The Iron Lady, her biopic of Margaret Thatcher, or tells stories that resonate 
– Mamma Mia! was a hit because so many women, particularly otherwise-ignored 
female middle-aged audiences, loved it with a passion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5edbbef58bb39eb889e7ce9d9763f4dde896a2bb%2F0_78_2335_1401%2F2335.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Phyllida%20Lloyd%3A%20a%20director%20who's%20determined%20to%20put%20women%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Phyllida%20Lloyd%3A%20a%20director%20who%27s%20determined%20to%20put%20women%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5edbbef58bb39eb889e7ce9d9763f4dde896a2bb%2F0_78_2335_1401%2F2335.jpg>
 Cush Jumbo as Mark Antony in Phyllida Lloyd’s 2012 production of Julius Caesar 
at the Donmar Warehouse. Photograph: Helen Maybanks 
Her creative collaborators also tend to be women – Mamma Mia! had a female 
producer, director, writer and star. Nicholas Payne, who recruited Lloyd to 
direct operas in the early 1990s, remembers suggesting an opera to her. “She’d 
say: ‘I’d do it if you gave me an entirely female technical crew.’ Of course, 
it was a deliberate challenge. You have to be bold about it, and that’s what 
she is.”

Lloyd grew up in a tiny Somerset hamlet, Nempnett Thrubwell, and went to an 
arts-based boarding school “where we lived and breathed theatre. We had to 
write, direct and produce plays from the age of 12, and perform them at pagan 
festivals on the Malvern Hills”. After university – Birmingham, where she read 
English and drama – she got a job at the BBC as an assistant in the drama 
department. Eager to have directing opportunities, she moved into fringe 
theatre, and was then given an Arts Council grant to train as a director.

Within a few years she had become associate director of the Bristol Old Vic, 
staged plays for Manchester’s Royal Exchange, the RSC, Royal Court, Donmar 
Warehouse and the National Theatre. In the early 1990s, Payne, then general 
director ofOpera North <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera-north>, had 
been watching Lloyd’s career. “I saw two or three of Phyllida’s productions 
[that] made me think there is something about the way in which she gets people 
to react on stage, which you could see transferring to opera. This kind of very 
detailed work with actors could be very liberating for singers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c30e225199d5f528b7e884e83492140796d8fb0%2F0_299_5130_3077%2F5130.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Phyllida%20Lloyd%3A%20a%20director%20who's%20determined%20to%20put%20women%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Phyllida%20Lloyd%3A%20a%20director%20who%27s%20determined%20to%20put%20women%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c30e225199d5f528b7e884e83492140796d8fb0%2F0_299_5130_3077%2F5130.jpg>
 Christine Baranksi, Meryl Streep and Julie Walters in the film version of 
Mamma Mia!, directed by Phyllida Lloyd. Photograph: Peter Mountain 
He remembers them having coffee and proposing she become an opera director. 
“She’s very thoughtful. She asked very intelligent questions – about the 
attitude of singers, the length of rehearsal periods – sensible, practical 
questions.” She has always been “very picky”, he says. “Even when she was young 
and poor, she would only take on a project if she thought it was the right 
thing for her.”

Her first production was L’Etoile by the French composer Emmanuel Chabrier. 
“It’s a wonderful, lighthearted music and a completely zany story, and I had 
seen enough by then of Phyllida’s work to see she had a gift for comedy.” The 
reviews, he says, were the best of any show he’s ever put on. A number of 
successful – or at least talked-about – operas followed, including La Bohème 
and a controversial Wagner’s Ring cycle for English NationalOpera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera>.

Judy Craymer, the producer who had the idea of a musical based on Abba hits, 
had seen some of Lloyd’s opera work. “She had never done a musical,” she says. 
“What I love is that she is slightly anti [the] traditional musical. So it was 
a different way of approaching the storytelling and the challenges. We didn’t 
want a typical Broadway/West End musical.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96c3cdf4b1cd3b21f149e3a9be91fa85dfc93b8e%2F0_94_2795_1677%2F2795.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Phyllida%20Lloyd%3A%20a%20director%20who's%20determined%20to%20put%20women%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Phyllida%20Lloyd%3A%20a%20director%20who%27s%20determined%20to%20put%20women%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96c3cdf4b1cd3b21f149e3a9be91fa85dfc93b8e%2F0_94_2795_1677%2F2795.jpg>
 Opera North’s 2010 production of La Bohème, directed by Phyllida Lloyd. 
Photograph: Robert Workman 
Lloyd brought a strong sense of Shakespearean structure to the show, Craymer 
says, “a sense of an enchanted island, second chances and mistaken identity. I 
think she has a sense of emergency – not panic, but a vitality.

“Mamma Mia! was a story that had to happen within 24 hours, people had to have 
a reason for getting on and off the stage. She kind of whips people, in a very 
subtle way, into action.”

The stage musical was a smash hit, transferring to Broadway and around the 
world, but when it came to the film version, Craymer says there were 
suggestions that “it should be done by a major Hollywood director”. She was 
clear that Lloyd should do it even though she had never directed a film before. 
“But she loves challenges.”

The composer Gary Yershon has known Lloyd since 1986, when they met in the 
stairwell of the Cheltenham Everyman theatre, where Lloyd was associate 
director. He says she hasn’t changed. “She was pretty much the same as she is 
now – she’s a quiet, intelligent, humourful, warm-hearted person with a twinkle 
in her eye and an immense capacity for concentration and invention.” Lloyd has 
always been a “political artist” he adds (in an interview in September, she 
said she was making work “intended as a plea for tolerance”).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c16979a41e5e97d9f7571da415265fb2f6cc5ad%2F0_67_1772_2215%2F1772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Phyllida%20Lloyd%3A%20a%20director%20who's%20determined%20to%20put%20women%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Phyllida%20Lloyd%3A%20a%20director%20who%27s%20determined%20to%20put%20women%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fphyllida-lloyd-director-all-female-shakespeare-trilogy-mama-mia-iron-lady%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c16979a41e5e97d9f7571da415265fb2f6cc5ad%2F0_67_1772_2215%2F1772.jpg>
 Meryl Streep stars as Margaret Thatcher in Phyllida Lloyd’s 2011 film The Iron 
Lady. Photograph: Allstar/FILM4 
Yershon is one of a number of collaborators whom Lloyd has worked with 
regularly. “The rootlessness of the freelance world is not a thing I 
particularly thrive on, actually,” she said in 1997. “She was building some 
kind of team she could feel secure with,” says Yershon. “The thing is, she does 
push you, in the best possible way. You’re pushed as far as you can go, and 
beyond. I think to do that, she needed people she could trust and rely on. I 
think that’s the reason.”

Is she hard to work with then? He laughs. “On a personal level, she’s not hard 
at all. She’s completely delightful and everybody loves her. But it’s her 
curiosity – she will shine a light on every corner, so nothing is unexamined. 
If she stumbles across something and it reveals to her that we’re going in the 
wrong direction, then the whole thing will turn around and you have to be going 
there with her. It’s not that she herself is hard to work with, but the 
journeys you go on are sometimes very arduous.”

Walter says rehearsals are long and rigorous, but Lloyd encourages everyone to 
have an opinion. “She’s very open to everybody’s ideas, very genuinely. You 
need your director to have a game plan of some kind, but she has the confidence 
to know that by allowing in other people’s voices and thoughts, it’s not 
necessarily going to threaten her plan.

“She’s able to absorb everybody else’s thoughts and take what’s useful, and 
reject what isn’t, in the nicest possible way. She doesn’t come in with a fixed 
thing, which she wants us all to fulfil. It makes for a good creative rehearsal 
room, and a very cooperative piece of work.”

In the trilogy, she says, Lloyd was seeking to redress how Shakespeare 
represents our cultural identity and yet excludes so many voices, simply 
because of the time in which he was writing. “She is driven by anger at the 
exclusion of women from history and from the narrative of our culture,” says 
Walter. “And that’s a widespread anger that is now galvanising a lot of artists 
and a lot of politicians, and women in general – and men. I think that 
motivates her, but terribly importantly, she’s also extremely witty and 
fun-loving. I think she has a lot of joy that she wants to express, and fun and 
love.”

Potted profile

Born: 1957, Bristol

Career: After starting in the BBC drama department, Lloyd turned to theatre, 
first putting on her own fringe shows before working in regional theatre, 
directing A Comedy of Errors for the Bristol Old Vic and a number of plays for 
the Manchester Royal Exchange. Her London stage productions include Mary Stuart 
(Donmar Warehouse, which transferred to the West End and Broadway), Pericles 
and The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie (National Theatre). She directed the Mamma 
Mia! musical, and its film adaptation; her other film, The Iron Lady, is based 
on the life of Margaret Thatcher. Her operas include La Bohème and Carmen for 
Opera North, The Handmaid’s Tale for ENO, and Verdi’s Macbeth for the Royal 
Opera House.

High point: Her groundbreaking all-female Shakespeare trilogy and the global 
success of Mamma Mia!

Low point: Her production of Wagner’s Ring cycle, which featured pole dancing 
and a female suicide bomber, proved controversial.

What she says: “You can’t wait for someone to discover you, you have to just 
get on and do it. Have confidence that directing is a very suitable job for a 
woman – with our gift for collaboration, listening and reading the nuance of 
things.”

What they say: “Phyllida has this unparalleled gift at playfulness mixed with 
serious profound thinking.” – Fiona Shaw, actor and director
 