
It feels like an unresolved chord. Everything is on edge. Suspended. Pregnant. 
Five young women stand across a bare stage. Stock still, they narrate their 
story. All it takes is a single step forward and the tension escalates.


The almost inaudible whispers and rattles of Ash Gibson Greig’s soundscape add 
to the creepiness. We know something’s afoot long before the pocket watches 
inexplicably stop at midday.


But these pupils are not the familiar figures in virginal white from Peter 
Weir’s 1975 classic film <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IuImwxk3xUk>. Rather, 
in Matthew Lutton’s gripping production forAustralia’s Malthouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/03/picnic-at-hanging-rock-review-vanishing-schoolgirls-haunt-a-new-generation>
 andBlack Swan 
<http://www.bsstc.com.au/about/archive/2016/picnic-at-hanging-rock> companies, 
they are modern-day private school girls in navy blue blazers with red trim, a 
touch more savvy and less erotically charged than their predecessors.


It puts them at a distance from Joan Lindsay’s 1967 novel which masquerades as 
the true turn-of-the-century story of the disappearance of three students and a 
teacher at the volcanic spot in Victoria.


The distance, however, is deceptive. The more the tale takes a hold, the more 
actors Harriet Gordon-Anderson, Arielle Gray, Amber McMahon, Elizabeth Nabben, 
and Nikki Shiels ditch the third-person narrative in favour of dramatic 
dialogue. In the blink of an eye – the show is a masterclass in stage 
management – they switch into period costume. It’s as if they become possessed 
by their own story and the primal forces it invokes.

 From left: Harriet Gordon-Anderson, Nikki Shiels and Elizabeth Nabben in 
Picnic at Hanging Rock. Photograph: Pia Johnson 
Scripted by Tom Wright, whose Voltaire adaptation Optimism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/aug/17/optimism-theatre-review-edinburgh>
 was seen here in 2009, the play has unexpected echoes ofLee Hall’s Alan Warner 
adaptation Our Ladies of Perpetual Succour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/06/novelist-alan-warner-love-ladies-of-perpetual-succour>
.


Where that play followed a group of convent schoolgirls from smalltown Oban to 
the seedier corners ofEdinburgh <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh>, 
taking on the cast of characters as they went, this one follows a rather more 
genteel party of young ladies into the dark heart of Australia.


“In a geological sense, we sleep on a sea of flame,” says one, alluding to 
untameable volcanic forces ever ready to defy the prim boarding-school illusion 
of a civilised society. What Wright and Lutton recognise is that Picnic at 
Hanging Rock is no mere mystical whodunnit, like a down under episode of The 
X-Files, but a metaphor for the limits and contradictions of colonialism.

Under the auspices of the expat Mrs Appleyard, the school is an anachronistic 
throwback to the values of the British empire, all gentility, white gloves and 
emotional repression. The staff are convinced the beauty of poetry and the 
order of arithmetic are sufficient to tame a hostile landscape.


If such attitudes were becoming redundant in the UK in 1900, they were more 
irrelevant still in the vigorous young nation of Australia, not least because 
of the untameable cruelty of nature itself.


So it is as if this Valentine’s Day outing conjures up a romance between the 
school’s adolescent girls and the dark masculine mystery of the landscape. They 
are compelled beyond rational explanation to abandon the ordered, the civilised 
and the polite in favour of the raw, the dangerous and the vast. Lindsay’s 
story holds its mythological power because it is a mystery that is unresolved. 
It tests the limits of human control.


As it does so, it exposes the fissures in supposedly civilised society. Behind 
the prim appearances are tales of abandoned children, neglected orphans and 
financial greed. Lutton’s production becomes a vision of psychological 
breakdown as a prettified illusion is ripped apart by the raw force of nature. 
It’s a show with a volcanic power.

• At the Royal Lyceum 
<https://lyceum.org.uk/whats-on/production/picnic-at-hanging-rock>, Edinburgh, 
until 28 January. Box office: 0131 248 4848.
 