
The following is an extract from issue 23 of the Blizzard, which is on sale in 
December. The Blizzard is a quarterly football journal available from
www.theblizzard.co.uk <https://www.theblizzard.co.uk> on a pay-what-you-like 
basis in print and digital formats.

The first full international match between France and England was played on 15 
May 1923 at the Stade Pershing in the Bois de Vincennes in Paris. It was an 
interesting game, attended by an impressive 30,000 spectators, despite driving 
rain and hail.France <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> had beaten 
an England Amateurs team at this same venue in 1921 but a similar result was 
not expected against the full England side.

The French team was all amateur, drawn from the regional Paris league, and its 
best player, Paul Nicolas of Red Star Paris, was out injured. The England team, 
captained by Charlie Buchan, was mostly professional but included three 
amateurs and six debutants. An injury to the forward Frank Hartley meant 
England played much of the match with 10 men. Nevertheless, the English 
dominated throughout and won 4-1, thanks in part to an early own goal from the 
French defender Pierre Mony – the footballer who got away with murder.

Football's original breakaway league: the indoor event that ended in bankruptcy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/when-saturday-comes-blog/2015/oct/14/football-breakaway-league-indoor-event-farce-bankruptcy>
Fast-forward exactly five years, to the night of 15 May 1928. It was 11pm, and 
Pierre Mony was closing up the restaurant he owned in Boulogne-sur-Mer before 
going drinking with friends. By then 32 years old, Mony was well-known across 
the Pas-de-Calais region as the star player of US Boulogne, and remained 
familiar to football fans throughout the country as a former international. 
Mony was heading around the corner from his Phénix restaurant, on Rue Victor 
Hugo, to Popes bar, on the busy Rue Coquelin. But before he left he took out a 
revolver, loaded it and placed it in his jacket pocket.

Parked in the street outside Popes bar was a Talbot convertible belonging to 
Mony’s friend, the champion cyclist and Grand Prix motor-racing driver Jean 
Delpierre. Mony found Delpierre inside the bar, sitting with friends at the 
counter. Mony said hello and the men ordered drinks and clinked glasses. They 
laughed and sang together until the bar closed at 1am. Then they decided to go 
elsewhere for “one last bottle”.

Mony, Delpierre and a third man, Maurice Dagbert, climbed into Delpierre’s car 
and drove the short distance to the Hotel de la Paix. It was 1.15am, and the 
hotel doors were closed, so the men rang the bell and stood on the pavement 
“chatting cheerfully” as they waited to be let in. Dagbert would later say 
there was absolutely no indication that anything unusual might happen. But, 
suddenly, Mony pulled the revolver out of his pocket, pointed it at Delpierre 
and shot his friend four times from close range.

The first bullet pierced Delpierre’s hat, the second hit him in the left arm, 
the third struck his thigh and the fourth punctured his abdomen. Terribly 
wounded, Delpierre stumbled into a nearby café, where his bleeding was stemmed 
with bandages. By the time a doctor arrived, Delpierre was in a dire condition. 
He was immediately transferred to the Saint-Louis hospital for emergency 
surgery. Meanwhile, Mony had fled, hurrying to the town’s port, where he threw 
his jacket and the revolver into the sea.

Pierre Mony was born in Paris in 1896 and came to Boulogne during the first 
world war as a pilot in the pioneering French air force, theAéronautique 
Militaire. Described by his squadron leader as “exceptional”, he was awarded the
médaille militaire for bravery. After the war, Mony studied law, although 
football was a major distraction.

He played for US Boulogne as one of two full-backs (the only defenders in what 
was typically a 2-3-5 formation) alongside his younger brother, Alexis. 
Pierre’s cigarette-card portraits from the time show a handsome, clean-shaven 
chap, with the ubiquitous 1920s slicked-back hairstyle. After Pierre played for 
a North representative team in a match against a Paris XI, the brothers came to 
the attention of the national selection committee.

Both Pierre and Alexis made their international debuts against Italy in Milan 
in January 1920. The sports newspaper La Vie Sportive regarded the selection of 
the Mony brothers as a sensible choice, saying they played “perfectly” together 
and were the best defensive pairing around. However, the paper soon had cause 
to revise that opinion.

In a “mediocre display” France lost 9-4. The Mony brothers (and the goalkeeper 
Maurice Cottenet) were severely criticised by the French press and spectators. 
Paris Soir said the Mony brothers had played so poorly that their international 
careers might be over. Alexis was never chosen to play for his country again. 
Pierre was selected for the France squad coached by Fred Pentland at the 1920 
Olympics, but didn’t get a game.

In 1921, Pierre Mony moved to CASG Paris. CASG won the Coupe de Paris in 1922 
and reached the latter stages of the Coupe de France. Mony played well and was 
recalled to the national team, although Paris Soir suggested this reflected the 
selection committee’s bias towards Paris-based players, saying: “Would he have 
regained the committee’s confidence if he had remained quietly in 
Boulogne-sur-Mer?”

With Mony back in the side, France lost 3-0 to Spain, 4-1 to Belgium, 8-1 to 
the Netherlands and then, following Mony’s own goal, 4-1 to England. His 
international record was not impressive: played five; lost five; conceded 28. 
Mony didn’t play for his country again. He left Paris and returned to Boulogne, 
first with OSC Boulogne and in 1926 back to US Boulogne. In that same year, he 
took over the Phénix restaurant on Rue Victor Hugo.

After shooting Delpierre, Mony walked to a friend’s house and asked to be 
driven to Calais where his wife, Paule, and their daughter were staying with 
his in-laws. Mony waited in the street outside the in-laws’ house until 6am, 
then went inside, kissed his daughter and left.

At 6.15am he went to Calais police station and asked to see the commissioner, 
saying he had “done a bad thing”. The officer on duty told Mony that the 
commissioner would not come into work before 8am. So Mony took a train back to 
Boulogne, walked into Boulogne police station, and told them: “Here I am.”

Mony was said to be overcome with emotion as he was questioned. He explained 
that he suspected Delpierre of having an affair with his wife. As his closest 
friend, Delpierre spent a lot of time at Mony’s restaurant and was often left 
alone with Paule. Delpierre and Paule went on outings together and had recently 
taken a trip to Nice. After the trip, Paule asked Mony for a divorce and took 
their daughter to Calais. Mony became very depressed – and plotted revenge. He 
admitted to buying the revolver with the intention of using it. He was charged 
with the attempted murder, with premeditation, of his supposed best friend.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpierre-mony-footballer-murder-france-boulogne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15ac488ee2159bda7123762a6108ac457bdf1580%2F767_866_4634_2780%2F4634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pierre%20Mony%3A%20the%20footballer%20so%20popular%20he%20got%20away%20with%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpierre-mony-footballer-murder-france-boulogne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pierre%20Mony%3A%20the%20footballer%20so%20popular%20he%20got%20away%20with%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpierre-mony-footballer-murder-france-boulogne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15ac488ee2159bda7123762a6108ac457bdf1580%2F767_866_4634_2780%2F4634.jpg>
 Action from the France v England game on 15 May 1923 at the Stade General John 
Joseph Pershing in Paris. England won 4-1. Photograph: Presse Sports / Offside 
Jean Delpierre was 10 years older than Mony and was best known locally as a 
cyclist. He was regarded as the “champion of the north”, having won the 
equivalent of the Tour du Nord. But he was also a motor-racing driver, selected 
by Peugeot to race in the 1913 French Grand Prix at Amiens. Delpierre was 
photographed sitting in Peugeot’s EX3 car before the race. He was moustachioed, 
with centre-parted hair, and wore a slight – perhaps nervous – smile. 
Unfortunately, Delpierre crashed the EX3 into a ditch during his first lap and 
was forced to retire. This indignity, plus the onset of war, put an end to his 
sporting career. He became a forwarding agent involved in the transportation of 
horses and spent his evenings drinking in the bars of Boulogne.

Now lying in Saint-Louis hospital, Delpierre was in a critical condition. He 
had undergone major abdominal surgery and was suffering from peritonitis. 
Delpierre died on the following day, 17 May, at 5pm. Mony, on hearing the news, 
expressed his “keenest sorrow”. The charge was upgraded to murder.

Pierre Mony was tried on 2 October 1928 in Arras, in a cramped civil court, as 
the criminal court had been damaged during the war and had not yet been 
repaired. The public gallery was packed with a smartly dressed crowd that was 
said to include every sportsman from Boulogne to Calais, all of whom “wore 
nervous masks”. Journalists from Paris fought with local reporters over the 
eight available press seats.

The president of the court advised the gallery that it was likely to hear some 
scandalous details and invited the “good company of ladies” present to leave 
the room. All but one of the ladies remained in their seats.

When Mony entered the courtroom, after five months in prison, those who knew 
him were shocked by his aged and emaciated appearance. He wore an expression of 
terror on his face and stared straight ahead, “as if under a dizzy spell”.

When he eventually spoke, Mony told the court, in faltering words, that he 
regretted his “act of madness” which had been driven by jealousy. His 
restaurant was frequented by a group of friends who were often “over familiar” 
with Paule. “It offended me greatly,” said Mony.

Mony had taken the revolver with the intention of confronting Delpierre. But 
why, the court asked, had Mony ended up drinking, laughing – and even singing – 
with him? The song the men had sung, it was explained, was “Manon”, from the 
comic opera of the same name about a deceived husband and an unfaithful wife. 
Restaurant regulars had nicknamed Paule Mony “Manon”.

“I sang bitterly, because they were mocking me,” said Mony, “I was well aware 
of that.” Later that night, as the men stood outside the Hotel de la Paix, 
Delpierre made a jibe about “Manon”. It was this final insult that caused Mony 
to fire the revolver. “I saw red,” said Mony. “Yes, I saw red.”

The court called 18 witnesses, the most anticipated of whom was Paule Mony. 
Many of those in the gallery showed great sympathy for Pierre and hostility 
towards Paule. The press also seemed happy to cast Paule as the villain of the 
piece, with L’Echo describing her as “the real culprit”. “Will she show any 
pity for the man who died because of her,” the paper wondered, “or for the man 
who, after all, killed out of love for her?”

Taking the stand, a tearful Paule denied having an affair with Delpierre. 
“I’ve been besmirched!” she said. “It’s shameful!” Paule described her husband 
as “an immoral, lazy, brutal man”. She admitted she had taken the trip to Nice 
with Delpierre, but said that was because her husband neglected her. “He left 
me free to follow my own inclinations and I let him follow his, that’s all!”

It was noted by the president of the court that, while Paule may have had a 
weakness for other men, Pierre had a similar predilection for other women. 
Several witnesses testified to his apparent infidelities. But the sympathy in 
the courtroom remained with Pierre.

The closing arguments included a lengthy and “stirring” defence speech. At 
2.35am, 14 hours after the trial had begun, the members of the jury were sent 
out to deliberate. They returned shortly afterwards and, when asked if Pierre 
Mony was guilty of murder, replied: “Non.”

Mony was acquitted. The crowd, which had stayed until the end, cheered. Mony, 
the colour draining from his face, collapsed onto the desk in front of him, 
seemingly unable to believe the outcome.

The footballer had got away with murder but his reputation was in pieces. 
Newspaper columnists said Mony’s sporting fame had been allowed to obscure the 
brutality of Delpierre’s killing. As an international footballer Mony had 
sometimes been criticised and maligned, but at club level he was popular and 
respected. All of that popularity and respect had been thrown away on the night 
he left his restaurant with a revolver in his pocket.

“He enjoyed the sunny glory of football stadiums and realised the dreams of 
thousands of teenagers,” said Le Journal. “Handsome, brave and rich, Mony 
seemed to have a happy life. And then he killed his ‘best friend’. All was lost 
in a foolish act and Pierre Mony is a ruined man.”

• Thanks to Julie Abrami for assistance with translation of sources.
 Photograph: The Blizzard 
The Blizzard is a 190-page quarterly publication that allows the best football 
writers in the world the opportunity to write about the football stories that 
matter to them, with no limits and no editorial bias. All back issues are 
available on a pay-what-you-like basis in both print and digital formats from
www.theblizzard.co.uk <https://www.theblizzard.co.uk/>, with digital issues 
available from just 1p.
 