
Coming from a family of baker-patissiers, I grew up with the smell of baking 
bread. We lived in a working-class part of Colmar in Alsace, where there were 
lots of textile factories and market gardens.

Our house was above my parents’ bakery and workshop, at number 11 avenue 
d’Alsace. It was a long building from the 1940s or 1950s, with everything 
arranged in a row: the bakery, the oven, the table for shaping the bread, the 
kneading machine, the washing-up area and, at the back, the pastry station with 
big machines for mixing and grinding. It felt a lot like a lab.

In front of the building was a courtyard where I spent most of my time 
playing. I was an only child, and my parents worked all the time, my father in 
his workshop, my mother in the shop. I’d have liked to have had someone to play 
with. But I also liked working. The only way I could spend time with my father 
was to go to the workshop – that is probably why I knew I wanted to be a 
patissier from the age of nine.

They’d give me simple things to do, like decorating the bûches de Noël with 
little plastic elves

I came to Paris when I was 14, and worked as an apprentice under the caterer 
and patissierGaston Lenôtre 
<http://www.lenotre.com/l-univers-lenotre/notre-histoire.html?___store=english&___from_store=default>
. I remember one day tasting his chestnut and pear ice-cream and thinking that 
I had absolutely no idea chestnuts or pears could taste like that.

I loved my father’s baba au rhum, which he made for special occasions, with 
whipped cream and fruit. It wasn’t really a kids’ dish, but I was always 
allowed to have some. The spongy texture of the cake, with the cream … what a 
dream. It was – is – heaven. I also loved histartes aux quetsches – damson 
tarts. The smell of those baking was my favourite.

The Christmas period, in particular, meant lots of work – I didn’t enjoy this 
time of year much. But I did help my parents. They’d give me simple things to 
do, like decorating thebûches de Noël with little plastic elves or Christmas 
trees. And I’d help my grandfather make deliveries to clients. We always had an 
enormous tree in the bakery, which I loved to decorate with garlands and 
baubles. I still love the way the glass balls reflect the lights. And my father 
made all the traditional Alsatian Christmas biscuits –bredeles – some of which 
weresablés, like the recipe below, only much simpler.

In my workshop, in terms of the creation and development of ideas, the 
Christmas period starts on 2 January and lasts until May. We don’t make 
anything traditional other than stollen, which I love, but come December, we do 
always have a big tree.

Sablé infiniment chocolat

The quality of the chocolate is most important for the flavour of these 
biscuits, and the fleur de sel serves to highlight it. The secret to the 
texture is to make sure the dough is cold before going in the oven, and not to 
overbake. The centre should be soft. Ideally you want to leave the biscuits for 
an hour, then coat them in melted chocolate before eating. Push the chocolate 
flavour to the limit.

Tim Hayward is nostalgic for his nan’s corned beef, chips and peas | Taste of 
home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/25/tim-hayward-chef-interview-corned-beef-chips-peas-recipe>
Makes 40-60
150g 70% cocoa baking chocolate such as Valrhona Guanaja 
<https://www.valrhona-chocolate.com/valrhona-guanaja-70-baking-bag.html>
175g flour
30g cocoa
1 tsp bicarbonate of soda
150g butter, at room temperature
120g light brown sugar
50g caster sugar
¾ tsp fleur de sel 
<http://www.souschef.co.uk/fleur-de-sel-guerande.html?origin=product-search&kwd=&source=pla&gclid=Cj0KEQiA39_BBRD0w-_rmOrc__8BEiQA-ETxXXqJ4VZsdbQX4Z5QqR8jSDBJNXiEm-q4nAVsf7ZUYsoaAlgp8P8HAQ>
¼ tsp vanilla extract

1 Chop the chocolate with a serrated knife. Sift the flour, cocoa and 
bicarbonate of soda together.

2 Put the butter in a bowl and soften with a spatula. Add the chocolate, 
sugars, fleur de sel and vanilla and mix well, then incorporate the 
flour-cocoa-bicarb mixture. Mix rapidly until combined, without overworking.

3 Divide the dough into three equal parts and roll each piece into a 15- to 
20cm-long sausage.

4 Wrap each piece in clingfilm and refrigerate for 2 hours. Heat the oven to 
170C/335F/gas mark 3½.

5 Remove the plastic film from the dough and slice into 1cm-thick discs. Place 
the discs on a baking tray lined with cooking parchment and bake for 11-12 
minutes. Remember: it’s important that you don’t overcook them.

 * Pierre Hermé <http://pierreherme.com/> is a Paris-based chocolatier and 
winner of the best pastry chef 2016 in theWorld’s 50 Best Restaurants awards 
<http://www.theworlds50best.com/awards/best-pastry-chef>. His new recipe book, 
Chocolate <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pierre-herme-chocolate.html>, is 
published by Flammarion; pierreherme.com
 