
It has just gone six in the morning when Bernie Monk emerges through the 
cloying mist of Grey valley and is handed a mug of steaming coffee. The eyes of 
two dozen protesters turn to the burly publican as he swats sandflies from his 
face and begins to speak.

“I’ve got a good plan,” he tells the group gathered in a semi-circle, wrapped 
up in beanies and khaki oilskins against a southerly battering New Zealand’s 
west coast. “A plan that will stop any bastards getting up there again.”


'Welcome relief': pub near epicentre of New Zealand quake opens for victims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/14/o-flynns-hanmer-springs-pub-provides-relief-for-new-zealand-quake-victims>
Monk’s plan involves finally retrieving the body of his son Michael and those 
of 28 other men who lie somewhere beyond the 1,800-metre mark inside the 
entrance to the Pike river mine. The term “bastards” refers to the mine’s 
owner, which intends to seal the site with concrete, dashing any hopes the 
fallen miners will ever be laid to rest.

The name Pike river provokes a communal shudder in New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> – striking at the heart of the 
working-class west coast, where jobs are scarce, homes are buffeted by the 
meeting of coastal and alpine climates, and the population has long been in 
steady decline.


For four terrible days after a devastating  explosion on 19 November 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/24/new-zealand-mine-second-explosion>
, families clung to hope that 29 miners who were working the pit that day had 
survived. But a buildup of poisonous gasses in the mine prevented rescuers from 
entering.

NZ map <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/dec/2016-12-08T23:43:07.html>
Public pressure to launch an underground rescue mission was intense, spurred 
by the astonishing rescue of 33 Chilean miners a few months before. But from 
that very first afternoon, many families say they felt “railroaded” by 
misinformation and stalling tactics by the government and then owner Pike River
Coal <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coal>, which sold the mine to the 
state-owned Solid Energy in 2012.

An inquest concluded there never was any hope of rescuing the men because they 
would have died immediately or soon after the first explosion, which was caused 
by excess methane gas.


A 2012 royal commission into the calamity found Pike River Coal guilty of 
operating an unsafe mine, and failing to heed numerous warnings from employees. 
It detailed a litany of oversights and malfunctions including inadequate 
ventilation, faulty mine design and issues at management level – it was a new 
mine with old-fashioned problems, poised for disaster to strike.


The commission also charged the government with poor oversight – in 2010 there 
were only two mine inspectors for the whole country.


In the years since the disaster many of the families of the 29 have see-sawed 
between stages of grief. But one thing has kept them almost entirely united – 
their commitment to bringing their husbands, fathers and sons home.


That commitment now comes in the form of a human blockade on the road leading 
to Pike river – day 29 and counting.


At half-past five each morning protesters gather in front of a steel farm gate 
hung with flowers and hand-painted signs, and sealed with padlocks and chains.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpike-river-mine-disaster-families-fight-to-stop-their-dead-being-sealed-away-forever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67930922d143d7d37ceeb63caea170e87b9a19ea%2F0_0_2200_1060%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pike%20river%20mine%20disaster%3A%20families%20fight%20to%20stop%20their%20dead%20being%20sealed%20away%20forever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpike-river-mine-disaster-families-fight-to-stop-their-dead-being-sealed-away-forever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pike%20river%20mine%20disaster%3A%20families%20fight%20to%20stop%20their%20dead%20being%20sealed%20away%20forever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpike-river-mine-disaster-families-fight-to-stop-their-dead-being-sealed-away-forever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67930922d143d7d37ceeb63caea170e87b9a19ea%2F0_0_2200_1060%2F2200.jpg>
 Twenty-seven of the 29 miners killed inside the coalmine. Photograph: Reuters 
Their modest barrier – inspired by Mahatma Ghandi’s teachings on peaceful 
resistance – is halfway between the mine’s gaping mouth and the memorial to 
their lost men, a monument of compromise, when there are still no bodies for 
their families to farewell.


Not all of the families support the protesters, and some want the remains of 
their men to be left in peace. And although Pike river is ingrained in the Kiwi 
psyche as one of the most tragic events of recent decades, fatigue that the 
story is still not resolved has steadily grown, with some media commentators 
saying it is time the families moved on.

However, the frustration of these protesters peaked this week with the 
surprise resignation of John Key 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/john-key-resigns-new-zealand-prime-minister-to-quit>
 – the same prime minister who eyeballed Monk in Greymouth six years ago and 
promised to “bring the boys home”.

Dave Corson, listening to Monk’s rousing morning address as dawn breaks over 
the gorge, says: “We’re behind you.”


“We’re all in this together!” shouts his wife, Marilyn. “Would anyone like a 
cup of tea?” she adds.

Solid Energy didn’t show up for two days after Key announced his departure, 
but the protesters stood guard nonetheless, numbering in their hundreds since 
action started on 12 November.


Volunteer sentries run 24/7 surveillance from numerous posts; sleeping in 
their cars in case trucks try to slip by in the middle of the night.


On Thursday, protesters allowed four Solid Energy vehicles access to Pike to 
check on gas levels but any attempts to bring equipment or materials to begin 
work have been met with a staunch refusal to budge. The group have already 
defeated one contractor, with unconfirmed reports that another is considering 
withdrawing.

Allied Concrete, which had the contract to provide concrete to Solid Energy to 
seal the mine, pulled out of the deal in late November, saying it could not 
reconcile its work with the “emotional toll” it would take on the families. It 
was a huge win for the group.

This week Solid Energy took out a full-page advertisement in the New Zealand 
Herald stating its intention to go ahead with the sealing of the mine and 
reiterating its reasons: the mine was too dangerous to enter, and further lives 
would be put at risk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpike-river-mine-disaster-families-fight-to-stop-their-dead-being-sealed-away-forever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F994272ce5a83fb1ee650d68ad7fe819f2cf5bb7d%2F0_246_1312_1639%2F1312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pike%20river%20mine%20disaster%3A%20families%20fight%20to%20stop%20their%20dead%20being%20sealed%20away%20forever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpike-river-mine-disaster-families-fight-to-stop-their-dead-being-sealed-away-forever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pike%20river%20mine%20disaster%3A%20families%20fight%20to%20stop%20their%20dead%20being%20sealed%20away%20forever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpike-river-mine-disaster-families-fight-to-stop-their-dead-being-sealed-away-forever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F994272ce5a83fb1ee650d68ad7fe819f2cf5bb7d%2F0_246_1312_1639%2F1312.jpg>
 The Pike river mine memorial, erected on land donated by a local farmer. 
Photograph: Eleanor Ainge Roy for the Guardian 
“While we have deep sympathy for the position of the families, the directors’ 
decision is entirely motivated by our responsibility for the safety of the site 
and any person entering the mine,” read the open letter from Solid Energy.


“As we said in 2014, any further loss of life in this mine is unacceptable and 
any possibility of other families having to go through what the Pike families 
have suffered is not a risk we believe should be taken.”


This position enrages the protesters because their experts say the opposite – 
that the mine is stable enough to re-enter and that mine recovery professionals 
should be allowed in to retrieve the bodies.


Dozens of mine recovery experts from around New Zealand and the world have 
volunteered their services to retrieve the bodies. The protesters refer to the 
mine as an active crime scene.

Perched 20 metres above the blockade on a weed-strangled hill, stands sentry 
Fred Heine. He spends his days peeling the grey-green countryside for the heavy 
police escort which would signal an attempt by Solid Energy to get past the 
blockade.

“In all these long years, no one seems to be willing to listen to the 
families,” says Heine. “I’ve think they’re beyond frustrated that people keep 
telling them to move on but there is still no closure – this is the only way 
they can see to force the issue.”

Monk and protest leaders have clearly stated their demands – a sitdown with 
the government and Solid Energy, so the experts can work out their differing 
opinions, and the families can plead with the prime minister to honour his 
promise.


“We would never send someone into the mine if it wasn’t safe, the last thing 
Pike families want is more deaths in that place,” says Tommy Daly, a key 
protest organiser who wears a blue “Stand with Pike” T-shirt every day, and has 
the virile energy of an unbroken colt

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpike-river-mine-disaster-families-fight-to-stop-their-dead-being-sealed-away-forever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49434d367524c0b5a97679566e77355b5a0b8711%2F0_53_2953_1772%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pike%20river%20mine%20disaster%3A%20families%20fight%20to%20stop%20their%20dead%20being%20sealed%20away%20forever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpike-river-mine-disaster-families-fight-to-stop-their-dead-being-sealed-away-forever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pike%20river%20mine%20disaster%3A%20families%20fight%20to%20stop%20their%20dead%20being%20sealed%20away%20forever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpike-river-mine-disaster-families-fight-to-stop-their-dead-being-sealed-away-forever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49434d367524c0b5a97679566e77355b5a0b8711%2F0_53_2953_1772%2F2953.jpg>
 Pike river ‘camp mother’ Marilyn Corson in front of the blockade. Photograph: 
Eleanor Ainge Roy for the Guardian 
“We’ve had all these promises over the years that the government would get the 
men out – it’s never happened. We’ve been shafted. But I made a promise to 
someone that I wouldn’t give up – and I haven’t forgotten that.”


As the rain increases in intensity small groups of protesters cluster around a 
camping picnic table, laid with steamed pink trout and lemon cake.


Monk won’t reveal the details of his plan yet but everyone is whispering 
theories as they sip on mugs of billy tea. Felling trees to block the gorge 
perhaps, erecting a wall out of Pike river stones?


“No one is going through, and this is the only way through,” growls Monk to 
the crew, raising morale before he prepares to drive an hour south to man his 
pub at Peroa.


“And when we start standing up, we are the biggest sons of bitches under the 
sun.”

 