
Natasha Butler had never heard of fentanyl 
<https://www.drugabuse.gov/drugs-abuse/fentanyl> until a doctor told her that a 
single pill had pushed her eldest son to the brink of death – and he wasn’t 
coming back. “The doctor said fentanyl is 100 times more potent than morphine 
and 50 times more potent than heroin. I know morphine is really, really 
powerful. I’m trying to understand. All that in one pill? How did Jerome get 
that pill?” she asked, her voice dropping to a whisper as the tears came. 
“Jerome was on a respirator and he was pretty much unresponsive. The doctor 
told me all his organs had shut down. His brain was swelling, putting pressure 
on to the spine. They said if he makes it he’ll be a vegetable.”

Painkiller addiction claims more lives in the US than guns, cutting across 
class, race and region

The last picture of Jerome shows him propped immobile in a hospital bed, eyes 
closed, sustained only by a clutch of tubes and wires. Natasha took the near 
impossible decision to let him die.

“I had to remove him from life support. That’s the hardest thing to ever do. I 
had him at 15 so we grew together. He was 28 when he died,” she said. “I had to 
let him die but after that I needed some answers. What is fentanyl and how did 
he get it?”

That was a question asked across Sacramento after Jerome and 52 other people 
in and around California’s capital overdosed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/24/counterfeit-prescription-pills-laced-deadly-opioid-fentanyl>
 on the extremely powerful synthetic opioid, usually only used by hospitals to 
treat patients in the later stages of cancer, over a few days in late March and 
early April 2016. Twelve died.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fpills-that-kill-why-are-thousands-dying-from-fentanyl-abuse-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26628a167168ae003ce4e999e0a1b03a2a569535%2F121_18_2279_1367%2F2279.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pills%20that%20kill%3A%20why%20are%20thousands%20dying%20from%20fentanyl%20abuse%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fpills-that-kill-why-are-thousands-dying-from-fentanyl-abuse-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pills%20that%20kill%3A%20why%20are%20thousands%20dying%20from%20fentanyl%20abuse%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fpills-that-kill-why-are-thousands-dying-from-fentanyl-abuse-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26628a167168ae003ce4e999e0a1b03a2a569535%2F121_18_2279_1367%2F2279.jpg>
 Sign of the times: like most fentanyl victims, Prince probably never knew he 
was taking the drug. Photograph: Bertrand Guay/AFP/Getty Images 
Less than a month later, this mysterious drug – largely unheard of by most 
Americans –killed the musician Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/03/what-is-fentanyl-prince-deadly-overdose>
 and burst on to the national consciousness. Fentanyl, it turned out, was the 
latest and most disturbing twist in the epidemic of opioid addiction that has 
crept across the United States over the past two decades, claiming close to 
200,000 lives. But Prince, like almost all fentanyl’s victims, probably never 
even knew he was taking the drug.

I had to remove my son from life support. That’s the hardest thing. I had him 
at 15, we grew together
Natasha Butler 
“The number of people overdosing is staggering,” said Lieutenant Tracy Morris, 
commander of special investigations who manages the narcotics task force in 
Orange County, which has seen a flood of the drug across the Mexican border. 
“It is truly scary. They don’t even know what they’re taking.”

The epidemic of addiction to prescription opioid painkillers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/09/us-drugs-oxycodone-painkillers-florida>
, a largely American crisis, sprung from the power of big pharmaceutical 
companies to influence medical policy. Two decades ago, a small family-owned 
drug manufacturer,Purdue Pharma <http://www.purduepharma.com/>, unleashed the 
most powerful prescription painkiller yet sold over the pharmacist’s counter. 
Even though it was several times stronger than anything else on the market, and 
bore a close relation to heroin, Purdue claimed thatOxyContin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/mar/24/drugsandalcohol.theobserver> was 
not addictive and was safe to treat even relatively minor pain. That turned out 
not to be true.

It spawned an epidemic that in the US claims more lives than guns, cutting 
across class, race and geographic lines as it ravages communities from white 
rural Appalachia and Mormon Utah to black and Latino neighbourhoods of southern 
California. The prescription of OxyContin and other painkillers with the same 
active drug, oxycodone, became so widespread that entire families were hooked. 
Labourers who wrenched a back at work, teenagers with a sports injury, just 
about anyone who said they were in pain was put on oxycodone. The famous names 
who ended up as addicts show how indiscriminate the drug’s reach was; everyone 
from politician John McCain’s wife Cindy to Eminem became addicted.
 Tragic loss: Jerome Butler, with his nephew Demichael. Photograph: Courtesy 
of the Butler family 
Clinics staffed by unscrupulous doctors, known as “pill mills”, sprung up 
churning out prescriptions for cash payments. They made millions of dollars a 
year. By the time the epidemic finally started to get public and political 
attention, more than two million Americans were addicted to opioid painkillers. 
Those who finally managed to shake off the drug often did so only at the cost 
of jobs, relationships and homes.

After the government finally began to curb painkiller prescriptions, making it 
more difficult for addicts to find the pills and forcing up black market 
prices, Mexican drug cartels stepped in toflood the US with the real thing – 
heroin – in quantities not seen since the 1970s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/25/opioid-epidemic-prescription-painkillers-heroin-addiction>
. But, as profitable as the resurgence of heroin is to the cartels, it is 
labour intensive and time-consuming to grow and harvest poppies. Then there are 
the risks of smuggling bulky quantities of the drug into the US.

The ingredients for fentanyl, on the other hand, are openly available in China 
and easily imported ready for manufacture. The drug was originally concocted in 
Belgium in 1960, developed as an anaesthetic. It is so much more powerful than 
heroin that only small quantities are needed to reach the same high. That has 
meant easy profits for the cartels. TheDrug Enforcement Administration 
<https://www.dea.gov/index.shtml> (DEA) has said that 1kg of heroin earns a 
return of around $50,000. A kilo of fentanyl brings in $1m.

At first the cartels laced the fentanyl into heroin to increase the potency of 
low-quality supplies. But prescription opioid painkillers command a premium 
because they are trusted and have become increasingly difficult to find on the 
black market. So cartels moved into pressing counterfeit tablets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fpills-that-kill-why-are-thousands-dying-from-fentanyl-abuse-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb0180b1ac75304484a4a20a918342521141d6f3%2F0_88_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pills%20that%20kill%3A%20why%20are%20thousands%20dying%20from%20fentanyl%20abuse%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fpills-that-kill-why-are-thousands-dying-from-fentanyl-abuse-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pills%20that%20kill%3A%20why%20are%20thousands%20dying%20from%20fentanyl%20abuse%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fpills-that-kill-why-are-thousands-dying-from-fentanyl-abuse-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb0180b1ac75304484a4a20a918342521141d6f3%2F0_88_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A family’s pain: loved ones remember Jerome Butler. Photograph: Alamy Stock 
Photo 
But making pills with a drug like fentanyl is a fairly exact science. A few 
grammes too much can kill. “It’s very lethal in very small doses,” said Morris. 
“Even as little as 0.25mg can be fatal. One of our labs had a dime next to 
0.25mg and you could barely see it. It’s about the size of the head of a pin. 
Potentially that could kill you.”

The authorities liken buying black market pills to playing Russian roulette. 
“These pills sold on the street, nobody knows what’s in them and nobody knows 
how strong they are,” said Barbara Carreno of the DEA.

After Prince died, investigators found pills labelled as prescription 
hydrocodone, but made of fentanyl, in his home, suggesting he bought them on 
the black market. The police concluded he died from a fatal mix of the opioid 
and benzodiazepine pills, a particularly dangerous combination. It is likely 
Prince did not even know he was taking fentanyl.

Others knowingly take the risk. In his long battle with addiction, Michael 
Jackson, used a prescription patch releasing fentanyl into his skin among the 
arsenal of drugs he was fed by compliant doctors. Although it was two 
non-opioids that killed him, adding fentanyl into the mix was hazardous.

Jerome Butler, a former driver for Budweiser beer who was training to be a 
security guard, thought he was taking a prescription pill called Norco. His 
mother’s voice breaks as she recounts what she knows of her son’s last hours. 
Natasha said she was aware he used cannabis, but had no idea he was hooked on 
opioid painkillers. She said her son at one time had a legitimate prescription 
and may have become addicted that way. She has since discovered he was paying a 
doctor, well known for freely prescribing opioids, to provide pills.

“I didn’t even know,” she said. “You find stuff out after. It’s killing me 
because they’re saying, ‘Well, yeah, Jerome was taking them pills all the 
time.’ And I’m like, ‘He was doing what?’”

Jerome may have had a prescription, but like many addicts he will have needed 
more and more. The pill that killed him was stamped M367, a marking used on 
Norco pills made of an opioid, hydrocodone. It was a fake with a high dosage of 
fentanyl.

This is fentanyl. The first time you take it you’re not coming back. You’re 
gone

“If Jerome had known it was fentanyl he would never have took that,” said 
Natasha. “This ain’t like crack or a recreational drug that people been doing 
for so many years and survived it but at 60 or 70 die from a drug overdose 
because their heart can’t take it no more. This is fentanyl. The first time you 
take it you’re not coming back. You’re gone.”

That wasn’t strictly true of the batch that hit Sacramento. It claimed 11 
other lives. The youngest victim was 18-year-old George Berry from El Dorado 
Hills, a mostly white upscale neighbourhood. The eldest was 59. But others 
survived. Some were saved by quick reactions; doctors were able to hit them 
with an antidote before lasting damage was done. Others swallowed only enough 
fentanyl to leave them seriously ill but short of death.

It was a matter of luck. When investigators sent counterfeit pills seized 
after the Sacramento poisonings for testing at the University of California, 
they found a wide disparity in the amount of fentanyl each contained. Some 
pills had as little as 0.6mg. Others were stuffed with 6.9mg of the drug, which 
would almost certainly be fatal.

The DEA thinks the difference was probably the result of failing to mix the 
ingredients properly with other powders, which resulted in the fentanyl being 
distributed unevenly within a single batch of counterfeit pills.

That probably explains the unpredictable mass overdosing popping up in cities 
across the US. In August, 174 people overdosed on heroin in six days in 
Cincinnati, which has one of the fastest-growing economies in the Midwest. 
Investigators suspect fentanyl because the victims needed several doses of an 
antidote,Naloxone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/apr/07/naloxone-drug-cure-americas-overdose-epidemic>
, where one or two will usually suffice with heroin. The same month, 26 people 
overdosed on fentanyl-laced heroin in a four-hour period in Huntington, a 
mostly white city in one of the poorest areas of West Virginia. In September 
seven people died from fentanyl or heroin overdoses in a single day in Cuyahoga 
County, Ohio.

The US authorities don’t know for sure how many people fentanyl kills because 
of the frequency with which it is mixed with heroin, which is then registered 
as the cause of death. The DEA reported 700 fatalities from fentanyl in 2014 
but said it is an underestimate, and rising. In 2012, the agency’s laboratory 
carried out 644 tests confirming the presence of fentanyl in drug seizures. By 
2015, the number of positive tests escalated to 13,002.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fpills-that-kill-why-are-thousands-dying-from-fentanyl-abuse-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff56460de5e51dc6dc2c0c6c08f2658c03189603d%2F0_470_4357_2615%2F4357.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pills%20that%20kill%3A%20why%20are%20thousands%20dying%20from%20fentanyl%20abuse%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fpills-that-kill-why-are-thousands-dying-from-fentanyl-abuse-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pills%20that%20kill%3A%20why%20are%20thousands%20dying%20from%20fentanyl%20abuse%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fpills-that-kill-why-are-thousands-dying-from-fentanyl-abuse-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff56460de5e51dc6dc2c0c6c08f2658c03189603d%2F0_470_4357_2615%2F4357.jpg>
 ‘The number of people overdosing is staggering’: fentanyl. Illustration: 
Justin Metz for the Observer 
The police did not have to look far for the source of the drug that killed 
Jerome. He and his girlfriend were staying at the house of her aunt, Mildred 
Dossman, while they waited for their own place to live. Jerome was smoking 
cannabis and drinking beer with Dossman’s son, William. Shortly before 1am, 
William went to his mother’s bedroom and came back with the fake Norco pill. 
Jerome took it and said he was going to bed.

Jerome’s girlfriend was in jail after being arrested for an unpaid traffic 
fine and so he was alone with their 18 month-old daughter, Success, lying next 
to him.

“The doctors explained to me that within a matter of minutes he went into 
cardiac arrest,” said his mother. “Then as he lay there that’s when time 
progressed for the organs to be poisoned by fentanyl. He was dying with his 
daughter next to him.” Natasha said other people in the house heard her son in 
distress, complaining his heart was hurting. But they did nothing because they 
were afraid that calling an ambulance would also bring the police.

It was not until 10 hours later that the Dossmans finally sought help from a 
neighbour who knew Jerome. He tried CPR and then called the medics. The police 
came, too, and in time Mildred Dossman, 50, was charged with distributing 
fentanyl and black market opioid painkillers. She was the local dealer.

The DEA is tightlipped about the investigation into the Sacramento deaths as 
its agents work on persuading Dossman to lead them to her suppliers. But it is 
likely she was getting the pills from Mexican cartels using ingredients from 
labs in China where production of fentanyl’s ingredients is legal.

Carreno said some Mexican cartels have long relationships with legitimate 
Chinese firms which for years supplied precursor chemicals to make meth 
amphetamine.

Packages of fentanyl are often moved between multiple freight handlers so 
their origins are hard to trace. Larger shipments are smuggled in shipping 
containers. Last year, six Chinese customs officials fell ill, one of them into 
a coma, after seizing 72kg of various types of fentanyl from a container 
destined for Mexico.

American police officers have faced similar dangers. In June, the DEA put out a
video <https://www.dea.gov/video_clips/Fentanyl%20Roll%20Call%20Video.mp4> 
warning law enforcement officers across the US that fentanyl was different to 
anything they have previously encountered and they should refrain from carting 
seizures back to the office.

A very small amount ingested, or absorbed through the skin, can kill you

“A very small amount ingested, or absorbed through the skin, can kill you,” it 
said.

A New Jersey detective appears in the video after accidentally inhaling “just 
a little bit of fentanyl puffed into the air” during an arrest: “It felt like 
my body was shutting down… I thought that was it. I thought I was dying.”

Along with the Mexican connection, a home-grown manufacturing industry has 
sprung up in the US. Weeks after Jerome died, agents arrested a married couple 
pressing fentanyl tablets in their San Francisco flat.

Candelaria Vazquez and Kia Zolfaghari made the drug to look like oxycodone 
pills. They sold them across the country via the darknet using Bitcoin for 
payment – on one occasion Zolfaghari cashed in $230,000. The couple shipped the 
drugs through the local post office. Customers traced by the DEA thought they 
were buying real painkiller pills.

The couple ran the pill press in their kitchen. According to a DEA warrant, a 
dealer said Zolfaghari made large numbers of tablets: “He could press 100 out 
fast as fuck.”

The pair made so much money that agents searching their flat found luxury 
watches worth $70,000, more than $44,000 in cash and hundreds of “customer 
order slips” which included names, amounts and tracking numbers. The flat was 
stuffed with designer goods. The seizure warrant described Vazquez’s shoe 
collection as “stacked virtually from floor to ceiling”. Some still had the 
$1,000 price tags on them. Zolfaghari was arrested carrying a 9mm 
semi-automatic gun and about 500 pills he was preparing to post.

Even as Americans are getting their heads around fentanyl, it is being 
eclipsed. In September, the DEA issued a warning about the rise of a fentanyl 
variant that is 100 times more powerful – carfentanil, a drug used to 
tranquilise elephants.

“Carfentanil is surfacing in more and more communities,” said the DEA’s acting 
administrator, Chuck Rosenberg. “We see it on the streets, often disguised as 
heroin. It is crazy dangerous.”

The drug has already been linked to 19 deaths in Michigan. Investigators say 
that with its use spreading, it is almost certainly claiming other lives. 
Dealers are also getting it from China, where carfentanil is not a controlled 
drug and can be sold to anyone.

The dealers made so much money that their flat was stuffed with luxury goods 
and cash

Natasha Butler is still trying to understand the drug that killed her son. She 
wants to know why it is that it took Jerome’s death for her to even hear of it. 
She accuses the authorities of failing to warn people of the danger, and 
politicians of shirking their responsibilities.

A bill working its way through California’s legislature 
<http://www.latimes.com/politics/essential/la-pol-sac-essential-politics-updates-measure-to-stiffen-penalties-for-1470950198-htmlstory.html>
 stiffening sentences for fentanyl dealing died in the face of opposition from 
the state’s governor, Jerry Brown, because it would put pressure on the already 
badly crowded prisons.

“I’m so dumbfounded. How does that happen?” says Natasha. Her tears come 
frequently as she sits at a tiny black table barely big enough to seat three 
people. She talks about Jerome and the tragedy for his three children, 
including Success, who she is now raising.

But some of the tears are to mourn the devastating impact on her own life. 
“Look where I’m at. I was in Louisiana. I had a house. I had a job. I had a 
car. I had a life. I worked every day. I was a manager for a major company. I 
came here, I became homeless. I had to move into this apartment to help out my 
granddaughter,” she said. “You see me. This is what my kitchen table is. My son 
is dead. He had three kids and those two mothers of those kids are depending on 
me to be strong. I want answers and help. I say, you got the little fish. Where 
did they get it from? How did they get it here? You are my government. You are 
supposed to protect us.”
 