
Private investors have pledged £45m to Boris Johnson’s Olympicopolis plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/02/london-olympicopolis-culture-hub-stratford>
, which could see outposts of the V&A, Sadler’s Wells and the Smithsonian take 
up residence on the 2012 Olympic site in east London.

The money joins the £141m of public cash promised last year by the chancellor, 
George Osborne.

The project has been inspired by the grand museums on South Kensington’s 
Exhibition Road and the Southbank Centre complex, both born out of major 
national events: the 1851 Great Exhibition and the 1951 Festival of Britain.

London Olympicopolis culture hub plan gets £141m funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/02/london-olympicopolis-culture-hub-stratford>
At a reception at the Olympic stadium on Thursday evening, the Foundation for 
FutureLondon will announce it has raised £45m from private sources. Its target 
is £180m.

Johnson, the mayor of London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, said the 
aim was to bring some of the world’s leading institutions in culture and 
education to the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park.

It will become an “internationally significant” destination, he said. “But we 
want it to do much more than that. As well as being a magnet for domestic and 
international visitors, the Foundation for FutureLondon’s activities will 
ensure that strong links will be forged with local communities so that they 
benefit in the long term from the creation of new jobs and the realisation of 
new cultural and educational opportunities.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Folympicopolis-east-london-arts-hub-stratford-boris-johnson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b1b2079bce44875677aef7643ff397a4c9498e7%2F0_44_1636_1164%2F1636.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plans%20for%20Olympicopolis%20arts%20hub%20in%20east%20London%20attract%20%C2%A345m%20of%20private%20cash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Folympicopolis-east-london-arts-hub-stratford-boris-johnson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plans%20for%20Olympicopolis%20arts%20hub%20in%20east%20London%20attract%20%C2%A345m%20of%20private%20cash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Folympicopolis-east-london-arts-hub-stratford-boris-johnson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b1b2079bce44875677aef7643ff397a4c9498e7%2F0_44_1636_1164%2F1636.jpg>
 The V&A Museum in South Kensington, west London, which was originally built as 
the Museum of Manufactures for the1851 Great Exhibition. Photograph: PA 
Sadler’s Wells plans to create a 600-seat contemporary dance house, while V&A 
East will showcase the museum’s collections of design, art, architecture and 
performance.

They will be joined by University of Arts London, which wants to move its 
London College of Fashion, with 5,000 students and 500 staff, to Stratford 
<http://newsevents.arts.ac.uk/44129/2020-vision-ual-olympicopolis-elephant-castle/>
. And a new research campus for University College London (UCL), which will 
include theuniversity’s first school of design and a centre for experimental 
engineering 
<https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0115/120115_UCL_east_masterplanners_shortlist_announced>
.

Discussions have also been held about the Smithsonian Institute in Washington 
DC opening a London outpost on the Olympic site

The former BP executive Sir William Castell is chair of the Foundation for 
FutureLondon, which has been tasked with generating philanthropic support for 
the project.


Castell said: “Our task is to build on the unparalleled success of the 2012 
Games to create a world class 21st century city in Queen Elizabeth Olympic 
Park. Olympicopolis is a project with enormous scale, vision and ambition. It 
is investing over £1bn to deliver access to the very best in education, 
technology and the arts, for the people of east London, enhancing the 
incredible cultural life already there.”

The total cost of the project has been estimated at £850m. As well as the 
Treasury and philanthropic money, UCL is contributing £270m for its campus. The 
remainder will come from other Olympicopolis partners, public money from the 
Greater London Authority and money raised through residential land sales. The 
aim is to start building in 2018 and be fully open in 2022.

Olympicopolis is the biggest manifestation of a gradual move east by the arts 
in London. As well as the Stratford projects, the formerbosses of the National 
Theatre, Nicholas Hytner and Nick Starr, have announced plans for a new 900 
seat commercial theatre near Tower Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/21/former-national-director-nicholas-hytner-new-theatre-london>
. And an announcement is soon expected on a new concert hall on the site of the 
present Museum of London after it moves to Smithfield Market.
 