
Plastics <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/plastic> is a word of sordid 
associations, suggesting an opaque pink cup of unpalatable finish or a 
door-knob mottled in nasty shades of brown. It is greatly to the discredit of 
the industry that this should be so. For here are translucent materials ready 
to receive the most brilliant colours, the subtlest textures and ideas. It is a 
whole new language waiting for its poetry. If you doubt the aesthetic 
possibilities of plastic, go to Coombe Lane, near New Malden Station, Surrey, 
where four young designers have set up an exhibition called “Barnstorm.”

The artists are David Gillespie, Tony Manzaroli, Ann Reason, and David 
Whitaker. Their work includes thick glass fibre blocks, asbestos cement sheets 
painted in coloured resins, glass panels surfaced with coloured and colourless 
resins, various interesting laminates, one of which incorporates thin sheets of 
wood, and some unconvincing furniture.

The patterns range from geometric shapes of a Japanese simplicity to an action 
painting in what looks like fresh blood. The ideas are derivative but to the 
best sources. The broad simplicity of pattern and scale are exactly what 
architects are always looking for. So is the colour, which ranges from 
brilliance to a subtlety which is never dull.

Gillespie and Manzaroli claimed to have formed their partnership with its eye 
on architecture and exhibition design. This being so their approach is 
curiously metaphysical. There seems to be no climatic distinction between those 
exhibits shown outdoors and those shown in. Only one set of glass panels, to 
conceal wall lighting, bears any resemblance to actual construction. For 
artists of monumentally good taste they are curiously indifferent to fixing 
details on which the success of panelling depends. The translucent sheets that 
hang from the roof of the barn, like banners in a medieval church, have a 
marked camber. They will obviously have to be given a backing of some kind.

Perhaps it is fortunate for architects to be given so free a hand. I cannot 
help noticing a parallel with the ceramics industry where the unfortunate 
customer has to choose between trivial mass-produced designs and the uneconomic 
output of the studio potters.

Gillespie and Manzaroli have hit upon the exact scale, and that combination of 
beauty and anonymity that mass-production needs. I find it sad that this talent 
is not harnessed to an industry that so woefully needs it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fplastic-design-architecture-barnstorm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b7902d39cc2fa7b3e5faafb2ee59136f29667e4%2F0_0_1401_1601%2F1401.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plastic%20to%20become%20design%20material%20of%20the%20future%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2028%20October%201961&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fplastic-design-architecture-barnstorm%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plastic%20to%20become%20design%20material%20of%20the%20future%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2028%20October%201961&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fplastic-design-architecture-barnstorm%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b7902d39cc2fa7b3e5faafb2ee59136f29667e4%2F0_0_1401_1601%2F1401.jpg>
 The Guardian, 28 October 1961.  