
At the end of June, Balenciaga <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/balenciaga>
 held theirfirst ever men’s catwalk show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2016/jun/22/ikea-chic-and-talking-heads-suits-balenciaga-gets-the-vetements-treatment>
 in Paris for spring/summer 2017. It was staged up six flights of stairs on a 
rooftop in blistering sunshine and with the Eiffel Tower resplendent behind. 
The first model out wore a camel coat with super-size shoulders and brown 
leather boots that finished below the knee. They boasted a stacked heel of 
several inches. This is not footwear for wallflowers. To pull these off you 
need a stomp. Possibly a snarl. Probably an awkward haircut.

This is not footwear for wallflowers. To pull these off you need a stomp. 
Possibly a snarl. Probably an awkward haircut.

Acne Studios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/jun/25/acne-10-things-fashion-brand>, 
the Swedish label that has cornered the market for designer denim and wardrobe 
staples, has always underpinned its normcore offering with talking-point 
fashion. The Iggy boot, a platform ankle boot with a 3.35in heel, was its most 
recent curveball; it has been worn on stage bythe 1975 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-1975>’s frontman Matt Healy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/31/1975-matt-healy-success-is-brittle>
 and graced the cover of cult men’s biannual magazineMan About Town 
<http://www.manabouttown.tv/>, worn with nothing but a pair of brown ribbed 
ankle socks. Meanwhile atVivienne Westwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/vivienne-westwood>, a male model trooped 
out in a pair of platform sandals and socks, a look more likely to be seen on 
theMarni <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/marni> women’s catwalk.

Charles Jeffrey <http://www.charlesjeffrey.net/>, an emerging London-based 
designer and Central St Martins graduate whose label, Charles Jeffrey Loverboy, 
is a celebration of all things club culture (he has a night in east London 
called Loverboy), is fast gaining a reputation for his individual take on 
menswear and has something of the Westwoods about him. His most recent show 
featured several boys in towering platform shoes.

Alessandro Michele’s era at Gucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2016/jun/20/from-pvc-to-jane-austen-guccis-menswear-hits-new-levels-of-eccentricity>
 has produced a horsebit backless fur-lined slipper for men – at the time of 
writingthe Gucci website 
<https://www.gucci.com/uk/en_gb/ca/men/mens-shoes/mens-moccasins-loafers-c-men-shoes-moccasins-and-loafers>
 featured no fewer than seven variations on this theme, including a brocade 
floral design. This shoe was first seen in Michele’s debut menswear collection 
last autumn; a house of this scale does not produce seven variations on a theme 
if there is no demand, especially when it is a product that has been kicking 
about for a year.


Shoes are one of the biggest growth areas in menswear – though this is likely 
being propelled more by the ever-expanding cult sneaker market than by anything 
else. Not that this stops designers pushing their footwear in increasingly 
extreme directions. As fashion trends often emerge out of a basic reaction to 
what’s happening in the mainstream, a neat explanation for the rise in sassier 
shoes for men is that they are frankly the polar opposite of a pair of designer 
sneakers.

Plus the 90s has been a decade plundered by designers over the past few 
seasons. It is the last time I wore a pair of stack-heeled boots. I had a pair 
ofBuffalo trainers <https://www.buffalo-boots.com/men/buffalo-classics/> with 
the thick-as-you-like sole, a pair of girls’ platform ankle boots not a million 
miles away from the Acne Iggys (yes, I’m eye-rolling at myself right now) that 
I wore to work and to the greasy spoon for breakfast at the weekend. But then 
the 90s were the era ofMichael Alig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/21/michael-alig-interview> and the 
New York Club Kids, a period brought to life byMacaulay Culkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/18/macauley-culkin-no-i-was-not-pounding-six-grand-of-heroin-a-month>
 who played Alig in the 2003 filmParty Monster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1064308,00.html>
. This crew knew a thing or two about finishing their outfits with a (shoe) 
bang.

2016 saw the loss of two of music’s greatest champions of heels: Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> and David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie>. There are so many images of 
Bowie in the 70s wearing pumped-up footwear; from the red boots of the Aladdin 
Sane tour with their thick black soles to the heeled boots of the Diamond Dogs 
era. The latter period includes the unforgettable image of Bowie sat next to a 
huge dog on its hind legsshot by Terry O’Neill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/jan/07/celebrity-portraits-by-terry-oneill-in-pictures>
 – his boots have a whiff of 2017 Balenciaga. Bowie was, of course, in 
fine-heeled company:Marvin Gaye <https://www.theguardian.com/music/marvin-gaye>,
the New York Dolls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jul/25/new-york-dolls-rocks-backpages> 
andGeorge Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/music/georgeclinton> were all 
fans of a platform during the peak of glam rock, soul funk and disco.

Perhaps the most obvious nod to Bowie at the recent shows came via designer 
twinsDean and Dan Caten <http://www.dsquared2.com/experience/en/history/> of 
Dsquared2 <http://www.dsquared2.com/gb> who put all their male models for 
spring/summer in six inches of glam rock boots (reportedly each had to prove 
they could walk in the boots before they got the gig). Meanwhile the duo also 
careered down the catwalk to take their bow in matchingsparkly thigh-high 
platform boots 
<https://pmcfootwearnews.files.wordpress.com/2016/07/dsquared2-designers.jpg?w=1170>
 worn over jeans. It’s hardly a look for the office. The dip-your-toe-in 
approach is perhaps a chunky soled boot (there are loads around this autumn) 
worn with slightly short tailored trousers.

Obviously, whether the world at large is ready for men in platforms remains to 
be seen. It’s not as if we’ve much progressed from the perennial summer fuss 
over men wearing sandals in public. But with the ongoing mash-up of unisex 
clothes, men’s and women’s wear increasingly being shown on one catwalk and the 
ongoing media yapping about gender fluidity, perhaps it means we’re heading 
(quite literally) to new heights of wardrobe blur.

Simon Chilvers is men’s style director of matchesfashion.com 
<http://www.matchesfashion.com/>
 