
Late August became open season in the Guardian letters page for shooting 
cryptic puzzles for not being what they were in the good old days. The 
onslaught was triggered by a letter published on 23 August. Next day there were 
a couple more in the same vein. But it was on 26 August that the massed guns 
were launched. A large section of the letters page that day was given over to 
the battle. In case you missed it, you can recapture the action by clicking on:
https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2016/aug/26/cryptic-crosswords-im-sorry-i-havent-a-clue
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2016/aug/26/cryptic-crosswords-im-sorry-i-havent-a-clue>
.

Aware that younger solvers and all of our growing number of overseas readers 
do the crosswords online and do not pay to buy the paper, I checked that 
admirable site Fifteen Squared, where the British ‘broadsheet’ cryptic puzzles 
are independently monitored each day, to see what comments were being 
registered there. I found that Sil van den Hoek had posted a comment on 28 
August to the effect that he found the collection of letters published in the 
Guardian two days earlier to be odd. His comment has since attracted 93 further 
responses. Not surprisingly, perhaps, since the Fifteen Squared site is most 
used by regular online crossword enthusiasts, these 93 comments are almost as 
universally in favour of the Guardian Cryptic as the letters in the paper were 
critical. The van den Hoek collection can be seen at:
http://www.fifteensquared.net/2016/08/28/the-guardian-letters-27-08-2106-i-havent-a-clue/
 
<http://www.fifteensquared.net/2016/08/28/the-guardian-letters-27-08-2106-i-havent-a-clue/>
.

I tend to be wary of those who look at the past and find it rose-tinted. Of 
course, like anything else if it is to survive and prosper, the cryptic puzzle 
has to evolve over time. Araucaria has deservedly joined the pantheon of 
all-time great setters, though many crossword luminaries like Colin Dexter and 
Jeremy Morse were pretty snooty about his cluing when he was still active. His 
bank holiday jumbo specials were of the highest quality but people seem to have 
forgotten that they were every bit as intricate as those that Maskarade is 
currently producing. When I became crossword editor in 1997 Paul, who is now an 
established Guardian favourite, had many vociferous critics. The much-lamented 
Bunthorne could never have been described as a setter of easier puzzles than, 
say, Puck or Picaroon today. As to the tricks of the trade, they too have 
developed and changed. But it is certainly much easier now than it was then for 
tyro solvers to learn about them. If you are stuck today on a particular clue, 
a note of explanation is provided by the excellent commentators at
http://www.fifteensquared.net <http://www.fifteensquared.net/>.

I inherited a policy that, in principle, each week of Guardian Cryptics should 
contain two average, two easier and two more difficult puzzles. In the first 
six months of this year we published 156 cryptic puzzles. It is subjective to 
classify a particular setter as difficult or easy and some, notably Paul like 
Araucaria before him, slips the odd easier puzzle in with his other deliveries. 
But, suppose you allow that Arachne, Brendan, Chifonie, Nutmeg, Orlando, Rufus 
and Shed are towards the more non-devious end of the spectrum, in these six 
months 49 of their puzzles were published, just three short of a third of the 
total. Of those, 19 were by Rufus, by far the most regularly published setter 
apart from Paul.

In short, although things have indeed changed over the past 20 years, it is 
perhaps surprising, given the changes in the demographic of our crossword 
solvers and the changes in language and technology, that they have not been 
greater.

_____ 

Many of you will be familiar with Eric Westbrook’s extraordinary 3-D crossword 
puzzle calendars, produced in aid of BBC Children in Need and the Royal 
National Institute of Blind People. It is planned that there should again be a 
calendar for 2017, but this year the monthly puzzles are just available online. 
The puzzle for this September is promoted as being 3-D ‘but with an added 4-D 
element’. The Guardian’s Puck has been closely involved in producing this 
September puzzle. You can download it by going to
http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk/puzzle_downloads.php 
<http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk/puzzle_downloads.php> and selecting the 
Puzzle and Answer Grid buttons for September. Downloading is free, though you 
are offered the option of making a contribution to charity. The deadline is the 
last day of September and, for every correct entry received, £1 will be donated 
to Air Ambulance and the John Radcliffe Hospital in memory of Ray Parry-Morris, 
one of the grid designers for the 3-D puzzles, who died last month after a 
short illness.

_____

We have continued to have problems over the summer with uploading the Genius 
puzzle at the right time and with the correct format. It has not yet been 
possible to include it in the new system for handling the other puzzles. As a 
result it still has to be loaded ‘manually’ and it cannot be properly checked 
until it has gone live. However, theSeptember Genius  
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2016/jul/04/genius-crossword-159>by 
Jack seems to have been without problem, so my fingers are crossed for the 
future.

June’s Genius No 156 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2016/jul/04/genius-crossword-157>, 
Pasquale’s midsummer puzzle, attracted a large number of first-day entries (51) 
and 295 in total by the deadline. ‘jeremy@g’ was first in at 01:28, followed 50 
minutes later by ‘psc’ from Australia and ‘m1f’.

No 157  
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2016/jul/04/genius-crossword-157>by 
Picaroon for July got off to a bad start and so had only 14 entries on the 
first day. There were 230 in total by the deadline. ‘mark.n’ was first in at 
10:03, followed by ‘hookt’ at 10:07 and ‘don@demon’ at 10:40.

You seem to have found No 158 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2016/jul/04/genius-crossword-158> for 
July by Paul the hardest of these three, with 10 in on the first day and only 
181 in total. ‘m1f’ was first in at 04:36, followed by ‘fg@yahoo’ at 13:13.

If you have any technical problems with our crossword service, please email 
userhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>. If you have any 
comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>. For 
Observer crosswords please emailcrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 