
Those searching for a fun way to boost their exercise levels might need to 
look further than the next PokéStop.

While Pokémon Go initially raised hopes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/10/pokemon-go-health-players-exercise-obesity-walking>
 of an innovative, albeit inadvertent, approach to encouraging individuals to 
walk further, new research suggests such effects are short-lived.

“We found that playing Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> moderately increases 
[players’] physical activity but the effect was not sustained over [a] six week 
period,” said Katherine Howe, co-author of the research from Harvard University.

Writing in the British Medical Journal 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/355/bmj.i6270>, Howe and colleagues from the US and 
Sweden describe how they sought to unpick the impact of augmented reality games 
on physical health by recruiting both players and non-players of Pokémon Go 
through an online survey.

In total, 560 avid Pokémon Go players – defined as being those who had reached 
level five or higher – and 622 individuals who had not downloaded the game took 
part in the study during August 2016. All of the participants were between 18 
and 35 years old and had an iPhone 6.


The smartphone automatically and passively records steps, allowing the 
researchers to compare the activity of participants four weeks before players 
downloaded the game with their number of steps taken during the six weeks 
after. “It is very objective data – it wasn’t self-reported so we really had an 
accurate reading of how many steps the users and non-users of the game walked,” 
said Howe.

'The silly game helped me walk again': readers on Pokémon Go three months on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/06/the-silly-game-helped-me-walk-again-readers-on-pokemon-go-three-months-on>
The results revealed that before downloading the game both non-players and 
soon-to-be players took a similar number of steps a day, averaging 4126 and 
4526 steps respectively. However, after players had downloaded the app, the two 
groups diverged.

While non-players took a similar number of steps per day throughout the whole 
period of interest, players of Pokémon Go took, on average, 955 extra steps a 
day in their first week of chasing digital creatures. “It translates to around 
11 minutes additional walking per day, which is about half of the WorldHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation’s recommendations for 
walking [of 150 minutes per week],” adds Howe. But the effect was short-lived – 
within six weeks the number of extra daily steps among players had returned to 
pre-download levels.

While the study did not probe the reasons behind the drop-off, Howe suggests 
it could be down to a combination of two factors - some players quitting the 
game completely and remaining players taking fewer steps.

Despite the findings, Howe remains optimistic that development of games like 
Pokémon Go could a have positive impact in myriad ways.


“There is a huge potential for augmented reality games to be beneficial for 
our health – they give us a reason to go outside, walk and socialise,” she 
said. “So I think there is a huge potential to develop these games to not only 
increase physical activity but also boost mental wellbeing, mood and social 
interaction for people of all ages.”
 