
Poland will bring the curtain up on the Euro 2016 quarter-finals when they meet
Portugal in Marseille on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/croatia-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
, just as they opened the last 16 on Saturday. Having just about overcome 
Switzerland, Adam Nawalka and his players will hope this is an omen.

Neutrals will simply hope for some more of the end-to-end, shifting momentum 
that characterised th match. The negative approach of Portugal against Croatia, 
together with Poland’s impressive defensive record, might give reason for a 
certain trepidation.

France v Republic of Ireland: Euro 2016 – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/26/france-v-republic-of-ireland-euro-2016-live>
It was Lukasz Fabianski, rather than the first-choice Wojciech Szczesny, who 
ended up conceding Poland’s first goal of the tournament in Saint-Etienne, 
eight minutes from the end of game four, but there was no question of blame 
being attached. If there is a better goal in this tournament thanXherdan 
Shaqiri’s stupendous scissor-kick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2016/jun/26/euro-2016-picture-of-the-day-xherdan-shaqiris-stupendous-strike>
 that beat Fabianski to take the game into extra-time, we will be lucky – even 
if Shaqiri responded to an inquiry about the “best” goal of his career by 
saying “I always score nice goals”.

After an authoritative first-half display, Poland hung on grimly against a 
resurgentSwitzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland>. That 
it took a stroke of genius from Shaqiri to break through was largely down to 
Fabianski, who notably made a fingertip save from Ricardo Rodríguez’s excellent 
free-kick. Fabianski then made sure the contest went the distance with an even 
better reaction stop from the substitute Eren Derdiyok’s header in the second 
period of extra-time.

If Szczesny had not suffered a badly-bruised thigh in the opener against 
Northern Ireland, Fabianski would still be filling one of the least enviable 
roles in the squad, that of default cheerleader. Instead, he has become a 
central figure.

“It’s the life of a goalkeeper really,” he mused, reflecting on a peripatetic 
international career. “It’s always been like that, especially in the national 
team. You can never really please everyone [of the coaches]. There will always 
be one happy [goalkeeper] and the other … not disappointed, but a little bit 
frustrated, because we’re playing regularly in our clubs.”

After leaving behind a similar situation with Arsenal and becoming the main 
man at Swansea after his 2014 move, he has had to bide his time again, and is 
seizing the moment. “Wojciech started and I just had roll up my sleeves, work 
harder and try to prepare for anything,” he said. “The situation with the 
Wojciech injury happened and I had to be ready.” He certainly was. Fabianski 
even managed a penultimate pass of sorts for his team’s goal, with his 
prodigious throw setting away Kamil Grosicki, who played in Jakub 
Blaszczykowski to score.Szczesny was magnanimous about his perceived rival, 
whom he has known since he was 14. Fabianski was 19 at the time. “I knew he was 
going to be a top goalkeeper the day I met him,” said the Arsenal man. “He’s 
had a chance to prove himself and I’m delighted for him. I think today he made 
the difference for us.”

After Fabianski’s heroics during the 120 minutes, he was not required to 
perform any more during the shootout as Granit Xhaka sliced Switzerland’s 
second spot-kick wide. “I’m sorry for my team-mates, for the travelling fans, 
for Switzerland,”the Arsenal-bound Xhaka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/25/arsenal-granit-xhaka-confirm-signing>
 told Swiss television. “Anyone who knows me knows that I will make sure I come 
back even stronger … And I promise I will step up at the next penalty shootout.”

When Poland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/poland> reach the Stade 
Vélodrome, they will hope their expected difference-maker finally steps up. 
Robert Lewandowski did finally manage an effort on target, but was largely 
subdued, playing a deeper role in support of Arkadiusz Milik. With the 
first-half chances that Milik missed and with it the opportunity to decisively 
tilt the game in Poland’s favour, Nawalka might want to swap that positioning, 
though he praised the Bayern Munich striker for “taking the opponents’ 
attention away from other players”.

Fabianski also praised Lewandowski’s work, pointing out that it was he that 
forced the panic between the goalkeeper Yann Sommer and Johan Djourou that 
almost presented Milik with a goal in the opening 30 seconds. “That’s what he 
gives us, even though we’re not creating as much as we would like to for him.” 
Whoever gets the chances in Marseille, Poland will have to cut out the 
profligacy to avoid suffering the same slow demise that Croatia did against 
Portugal.
 