
The response to my request last month for your views as to whether clues 
leading to acronyms as solutions, like BBC or GCHQ, which are not pronounced as 
words, should be given letter counts of (3) and (4) was pretty conclusively in 
favour of a change of policy on the grounds that (1,1,1) and (1,1,1,1) make the 
whole game too easy. There were, though, some strong voices against any change. 
Joan B. took the view that, if we were going to move in this radical direction, 
setters should be asked to come up with indicators in such clues that the 
solution was not spoken as a single word. David M. took the view that a 
crossword should do what it says on the label, namely be made up of words, 
which would exclude the likes of BBC entirely. John R. took the view that, as 
people would be happy with BBC FOUR being shown as (3,4) they should also be 
happy with BBC as (3).
It is a difficult call, on a par with a decision I had to make soon after I 
started to edit the Guardian crosswords as to whether it should continue to be 
E-MAIL (1-4) or should be changed to EMAIL (5). But, as the buck stops here, I 
think that the time has come to move on and introduce the radical new policy of 
making the BBC into (3). I know only too well that one thing can lead to 
another and that such a move may have unforeseen consequences. I can only pray 
that I am not quickly forced by events into having to make a humiliating U-turn.
_____
When we are always reading reports of how much time people now spend sitting 
alone in front of a computer screen it is a delight to discover that online 
crosswords are also bringing people together, both virtually and in person. 
This applies particularly to the Guardian Quick crossword, where the comment 
facility online under each puzzle has led to the development of the Guardian 
QCC, or Quick Crossword Club. (Incidentally, though like all clubs the QCC has 
its hard core regulars, who may seem a bit intimidating to potential newcomers, 
I have been asked to point out that it is in no way an exclusive institution. 
There is no question of having to be invited to join and membership is free.)
In May a group of QCC regulars decided to meet in Edinburgh. Nine of them made 
it in person, but during their gathering linked via Skype to others all over 
the world and, clearly, a good time was had by all. An account of the event can 
be read in the comments underQuick crossword No 13,115 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/quick/13115> for 22 May, posted at 10:08 
and 10:09 that day. You can also see a video of the gathering at 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wlsOj1h3M8Y&feature=youtu.be .
_____
Alan Connor's blog 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/may/31/crosswords-for-beginners-which-papers-are-easiest>
 of 31 May on the crossword home page is an interview with Niall MacSweeney 
about his recent experiment in measuring the level of difficulty of the cryptic 
puzzles in various newspapers. His methodology was to take all the puzzles in 
the Guardian, Observer, Financial Times, Independent, Telegraph, Sunday 
Telegraph, Times and Sunday Times for the month of March and, doing a couple or 
so a day, to see how long it took him to solve them. The results are 
fascinating, though obvious caveats need to be entered. The same solver was 
involved each time, but we all have good days and bad days. Most setters have 
easier and harder puzzles and most will have had only one or two puzzles 
published in March. However, taking the averages for the month, the 
Independent, Guardian and Times came out as the hardest and at about the same 
level of difficulty, though these averages covered a wide range. (One Araucaria 
puzzle took Niall 75 minutes and another 41; one Rufus took him 7 minutes and 
another 20; one Times puzzle took him 103 minutes and another only 15.) The 
Financial Times was on average significantly easier than the first three and, 
of the dailies, the Telegraph was consistently the easiest, though its Toughie 
puzzle was up with the first three. Anyone interested in seeing a spreadsheet 
of the full results should send an email toniallmacsweeney@hotmail.com 
<mailto:niallmacsweeney@hotmail.com>.
 _____
The May Genius puzzle (No 107 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/java/new/0,,-28036,00.html> set by Puck) 
attracted another large entry, despite some controversy as to whether COLLEDIG 
is not a more usual translation in Welsh for 'lost' than GOLLWYD, which, of 
course, is a mutation from a declension of the verb COLLI ('to lose'). I do not 
feel myself fully qualified to adjudicate in this matter, but by the deadline, 
401 of you seemed to have been happy with GOLLWYD and 75 of you managed to 
complete the puzzle by the end of the first day. The first three in were 
bunched: Ian at 01:29, Tony at 01:33 and Dave at 01:41. Then there was a slight 
gap until Ian from SW3 at 02:22. The first overseas entry was from psc in 
Australia at 03:05.

Congratulations to Duncan Taylor from East Lothian, who is May's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>

â€¢ This article was amended on 5 June 2012 to correct the name of the winner of 
the Genius crossword and to add his location.
 