
Porsche marked their return to the pinnacle of sportscar racing with a podium 
spot behind a one-two lock-out for Toyota in the first race of the newFIA World 
Endurance Championship (WEC) <http://www.fiawec.com> season, the Six Hours of 
Silverstone. It began with the furious, white-heat intensity of a sprint race 
and ended in a deluge that appeared to dent the teams' and fans' enthusiasm for 
the series, which boasts three major manufacturers at the sharp end, not one 
jot.

Britain's Anthony Davidson, alongside team-mates Sébastien Buemi and Nicolas 
Lapierre, took the win in the No8 Toyota TS040, after gaining an advantage 
during light rain early in the race, staying on inters, while the sister No7 
car switched to full wets which proved to be the wrong choice as the rain 
dissipated. The No8 held the lead until the race was red-flagged due to very 
heavy rain that swamped the circuit just under 30 minutes from the finish. Alex 
Wurz, Kazuki Nakajima and Stéphane Sarrazin in the No7 Toyota took second and 
Mark Webber,in his first race since leaving Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/23/mark-webber-red-bull-formula-one>
, Timo Bernhard and Brendon Hartley brought the Porsche 919 Hybrid home in 
third place on the car's first competitive outing.

Success for Porsche and Toyota then, but also for the series itself, which has 
undergone radical regulation changes this season, to which the teams have 
adapted with considerably less fuss than their counterparts in F1. About 43,000 
fans attended the weekend atSilverstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone>, suggesting that the format and 
presence of three major manufacturers in the top LMP1 category is proving 
popular. At the heart of the new regulations is the principle of a reduction in 
the use of fossil fuel, by placing a limit on the amount of energy that can be 
used by the cars over a lap. The teams are then free to choose the method that 
will best generate the power, allowing innovation and experimentation, long 
gone from other formulae.

Toyota's new TS040 Hybrid runs a petrol engine, with a four-wheel drive 
super-capacitor-based energy recovery system (ERS), Porsche a V4 petrol turbo, 
with a battery ERS based on the front axle and heat from the turbo, and Audi, a 
diesel engine with a front-axle flywheel ERS. The net result on display at 
Silverstone was the same high performance expected from prototypes but with up 
to a 30% reduction in fuel consumption.

Untested and brand-new technology has given Toyota the edge in the first 
meeting of this eight-race season. "It is brilliant to win my home race, the 
team did a fantastic job all weekend," said Davidson. "It looked like it would 
be an epic fight with Audi and Porsche if it had stayed dry, but we knew the 
rain was coming and we had set our car up for wet conditions. We made the right 
call on tyres, the strategy was just perfect; that's how you win races."

And winning will be firmly on the radar for the team this year, having closed 
last season with victory in Bahrain anda second place at the series' 
blue-riband event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jun/23/le-mans-audi-death-allen-simonsen>
, the 24 Hours of Le Mans. This is the Toyota's third year in the championship, 
when traditionally equipment and skills are expected to be honed sufficiently 
to make a tilt at both the title and the 24. At Silverstone they not only had 
the reliability to do so but, after frenetic battling with Audi during the 
first hour, proved their drivers are more than happy to make a fight of it.

Porsche, too, back in the top prototype class for the first time since their 
win with the 911 GT1 at Le Mans in 1998, will be pleased with their return. 
Their second 919, driven by Neel Jani, Romain Dumas and Marc Lieb, had to 
retire after 30 laps due to a hydraulic problem but for Webber's No20 to make 
it to the finish, and in a podium spot although two laps off the winner, was a 
more than satisfactory opening for both driver and team. One consolidated by a 
hugely strong showing by the new 911 RSR taking a one-two in the GTE-Pro class 
on its WEC debut.

Webber will no doubt have watched with a wry smile as his old team-mate 
Sébastian Vettel had difficulty with team orders again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/20/lewis-hamilton-mercedes-gp> at 
the grand prix in China on Sunday morning after the pair'sincident in Malaysia 
in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/mar/24/sebastian-vettel-mark-webber> 
but after playing down expectations at Silverstone, saying before the race, "to 
get through six hours will be an interesting challenge for us, we might be 
sitting back watching a bit and learning. It's a fact we have work to do in 
this type of racing", this result will offer genuine pleasure for the 
Australian driver.

In contrast. Audi, the dominant force in endurance racing for the past decade  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/09/world-endurance-championship>and 
twice WEC world champions, had a very rare, terrible day at the office, with 
both their R18 e-tron quattros having to retire after driver errors. They had 
shown good early pace and taken the lead from Toyota but Lucas di Grassi put 
his car in the wall at Woodcote during the first wet period and then Benoît 
Tréluyer lost his back end at Copse and flicked into the inside barrier after 
94 laps. It is the first double retirement for the team sincePetit Le Mans in 
2011 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/oct/02/peugeot-petit-le-mans> and 
the first time they have failed to make the podium in the WEC. With both tubs 
damaged they face a huge amount of work tomake the season's second round at Spa 
on 3 May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/may/05/audi-lotterer-treluyer-fassler-spa?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=t.co>
, the final race before Le Mans in June. The team will make it, of course, 
their dominance has not been accidental after all, but on the evidence of this 
opening race, and the competition from Toyota and Porsche, they are in for a 
fierce, season-long fight.
 