
Fans of one of England’s most long-suffering football clubs are cursing their 
luck again after finding that one of their city’s most prominent landmarks is 
to be painted in the colours of their biggest rivals.


As part of a lucrative sponsorship deal with Emirates airline, Portsmouth’s 
Spinnaker Tower is to be painted red and white – the colours of arch-rivals
Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/southampton> – leaving fans of 
Portsmouth FC furious.


The £3.5m deal will see Emirates branding displayed on the side of the 170 
metre (560ft) viewing tower and was welcomed by the Conservative council 
leader, Donna Jones, as a boost for the city at a time of cuts and austerity.


But there was uproar among Pompey supporters, who have seen their club suffer 
three relegations and financial meltdown in recent years.


An online petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/donna-jones-luke-stubbs-portsmouth-city-council-say-no-to-a-red-and-white-spinnaker-tower?recruiter=46118226&utm_source=share_petition&utm_medium=twitter&utm_campaign=share_twitter_responsive>
 has been launched urging the council to block the colour scheme as it “flies 
in the face of the loyal values of the city” and “shows an incredible lack of 
empathy for the residents”.


Several took to Twitter to voice their opposition to the move, with one 
branding the council “a disgrace”.


Steven Phillips said: “If this red & white scheme for @SpinnakerTower is for 
real (please tell me it’s a joke) thenPortsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> City Council is a disgrace. 
#Pompey.”


Another observer, Laurie Symons, tweeted: “As if they’re painting Spinnaker 
Tower red and white haha! Surely a wind-up?”


Nigel Tresidder, chairman of the central branch of Portsmouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/portsmouth> Supporters’ Club, suggested it 
should be painted red, white and blue as a compromise.


He said: “I don’t think it is the right thing to do. Our supporters won’t like 
it, I’m very sure about that.

“I never thought this would have happened to be quite honest but that’s the 
council I’m afraid. Anything where they can make money ... I know they have to 
make it but at the end of the day it should be red, white and blue.”

Meanwhile, Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> fans 
could barely contain their delight.

One supporter, Ant James, tweeted: “This is too bloody good. Portsmouth, 
forever sitting in the shadow of red and white.”

The council leader said the sponsorship money would reduce the need for cuts 
to vital services such as libraries, community centres and leisure centres.

Jones said: “With the financial situation the council faces, we have to think 
creatively about how we can achieve the maximum income potential from our 
assets, and this is just one of several deals we are working on.”

Sir Tim Clark, president of Emirates airline, said: “Part of the reason that 
this sponsorship opportunity was so appealing to us is that it will enable the 
local city council to reinvest this partnership money into the local community, 
something that we are proud to be able to support.”

The prominent new branding is expected to be in place in time for the arrival 
of the America’s Cup World Series of sailing races in Portsmouth in July.
 