
Tensions are running high between the League One neighbours Port Vale and 
Crewe Alexandra <https://www.theguardian.com/football/crewealexandra>, with the 
Vale chairman claiming his wife “fears for her life” when visiting their 
rivals’ ground.

Norman Smurthwaite, the Port Vale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portvale> chairman, provoked an angry 
response from Crewe followers after belittling their away support levels on 
Twitter before last Saturday’s match between the sides, which Crewe won 1-0 in 
front of a travelling contingent of 1,384.

One Crewe fan, John Ford, wrote to the Crewe Chronicle 
<http://www.crewechronicle.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/port-vale-chairman-claims-wife-8545661>
 after the derby, complaining that coaches he had organised to games at Vale 
Park had been attacked by home fans on three of the previous five visits.

Ford wrote: “Many Crewe supporters don’t like the hatred before and after the 
derby. We have had coaches stoned on three of our last five visits there and 
now have problems getting companies to transport us to Vale Park.

“Plus, the £25 we are asked to pay to park each coach is the most expensive in 
League One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>.

“The highlight of the day was achieving the double over our neighbours, even 
though on Saturday the lads had to play on a ploughed field. Maybe you would be 
better off growing potatoes on it?

“So, Mr Smurthwaite, perhaps next time you go on social media you should 
engage your brain first. Otherwise you’ll never have three letters after your 
name like our chairman, John Bowler MBE.”

The Vale chairman refused to let the matter lie, though, retorting in a series 
of tweets that while he respected the Crewe chairman, he found visits to 
Crewe’s Gresty Road intimidating and said his wife “fears for her life… due to 
vulgar and threatening behaviour”.

Smurthwaite also claimed that his comments about Crewe’s following helped 
increase their contingent at Vale Park, which in turn boosted revenue for his 
club. “Passion and effort wins,” he added. However, on this occasion, his team 
did not.
 