
The Port Vale owner, Norman Smurthwaite, was so angered by the FA Cup defeat at
Exeter City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/exetercityfc> he has put the 
club up for sale.

According to the Stoke Sentinel 
<http://www.stokesentinel.co.uk/Port-Vale-Norman-Smurthwaite-puts-club-sale/story-28314344-detail/story.html>
, the owner and chairman claimed he had put £800,000 more into the club than he 
originally budgeted for this season and is no longer prepared to put in any 
more.

Smurthwaite, who has been in charge for three years, told BBC Radio Stoke: “I 
think the fairest thing to the club is that, if there is somebody who has the 
ambition, and maybe has the energy and a team of people instead of me doing it 
on my own, is to come in and take the club over. So, officially from today, the 
club is up for sale.”

He added: “I just feel I have let the club down because I have tried to do 
everything myself which meant cut costs to put every available penny on to the 
pitch. Clearly that must be wrong because if the players had put the same 
amount of effort into playing as I do into paying them every month we would 
have knocked that club for six.”

After the 2-0 defeat by Exeter on Sunday, Smurthwaite went on to supporters’ 
coaches to apologise before collaring the manager, Rob Page, on the touchline 
to discuss the performance. Exeter’s reward was athird-round home tie against 
Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/07/fa-cup-third-round-draw-liverpool-exeter>
.

With Port Vale 11th in League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball>, 12 points behind the 
leaders Burton, Smurthwaite said he was not about to sack Page but added: “I 
read that Rob says we are punching above our weight. Well Burton’s budget is 
about 30% less than ours. If I thought for one moment we would be punching 
above our weight I would have kept the £800,000 and spent it on something else.”
 