
The pound has fallen to a fresh 10-week low against the dollar as Brexit fears 
and the prospect of a Donald Trump bounce for the US economy gripped the 
markets.

For the first time since 25 October, sterling fell to almost $1.20 before it 
mounted a recovery after figures showed the UK’s industrial sector returned to 
health in November.

Strong figures from Britain’s supermarkets and a boost for mining company 
profits pushed the FTSE 100 to a 12th consecutive day of rises, making it the 
index’s longest winning streak on record.


Currency traders said the US president-elect was still the biggest influence 
on the dollar following several hints that he would support a spending splurge 
when he takes office to boost manufacturing and infrastructure investment. The 
dollar has surged since his election in November backed by strong US employment 
and manufacturing figures.

The UK industrial sector, which had a difficult autumn, returned to health in 
November after manufacturing output rose more than expected and the North Sea’s 
biggest oilfield resumed production following a temporary closure.


But the weak pound drove up the cost of imports and left Britain with a record 
trade deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/uk-trade-deficit-widens-september-exports-fall-pound-drop>
 with the EU, months before the government triggers article 50 to begin the 
process of leaving the bloc.

The rise in manufacturing production and more buoyant energy sector failed to 
mark a recovery frompoor figures for October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/07/uk-industrial-production-falls-0ctober-economy>
 and September, and push the broader measure of industrial output into positive 
territory over a three-month period.

UK firms brace for further Brexit price rises, surveys show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/uk-firms-brace-for-further-brexit-price-rises-surveys-show>
The Office for National Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/office-for-national-statistics> (ONS) monthly 
estimate of manufacturing increased by 1.3% in November, with industrial 
production pushing ahead by 2.1%. The largest contribution came from 
pharmaceutical companies, which increased output by 11.4%.

Overall, UK economic growth in the fourth quarter edged slightly lower to 
0.5%, from0.6% in the third 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/23/uk-gdp-growth-brexit-industrial-services-construction-wages>
, according to new figures from the National Institute of Economic and Social 
Research (Niesr).

The first official estimate of growth in the fourth quarter and 2016 will be 
published on 26 January bythe ONS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/office-for-national-statistics>.

The growth in industrial production was also driven by an 8.2% month-on-month 
increase in mining and quarrying output.

The construction sector, which has been badly affected by Brexit uncertainty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/housebuilding-stalls-britain-eu-construction>
, slipped back by 0.2% following falls in repair work and commercial building.

Samuel Tombs, the chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said the 
effect of the rise in industrial production would not be enough to push up GDP 
in the fourth quarter of 2016.

“Industrial production will be lower in the fourth quarter as a whole than in 
the third, despite November’s surge,” he said.

“We think production likely fell in December, despite the improvement in 
manufacturing surveys at the tail end of 2016, because unusually warm 
temperatures in December likely depressed output in the energy supply sector.

“As a result, industrial production likely fell for the second consecutive 
quarter in the fourth quarter – technically marking a recession for the sector 
– leaving the services sector as the sole locomotive of growth at the end of 
last year.”

Separate trade figures showed the overall goods and services deficit – the gap 
between exports and imports – was £2.6bn larger than in October.

They reflected a £3.3bn rise in imports, while Britain recorded an additional 
£700m of exports.
Graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-11T16:25:29/embed.html>
The ONS said: “The widening of the deficit in November 2016 is attributed to 
trade in goods in which there were increased imports from both EU and non-EU 
countries, partially offset by an increase in exports to EU countries.”

The monthly deficit with the EU reached a record £8.6bn, up from £7.8bn in 
October, as imports of transport equipment, chemicals and portable computers 
outweighed rising exports.

Niesr estimates the UK economy grew at the weakest rate in three years in 
2016. Annual growth slowed to 2% last year from 2.2% in 2015, the weakest rate 
since 2013, when the economy grew by 1.9%.

Growth of 2% would still make Britain the fastest growing of the G7 countries 
in 2016 according toforecasts by the International Monetary Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/britain-fastest-growing-g7-economy-imf-international-monetary-fund-brexit-vote>
.
 