
Freddie Ladapo struck his first goal for Crystal Palace as they secured a 3-2 
friendly win at thenewly promoted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/30/plymouth-argyle-wimbledon-league-two-play-off-match-report>
 League One sideAFC Wimbledon.

The least impressive winners of a major football tournament (statistically) | 
The Knowledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/27/the-least-impressive-winners-of-a-major-football-tournament-statistically>
Palace, who stretched their unbeaten pre-season run to five matches, went 
ahead through Connor Wickham and although Lyle Taylor equalised before the 
break, Yannick Bolasie and Ladapo struck in the second half before the Dons 
scored again through Pape Souaré’s own goal.

Swansea City followed up their 5-1 weekend win against Bristol Rovers by 
winning 3-0 at League One sideSwindon Town. Second-half goals from André Ayew 
and Jay Fulton put Francesco Guidolin’s side in control and Modou Barrow added 
a third in the 71st minute.

Southampton registered their third pre-season friendly win, thanks to goals in 
each half from Virgil van Dijk and Sam Gallagher as they beatTwente 2-1 in the 
Netherlands. Van Dijk’s 17th-minute goal put Saints ahead and the substitute 
Gallagher put Claude Puel’s side 2-0 up with 20 minutes left before Peet Bijen 
pulled one back for the Eredivisie side.

Fabio Borini’s 75th-minute penalty ensured a fourth straight friendly win for 
Sunderland as they beat the newly promoted Ligue 1 side Dijon 3-2. David Moyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-moyes>, taking charge of his second 
game for Sunderland following Monday’s 2-0 win against Stade Nyonnais, saw Joel 
Asoro give his side a half-time lead and after Dylan Bahamboula equalised for 
Dijon, Wahbi Khazri put Sunderland back in front.

Dijon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dijon> levelled again through 
Jérémie Bela in the 69th minute but Borini kept his cool to score the winner 
after Duncan Watmore’s cross had been handled.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fpre-season-friendly-roundup-crystal-palace-sunderland-southampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe645b85f2e82f618d67ff4568a5067cf331a9260%2F39_120_3641_2184%2F3641.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pre-season%20friendly%20roundup%3A%20Crystal%20Palace%20and%20Sunderland%20seal%20wins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fpre-season-friendly-roundup-crystal-palace-sunderland-southampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pre-season%20friendly%20roundup%3A%20Crystal%20Palace%20and%20Sunderland%20seal%20wins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fpre-season-friendly-roundup-crystal-palace-sunderland-southampton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe645b85f2e82f618d67ff4568a5067cf331a9260%2F39_120_3641_2184%2F3641.jpg>
 The Sunderland manager, David Moyes, before the friendly against Dijon. 
Photograph: Peter Cziborra/Reuters  