
Scouts from several English clubs including West Ham, Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and Liverpool attended 
Marseille’s’s 1-1 draw with Lyon on Sunday night to watch Georges-Kévin 
N’Koudou.

Premier League locked in to virtuous circle and likely to stay on its perch | 
Sean Ingle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/24/premier-league-sky-tv-broadcasting-rights>
The 20-year-old, who moved to the Stade Vélodrome last summer from Nantes for 
£1m, has attracted attention for his performances this season despite his club 
struggling in mid-table in Ligue 1. N’Koudou has scored eight times and laid on 
four assists in all competitions, meaning he has contributed to more goals than 
any other player under the age of 21 in Europe’s top five leagues – ahead ofthe 
Manchester City and Barcelona target Leroy Sané 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/31/manchester-city-schalke-leroy-sane>
 of Schalke and Tottenham’s Dele Alli.

Born in Versailles, the France Under-21 international began his career at 
Paris Saint-Germain before joining Nantes in 2013.Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> are understood to be reluctant 
to let him leave in January but are bracing themselves for offers in the 
summer, with a fee of around €20m expected to be enough to persuade them to 
sell.

West Ham and Tottenham also retain an interest in the striker Michy Batshuayi, 
who signed a lucrative new contract earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/06/michy-batshuayi-marseille-contract>
. The Belgium striker laid on the assist for Marseille to take the lead against 
Lyon through the Newcastle loanee Rémy Cabella, meaning Batshuayi has now 
scored 12 times and set up four goals in Ligue 1 – half of Marseille’s total of 
32.

However, Marseille’s president, Vincent Labrune, has said they want to keep 
the 22-year-old in January and has indicated he will not consider selling for 
less than €50m. West Ham could now turn their attention to the Galatasaray 
striker Burak Yilmaz and have also been linked with a move for the Nigeria 
international Emmanuel Emenike, who plays for Al Ain in Qatar.

Slaven Bilic’s side, Tottenham, Crystal Palace and Aston Villa also made 
inquiries for the Toulouse striker Wissam Ben Yedder but the 25-year-oldhas 
pledged to stay until the summer 
<https://twitter.com/WissBenYedder/status/690620053193125888> to help his 
current club in their battle against relegation.
 