
Manchester United

Frustrating. We’ve squandered leads and points, but the team is vastly 
improved since Mourinho took over. We’re slowly returning to the attractive 
football the fans yearn. At times the team can appear one-paced, and really 
needs the infectious, direct positivity of Mkhitaryan. Rooney and Mata 
shouldn’t be starting as wide attackers, at least not together, but Pogba and 
Zlatan have developed a good understanding and combined well at Palace. They 
are our star players and it’s that sort of thing we should be seeing every game.
6/10

Stars and flops Bailly has been outstanding, steadying a vulnerable defence, 
and Mkhitaryan has found his form after a tough start. On the other hand, 
Fellaini has once again shown the pace of the game is too quick for his ambling 
and clumsy style. Mourinho is the third manager to persevere with him but I 
expect he’ll go in January.

Happy with the manager? We’re still in transition: it’ll take another couple 
of transfer windows before he gets his team right. He has cut a forlorn figure 
on the sidelines at times, but most fans can see the football is better and the 
team is stronger now than any of the sides since Fergie retired. But our 
regular inability to defend a lead has to be solved. Personally, I think José 
will get it right. He has given players like Herrera more freedom and the team 
looks like it’s going to click.7/10

2016 has been a grim year. But which football moment made you smile? Who could 
you forgetAlan Pardew dancing at Wembley <https://vine.co/v/iEgv79QgmrY>? His 
euphoria lasted all of two minutes, but the memory will live on for ever.

– Shaun O’Donnell Observer reader

Middlesbrough
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ac3314a9c08897f8ec81b84d01816ddb7ed9fe5%2F1463_78_2170_1302%2F2170.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ac3314a9c08897f8ec81b84d01816ddb7ed9fe5%2F1463_78_2170_1302%2F2170.jpg>
 Adam Forshaw: stepped out of the shadows. Photograph: Huw 
Evans/Rex/Shutterstock 
It’s been a tough and testing return to the top flight. Last week’s 3-0 
stuffing by Liverpool was sobering; up until then I was fairly satisfied that 
we were competing with everyone. Arsenal, Man City and Chelsea all found us 
difficult to break down. Our big problem has been scoring, and that has to be 
fixed.6/10

Stars and flops Adam Forshaw has been superb, stepping out of the shadows to 
become our creative hub and livewire in midfield. He was even mentioned as an 
England prospect, and centre-half Ben Gibson can’t be far off a call-up, too. 
Ben, our homegrown local hero, continues to progress and now has the confidence 
to boss our defence and lead the team in the battle for survival.

Happy with the manager? When you’re struggling at the wrong end your manager 
is bound to receive some stick. There are many that knock him for his 
negativity and his struggle to be proactive or react to change in games. Yet 
we’ve achieved so much under Karanka and everyone is learning together in our 
first term in the top flight. You get nowhere by being trigger-happy with the 
manager. In Aitor we trust: he brought us back to the Premier promised land, 
and can keep us here.7/10

Which 2016 football moment made you smile? It has been grim: on top of 
everything else we had the death of our beloved commentator and voice of the 
Boro, Alastair Brownlee, in February. But promotion after seven years of 
despair was a gift to light up this dark year.

– Robert Nichols fmttm.com <http://fansonline.net/middlesbrough/index.php>, 
@rob_fmttm <https://twitter.com/rob_fmttm>

Southampton
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb94ec7fd70945815df0ab984650a77cd7def06e4%2F366_53_756_454%2F756.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb94ec7fd70945815df0ab984650a77cd7def06e4%2F366_53_756_454%2F756.jpg>
 Virgil van Dijk: on his way? Photograph: Eddie Keogh/Reuters 
It’s been hit and miss. We’ve had some excellent performances, some bloody 
awful ones, and a whole lot in between. The mood has veered towards the 
negative because of the European exit and lack of goals, but still, a solid 
spot in the top half isn’t necessarily something to be sniffed at.6/10

Stars and flops Virgil van Dijk is showing why he’ll be the next one to be 
sold to a top club for silly money. Why nobody else seemed interested in him 
when we signed him 18 months ago is baffling. Sofiane Boufal is starting to 
offer glimpses of why we broke our transfer record to sign him, and Oriol Romeu 
is showing he should have been given more opportunities under Ronald Koeman. 
But after such a good second half of last season, Shane Long’s form has 
disappeared into thin air and that’s meant a reliance on former footballer Jay 
Rodriguez, who, bless him, can’t even score from a yard out these days.

Happy with the manager? Mostly yes. He’s got the club back into the ethos of 
promoting our own youth graduates into the first team, with Sam McQueen and 
Josh Sims being the main highlights so far, but the failure to get the best out 
of our attacking players (although we’ve created more than enough chances, in 
his defence) is a mark against.6/10

Which 2016 football moment made you smile? The abuse Ronald Koeman got from 
Everton fans for daring to have red decorations on his Christmas tree. That was 
very amusing on many levels.

– Steve Grant saintsweb.co.uk <http://saintsweb.co.uk/content.php>, 
@SteveGrant1983 <https://twitter.com/SteveGrant1983>

Stoke
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F408dea7111ca0ba83b11f8bf3a0df5fd0b10e1c9%2F0_37_1524_914%2F1524.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F408dea7111ca0ba83b11f8bf3a0df5fd0b10e1c9%2F0_37_1524_914%2F1524.jpg>
 Lee Grant: Stoke’s star so far. Photograph: Tony O'Brien/Reuters 
The start was a mess – carrying on the form from the end of last season. We 
didn’t win until October and conceded four goals in three of four straight 
defeats. But since we beatSunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> on 15 October things have 
pretty much stabilised and we’re back in our traditional mid-table spot. The 
players and Mark Hughes deserve credit for pulling it back, but the lack of 
season-on-season progress has to remain a concern.6/10

Stars and flops It says a lot that Lee Grant, our 33-year-old on-loan Derby 
keeper, is the star so far. Joe Allen has been really solid, though, and I hope 
we keep Bruno Martins Indi. But too many others have been below par – and 
Gianelli Imbula really hasn’t made £18.3m’s worth of impact since he arrived. 
Maybe the biggest let down, though, is Bony. He just doesn’t look interested.

Happy with the manager? He’s settled down after that touchline meltdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/mark-hughes-stoke-city-charged-misconduct>
 early in the season, when he was everyone’s favourite to be the next manager 
sacked. He’s got a big month ahead because this campaign could still go either 
way. We particularly need a consistent striker – the Berahino links never stop 
– and an answer to our No1 dilemma, with Derby pricing Grant out of a move and 
Jack Butland still injured.6/10 

Which 2016 football moment made you smile? Steve McClaren’s Sky commentary of 
England v Iceland,reassuring viewers England had nothing to worry about 
<https://twitter.com/Oddschanger/status/786161723334021120> just as Sigthorsson 
hit the winner. Summed the summer up neatly.

– Steven Miller, Observer reader

Sunderland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2db64f718f33417ee101e98f59bafb2d91b8dbaf%2F0_18_2239_1343%2F2239.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2db64f718f33417ee101e98f59bafb2d91b8dbaf%2F0_18_2239_1343%2F2239.jpg>
 Jordan Pickford: future England keeper. Photograph: Oli Scarff/AFP/Getty Images
We’re deeply entrenched in the annual relegation battle, there’s no money to 
spend and the club is up for sale. Our fans are a stoical bunch but that’s 
really being stretched this season. David Moyes inherited a difficult situation 
after Allardyce took a short vacation with England, and some applaud him for 
his realistic approach while others criticise him for his perceived negativity. 
All in all, though, not a great half-season.4/10

Stars and flops Jordan Pickford has been outstanding – a future England 
keeper. Victor Anichebe has done well in his few games and Jermain Defoe 
continues to show how a pro should look after himself. But we’re still waiting 
to see if Didier Ndong can live up to his record-signing status , and if Adnan 
Januzaj can progress. Two young men who could do better. Papy Djilobodji is 
improving, thank goodness, but Jack Rodwell has disappeared.

Happy with the manager? He’s been honest and made clear that there’s a lot of 
structural work to do, rather than just papering over cracks. That hasn’t gone 
down well with many fans and he’s had some severe criticism. But he’s here for 
the long run and if that means taking a relegation, so be it. I’d give him6/10; 
others would take five off that.

Which 2016 football moment made you smile? I would say the relegation of our 
Tyneside friends, but that may come back and bite us – so let’s go with 
Iceland’s joy after beating England. On the whole, though, being a football fan 
in general, and a Sunderland supporter in particular, is a grim business. 
Smiling rarely comes into it.

– Pete Sixsmith SalutSunderland.com <http://salutsunderland.com/>

Swansea
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73e046f61fcfdc01e8c6021d601e5ac74d55e522%2F142_80_2306_1384%2F2306.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73e046f61fcfdc01e8c6021d601e5ac74d55e522%2F142_80_2306_1384%2F2306.jpg>
 Bob Bradley: baffling changes. Photograph: Jason Cairnduff/Reuters 
It’s been a disaster so far and there’s no sign that things will improve. So 
much has gone wrong on and off the pitch, starting with the former owners 
concentrating on selling their shares instead of focusing on the obvious need 
to strengthen the squad. Already many fans are preparing themselves for 
Championship football and you can’t blame them. Once we were a club known for 
having a strong and close link with the fans, now we feel more detached than 
ever before.2/10

Stars and flops Take your pick when it comes to the flops, but the record 
signing of Borja Bastón from Atlético Madrid has been a particularly odd and 
frustrating situation. He’s barely been involved while fellow Spanish striker 
Fernando Llorente has scored five in 10 starts without really performing. Gylfi 
Sigurdsson remains the one player who is definitely Premier League quality. We 
simply have to keep him in January.

Happy with the manager? Bob Bradley arrived in difficult circumstances, but 
he’s made us worse. We’re leaking goals, far more than under Guidolin, and he’s 
looked void of ideas, particularly during games – failing to make changes fast 
enough. It seems he’s finally settled on a favoured team but he was making far 
too many formation and personnel changes which were baffling to say the least.
2/10

Which 2016 football moment made you smile? Wales’s Euro 2016 campaign: 
incredible. They actually helped us enjoy football again. The semi was a 
disappointment, but what an achievement overall.

– Kevin Elphick Swansea.vitalfootball.co.uk 
<http://www.swansea.vitalfootball.co.uk/>

Tottenham
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36f882aca1ff8c72abb6b4146c5fec9209f844fe%2F0_114_3296_1977%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36f882aca1ff8c72abb6b4146c5fec9209f844fe%2F0_114_3296_1977%2F3296.jpg>
 Danny Rose: provided excitement. Photograph: TGSPhoto/Rex/Shutterstock 
I thought we’d gone up a level when we beat Manchester City in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/tottenham-hotspur-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
. We were lacking three of our “first XI” (Dembélé, Dier and Kane) and their 
replacements (Wanyama, Sissoko and Son) were an improvement, it seemed, on the 
Chadli/Mason/Carroll backup of last season. Then we went 10 games with only one 
win and crashed out of the Champions League. In the league, just as this time 
last year, we’ve been hard to beat but have won only half of our games. 
Puzzlingly, last year’s strong midfield pairing of Dembélé and Dier has not 
been used at all.6/10

Stars and flops Rose and Walker have provided excitement; Son shone at the 
start but has struggled since being rested/dropped for West Brom away. Eriksen 
is often anaemic, Sissoko has been publicly chastised by his manager, and we’re 
still waiting for a goal from open play from Janssen.

Happy with the manager? Pochettino, he’s magic, you know? When he gets the 
selection and tactics right, he receives deserved praise, especially from me. 
But is he interested in, or capable of, winning a trophy? He talks of his 
“project”, which seems to be a yearly top-four finish. But what happens when we 
do qualify? We don’t make it through a not overly difficult group. He’s a 
failed magician if he thought the team he selected for the must-win Monaco away 
tie could do the job. And this obsession with “football from the back” often 
results in unnecessarily self‑inflicted pressure on the defence.6/10 

Which 2016 football moment made you smile? The joyous reaction on and off the 
pitch when our Harry Winks scored his first league goal.

– Dave Mason Observer reader

Watford
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc02e119e80211e54835803061ec1b73634078aee%2F186_352_2983_1791%2F2983.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc02e119e80211e54835803061ec1b73634078aee%2F186_352_2983_1791%2F2983.jpg>
 Sebastian Prödl: leader of the defence. Photograph: Dan Mullan/Getty Images 
Our traditional summer overhaul inevitably results in a degree of 
working-out-how-it-all-fits, but despite that we’ve held our own. There have 
been some iffy performances among the eye-catching victories – such is the lot 
of a mid-table side – and our relatively elevated position shouldn’t disguise 
that the pack behind us is horribly congested. As it stands, however, we’re as 
close to the Champions’ League as we are to relegation, and our expectations 
aren’t yet so lofty that this isn’t a good thing in itself.8/10

Stars and flops Two of last season’s signings have settled into more 
significant roles this time around. Sebastian Prödl was a solid option last 
term but has become the leader of the defence. Nordin Amrabat, meanwhile, was 
signed as a striker, tried as a wing-back and now causes havoc as an abrasive, 
direct winger. As for flops… Odion Ighalo has had as difficult a year as 2015 
was astonishing, while Abdoulaye Doucouré, a midfielder of whom much was 
expected, is “not fancied” by Mazzarri.

Happy with the manager? Yes. Last year we were solid, with enough up top to 
win us games. Now we are flexible and can be (whisper it) expansive. It’s 
difficult to get to know him while he’s cautious about his use of English, and 
I could do without his chastising of referees, but so far, so good.7/10 

Which 2016 football moment made you smile? 2-0 down to a showboating West Ham 
at the London Stadiumbecoming 4-2 up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/west-ham-united-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 with my daughters screaming with glee.

– Matt Rowson bhappy.wordpress.com <https://bhappy.wordpress.com/>, @mattrowson
 <https://twitter.com/mattrowson>

West Brom
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ce71b75375fc39120badaaf11a93d41eaeab7b7%2F222_116_1617_970%2F1617.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ce71b75375fc39120badaaf11a93d41eaeab7b7%2F222_116_1617_970%2F1617.jpg>
 Tony Pulis: not a warm relationship Photograph: Reuters 
I’m delighted, which is something I really didn’t expect to be saying two 
months ago. We had our usual difficult summer and a sluggish start, but the 
form of the last two months has been very good. We’ve finally found an 
attacking balance. Being in the top half at this stage is way above what most 
of us were expecting.8/10

Stars and flops Chadli was an excellent signing – he was the one bright spot 
in our slow start. However, it was the return of stalwarts Brunt and Morrison 
that kick-started the season. Rondón has grown as a player too, playing the 
lone role. Seven league goals don’t tell the full story of his season. He’s a 
beast to play against and we may struggle to keep him at this rate. It’s harsh 
to call out any flops – Fletcher was having a bad time but like the rest of the 
team, he has bounced back well.

Happy with the manager? It’s never been a warm relationship with Pulis, but 
few could deny that he’s doing a good job. Fans wanted a more positive approach 
and we’ve had that. Some have even started singing his name …8/10

Which 2016 football moment made you smile? Stourbridge’s FA Cup win against 
Northampton. Fantastic for the town.

– Richard Jefferson wbaunofficial.org.uk/forum 
<http://wbaunofficial.org.uk/forum/>, @richbaggie 
<https://twitter.com/richbaggie>

West Ham
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06e5835b9a5fa94b92b213ce9d8253fa992d2f6e%2F462_197_2356_1414%2F2356.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%20fans%E2%80%99%20half-time%20verdict%20part%202%3A%20Manchester%20United%20to%20West%20Ham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fpremier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-2-manchester-united-west-ham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06e5835b9a5fa94b92b213ce9d8253fa992d2f6e%2F462_197_2356_1414%2F2356.jpg>
 Michail Antonio: big contribution. Photograph: Robbie Jay Barratt/Getty Images 
A perfect cocktail of bad signings, injuries and a move to a cavernous new 
stadium has left us heading towards the drop zone. There have been some signs 
of improvement with the switch to a back three, but it’s got to be better next 
year. It took until 27 November for a striker to score and, as ever, we’re 
relying on Carroll and Sakho returning to fitness. The standing-versus-sitting 
debate, poor stewarding, the loss of Ken’s Cafe and the herberts confronting 
the Chelsea fans have all added to the unease, even if the problems have been 
overhyped.3/10

Stars and flops Michail Antonio has made a big goalscoring contribution and 
thankfully Bilic has given up trying to convert him into a right-back. Winston 
Reid and Kouyaté have at least been solid while the underrated Obiang has 
stiffened the midfield. Payet looks distracted, but still makes nearly all our 
goals. Most of the new signings have flopped apart from Fernandes and Fletcher. 
We’ve gone for popcorn rather than the full burger. Zaza has been a huge 
disappointment, as have Tore, Feghouli, Calleri and Nordtveit. The jury is 
still out on £20m Ayew.

Happy with the manager? Bilic deserves more time, but has to take the blame 
for the poor signings, for selling Tomkins and for playing Carroll twice in an 
August week which resulted in his injury.4/10

Which 2016 football moment made you smile? That Iceland commentator after they 
beat England: “We are never going home … Never wake me up from this insane 
dream!”

– Pete May Author of Goodbye to Boleyn 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Goodbye-Boleyn-Pete-May/dp/1785901478/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1477756951&sr=1-1&keywords=goodbye+to+boley>
; blog:hammersintheheart.blogspot.co.uk 
<https://hammersintheheart.blogspot.co.uk/>

 * Click here for part 1: Arsenal to Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/premier-league-fans-half-time-verdict-part-1-arsenal-manchester-city> 