
1) Leicester without Vardy aim to party like it’s 1963

Every year for more than half a century folks have been hoping for a repeat of 
the Boxing Day fun of 1963, when the 10 top-flight fixtures produced a record 
tally of 66 goals. We can’t get an exact repeat of that this year because half 
of the teams who were in the First Division back then are now in the lower 
leagues (although, as it happens, Ipswich and Fulham are meeting in the 
Championship this Boxing Day so Mick McCarthy could point to progress if his 
team do better than the 10-1 defeat that Jackie Milburn’s side suffered against 
Fulham in ’63). But this year’s Boxing Day fixture list has thrown up an 
identical pairing to the ’63 schedule, as Leicester host Everton. Back then, 
Everton, rather than Leicester, were the defending champions and they lost 2-0 
in what turned out to be the lowest scoring match on that record-breaking day. 
Both Leicester’s goals were scored by Ken Keyworth, who we are going to 
describe as the Jamie Vardy of his time if we can specify that we only mean he 
was his team’s most prolific striker. Vardy, mind you, has not been prolific 
this season but hedid score a hat-trick in his last home match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/leicester-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 and would have been hoping to resume where he left off if he had not gone and 
jumpedinto that tackle on Mame Biram Diouf at Stoke. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/jamie-vardy-red-card-appeal-rejected>
 His suspension spares Everton’s sluggish central defence from having to cope 
with his speed, but Shinji Okazaki and Islam Slimani could pose different 
challenges. Leicester could find their other suspensions more problematic: the 
club did not recruit adequate defensive cover in the summer so the absences of 
Robert Huth and Christian Fuchs give Everton an opportunity to recover from 
their Merseyside derby disappointment – and avenge the defeat of ’63.PD

• Vardy to serve three-match ban after red card appeal is rejected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/jamie-vardy-red-card-appeal-rejected>
• Lukaku to sign new Everton deal but may leave in summer – Raiola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/romelu-lukaku-new-everton-contract-leave-agent-mino-raiola>
• Leicester struggling but Man City wrote book on bad title defences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/21/manchester-city-1930s-cautionary-title-to-relegation-tale-leicester-city>

2) The omens are good for Liverpool against Stoke

This is this year’s other repeat of the 1963 Boxing Day schedule, or rather it 
would have been if this year’s match had not been pushed back to 27 December. 
Fifty-three years ago a 6-1 home victory over Stoke helped Liverpool on their 
way to their first top-flight title in more than two decades and, eventually, a 
glorious era of domestic dominance. The parallels are obvious. Right? Well, 
let’s see what Joe Allen has to say about that. The Welshman returns to Anfield 
in splendid, free-scoring form and will undoubtedly be instrumental in Stoke’s 
attempt to gain their first league win at Liverpool since 1959. But Glen 
Johnson could be even more important, and so too will Bruno Martins Indi, who 
has become the fulcrum of Stoke’s defence since joining the club in the summer, 
especially with Ryan Shawcross still seemingly struggling for maximum fitness. 
Meanwhile, if Daniel Sturridge is capable of lasting 90 minutes, then he should 
start for Liverpool in place of Roberto Firmino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/20/liverpool-everton-merseyside-derby-klopp-firmino-tactics>
, who has looked in serious need of a rest in recent games.PD

• Liverpool’s Mané will head to Gabon with a heavy heart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/liverpool-sadio-mane-africa-cup-of-nations-senegal>
• Klopp praises Sturridge for helping Liverpool to derby victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/daniel-sturridge-liverpool-jurgen-klopp-ronald-koeman-everton>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-in-boxing-day-and-festive-fixtures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff47d9ae4b4105ed567c6367c8b970ef093fb77f0%2F497_135_2997_1798%2F2997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20Boxing%20Day%20and%20festive%20fixtures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-in-boxing-day-and-festive-fixtures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20Boxing%20Day%20and%20festive%20fixtures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-in-boxing-day-and-festive-fixtures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff47d9ae4b4105ed567c6367c8b970ef093fb77f0%2F497_135_2997_1798%2F2997.jpg>
 Daniel Sturridge could return to the Liverpool starting lineup. Photograph: 
John Powell/Liverpool FC via Getty Images 
3) Arsenal and West Brom hope not to fuel old arguments

For a while it looked like this, at last, would be the season of goodwill 
towards Arsène Wenger. But then his team lost two tough away matches in a row 
and lo, Arsenal fans will again spend Christmas Day bickering about their 
manager and the way he plays his version of monopoly. The second half of 
Wenger’s reign at Arsenal has not all been about property development, there 
has also been some team building, but the question remains as to whether the 
manager has laid sturdy enough mental foundations. BeatingWest Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> at home would not resolve that 
argument but it would at least deliver Arsenal fans the gift of momentary 
respite from in-fighting. Back in 1963 the squabbling was all in the West Brom 
camp before their Boxing Day meeting with north London opponents: their players 
went on strike in the run-up to the game in protest at being told by their 
manager, Jimmy Hagan, that they had to train for it in shorts despite the 
freakishly cold weather (it is not clear whether the freezing conditions also 
precluded naked headbutting but Hagan eventually reached an understanding with 
the players, who went on to draw 4-4 with Spurs). The more recent past provides 
a better pointer for West Brom’s visit to the Emirates, of course. And judging 
by West Brom’s approaches to their big away games so far this season, we can 
count on Pulis trying to make this a difficult match for Arsenal and a 
harrowing watch for everyone.PD

• Özil wins possession more than you might think 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/dec/21/mesut-ozil-arsenal-defence-alexis-sanchez-arsene-wenger>

Will anyone stop Chelsea winning the league? – Football Weekly Extra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/audio/2016/dec/22/will-anyone-stop-chelsea-winning-the-league-football-weekly-extra>
4) Moyes and co could make life difficult for Manchester United

Let us stop with the 1963 comparisons now. In fact, let us not mention the 
past at all, lest we bring a tear to the eye of David Moyes. But if we must 
mention the Scot’s previous experiences at Old Trafford, let us concentrate on 
the wins he enjoyed there during his 11 years as Everton manager. Eh? Oh well. 
Tell you what, let us just look back to Sunderland’s triumphant last match,a 
1-0 victory over Watford inspired by Adnan Januzaj, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/sunderland-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 who, alas, is ineligible for the forthcoming match against his parent club. 
Poor Moyes cannot catch a break when Old Trafford is involved. But his job is 
to make his own luck no matter the weak hand he is dealt, and on Monday that 
will entail choosing a suitable replacement for Januzaj. Chances are Moyes will 
plump for John O’Shea. Don’t laugh! The Irishman did well in a back threewhen 
Sunderland made life tough for Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/sunderland-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 a fortnight ago and redeploying that system seems like Moyes’s best chance of 
inflicting misery on Manchester United supporters, again.PD

• Man Utd close in on Benfica’s Lindelof to strengthen defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/manchester-united-benfica-victor-lindelof-jose-mourinho>
• Ibrahimovic: the older I get, the better I get, like red wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/18/zlatan-ibrahimovic-older-i-get-better-i-get-like-red-wine-manchester-united-west-brom>

5) Memories of Brown team talk provide light relief to stern test

It is precisely eight years since Hull met Manchester City on Boxing Day 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/dec/31/hullcity-stokecity> and Phil 
Brown memorably delivered his half-time team talk on the pitch, with his team 
already 4-0 down. “I thought it was nice and cold and I thought I would keep 
the boys alive because they looked as if they were dead,” he said, and the 
novel move kind of worked – they drew the second half 1-1, and the game ended 
5-1. City were in the bottom three at the time, while Hull were sixth; by 
season’s end City were 10th and Hull, who won only one more league game, 
avoided relegation by a point. Manchester City, who at the time had not 
finished in the top four since 1978, have only failed to do so once since, when 
they came fifth in 2010. The knee injury sustainedby Pablo Zabaleta in the win 
over Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 means that no survivors of the 2008 game will appear in this one – Vincent 
Kompany and Joe Hart also played that day and remain on City’s payroll – but 
Hull may find their task is no less formidable.SB 

• Snodgrass rejects new Hull contract and targets January departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/robert-snodgrass-rejects-new-hull-city-contract-targets-january-exit-football>
• Touré: I want Manchester City to be bigger than Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/yaya-toure-manchester-city-bigger-manchester-united>

6) Carroll could have a whale of a time in Swansea

Swansea have been so diabolical away – no, that is not the right word – so 
sheepish away that it is easy to forget that they have been relatively fearsome 
in their last two home matches, beating both Crystal Palace and Sunderland. So 
they are certainly capable of beating West Ham. But that does not seem likely, 
as Slaven Bilic’s side have shown evidence of tightening up in recent games 
and, in Andy Carroll, have a forward who could wreak havoc against the softest 
central defence in the Premier League (again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/07/west-ham-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
).PD

• West Ham do not want to sell team’s ‘top player’ Payet, says Bilic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/west-ham-not-want-sell-dimitri-payet-slaven-bilic>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-in-boxing-day-and-festive-fixtures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a17844c55407bfc52caa290bd511652c2030b80%2F329_109_3860_2316%2F3860.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20Boxing%20Day%20and%20festive%20fixtures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-in-boxing-day-and-festive-fixtures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20Boxing%20Day%20and%20festive%20fixtures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-in-boxing-day-and-festive-fixtures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a17844c55407bfc52caa290bd511652c2030b80%2F329_109_3860_2316%2F3860.jpg>
 Andy Carroll readies himself for Swansea City. Photograph: Avril Husband/West 
Ham United via Getty Images 
7) When will Conte’s Chelsea stop winning?

With Diego Costa and N’Golo Kanté suspended, is the end nigh for Chelsea’s 
winning run? Michy Batshuayi hopes not. Costa’s one-match ban gives the Belgian 
striker, forwhom Chelsea paid £33m in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/03/chelsea-announce-signing-michy-batshuayi>
, an opportunity to prove his worth. It is up to Bournemouth, meanwhile, to 
prove that without Kanté’s protection Chelsea’s defence is far more vulnerable. 
Bournemouth have been wobbly on the road so far this seasonbut they won at 
Stamford Bridge last term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/05/chelsea-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
 and Eddie Howe, and fans of a close title race, would welcome a repeat of that 
result this year.PD

• Conte targets Bakayoko and Sidibé after £60m Oscar windfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/chelsea-tiemoue-bakayoko-djibril-sidibe-oscar-windfallhttps://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/21/chelsea-tiemoue-bakayoko-djibril-sidibe-oscar-windfall>
• Chelsea to reject loan offers for deputy striker Batshuayi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/chelsea-to-reject-loan-offers-michy-batshuayi>

8) A meeting of frustrating finishers at St Mary’s

Forget about Mauricio Pochettino: what these two teams have in common is an 
infuriating wastefulness. Both create a lot of chances, both tend to miss most 
of them. Southampton showed signs of improvement in their last match,that 3-1 
win at Bournemouth, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/bournemouth-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
 when they produced a sharpness that they had often lacked. They will probably 
need to produce that again, and replicate the intensity and speed they showed 
at Bournemouth, if they are to inflict a third successive away defeat on 
Tottenham Hotspur.PD

• Lloris signs new contract to 2022 – taking him to age 35 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/hugo-lloris-new-tottenham-contract-2022>
• The changing face of White Hart Lane – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/dec/21/tottenham-hotspur-new-stadium-changing-face-white-hart-lane-in-pictures>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-in-boxing-day-and-festive-fixtures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ccdcd28ae307531f6c0851bf4399e2c331e85f2%2F94_186_2190_1313%2F2190.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20Boxing%20Day%20and%20festive%20fixtures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-in-boxing-day-and-festive-fixtures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20out%20for%20in%20Boxing%20Day%20and%20festive%20fixtures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fpremier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-in-boxing-day-and-festive-fixtures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ccdcd28ae307531f6c0851bf4399e2c331e85f2%2F94_186_2190_1313%2F2190.jpg>
 Tottenham Hotspur’s Son Heung-min misses a chance against Burnley at White 
Hart Lane. Photograph: Ian Kington/AFP/Getty Images 
9) Palace seek to stop away rot at Vicarage Road

Crystal Palace sack manager Alan Pardew after disastrous run of results
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/crystal-palace-alan-pardew-sacked>
Three defeats in their last four games have seen Watford slip from seventh to 
12th, but if the feeling of anxiously looking over their shoulders is an 
unpleasant novelty to them, it has become regrettably familiar to a Palace side 
which, after losing eight of their last 10 league games (aggregate score 14-24) 
and sacking Alan Pardew, could drop into the bottom three for the first time 
since August should they lose at Vicarage Road. Last year’s1-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/27/watford-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
 there came during that part of Pardew’s tenure when Palace were particularly 
impressive away from home – it was their 11th victory in 14 away games – and 
although they required a second-half penalty to secure it, their superiority 
was gently evident throughout. Afterwards Pardew talked happily about how his 
side were inherently suited to success on their travels – “we’ve got good 
players for an away team because we’ve got pace” – but though they have not 
forgotten how to sprint, more recently their running away from home has 
sometimes been of the headless chicken variety. Talking of runs, they return on 
one of two victories in their last 19 away games, and three in the last 
calendar year. And their away fixtures are not going to get any easier: they 
have already visited every other member of the bottom seven (they are the only 
team yet to have hosted any member of that group). With Pardew gone, the time 
has come for a return to winning aways.SB

• Middlesbrough to rival Palace in pursuit of Villa’s Gestede 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/middlesbrough-crystal-palace-aston-villa-rudy-gestede>
• Palace sack manager Pardew after disastrous run of results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/crystal-palace-alan-pardew-sacked>

10) Home comforts suit Defour as Burnley face big week

Since half-time in the televised 4-0 defeat at West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/west-bromwich-albion-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
 last month, which he started, Burnley have played 315 minutes (plus stoppages) 
of football away from Turf Moor and Steven Defour has been on the pitch for six 
of them. The Belgian has however started every home game he has been available 
for this season, and is likely to return to the team for the visit of 
Middlesbrough, the first of two crucial-looking home games for the Clarets over 
the festive period, with Sunderland due on New Year’s Eve. Given that they have 
won 16 points at home and just one away, it could be argued that Burnley only 
really play when on their own ground, but in Defour’s case it is literally 
true. There has also been a statistical decline in his performances: there were 
three assists and one brilliant goal in his first five appearances, but none of 
either in his last seven. Sean Dyche has said that Defour is yet to adapt to 
the English game. “It’s a different journey through the Premier League. It’s 
physical, it’s fast,” hetold the Lancashire Telegraph 
<http://www.lancashiretelegraph.co.uk/sport/football/14972787.Belgium_ace_Steven_Defour_is_still_learning_about_English_game_insists_Burnley_boss_Sean_Dyche/>
 last week. “I’ve seen him play at Anderlecht, it’s a different ball game 
there. It’s slow, it’s methodical, with pockets of good tempo. The Premier 
League is hard and fast and the stats prove that. It’s finding the right 
balance to him understanding us and understanding the Premier League.” Word 
from Belgium is that the player is becoming frustrated with life in England, 
but active involvement in the next week’s two crucial fixtures could help make 
his a happier new year.SB

• Barton back at Burnley and in the last-chance saloon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/21/joey-barton-burnley-last-chance-saloon>
 