
1) Klopp makes right call in giving Karius a break

In truth, Simon Mignolet did not have much to do during Liverpool’s 3-0 
victory at Middlesbrough, but Loris Karius was taken out of the spotlight 
nevertheless.The saga involving Liverpool’s first-choice goalkeeper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/14/loris-karius-neville-gary-phil-liverpool-goalkeeper-sky-sports>
 before the midweek fixtures overshadowed all else at the club, but Jürgen 
Klopp’s team responded with a convincing performance, one of their best this 
season. On Karius, the Liverpool manager said: “I’m not interested in public 
pressure, I’m interested in the boy and there’s no reason to push him through 
this situation.” Mignolet appears set for an extended run in the team while 
23-year-old Karius gathers his thoughts. He was not happy with the decision, 
Klopp said, but it was probably the correct call.James Riach

 * Match report: Middlesbrough 0-3 Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/middlesbrough-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 * Marina Hyde on Loris Karius v the Neville brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/14/loris-karius-neville-gary-phil-liverpool-goalkeeper-sky-sports>
2) Is three at the back the future for Tottenham?

For the third time in his two-and-a-half year tenure at Tottenham Hotspur, 
Mauricio Pochettino started with three at the back against Hull City on 
Wednesday night and, for the third time, his team got a good result. Last 
season, the manageroversaw a win at Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/28/watford-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 using the approach while earlier this season, he gota 1-1 draw at Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/arsenal-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
. At home to Hull, the idea behind the 3-4-2-1 formation was to get his usual 
full-backs, Kyle Walker and Danny Rose, to push higher up the pitch. The pair 
are the principal sources of pace and width in this team but they have been 
stifled at times in recent weeks and, as a consequence, Tottenham have 
spluttered. Against Hull they were in the groove and crosses from first Rose 
and then Walker laid on the opening goals for Christian Eriksen, in the 3-0 
win. It was not all smooth sailing. There were moments during a sticky start to 
the second-half when Tottenham struggled to play out from the back but, 
overall, the system looked balanced and a good fit for Pochettino’s players – 
most crucially, Walker and Rose.David Hytner

 * Eriksen double inspires Tottenham to comfortable win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/tottenham-hotspur-hull-city-premier-league-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-midweek-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb0488b1858be2e0d412222e04658cbc12d87d9a%2F0_0_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20midweek%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-midweek-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20midweek%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-midweek-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb0488b1858be2e0d412222e04658cbc12d87d9a%2F0_0_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
 Kyle Walker was a constant threat down the right flank for Tottenham in a more 
advanced wing-back position. Photograph: Matthew Childs/Reuters 
3) Everton’s passion play leaves Wenger worried

In recent months Ronald Koeman has played the bad cop, the good cop and the 
bad cop again, altered personnel, tried different formations – anything to lift 
Everton out of their alarming stupor – and ultimately it tookan overdue show of 
passion and commitment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/13/everton-arsenal-goodison-home-crowd>
 to restore positivity at Goodison Park on Tuesday night. Arsenal were coasting 
until James McCarthy, Ross Barkley and Aaron Lennon won a series of challenges 
around the half-hour mark that roused the home crowd and their team. Aggression
carried them towards victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/everton-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 and fuelled an atmosphere that underlined why, when Everton eventually do 
relocate, Goodison will be sorely missed. It also rekindled concerns over 
Arsenal’s ability to withstand opponents who “go face-to-face” – as Koeman had 
instructed his players to do on Tuesday. Criticism of Arsenal’s final hour at 
Goodison was not unfair on a team that had not lost a Premier League away game 
since 28 February. Arsène Wenger was asked whether he was worried by how his 
team were disturbed by a simple show of aggression. “A little bit, yes,” he 
replied. “Everton fought for every ball. I don’t think they can do it every 
game but you have to give them credit.”Andy Hunter 

 * Wenger’s referee complaints ridiculed by Koeman
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/arsene-wenger-ronald-koeman-mark-clattenburg-everton-arsenal>
 * Williams atones for error as Everton come from behind  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/everton-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
4) Sunderland pay perfect tribute to young supporter

Chelsea went six points clear at the top courtesy of a 10th straight win, 
Sunderland remained bottom yet suggested three at the back might just serve 
them well in the future, and Cesc Fàbregas is emerging from Antonio Conte’s 
deep freeze to remind us again he can play a bit. But, as David Moyes so 
rightly put it, the “most important person” inside the stadium was 
five-year-old Bradley Lowery from County Durham. Bradley suffers from a rare 
form of now terminal cancer and, wanting to do something special for him, 
Sunderland did not disappoint. Apart from leading Moyes’s team out, Bradley 
joined in the warm up, converting a penalty against Chelsea reserve goalkeeper 
Asmir Begovic after accepting Diego Costa’s advice. The spontaneous, rapturous, 
fifth-minute applause which echoed around the ground in salute to his bravery 
was hugely evocative. “Nothing,” said Moyes, “mattered more than Bradley.”
Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> got his night 
absolutely right.Louise Taylor

 * Match report: Sunderland 0-1 Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/sunderland-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 * Chelsea and Watford face questions over agent links 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/chelsea-watford-face-questions-over-agent-links>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-midweek-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f64a0bc96c5a1260224a841df720add4fa15d28%2F0_476_3856_2313%2F3856.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20midweek%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-midweek-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20midweek%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-midweek-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f64a0bc96c5a1260224a841df720add4fa15d28%2F0_476_3856_2313%2F3856.jpg>
 Chelsea’s Diego Costa with five-year-old Sunderland fan Bradley Lowery. 
Photograph: Richard Lee/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
5) United’s Rojo has not learned his lesson

Having got away with one two-footed tackle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/everton-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 against Everton at the beginning of the month, one might have thought Marcos 
Rojo had learned his lesson. He clearly hadn’t, and on Wednesday night at 
Selhurst Park he was at it again. Admittedly, his effort against Wilfried Zaha 
was not quite as violent or mis-timed as the one on Idrissa Gueye but it was 
extremely foolish and, more importantly, dangerous. Mourinhodefended the player 
afterwards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/jose-mourinho-marcos-rojo-wilfried-zaha-manchester-united>
, calling him “aggressive but clean”, but the manager realises, of course, that 
the Argentinian cannot carry on like this. Because if he does, it is only a 
matter of time before United drop points because he has been sent off, or 
someone breaks a leg.Marcus Christenson

 * Match report: Ibrahimovic strike settles lively contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/crystal-palace-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 * Mourinho defends ‘clean’ Rojo after lunge on Zaha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/jose-mourinho-marcos-rojo-wilfried-zaha-manchester-united>
6) Touré could be a big deal for City once again

His peculiar partial drink-driving admission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/yaya-toure-admits-to-drink-driving-but-denies-intentionally-consuming-alcohol-manchester-city>
 aside, the last month has been good for Yaya Touré. An irreplaceable midfield 
linchpin for almost all of his Manchester City career, Touré found himself 
frozen out this season, seemingly destined to play no part in the Pep Guardiola 
era. As domestic results stalled, Touré, who wasleft out of City’s Champions 
League squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/02/manchester-city-yaya-toure-left-out-champions-league-squad-pep-guardiola>
 altogether, played his hand perfectly –apologising publicly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/04/yaya-toure-manchester-city-apology>
 to end an embarrassing stand-off prolonged by his agent, Dimitri Seluk, and 
getting back into Guardiola’s good books witha winning double at Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/crystal-palace-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
. Now, with Ilkay Gündogan injured, Fernandinho suspended and Fabian Delph 
lacking match fitness, it would be a surprise if Touré, so often a big-game 
player for City, did not start Sunday’s home game against Arsenal. Suddenly, 
the Ivorian is a big deal at the Etihad Stadium once more.Niall McVeigh

 * Manchester City win marred by injury to Gündogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/manchester-city-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 * Paul Wilson: Guardiola and Koeman struggle to tackle full English 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/14/pep-guardiola-ronald-koeman-manchester-city-everton-full-english>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-midweek-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F767fa1c9f6c7b533e9b062ba24ab2b83d88ebf8b%2F0_35_2645_1587%2F2645.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20midweek%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-midweek-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20midweek%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-midweek-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F767fa1c9f6c7b533e9b062ba24ab2b83d88ebf8b%2F0_35_2645_1587%2F2645.jpg>
 Yaya Touré was an imposing presence in Manchester City’s midfield as they kept 
a rare clean sheet against Watford. Photograph: Phil Noble/Reuters 
7) Just how far can Bournemouth go this season?

Eddie Howe batted away questions about challenging for Europe after his side’s 
latest Premier League win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/bournemouth-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
, this time against the reigning champions Leicester City, a win which briefly 
moved Bournemouth up to eighth in the table, the club’s highest ever league 
position. The unorthodox mix of players nurtured by Howe in their League One 
days, namely Marc Pugh, who scored his first of the season against Leicester, 
Steve Cook and the captain Simon Francis, continue to excel in the top flight, 
alongside Arsenal and Chelsea loanees Jack Wilshere and Nathan Aké. “I’m not 
going to say Europe, no, no, no,” Howe said. “I’m going to say I’m going to 
make the team better and stronger. In many aspects I think that’s possible and 
what that leads to, who knows? When you consider where the club was a few years 
ago, you wouldn’t have thought this was possible but it’s not my job to sit 
back and look at that achievement because there’s another dream to chase now.” 
Bournemouth host Southampton on Sunday on the back of consecutive home wins. 
“We know what it means to our fans, we know the importance of the game,” Howe 
said. The challenge now for Bournemouth is to win back-to-back matches for the 
first time this season.Ben Fisher


 * Pugh’s half-volley drives Bournemouth past Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/bournemouth-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>

8) Why exactly did Stoke fans boo Martina?

As paying punters, the crowd at any game are allowed their say. This, though, 
can lead to faintly ridiculous occurrences as at the bet365 Stadium, when Stoke 
City’s support constantly booed Southampton’s Cuco Martina. His crime? It 
remains a puzzle. The only thing he seemed to take part in that could cause 
such (irrational) ire was to fashion the throw-in from which Sofiane Boufal 
found Marko Arnuatovic stamping a boot on him. For this, the Austrian was sent 
off, quite rightly, by the referee, Anthony Taylor. For Martina, it seemed to 
be the catalyst for a long night of jeering that he hardly deserved and which 
hardly cast the Stoke crowd in the greatest light during the goalless draw.
Jamie Jackson

 * Stoke survive early Arnautovic red card to earn point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/stoke-city-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
9) Burnley’s luck is bound to turn away from home

Burnley’s difficult away run continues. Their defeat at West Ham makes it just 
one point in seven games on the road for the Clarets. That said, they at least 
played like a sideheading in the right direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/08/premier-league-table-liverpool-top-burnley-west-ham>
. Work rate and organisation has never been in doubt with Sean Dyche’s side – 
it’s the quality to open up opposition defences that has been in question. But 
under the lights of the London Stadium, the Clarets proved they can use their 
endeavour and mutual understanding to create clear chances. Scott Arfield’s 
set-piece delivery and running with the ball proved a thorn in West Ham’s side 
in the second half, Andre Gray made an effective return and Sam Vokes could 
have had a hat-trick. That the Welshman missed a sitter from six yards may have 
some raising their eyebrows, but others will observe that if Burnley keep 
creating these opportunities their luck will eventually turn.Paul MacInnes

 * Match report: West Ham United 1-0 Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/west-ham-united-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-midweek-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5f169e0813c1aa164fbff14dcd6673b9715ae75%2F0_116_3296_1977%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20midweek%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-midweek-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20midweek%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-midweek-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5f169e0813c1aa164fbff14dcd6673b9715ae75%2F0_116_3296_1977%2F3296.jpg>
 Sam Vokes reacts after another chance goes begging for Burnley at the London 
Stadium. Photograph: TGS Photo/Rex/Shutterstock 
10) Swansea’s January business key to securing a soft Brexit

We need to accept that Brexit is going to happen soon. But it would be a pity 
if it were a hard Brexit. Because Leon Britton does not deserve to leave the
Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> as a 
relegated player. The 34-year-old has been too good for too long for his time 
at Swansea to end with a failure. He could, though, play a role in keeping 
Swansea up, despite his dwindling physical powers. He showed in the last two 
matches that he still has the artful spirit and twinkly feet that have made him 
such a joy to watch down the years. But Swansea evidently need more than that, 
starting with, but not limited to, a solid centre-back and a consistent winger 
or two. Their January recruitment is likely to have a big bearing on whether 
their little gem of a midfielder gets to finish this season, and possibly his 
career, in the top flight. The only major injustice, then, would be that he 
never got an England cap.Paul Doyle

 * Rondón sinks Swansea with hat-trick of headers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/west-bromwich-albion-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report> 