
1) Giroud continues to polarise opinion despite his hat-trick

The Dozen: the weekend's best Premier League photos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/may/15/the-dozen-the-weekends-best-premier-league-photos>
What a strange afternoon it was for Olivier Giroud. The Arsenal striker scored 
a hat-trick inthe 4-0 home win over Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/arsenal-aston-villa-premier-league-match-report>
, taking his final tally for the season to 24 goals – 16 of which were in the 
Premier League. But for most of the game – specifically the period between his 
fifth-minute opener and his finish for 2-0 in the 78th minute – he drew the ire 
of the Emirates Stadium crowd like a magnet. Whenever a move broke down, there 
were screams of frustration and derision, and Giroud was invariably the target. 
Sometimes, his movement was not sharp enough and the expletives flowed in his 
direction and on other occasions, his touch or decision-making was not up to 
scratch. There was even the moment on 31 minutes when Mesut Özil’s pass for him 
was off-target and the crowd erupted at Giroud. And yet, after he had completed 
his hat-trick, there was a rousing rendition from the stands of his song, which 
goes to the tune of Hey Jude. Giroud has had plenty of highlights this season, 
including the goal inthe Champions League victory over Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/20/bayern-munich-beaten-as-olivier-giroud-hands-arsenal-a-european-lifeline>
 and the hat-trick inthe decisive group stage win at Olympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/09/olympiakos-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
. The feeling remains, however, that here is a very good centre-forward but not 
one who possesses the requisite world-class level. After his poor form over the 
second-half of the season, he appears to have exhausted the patience of the 
Arsenal support and with the scrutiny on him so intense, his margins for error 
have become non-existent. It is difficult not to foresee a clamour for Arsène 
Wenger to upgrade in the position over the summer.David Hytner

 * Match report: Arsenal 4-0 Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/arsenal-aston-villa-premier-league-match-report>
 * Hodgson watches Arsenal’s Wilshere before naming England squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/roy-hodgson-england-arsenal-jack-wilshere-squad-european-championship>
 * Arsenal women win FA Cup for 14th time on day of optimism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/arsenal-women-fa-cup-chelsea-danielle-carter>
2) Benítez shows just why so many Newcastle fans want him to stay

Mauricio Pochettino apologises to Tottenham fans for Newcastle shambles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/tottenham-hotspur-mauricio-pochettino-newcastle-united>
Football really is played in the mind – St James’ Park devoted 90 minutes 
imploring Rafa Benítez to remain as their manager, to which the Spaniard 
responded by proving precisely why he’s worth the fuss and why Sunderland’s Sam 
Allardyce was so worried about a manager who arrived fractionally too late to 
save Newcastle and relegateSunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland>. Freed of the pressure 
invoked by the fear of relegation, Benítez’s players knew exactly how to adhere 
to his instructions to deconstruct Tottenham’s so-called high press, courtesy 
of a blend of patient counter-attacking football – representing a hybrid of the 
best of Alan Pardew and Steve McClaren. Spurs may have suffered mentally after 
losing out to Leicester on the title but this was still a tactical masterclass 
on Benítez’s part.Louise Taylor

 * Match report: Newcastle United 5-1 Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/newcastle-united-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 * Pochettino apologises to Tottenham fans for Newcastle shambles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/tottenham-hotspur-mauricio-pochettino-newcastle-united>
3) Manchester United’s FA Cup preparation impeded

Ander Herrera talked later about the “nerves and tension” as Manchester United 
and Bournemouth players were kept in the dressing rooms and the club’s former 
captain, Gary Neville, was among those expressing his horror about the 
possibility an English football groundmight have come under attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/manchester-united-abandon-final-premier-league-game-after-security-alert-leads-to-old-trafford-evacuation>
. Instead, it was a galling day for United for many reasons –Manchester City’s 
1-1 draw against Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/swansea-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 ending any chance of Louis van Gaal’s team qualifying for the Champions League 
– with the added possibility that Bournemouth will seek compensation for their 
travel costs. Of greater concern to Van Gaal, his team must now play a midweek 
fixture when they are preparing to meet Crystal Palace at Wembley on Saturday. 
The manager will inevitably be tempted to rest players with the final in mind, 
but that is still far from ideal when United need a draw to climb above 
Southampton into fifth place and guarantee direct entry to the Europa League 
group stages.Daniel Taylor

 * Manchester United stadium ‘bomb’ identified as training device 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/manchester-united-abandon-final-premier-league-game-after-security-alert-leads-to-old-trafford-evacuation>
 * United launch investigation into training ‘bomb’ left at Old Trafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/manchester-united-bomb-hoax-old-trafford-evacuated>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fold-trafford-evacuated-after-security-alert-before-manchester-united-game-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Old%20Trafford%20evacuated%20after%20security%20alert%20before%20Manchester%20United%20game%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fold-trafford-evacuated-after-security-alert-before-manchester-united-game-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Old%20Trafford%20evacuated%20after%20security%20alert%20before%20Manchester%20United%20game%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fold-trafford-evacuated-after-security-alert-before-manchester-united-game-video&media=>
Old Trafford evacuated after security alert before Manchester United game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/may/15/old-trafford-evacuated-after-security-alert-before-manchester-united-game-video>
4) Chelsea face a summer of change

Chelsea’s final home game of term was overshadowed by the locals’ appreciation 
of Claudio Ranieri and Leicester City’s achievements this season, as well as 
their raucous pleading for John Terry to extend his stay in south-west London 
into a 19th senior campaign. Rather less focus was drawn to Guus Hiddink’s own 
farewell as he concluded a second spell in interim charge of this club though, 
just before he departed, the Dutchman sought to lighten the mood. Asked 
whether, this being Chelsea, there might a third coming at some stage in the 
future – perhaps even if Antonio Conte endures a stodgy start to life at 
Stamford Bridge next season – Hiddink snapped back: “A big possibility, yes.” 
The honesty initially felt refreshing, even if the sense of mischief was 
quickly exposed. “No, I’m joking,” he added. “I don’t even know if I’ll be 
available, so I don’t think so. They’re going now into a period where I’ll not 
be needed. And it would be very bad if I was called in, what, early December 
(to take over again). That would be bad forChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>. No, I have full confidence they 
will go up now back to where they belong: fighting for silverware and being in 
the top four.”

Yet this season has proved that restoration will be far from assured. A summer 
of upheaval awaits at Chelsea, whether Terry is retained or not, and a number 
of players will surely be moving on in the closed season. Most obvious are the 
loan departures: Radamel Falcao will return to AS Monaco and Alexander Pato to 
Corinthians or another club willing to take him on. Oscar has spoken of a 
desire to prove himself to Conte over recent days, but he has featured so 
little in recent weeks that it is tempting to assume his days are numbered. 
What, too, of the likes of Pedro Rodríguez and Loïc Rémy? Can Diego Costa be 
retained amid interest from Atlético Madrid, and is Baba Rahman a left-back 
likely to flourish under the Italian? These are questions for the months ahead, 
but the sense is the time has come for change. This team may have limped to the 
50-point mark with their draw against the champions, but they have been pining 
for the end of this campaign for months. The under-achievement has been hideous 
at times. Conte has a major task ahead to prove this season has been a blip and 
force this club back into contention.Dominic Fifield

 * Match report: Chelsea 1-1 Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/chelsea-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 * Claudio Ranieri: an apology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/15/claudio-ranieri-an-apology-leicester-city>
5) West Ham must target a new striker

For all their complaints about controversial refereeing decisions, West Ham 
United only have themselves to blame for their failure to clinch European 
football and dropping 11 points from winning positions in their final 10 games 
can also be attributed to their lack of ruthlessness. Their latest show of 
wastefulness came as they ended a positive season witha 2-1 defeat to Stoke City
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/stoke-city-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
 and Diafra Sakho was particularly culpable, spurning a glorious chance to make 
it 2-0 early in the second half. West Ham’s need for an upgrade up front is 
clear. Andy Carroll has finished the season well and has looked fitter in 
recent months but Enner Valencia has suffered a dramatic loss of confidence and 
Emmanuel Emenike will not be signed on a permanent basis. There are also doubts 
over Sakho’s future, though the Senegalese forward is worth keeping if he 
starts next season in a more positive frame of mind. In that context, links 
with Marseille’s Michy Batshuayi and Lyon’s Alexandre Lacazette make sense.
Jacob Steinberg

 * Match report: Stoke City 2-1 West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/stoke-city-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-final-day-of-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d249ff9f504da8c929eeb4e2264db9f16ca3a0d%2F0_47_3676_2206%2F3676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20(almost)%20the%20final%20day%20of%20the%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-final-day-of-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20%28almost%29%20the%20final%20day%20of%20the%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-final-day-of-the-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d249ff9f504da8c929eeb4e2264db9f16ca3a0d%2F0_47_3676_2206%2F3676.jpg>
 Diafra Sakho rues a missed chance to score for West Ham against Stoke. 
Photograph: James Griffiths/West Ham United via Getty Images 
6) Mané’s resurgence turns him into an important bargaining chip

It had reached the stage, either side of the transfer deadline, when it seemed 
sensible enough for Southampton and Sadio Mané to plot a relatively amicable 
parting of ways. He had infuriated Ronald Koeman by arriving late to a team 
meeting at the turn of the year, consequently sitting outa defeat at Norwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/02/norwich-city-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
 that was wholly in keeping with the Saints’ winter form, and links with 
Manchester United never really went away. His performances back then gave 
little reason to baulk at a suitable fee but Mané has been in stunning form 
during the final two months of the season – scoring eight goals in as many 
games and showing marked improvement in much of his build up play – and looks 
very much the kind of player an upwardly mobile team needs to stick around. 
Speaking afterthe 4-1 win over Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/southampton-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
, Koeman defended Mané’s overall contribution during the season and pointed out 
that the player, still just 24, had completed only his second Premier League 
season after joining from Red Bull Salzburg. A couple of minutes earlier Koeman 
had also said that Southampton “need to be prepared that we lose some players”, 
but unless a deal is already done the hope must be that Mané’s future is an 
important bargaining chip when Koeman meets the Southampton hierarchy for talks 
over his own contractual situation later this week.Nick Ames

 * Match report: Southampton 4-1 Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/southampton-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
7) No place for Henderson in Europa League final

“I haven’t made a decision yet about the lineup for Wednesday but it’s nice to 
have the option,” said Jürgen Klopp after watching Jordan Henderson come 
through nearly half an hour of action at the Hawthorns unscathed. And of course 
it was heartening to see Henderson (and Danny Ings) return, but the captain 
should not start the Europa League final no matter how he fit he is. Emre Can 
and James Milner bring more to Liverpool’s central midfield. So does Joe Allen, 
which means Henderson should not even be first option off the bench.Paul Doyle

 * Match report: West Brom 1-1 Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/west-bromwich-albion-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 * Klopp has Liverpool united behind him for Europa League final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/14/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-europa-league-final-sevilla-basel>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-final-day-of-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21818633653df7d7aa1ba25df21fa286ae911a1d%2F0_256_3104_1862%2F3104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20(almost)%20the%20final%20day%20of%20the%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-final-day-of-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20%28almost%29%20the%20final%20day%20of%20the%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-final-day-of-the-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21818633653df7d7aa1ba25df21fa286ae911a1d%2F0_256_3104_1862%2F3104.jpg>
 Jordan Henderson returned to first-team action in Liverpool’s draw against 
West Brom. Photograph: Joe Toth/BPI/Rex Shutterstock 
8) Swansea’s final league position hides a multitude of sins

Full credit to Swansea. They finished 12th in the Premier League, 10 points 
clear of the relegation zone, and in a season when they looked almost doomed at 
one stage (anyone who witnessedthe 4-2 defeat at home against Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/13/swansea-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
 in January could have been forgiven for fearing the worst). So it is quite an 
achievement to stay up. Yet perhaps that final league position hides a 
multitude of sins. It has been a chaotic season, featuring three different 
managers, and it would be naive to think that everything is fine now that 
Swansea have secured a sixth successive season in the Premier League. In that 
context it was a little alarming to hear Francesco Guidolin say that he did not 
think many changes were needed to his playing squad. An alternative view would 
be that the squad requires major surgery, including bringing in two strikers 
for starters. André Ayew and Gylfi Sigurdsson scored 23 of Swansea’s 42 goals 
and neither player is a centre forward. The next highest league scorer is 
Bafétimbi Gomis with six. After that there are four players on two goals. Away 
from the lack of firepower up front, the right-back position has to be 
addressed, Swansea need another centre-half to provide competition for Ashley 
Williams and Federico Fernández, and it is hard to see how Wayne Routledge and 
the returning Nathan Dyer represent the future on the flanks. There are, in 
other words, plenty of question to answer. Maybe the biggest of them all is 
whether Guidolin is the right man for the job.Stuart James

 * Match report: Swansea 1-1 Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/swansea-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>

9) Sunderland looking stronger for their home-grown talent

If there’s anything more likely to send a supporter skipping into summer with 
a spring in their step than a glorious late-season surge to survival at the 
expense of their most hated local rivals, it’s rounding that off by witnessing 
the debuts of a couple of promising local youngsters in a lively away 
performance. Sunderland’s much-changed team at Watford was full of local 
promise: Jordan Pickford, a 22-year-old goalkeeper from Washington (Tyne and 
Wear, not DC), appearedin the Cup against Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/09/arsenal-sunderland-fa-cup-match-report>
 andthe league against Tottenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/16/tottenham-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
 in January, playing well despite conceding seven goals, and was impressive 
again, handling everything that came at him with assurance and releasing Duncan 
Watmore for a counter-attack with a fine, quick kick from his hands. Tom 
Robson, from Stanley, had a decent game at left-back – though Watford’s wing 
play is not the most threatening – and Winlaton-born Rees Greenwood, one of the 
stars of the side that finished second in the Under-21 Premier League, was full 
of running in front of him.

George Honeyman, from Prudhoe and at 21, a year older than Robson and 
Greenwood, replaced the latter in the second half without having a great 
impact. “The onus was on the players who had not played as much to come in, 
take up the challenge and show what they had got for next season – and for the 
young lads to come in and show that they would love to have this opportunity to 
play on a regular basis,” said Sam Allardyce. “All of those players today have 
performed very, very well indeed. We know what Pickford can do, but I think 
that of Rees and George, Rees was probably the better of the two. Tommy saw 
through the whole game and looked very, very comfortable at left-back.” As for 
Watford, for the first time since the purchase of the club by Gino Pozzo in 
2012 – and, indeed, at least two decades before that – they went through an 
entire league season without an academy product making an appearance. The 
closest they got was Connor Smith’s 59 minutes in the Capital One Cup against 
Preston in August;Watford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> lost, 
and Smith was released in January before joining AFC Wimbledon. The defender 
Tommie Hoban was given a four-year contract last summer but has spent the vast 
majority of the season recovering from groin and hip injuries.Simon Burnton

 * Match report: Watford 2-2 Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/watford-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-final-day-of-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96b062786e148f319e609d0fd789de91ffad9eed%2F0_192_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20(almost)%20the%20final%20day%20of%20the%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-final-day-of-the-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20%28almost%29%20the%20final%20day%20of%20the%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fpremier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-final-day-of-the-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96b062786e148f319e609d0fd789de91ffad9eed%2F0_192_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Tom Robson, right, played the entire match and impressed Sunderland manager 
Sam Allardyce on his debut. Photograph: Steven Paston/PA 
10) An afternoon of hellos and goodbyes

Tim Howard was rightly centre of attention as he embarked on one last lap of 
Goodison Park followingthe defeat of Norwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/everton-norwich-city-premier-league-match-report>
, the veteran goalkeeper ending a decade of distinguished service at Everton 
with a move to Colorado Rapids this summer. After a few run-ins that marred his 
final weeks as the club’s No1 goalkeeper earlier in the season, it was a nice 
touch that Howard reserved his bows – and a few tears – for the supporters in 
the Gwladys Street. It felt like a changing of the guard in many respects at 
Goodison, with the 37-year-old on his way out and teenagers Tom Davies, Kieran 
Dowell and Jonjoe Kenny all impressing, but the overhaul at Everton this summer 
extends beyond goalkeeper and manager. Trailing behind Howard, and deserving of 
their own acclaim should this season prove to be their last with the club, were 
Leon Osman and Tony Hibbert, invaluable Everton servants in their own right. 
Steven Pienaar was also present and is also out of contract this summer, as is 
Darron Gibson, while it remains to be seen whether John Stones and Romelu 
Lukaku were saying a lasting farewell on the lap of ‘appreciation’. Roberto 
Martínez’s replacement has rebuilding work ahead, but plenty of young talent 
willing and able to assist.Andy Hunter 

 * Match report: Everton 3-0 Norwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/everton-norwich-city-premier-league-match-report> 