
Britain’s railways are not easily understood. While most people, particularly 
regular rail users, think they should be better, many disagree on how this can 
be achieved.

Debate continues about the merits or otherwise of the country’s rail 
infrastructure, including high-speed rail, electrification, privatisation, 
nationalisation and ticketing and train technology. But let’s nail down a few 
facts and save the disagreements for later.

Some advance fares are very cheap. However, the downside is that unregulated 
ticket prices have skyrocketed
John Disney, Nottingham Trent University 
What is Network Rail?

Network Rail maintains the UK’s railway infrastructure: most rails, signals, 
crossings and some of the largest railway stations such the main London 
terminals, Birmingham New Street and Manchester Piccadilly. It is a non-profit 
company, controlled by the state. Network Rail was created in 2002, following 
thecollapse of Railtrack <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/1583675.stm> 
after a series of fatal accidents and a lack of public trust.

Why is it struggling? 

Network Rail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/network-rail> inherited a 
lot of problems from its predecessor and needed to invest heavily in 
improvements. To do this it was borrowing money, backed by government 
guarantees so the state would have to pay back its loans if it defaulted.

It used to be classed as a private/public not-for-profit company and the money 
it borrowed did not show up on the Treasury’s balance sheet. But in 2014, 
Network Rail was reclassified in response toEU law 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/esa-2010> and is now officially owned by the 
Department for Transport (DfT) and its £34bn debt is on the Treasury’s books. 
Given the chancellor’s desire to cut public borrowing, this raises questions 
about how money will be raised for future investment in the railways.

John Disney of Nottingham Trent university says Network Rail is still 
attempting to undo the legacy of Railtrack. “The reason Railtrack failed was 
because it kept maintenance to a minimum. I think that Network Rail would say 
they’ve still not caught up with that maintenance backlog,” he says.


What happens next? 

Here there is great debate. An independent review of Network Rail, the Shaw 
Report <https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/shaw-report-into-network-rail>
, dismissed privatisation of the whole company. However, it did express support 
for involvement of private companies and investment. Another big theme of the 
report was accountability and a lack of understanding and awareness among rail 
users of who is actually in charge of the railways.

The report, which the government is expected to respond to later this year, 
called for more clarity on the state’s role and for greater focus on the needs 
of passengers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fprivatised-nationalised-electrified-guide-uk-railways-network-rail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b4e9aa7433da195252f6b3e3345ba326c5030a0%2F0_45_1755_1053%2F1755.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Privatised%2C%20nationalised%2C%20electrified%3F%20A%20guide%20to%20the%20UK's%20railways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fprivatised-nationalised-electrified-guide-uk-railways-network-rail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Privatised%2C%20nationalised%2C%20electrified%3F%20A%20guide%20to%20the%20UK%27s%20railways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fprivatised-nationalised-electrified-guide-uk-railways-network-rail%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b4e9aa7433da195252f6b3e3345ba326c5030a0%2F0_45_1755_1053%2F1755.jpg>
 Train operating companies, including Virgin and First Group, bid for rail 
franchises and run certain lines. Photograph: David Cheskin/PA 
So who is in charge?

Although the track is owned by Network Rail, most services are provided by the 
train operating companies (TOCs). The TOCs, which include companies such as 
Virgin, First Group,Arriva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness>
 and Southern Railways, own the franchises relating to certain lines and 
stations. However, these companies do not typically own the trains but lease 
them from rolling stock companies.

Does economic growth in the north depend on transport? Join our free seminar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/apr/27/economic-growth-north-transport-seminar>
How do companies win these franchises?

They enter into a competitive process, governed by DfT, to win a particular 
franchise. But UK rail franchises are quite diverse. Some are very profitable 
while others are subsidised by the government. The companies will, therefore, 
be offering either to pay a premium to the government for the rights or to 
provide the service for the least amount of subsidy.

Who controls fare prices?

There are two types of fares on British railways: regulated fares and 
unregulated fares. Regulated fares are stipulated in the TOCs’ franchise 
agreements and are typically raised annually by the government at the start of 
the year. Examples of regulated tickets are season tickets, off-peak tickets 
for longer journeys and some shorter-distance day return tickets.

However, unregulated fares, which include open returns and on-peak fares, are 
set by the companies themselves and can be very expensive. Disney says the UK 
has some of the most expensive and some of the best value tickets in Europe. 
“Some advance fares are very cheap. However, the downside is that unregulated 
ticket prices have skyrocketed. Anytime returns from provincial cities into 
London have gone up 200% in some cases,” he says.

So who really pays for the railways?

Rail upgrades are expensive and the money raised by the franchises is not 
enough, so the government has to subsidise the industry. Disney says that, in 
the past, the cost of the railways was roughly evenly split between the 
government and rail users but that this has shifted. “Now rail passengers pay 
around 75% of the full cost,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fprivatised-nationalised-electrified-guide-uk-railways-network-rail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cee4c88597e1020d719de1791c171fbfc68deed%2F0_10_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Privatised%2C%20nationalised%2C%20electrified%3F%20A%20guide%20to%20the%20UK's%20railways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fprivatised-nationalised-electrified-guide-uk-railways-network-rail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Privatised%2C%20nationalised%2C%20electrified%3F%20A%20guide%20to%20the%20UK%27s%20railways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fprivatised-nationalised-electrified-guide-uk-railways-network-rail%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cee4c88597e1020d719de1791c171fbfc68deed%2F0_10_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 There are a number of electrification projects being carried out across the 
country. Photograph: Paul Gillis/REX/Shutterstock 
What’s the deal with electrification?

Electric trains and tracks are faster, greener and cheaper to run in the long 
term than diesel engines. However, electrification involves big, upfront costs 
for Network Rail and ministers are anxious about spending the money. Also, when 
existing lines are being electrified, they tend to be closed down for a while 
and this is not good news for users. There are a number of delayed 
electrification projects being carried out across the country as part of a 
£40bn upgrade by Network Rail.

Lord Adonis: HS3 could be the rail revolution of the 21st century
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/apr/27/lord-adonis-hs3-rail-revolution-north-high-speed>
Why can’t we increase train capacity?


Increasing train capacity to keep up with demand is problematic. Many lines 
run close to private property and there is no space to add new lines. 
Doubledecker trains, as used in some European countries, cannot be deployed 
because British bridges are too low. Longer trains could be added in some cases 
but this may require platform alterations or technology that prevents rear 
doors from opening. There is already technology that is enabling trains to run 
faster and closer together – but this has its limits. Although these trains may 
run faster, passengers still need just as much time to get on and off, so 
bottlenecks emerge.

How about new lines? 

Building new lines tends to be less problematic than upgrading old ones and 
there is no disruption while the work is being done. But, it always involves 
significant expenditure. The recently opened Chiltern line from Oxford Parkway 
to Marylebone cost £320m.

Which leads us to HS2 – will it ever happen?

Almost certainly. The high-speed rail bill, which paves the way for the first 
phase ofHS2 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2>, London to the West Midlands, 
was passed in the House of Commons in March this year by 399 votes to 42. It’s 
currently in the Lords, with royal assent expected in December 2016. If that 
all happens, it’s spades in the ground in 2017.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 