
Scott Eustis did not stop smiling for hours. The coastal wetland specialist 
with theGulf Restoration Network 
<http://healthygulf.org/blog/posts-by-author/51> was attending a public hearing 
in Baton Rouge. Its subject was a pipeline extension that would run directly 
through the Atchafalaya Basin, the world’s largest natural swamp. Eustis was 
surprised to be joined by more than 400 others.

“This is like 50 times the amount of people we have at most of these 
meetings,” said Eustis, adding that the proposed pipeline was “the biggest and 
baddest I’ve seen in my career”.

The company behind the pipeline, Energy Transfer Partners (ETP), had seemed to 
turn its attention to Louisiana just one day after Native American protesters
thwarted the company’s Dakota Access project last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/dakota-access-pipeline-permit-denied-standing-rock>
.

A spokeswoman for ETP, Vicki Granado, said the Bayou Bridge pipeline extension 
was announced in June 2015. If approved, the project will run though 11 
parishes and cross around 600 acres of wetlands and 700 bodies of water, 
including wells that reportedly provide drinking water for some 300,000 
families.

At the public hearing in Baton Rouge on Thursday, the first speaker, Cory 
Farber, project manager of the Bayou Bridge pipeline, said it was expected to 
create 2,500 temporary jobs. When Farber then said the project would produce 12 
permanent jobs, the crowd laughed heartily.

“Those who have airboat companies and equipment companies that specialize in 
putting in equipment, they’re not opposed to pipelines because of the 
short-term jobs,” saidJody Meche 
<http://neworleans.indymedia.org/news/2012/10/17122.php>, president of the 
state Crawfish Producers’ Association, one of dozens who spoke at the hearing.

“But once that pipe is in there, the jobs are gone.”

Once that pipe is in there, the jobs are gone
Jody Meche 
Other attendees applauded in favor of the pipeline, and former US senator Mary 
Landrieu ofLouisiana <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/louisiana>, a 
supporter, was in attendance. But Native Americans also dotted the crowd, many 
of them fresh from Standing Rock.

“The Native Americans in North Dakota get a lot of credit for showing people 
their power,” Eustis said.

Protester Cherri Foytlin, organizer of the pro-sustainability Bridge the Gulf 
<http://bridgethegulfproject.org/> project, brought her teenage daughters, 
Jayden and Erin. In November, Erin and 20 other kids from around the country 
filed alawsuit against the federal government 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2016/11/the_kids_lawsuit_over_climate_change_is_our_best_hope_now.html>
 for ignoring climate change. The suit will soon go to trial.

Meche not only makes his living in the Atchafalaya Basin, but he also calls it 
home. Where most in attendance worried about potential oil spills and their 
effect on drinking water, Meche was more concerned with ways existing pipelines 
have, he said, “crippled” the fishing industry.

“They excavated the trench that they put the pipe in and then [they didn’t 
clean up] and it leaves a dam behind that blocks the water flow,” he said on 
the microphone, “until there’s not enough oxygen in the water for the crawfish, 
the fish, or anything.”
 If approved, the project will run though 11 parishes and cross around 600 
acres of wetlands and 700 bodies of water, including wells that reportedly 
provide drinking water for some 300,000 families. Photograph: Alaina 
Dunn​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​ 
Meche said these left-behind “spoil banks” 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/carey-louisiana-wetlands-tattered-by-industrial-canals/>
 also disintegrate and slip down into the interior of the swamp, filling it 
with silt. “Areas that were 8ft deep 20 or 30 years ago are now a hill,” he 
claimed, adding that it all increases flood risk to boot. After his three 
minutes were up, he left the microphone, breathing heavily.

Debate was fierce. Pro-pipeline speakers – oil industry reps, state 
representatives, a retired Louisiana State University professor – pointed out 
that many pipelines already run through the Atchafalaya Basin and said 
pipelines were in general the safest way to transport oil – in the case of the 
Bayou Bridge pipeline, 280,000 barrels per day of crude to the Gulf coast 
region, with the potential for 480,000.

At a pre-hearing teach-in outside in the long shadow of Baton Rouge’s capital 
building, Anne Rolfes and herLouisiana Bucket Brigade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/25/oil-drilling-gulf-of-mexico-bucket-brigade-new-orleans>
 activists repeated how pipelines caused 144 accidents in Louisiana alone last 
year.

Pipeline supporters countered by citing a Frasier institute study 
<https://www.fraserinstitute.org/article/pipelines-are-safest-way-transport-oil-and-gas>
 from2015 
<https://www.fraserinstitute.org/sites/default/files/safety-in-the-transportation-of-oil-and-gas-pipelines-or-rail-rev2.pdf>
 that said rail transport of oil was more than 4.5 times more likely to 
experience an accident than pipelines, and that 99% of pipeline accidents from 
2003 to 2013 did not damage the environment. Pipeline PR materials also say 
pipelines are cleaner and more environmentally safe than rail transport because 
they don’t burn fossil fuels.

ETP’s new pipeline plans also acknowledge the need to deal with spoil banks, 
and include a suggested post-construction initiative to improve water quality 
and flow to the basin.

If he thought this was true, Meche said, he would support the idea. “I have no 
problem with the pipeline if they do it right,” he said. “I do like my oil and 
gas.”

100,000 people were displaced from their homes because of climate change – I 
guess we’re finally just sick of this
Scott Eustis 
He just suspected that ETP would not go the extra mile. “You know how much 
money you’re talking about, bringing tractors back in the basin to fix all 
that? They’re only going to pay what they are obligated to do, and nothing 
else.”

Rolfes also scoffed at oil industry promises. “The best way to determine the 
future is to look at the past,” she said. “And you can see how honest they were 
about filling the old canals: there’s not a single example of them fixing the 
existing spoil banks.”

At least, as activists see it, Louisiana residents are starting to really care 
about environmental issues and, more importantly, to make themselves heard.

“A lot of times we don’t get this opportunity to speak up,” said Eustis, still 
admiring the surprisingly large crowd. “[These oil companies] want to just roll 
over us.

“But after Katrina, and the BP spill, and the Baton Rouge flood last year – 
100,000 people displaced from their homes because of climate change – I guess 
we’re finally just sick of this.”
 