
The sense of deflation which grumbled around the majority of supporters left 
in this arena at the final whistle told its own story. Arsenal have passed up 
an opportunity to win Group A and given thatParis Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> may not grant them a 
second chance, will approach the weeks ahead with a familiar sense of dread as 
to what awaits in the new year. The last round of fixtures may yet conjure a 
reprieve but that seems unlikely. The initiative is undoubtedly with the French 
club.

It seems inconceivable that PSG, now top of Group A and bolstered by a better 
head-to-head record with the Gunners, could fail to see off Ludogorets at Parc 
des Princes on the night Arsenal complete their group campaign with a far 
trickier game at Basel. Finishing second could condemn Arsène Wenger’s side to 
a daunting collision with any of Barcelona, Juventus or Atlético Madrid in the 
first knockout round. “At the moment we are second, but it’s not over,” offered 
Wenger, optimistically. “But if we do finish there, you can’t guess whether 
that’s good or bad. You have to wait for the draw.” In truth,Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> have learned through bitter 
experience what a failure to secure first place tends to produce.

Arsenal 2-2 PSG: Champions League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/23/arsenal-v-psg-champions-league-live>
The last 16 has been the limit of their involvement for the past six seasons 
and given how Wenger’s side have rather clung on desperately in two meetings 
with Paris Saint-Germain in this group, there has been little evidence offered 
up to suggest they will be better placed to progress further this time. Arsenal 
may remain undefeated in the group, and across 18 games in all competitions 
since the opening weekend of the season, but the French club were more 
accomplished in both draws andif Edinson Cavani had not been so profligate home 
and away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/psg-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
, the Premier League side would have been gasping in the Paris team’s vapour 
trail.

The Uruguayan missed two excellent opportunities in the frantic closing stages 
alone. His movement is invariably excellent but he chokes too often when 
offered time to contemplate a finish. If PSG had someone with more instinctive 
bite, they would be true contenders.

Manchester City through after David Silva earns draw at Mönchengladbach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/borussia-monchengladbach-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
Even so, they were still the better team here aside from a 10-minute period 
around the interval, when their concentration and intensity were disrupted by a 
burst of local urgency. In Marco Verratti they have a midfielder of real 
pedigree, while Blaise Matuidi seems to raise his game whenever confronted by 
English opposition. This was a third successive trip to London – the first two 
at Chelsea – which has yielded a sense of satisfaction.

Arsenal could cling to their resilience as cause for optimism. They might have 
been sunk in those early exchanges, when Verratti swarmed all over their 
midfield and Thiago Motta’s calm authority went unchallenged. It had been his 
pass between Carl Jenkinson and Shkodran Mustafi which liberated Matuidi, with 
his centre drilled across goal for Cavani to score from point-blank range. Yet 
rather than wilt in the face of an onslaught, the home side eventually roused 
themselves to recover.

Mesut Özil’s vision prevents Arsenal from drifting against PSG | Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/23/mesut-ozil-arsenal-psg-champions-league>
In the seconds before the interval Olivier Giroud stole possession from 
Grzegorz Krychowiak just outside the area. In the confusion that followed, 
Mesut Özil’s clever reverse pass found Alexis Sánchez who, sensing the panicked 
Krychowiak sliding in, stretched out his back leg seeking contact and, feeling 
the touch to his right foot, eagerly went to ground.

“I can’t kid myself, my mistake cost the team a fair bit,” Krychowiak said. 
“Maybe it was a bit of a lack of concentration, taking a bit of a chance in a 
dangerous part of the pitch.”

The penalty award prompted a spat between Cavani and Aaron Ramsey, the striker 
making contact with his opponent unwisely on the chest, leaving the Welshman 
clutching his jaw – both managers dismissed it as handbags unworthy of real 
sanction – and Giroud converted the spot-kick with what was Arsenal’s first 
shot of note.

Lionel Messi scores twice as Barcelona send Celtic crashing out of Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/celtic-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
At least that proved PSG were vulnerable and when Jenkinson’s second-half 
cross was scuffed goalwards by Ramsey after the interval, the French side 
imploded yet again. The attempt was only vaguely threatening but composure had 
drained.

Marquinhos duly rammed his clearance into an onrushing Verratti, off balance 
and facing his own goal, with the ball scuttling beyond Alphonse Areola and 
into the corner of the net. Yet that concession never seemed likely to prove 
the tie’s defining moment. That was supplied by Lucas Moura, permitted too much 
space by Jenkinson at Hatem Ben Arfa’s corner and whose header flicked off Alex 
Iwobi and beyond the goalkeeper David Ospina to claim the draw.

Iwobi departed crestfallen for the bench seconds later. “The frustrating thing 
was Ospina was behind him, and Alex is certainly the most disappointed by what 
happened to him,” said Wenger. “It’s part of the game. We have to take it on 
the chin and support him.” His team have now drawn three games in a row. “We 
have not lost but we have lost a winning momentum a little bit. But we played 
against a good team tonight as well.”

Certainly, PSG’s credentials in this competition feel more persuasive. Arsenal 
can only travel to Switzerland in a fortnight in hope. Or pray that next 
month’s draw will be kind.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Farsenal-psg-champions-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1be293600ed6cb63df0904ab23aa82140d83ec4e%2F0_123_3888_2332%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=PSG%20and%20Lucas%20draw%20Arsenal%E2%80%99s%20sting%20to%20seize%20initiative%20in%20Group%20A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Farsenal-psg-champions-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=PSG%20and%20Lucas%20draw%20Arsenal%E2%80%99s%20sting%20to%20seize%20initiative%20in%20Group%20A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Farsenal-psg-champions-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1be293600ed6cb63df0904ab23aa82140d83ec4e%2F0_123_3888_2332%2F3888.jpg>
 Olivier Giroud leads the celebrations after Marco Verratti’s own goal. 
Photograph: Thomson/JMP/Rex/Shutterstock  