
How do you fill a hole that’s Zlatan-shaped? This is only the most pressing of 
questions facing the manager Unai Emery as Paris St-Germain prepare to kick off 
anotherChampions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> 
campaign when they welcome Arsenal to the Parc des Princes.

As Premier League fans are beginning to realise, Ibrahimovic occupies a lot of 
space. His 113 goals in 122 games over four seasons in Paris were comparable 
only to Messi and Ronaldo. He provided a focal point for everything PSG did on 
the pitch and was their icon off it. He turned them from a club desperate to 
enter the inner sanctum of European football to one that had the old guard 
looking nervously over their shoulder. One could even stretch the point further 
and suggest he put French football itself back on the map. And now he has gone.

Arsenal better set for deep run in Champions League, says Arsène Wenger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/12/arsenal-champions-league-arsene-wenger-psg>
He was certainly missed on Friday night as PSG’s shocking start to the season 
continued, by their recent standards at least. A dour performance at home to St 
Etienne made visible a lack of both a focal point in attack and confidence in 
the team. Yet still it looked as if the champions would earn three points after 
the visiting full-back Kévin Malcuit brought down Blaise Matuidi in the box and 
Lucas Moura converted the penalty. In seasons gone by this would have been the 
platform for a regulation 1-0 win. But with the final minute of added time 
under way, Malcuit popped up at the opposite end of the pitch and crossed for 
Robert Beric to chest and volley home.

A shocking start for PSG still means seven points from a possible 12 but, when 
winning the title has become a given 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/13/psg-troyes-9-0-ligue-1-title> 
and the only live topic of conversation is the margin of victory (31 points 
last season), achievement is measured differently in the French capital. Quite 
simply, Laurent Blanc won every domestic trophy butwas still sacked by the 
club’s Qatari owners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/paris-saint-germain-laurent-blanc>
 because he couldn’t crack the conundrum of winning the Champions League. Emery 
is a back-to-back-to-back Europa League winner and was hired for his 
continental experience, but finds himself under siege before the competition 
has even begun.

During a bristling performance at his pre-match press conference on Monday, in 
which he reverted to speaking in his native Spanish, Emery asked for patience. 
“I’m the coach. So, when we win matches, there are positive press and when we 
lose there is criticism,” he said. “That is always the case. I’m also very 
self-critical and learn a lot as well from this process of self-criticism. 
That’s always been the case. I focus on the work I have to do in terms of 
patience and precision in my work.”

Emery was perhaps the hottest coaching property on the continent when he 
swapped Seville for Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/psg-name-unai-emery-coach-sevilla>
, but while his coaching abilities are not in doubt, this job will put him 
under far greater scrutiny than he faced in Andalucia. Fans are complaining 
about a loss of identity and the media are suggesting players are struggling to 
adapt to the new coach’s tactics.

Marco Verratti says second-best not enough for PSG before Arsenal clash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/12/marco-verratti-insists-paris-saint-germain-not-second-best-arsenal-champions-league>
The Spaniard can surely claim mitigating circumstances. Not only must he make 
do without an icon, he has also lost the club’s second most recognisable name 
in David Luiz. Emery admitted he had wanted to keep David Luiz. “Like all of 
the other big-name players, I wanted him to stay here”, he said. Emery has 
struggled to get the big names that remain on the pitch. Thiago Silva is yet to 
play this season through injury while Edinson Cavani is only now being 
reintroduced into the side. The key summer signing Grzegorz Krychowiak, 
meanwhile, made his first appearance of the season on Friday as a substitute.

The same applies to Jesé, the £20m signing from Real Madrid, saddled with the 
onerous burden of replacing Ibra. Some eyebrows have been raised over the price 
for a player who made just 14 league starts in three seasons for Real. Emery 
knows the Spaniard from La Liga and sees him as a player with massive 
potential. But this unfinished product went on record this week to insist that 
he sees himself as the club’s No9, ahead of Cavani. “Cavani is a great player, 
but I am no substitute,” he told Le Parisien. “I come here with the desire to 
play in every game.”

Such provocations and challenges are the norm at a big club. And Emery still 
has a talented squad to work with, one that includes the emerging French 
talents of the defenders Presnel Kimpembe and Layvin Kurzawa, along with the 
forward Jean-Kévin Augustin. Cavani, Krychowiak, Ben Arfa and even Silva could 
start againstArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>. But Emery 
has endured a tough start to his new job and, when expectations are this high, 
only Champions League victories will make things easier.
 