
Paris Saint Germain defender Serge Aurier has been refused permission by 
British authorities to travel to England for Wednesday’s Champions Leaguematch 
against Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/arsene-wenger-playing-sanchez-manchester-united-not-risk>
.

The French club announced that Aurier, a 23-year-old Ivory Coast 
international, had been denied an entry visa because ofan assault conviction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/26/serge-aurier-psg-two-month-prison-sentence-police-nightclub>
 he received in September for acting violently towards police outside a 
nightclub.

In a statement, PSG said: “Due to a sudden about-face by the British 
authorities, Serge Aurier has not been allowed to travel with Unai Emery’s 
squad for the clash away to Arsenal.Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> is stunned by this 
incomprehensible situation that attacks the very integrity of the UEFA 
Champions League.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Farsenal-will-finish-the-job-against-psg-says-arsene-wenger-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arsenal%20will%20'finish%20the%20job'%20against%20PSG%2C%20says%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Farsenal-will-finish-the-job-against-psg-says-arsene-wenger-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arsenal%20will%20%27finish%20the%20job%27%20against%20PSG%2C%20says%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Farsenal-will-finish-the-job-against-psg-says-arsene-wenger-video&media=>
Arsenal will ‘finish the job’ against PSG, says Arsène Wenger – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/22/arsenal-will-finish-the-job-against-psg-says-arsene-wenger-video>
PSG say the British authorities originally granted Aurier a visa, however this 
was revoked on 16 November. The club informed the authorities that Aurier has 
appealed against his conviction.

“The club has argued several times that since the player has launched a legal 
appeal against the criminal ruling, he is therefore entitled to the presumption 
of innocence, as any other person exercising their right to appeal.


“Paris Saint-Germain strongly regrets that the presumption of innocence has 
not influenced Britain’s decision.”

PSG were also furious that they were only informed of the decision at 14:00 
the day before the game, “despite the club working for the last six days to 
find a solution to enable our player to travel with his teammates to London”. 
They deemed such timing a “flagrant lack of respect for the club”.

In response, a Home Office spokesperson said: “We reserve the right to refuse 
a visa to anyone who is convicted of criminal offences.

 “Mr Aurier received a two month custodial sentence in September for 
assaulting a police officer. The immigration rules clearly state that non-EU 
nationals who have received a custodial sentence of less than 12 months within 
the last five years will be refused on criminality grounds.

 “All applications are carefully considered on their individual merits, in 
line with the UK immigration rules and based on evidence provided by the 
applicant.”
 