
Zlatan Ibrahimovic took his tally to 37 goals in another remarkable season, 
scoring a hat-trick as the defending champions,Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain>, won 4-2 at Toulouse to 
maintain their five-point lead over Monaco.

Ibrahimovic, who also helped set up the other goal for the Argentina winger 
Ezequiel Lavezzi, has 22 league goals and is closing in on his career-best 
total of 30 from last season. At this rate he is on course to get 50 goals in 
all competitions.

Toulouse's coach, Alain Casanova, promised to attack and was true to his word, 
with the lively striker Wissam Ben Yedder scoring twice to set up a nervous 
finish before Ibrahimovic converted his second penalty of the match in the last 
minute.

PSG took the lead in the 33rd minute when Serbian defender Uros Spajic brought 
down Lavezzi, and Ibrahimovic drilled his spot-kick down the middle with 
Zacharie Boucher guessing wrong as he dived to his right.

PSG should have scored again in the 43rd minute when Ibrahimovic crossed from 
the left and the centre-back Thiago Silva failed to hit the target as he lunged 
in at the far post.

A minute later Toulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse> 
punished PSG for that miss when Ben Yedder volleyed in a cross from the 
midfielder Ã‰tienne Didot.

But PSG regained the lead in the 56th minute when Ibrahimovic again crossed 
from the left, Blaise Matuidi let the ball run and Lavezzi finished with a 
first-time shot.

Ibrahimovic seemed to have put the result beyond doubt in the 70th, heading in 
the substitute Yohan Cabaye's free-kick after the impressive Lavezzi had been 
fouled, but sloppy play let Toulouse back into the game three minutes later.

After the PSG midfielder Thiago Motta went to challenge Martin Braithwaite the 
ball bounced into the penalty area and Ben Yedder beat the goalkeeper Salvatore 
Sirigu with a calm finish.

Not to be outdone, Ibrahimovic went close with another header from Cabaye's 
free-kick which Boucher kept out and then scored another penalty after Issiaga 
Sylla handled his free-kick.

Ibrahimovic was lucky, however, as he tried to dink it over Boucher. The 
goalkeeper saved the shot, only for the rebound to fall kindly into the Sweden 
forward's path.
 