
Paris Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> have 
signed the Poland midfielder Grzegorz Krychowiak from Sevilla on a five-year 
deal.

The 26-year-old, the second signing for PSG’s new coach Unai Emery after Hatem 
Ben Arfa arrived from Nice on a two-year contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/paris-saint-germain-hatem-ben-arfa-signs>
, was one of Poland’s best players as they reached the Euro 2016 quarter-finals,
losing to Portugal on penalties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/30/poland-portugal-euro-2016-quarter-final-match-report>
.

Mikel Arteta to join Pep Guardiola at Manchester City in a coaching role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/03/mikel-arteta-pep-guardiola-manchester-city>
“I’m coming to Paris to experience strong emotions and to win as many trophies 
as possible,” Krychowiak, who has 38 caps, said. “This new challenge in my 
career promises to be a passionate one.”

No financial details were given but PSG are believed to have paid an initial 
fee of around €30m for Krychowiak, who had three years left on his existing 
contract. He also played for two seasons under Emery atSevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla>, winning the Europa League 
twice. The combative central midfielder played in the French league for Reims, 
Nantes and Bordeaux.

“It’s with great pride that I come back to France to wear the jersey of a club 
that’s as ambitious as Paris Saint-Germain,” he said. “Working alongside Unai 
Emery again obviously counted in my decision.”

During an interview with Le Parisien newspaper in May, the PSG president 
Nasser al-Khelaifi praised the fighting spirit and tactical nous shown by 
Sevilla during their Europa League campaign. “I’m very happy Grzegorz 
Krychowiak is joining us. He’s played very well over the past two seasons for 
Sevilla, especially in Europe,” Al-Khelaifi said. “He represents the values of 
rigor and combativeness that are dear to the club, to the fans and to our new 
coach. He is without doubt going to be an important member of our squad.”

Krychowiak is likely to play in a midfield three alongside Italy’s Marco 
Verratti and the France midfielder Blaise Matuidi.
 