
Six red cards, two refereeing cock-ups, a racism row and a broken nose; there 
was little Valentine's Day spirit inLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> this weekend. Instead of 
French kissing, the Glaswegian variety seemed more popular.

Yet love is certainly in the air at Paris Saint-Germain, who seem to have 
forgotten last month's boardroom warfare and have risen to second place after
beating Saint-Etienne 2-1 
<http://geeknsexy.com/2009/02/15/psg-st-etienne-resume-video-des-buts/>, 
although they were helped by the referee Laurent Duhamel's decision to only 
booked Stéphane Sessegnon for his 10th-minute head-butt on Blaise Matuidi and 
give the same punishment to Claude Makelele for a second-half two-footed tackle 
on Yoann Benalouane.

"Everyone saw the head-butt except the referee and his assistant, while 
Makelele also deserved a red card," fumed goalkeeper Jérémie Janot. "I have no 
comment to make about the refs," smiledLes Verts coach Alain Perrin, who is up 
before the disciplinary panel this week forhis comments about Jean-Michel 
Aulas's influence on referees 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/FF/breves2009/20090201_235724_perrin-on-s-est-fait-voles.html>
. "But if the ref didn't see anything, how come he gave a yellow card?" 
Duhamel, by the way, was the referee in charge when Wayne Rooney was accused of
stamping on Aalborg's Kasper Risgard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/dec/15/wayne-rooney-uefa> last 
December.

PSG won by a single goal for the ninth time this season and it's now their 
turn to talk down title chances, with Ludovic Giuly claiming that finishing in 
the top three alone would be extraordinary: "We need to show the kind of 
consistency that saw us beat Bordeaux [1-0 in Week 2] andMarseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> [4-2 in week 10]." Makelele 
was asked after the game if he had been dreaming of the title in the shower, or 
when he lay in bed at night. "We're happy where we are, and we have to keep 
going like this," he replied, thankfully not revealing his innermost bedroom 
thoughts. "But I guess if we're still second and one point behind Lyon with 
three games left then maybe we'll start thinking about it."

The feeling persists that PSG are playing at their absolute limit and 
considering they have such a small squad, their lack of injuries has 
undoubtedly helped. While Sessegnon and Guillaume Hoarau have inspired them in 
various games this season, in recent weeks Jérémy Clément has been their star 
man, despite playing with a broken hand. He scored the winner after another 
in-form player, the 19-year-old defender Mamadou Sakho, had put them ahead.

Bordeaux, one point behind Lyon a fortnight ago, have fallen six points away 
afterdrawing 1-1 with Grenoble 
<http://fourfourtwo.free.fr/index.php/ligue-1/bordeaux-concede-le-nul-1-1-a-domicile-contre-grenoble-video-des-buts-de-chamakh-et-cesar-1801>
. Yoann Gourcuff was left on the bench (for only the fourth time in 34 games) 
after Raymond Domenech went back on his word and played him for the full 90 
minutes in the midweek defeat to Argentina in Marseille. "Absolutely 
ridiculous,"was Laurent Blanc's response 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090212_190645_blanc-decu-par-les-bleus.html>
 while he wasn't the only one to leave the Vélodrome furious: Samir Nasri 
stayed on the bench throughout, as Domenech refused the midfielder a return to 
his home stadium.

Last week, Bordeaux's former heroes insisted that the team could win the 
title: Zinedine Zidane compared the side to the 1996 Uefa Cup finalists that he 
played for, while René Girard said: "This team has a soul andlast week's loss 
to Marseille <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H291_AOZwfU> hasn't changed my 
opinion." This result might though, as Bordeaux only had Marouane Chamakh's 
goal to show for all their dominance, before Bostjan César equalised from an 
offside position. The referee Philippe Kalt later acknowledged his error, 
though it could have been worse as man of the match Sofiane Feghouli rattled 
the crossbar late on. "Our real rivals are not Lyon but Marseille, PSG and 
Lille," said defender Marc Planus, urging a reality-check.

John Mensah's eminently avoidable second-half dismissal overshadowed Lyon's 
routine3-1 win over Le Havre <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iBMFic5u_dY>. The 
Ghanaian had asked to be taken off at half-time after a fan had racially abused 
him, but his coach Claude Puel refused, and Mensah was booked twice in 18 
minutes for an early bath. "I made a mistake as I should have taken him off, 
but I thought he had recovered his composure," said Puel. The fan was arrested 
(just before Mensah's first yellow card) and has confessed to shouting racist 
abuse, including monkey-chants, at Mensah. He can expect a severe punishment: 
last May, the Metz fanwho insulted Valenciennes' Abdeslam Ouaddou 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x4eruk_metz-valenciennes-insultes-racistes_sport>
 was given a three-month suspended prison sentence and three-year stadium ban, 
while another Metz fan was handed a six-month prison sentence. In August, a 
Lille fan received a three-month prison sentence. "We are really upset for John 
and promise to get his confidence back," said Ederson, scorer of Lyon's opening 
goal.

Mensah has had a tough season. In October, he put his poor form down to "being 
haunted" by his arrest when police stopped him in his 4x4. "I was not speeding, 
I was not asked for my papers, I was just put in custody for several hours for 
no reason," he said. "The police thought my car was stolen and apologised to 
me. I'm a Christian so I forgave them, but I admit it was hard.They treated me 
like a criminal 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/sports/mensah-on-m-a-traite-comme-un-criminel-24-09-2008-251114.php>
." His agent has advised him against going home to Ghana but Mensah, who on 
Tuesdayclaimed the fan "ruined his career" 
<http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/breves2009/20090217_075846_mensah-a-pense-rentrer-au-ghana.html>
, has refused to commit to Lyon beyond this season.

Elsewhere, Marseille and Toulouse remain one point behind PSG 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=23> 
after narrow away wins. Auxerre had coach Jean Fernandez sent off for 
complaining about another red card, given to Thomas Kahlenberg for an elbow 
that left Lille's Mathieu Debuchy with a bloodied nose, and although Auxerre 
are appealing the dismissal, they will savourthe 2-0 win 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pty-AMxefp0> that lifts them clear of danger. 
Not so safe are Le Mans, dropping quickly after Daniel Jeandupeux's job title 
was altered from sports director to coach. Theylost 2-1 at home to Nice 
<http://www.last-video.com/video-le-mans-nice-1-2>, Mahamane Traoré's 
last-minute-winner coming after Loïc Rémy and Grégory Cerdan (clearlyno 
relation to the boxing champion Marcel 
<http://monbricabrac.m.o.pic.centerblog.net/ayxc0s51.jpg>) were dismissed for 
scuffling over picking the ball out of the net following Emerse Faé's Nice 
equaliser.

Attention this week turns to the Uefa Cup, where Saint-Etienne, PSG, Marseille 
andBordeaux <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bordeaux> are all in action. 
With the latter three all chasing Ligue 1's second spot (or better), 
full-strength line-ups may not be the order of the day. The French league is 
desperate to provide a Uefa Cup winner to improve their rankings for European 
competitions, but the clubs' short-term thinking is clear: the further they 
broaden their horizons in Europe, the more domestic challenges will become 
blurred. All of which plays nicely into Lyon's hands, who have the not 
inconsiderable challenge of Barcelona to worry about in the Champions League. 
"They might start dropping points when their focus switches to Europe," said 
Gourcuff, somewhat unconvincingly.

Results, Week 23: Bordeaux 1-1 Grenoble, Auxerre 2-0 Lille, Rennes 1-1 Nancy, 
Le Mans 1-2 Nice, Caen 1-1 Lorient,Valenciennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valenciennes> 1-1 Nantes, PSG 2-1 
Saint-Etienne, Lyon 3-1 Le Havre, Sochaux 1-2 Toulouse, Monaco 0-1 Marseille.

Latest Ligue 1 table 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?Lang=0&CTID=23>
 