
Paul provoked howls of protest last month (Saturday prize puzzle, No 25,316, 7 
May <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/prize/25316>) with his clue for 
24,3 across: 'Into smacking, if I then propose shaking, the results could 
confirm it (3,5,2,2,3,7)'. The anagram involved led to THE PROOF IS IN THE 
PUDDING. A broadside from Dave in the Netherlands was a typical tirade, making 
the point that the saying is actually 'the proof of the pudding is in the 
eating'.

'The proof is NOT in the pudding. Does nobody learn basic English any more? 
I've heard this frequently misused by reporters in newspapers, presenters on 
the BBC, politicians and now you in your crossword. It is used fairly 
frequently but rarely correctly. Paul needs to be sent on an English course 
before he's allowed to set another crossword.'

Leaving aside the pedantic question of how one hears a newspaper reporter, I 
can assure Dave that we do and did know the correct version of the saying. 
However, as he concedes, its incorrect abbreviation has long been commonplace. 
So commonplace, in fact, that the wrong version came up on Google with over 12 
million results, while the longer correct version produced only just over 1 
million.

Here is part of a note on the wrong version, provided by www.phrases.org.uk 
<http://www.phrases.org.uk>. '"The proof of the pudding" is just shorthand for 
"the proof of the pudding is in the eating". That longer version makes sense at 
least, whereas the shortened version really doesn't mean anything â€“ nor does 
the often-quoted incorrect variation "the proof is in the pudding". The 
continued use of that meaningless version is no doubt bolstered by the fact 
that the correct version isn't at all easy to understand.'

In the circumstances I thought that the shorter version was legitimate in a 
Guardian crossword, if not in the paper's news pages. I was further swayed by a 
neat link Paul made with another clue in the same puzzle: 'With this, 24 3 [ie 
'the proof is in the pudding'] (5,4) for TIPSY CAKE.
_____

A number of you noticed (and were sufficiently surprised to comment) that the 
Brendancryptic puzzle for 30 May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/25335> (No 25,335) had no 
running theme in its clues, which his offerings usually do. What you may have 
missed is that the letters running clockwise round the completed grid from the 
top left-hand corner read: THERE'S NO THEME IN THIS CROSSWORD.
_____

A solver from Australia has pointed out an error in Quick No 12,813 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quick/12813> (4 June). The clue for 23 
across read: 'Julia, Australian premier (7)' for GILLARD. The setter and I 
should have known that the Welsh-born Australian Labor Party leader, Julia, is 
properly prime minister (not premier) of Australia. 'Premier' is the title 
properly given to the leader of the government in each of the Australian states 
and not to the head of the Federal government at Canberra. My apologies and the 
clue has been corrected in the website archive.
_____

I also made a mistake in reporting the names of those submitting the first 
correct solutions to theApril's Genius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2011/may/02/genius-annotated-solutions-94>
 (No 94) by Puck by jumping the gun and giving you instead the names of those 
first in with theMay puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2011/jun/06/genius-annotated-solutions-95>
 (No 95) by Lavatch. The April leaders were in fact Tony of London W5 at 02:05 
and M1F of East Kilbride at 03:06. This time (May) Ian of London N14 at 01:54 
beat Ian of London SW3 by just over an hour. Douglas of Auckland, NZ was the 
first home from overseas at 04:40.

Congratulations to Nigel Dark from Suffolk, who is May's Genius winner.
We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>. For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>.
 