
The Swindon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/swindon> Town midfielder 
Massimo Luongo has become Chris Ramsey’s first permanent signing at Queens Park 
Rangers as they prepare for life in the Championship next season.

Ben Gladwin, another midfielder, swiftly followed Luongo in making the move 
from Swindon toQPR <https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr>. Both players 
have joined on three-year deals for undisclosed fees.

The 22-year-old Luongo scored six times and contributed eight assists during 
Swindon’s run to theLeague One play-off final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/24/preston-north-end-swindon-town-league-one-play-off-final-match-report>
, where they were beaten 4-0 by Preston on Sunday.

Ramsey is familiar with the midfielder having worked with him during the 
Australia international’s time in Tottenham Hotspur’s academy.

Speaking to QPR’s website 
<http://www.qpr.co.uk/news/article/massimo-luongo-joins-qpr-from-swindon-town-2474048.aspx>
, Ramsey said: “Mass is a player I know a lot about having played a part in his 
development at Spurs. He brings quality on the ball, the ability to link up 
play all across the pitch, and his goals and assists record at club and 
international level speaks volumes for a creative midfielder.

Swindon’s Massimo Luongo is ready to face Sheffield United and the big time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/06/swindon-massimo-luongo-sheffield-united>
“As with any young player, there are areas of his game that need improving, 
but knowing him as I do, I know he will embrace the learning curve of playing 
for us in the Championship. I’m confident he will flourish at Loftus Road.”

Luongo’s arrival comes the day after QPR announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/27/qpr-release-six-players-rio-ferdinand-joey-barton>
 that Joey Barton, Richard Dunne, Rio Ferdinand, Bobby Zamora, Shaun 
Wright-Phillips and Brian Murphy would be leaving the club following their 
relegation from the top flight.

Luongo said: “Regular football is important to me, that’s why QPR appealed to 
me. I’m at my best when I’m playing week in, week out – I’m all for playing as 
many games as possible in a season.

“The step up to the Championship is going to be a challenge, but I’ll always 
back myself.”

Gladwin, who is also 22, scored 11 times last season, with eight of the goals 
coming in Swindon’s final seven fixtures.

Gladwin said: “I’m really pleased to be joining the club – and I’m really 
excited. There was interest from the Premier League but for me, personally, I 
think this move is a little more realistic at this stage of my career. Playing 
is what it’s all about, sitting on the bench is no way to improve your game.

“Chris Ramsey is a fantastic coach and I’m sure he’ll improve me on the 
training pitch. I spoke to him earlier this week and was hugely impressed by 
what he had to say and where he sees me fitting in.”
 