
Whether the government finally decides on a new airport runway for Heathrow or 
for Gatwick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/16/heathrow-gatwick-expansion-commission-decision>
, the decision will be fiercely contested. And the fiercest – if, alas, least 
influential – objections will come from those whose wellbeing will be directly 
affected.

British public support for fracking sinks to lowest ever level
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/13/british-public-support-for-fracking-sinks-to-lowest-ever-level>
Some will face the loss of their home; those whose property is spared will be 
blighted by continued planning uncertainty or potential noise and air 
pollution. Others will suffer years of disruption from the massive construction 
work a new runway will entail. Only those whose homes are to be demolished will 
be awarded anything like reasonable compensation, though money will never be 
enough to offset the loss of familiarity and place.

The new airport capacity for the south-east is only one of many battles 
looming between residents and business and development interests. The 
high-speed rail line HS2 is probably the next most controversial project, 
closely followed by London Crossrail, any large housing development almost 
anywhere, and the recent government decision topermit fracking at a site in 
Lancashire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-fracking-given-go-ahead-as-lancashire-council-rejection-is-overturned>
.

With the prime minister reportedly keen to exploit today’s ultra-low interest 
rates to improve the country’s lagging infrastructure, the number of such 
disputes, and the attendant cost, is likely to soar. At least part of a 
solution, however, was recently heralded by Theresa May.

The last government broached the creation of a shale wealth fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/06/fracking-local-people-payments-theresa-may>
 to temper public hostility to fracking; this would distribute 10% of all shale 
gas tax revenue to the communities affected. May’s crucial tweak was to propose 
the money be given directly to householders, rather than added to council 
coffers. This would give residents a direct financial stake in a development 
likely to cause them grief, even as it promised benefits to others – cheaper 
energy prices, say, from shale gas.

Allowing residents a cut of the tax revenue might not actually tip the balance 
of opinion

Allowing residents a cut of the tax revenue might not actually tip the balance 
of opinion. AYouGov survey 
<https://www.foe.co.uk/resource/press_releases/only-1/3-public-support-fracking-despite-cash-payments-yougov_15082016>
 found that a majority would still oppose fracking even if households were paid 
– and the sums, it has been emphasised, would not be large. But some payment, 
however small, could help even up the advantage just a little.

A very British response to the idea has been that direct payments would be 
tantamount to bribery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/07/fracking-bribe-public-accept-greenpeace-labour-cash>
. But direct payments seem to me preferable to a contribution that gets 
dissipated in council budgets, or to nothing at all.

Indeed, I would argue that the same principle should be extended to those 
adversely affected by all large commercial and infrastructure projects. This 
could reduce objections – including to much-needed new housing – but it would 
also enshrine in statute the recognition that there is a quality-of-life cost 
to major works and that this should be priced in at the start.

Charges of “bribery” have been made before. When developers of a big London 
site recently offered payments to affected residents, they were denounced for 
trying to rig the planning process. Withcouncils not unamenable to incentives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/sep/17/truth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities>
, however, the alternative is often not a better development, but some 
recompense for long-suffering residents as opposed to none.

I admit to a personal interest here. For the best part of four years the peace 
of our particularly quiet London flat was destroyed by the demolition and 
commercial redevelopment of a large government building next door. There was no 
compensation, not even a discount on council tax, and councils have no real 
interest in pursuing breaches of noise and other regulations because of the 
time and cost.

If compensation for disruption were levied upfront and fines for subsequent 
breaches had to be paid direct to affected neighbours (as for late trains), 
developers might not be more compliant, but they would have – slightly – 
happier neighbours. Far from being bribery, this would be an acknowledgement 
that quality of life is worth something.
 