
It is easy sometimes to wonder whether our governments care about anything 
except money; yet they refuse to put a monetary value on those aspects of life 
that lend enchantment (Mary Dejevsky, Quality of life has a price. The frackers 
should pay it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/16/quality-of-life-frackers-pay-heathrow-hs2>
, 17 October). A beautiful view is one of these; so is peace and quiet. So is 
the ability to keep one’s windows open at night.

These blessings are disappearing at great speed, as the skies fill up, and as 
lorries, cars and machines are added to our beloved landscapes. We are told 
that “those affected by fracking” might be compensated, but I do not believe 
that many people would rather have £10,000 than the peace and quiet, and the 
grassy view that will vanish, with their clean drinking water, as the frackers 
appear. It is generally noise that provides the majority of council complaints. 
For example, between January and September 2014, councils in the UK received 
200,220 noise complaints, almost half the total number (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/mar/18/complaints-survey-noisy-neighbours>
, 18 March 2014).

Quality of life has a price. The frackers should pay it | Mary Dejevsky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/16/quality-of-life-frackers-pay-heathrow-hs2>
Theresa May’s predecessor trumpeted the arrival of real localisation, with 
people having a say in what happened in their immediate locality. I think it 
would be surprising if the opinions of locals played any real part in the major 
decisions we are awaiting – on a runway and on fracking – even if these 
activities could utterly ruin their lives.
Juliet Solomon
Frome, Somerset

• The very promise of payment for householders threatened by fracking, where 
the arguments against are so strong and the social and environmental impacts so 
negative, constitutes a bribe, which is both wrong in principle and an 
exploitable precedent for future antisocial actions.

Michael Sandel, in his little book What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of 
Markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/25/money-cant-buy-sandel-review>, 
deals forensically with such situations, which have become central to the 
neoliberal approach. From copious evidence he concludes that relying solely on 
cash payments to induce citizens to acquiesce in an unwanted, antisocial event 
“is not only expensive, it is also corrupting. It bypasses persuasion and the 
kind of consent that arises from deliberating about the risks the activity 
poses and the larger community’s need for it.” It also lets weak governments 
off the hook.

The intrusion of what Sandel calls “market norms” tends to crowd out the moral 
and social issues, which is a bad precedent for future action. Or have we 
already reached the point where money buys everything and anything?
Ralph Windle
Witney, Oxfordshire

• The 50 MPs and representatives from main parties in Scotland, Wales and 
Northern Irish assemblies who support Heathrow expansion should spend some 
serious time in Hounslow – or Isleworth, Brentford, Chiswick, Richmond, 
Twickenham, East Sheen, Barnes, Putney, Wandsworth, and Clapham, Hillingdon, 
Windsor, Staines/Spelthorne for that matter – before they can make objective 
judgments on the third runway issue (Heathrow confident of official backing for 
expansion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/17/heathrow-third-runway-close-to-getting-government-green-light>
, 18 October). That’s more than 1.25 million people, and a third runway will 
bring Hammersmith & Fulham, Kensington & Chelsea, Kingston-upon-Thames, 
Merton/Wimbledon and more of leafy Berkshire into the equation. The affected 
population will rise to more than 2 million people.

Stop obsessing about planes and trains, and start using roads better | Simon 
Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/20/stop-obsessing-planes-trains-use-roads-better-third-heathrow-runway-hs2-car>
The quality of life for those under the flightpath doesn’t seem to have 
received much coverage of late – perhaps that’s something for another 
last-minute study. One of the reasons that life remains bearable under existing 
flightpath arrangements is because of the respite given by runway alternation. 
This will all change with a third runway.
Brian Coope
London

• With airport expansion, as with the Brexit referendum, the government is 
asking the wrong question. The choice should not be between expanding Heathrow 
or expanding Gatwick but between more airport pollution in London or less, 
between some London airport expansion or none. If neither airport is expanded, 
air travel from London will have to become more expensive to cope with apparent 
rising demand, and anyone who can afford to travel through London will have to 
pay more. Probably mainly business people and holidaymakers bound for exotic 
destinations.

Climate change means no airport expansion – at Heathrow or anywhere | George 
Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/18/climate-change-airport-expansion-heathrow>
The hard-working families about whom the government professes to care will 
still be able to holiday abroad if they wish. They could for instance catch a 
ferry from Harwich or fly from Birmingham. Or they could holiday at home.

The idea that Britain will lose economically by not expanding its role as a 
air travel hub is fallacious. A transport hub aims to cater for transit 
passengers, who offer nothing to the local economy apart from paying landing 
fees to the airport and buying food and drink at airport-franchised shops. Like 
the proverbial seagulls, they fly in, shit over everything, and fly out again. 
Let the transit passengers do that to the people of Dublin, Paris or Amsterdam, 
as we aimed to do when we voted for Brexit.
Richard Cooper
Chichester, West Sussex

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 