
The Queen has suggested that Britain needs to “take a deep breath” to face the 
“world’s big problems” after a tumultuous political year.

In her annual Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> 
message, the monarch made no mention of Britain’s historic vote to leave the 
European Union, focusing instead on the “inspiration” of Britain’s successful 
Olympics team.

In what could be seen as a coded message to the nation in the aftermath of the 
Brexit vote, she said: “When people face a challenge they sometimes talk about 
taking a deep breath to find courage or strength. In fact, the word ‘inspire’ 
literally means ‘to breathe in’.”

The Queen’s Christmas address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/25/the-queens-speech-christmas-day-full-transcript-elizabeth>
 was recorded before she fell ill,forcing her to miss the annual church service 
at Sandringham for the first time in almost 30 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/25/queen-elizabeth-too-ill-to-attend-christmas-day-church-service>
. She had also delayed travelling to the royal estate for the annual Christmas 
break earlier this week.

The Queen's speech in full: 'We can do small things with great love'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/25/the-queens-speech-christmas-day-full-transcript-elizabeth>
In the address, she added: “Even with the inspiration of others, it’s 
understandable that we sometimes think the world’s problems are so big that we 
can do little to help.”

She partially echoed a Thought for the Day message given by the Prince of Wales
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/22/prince-charles-rising-intolerance-risks-repeat-of-horrors-of-the-past>
 earlier this week, in which he had called for more tolerance towards refugees 
by urging people to remember that Jesus, Mary and Joseph were forced to flee 
violent persecution.

The Queen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/queen> did not go that far, but in 
an address which traditionally has a strong religious theme, she pointed out 
that Jesus was “maligned and rejected by many, though he had done no wrong”.

The Queen has done a Christmas broadcast every year of her 64-year reign 
except for 1969, when there was an overload of royal coverage due to her son’s 
investiture as Prince of Wales.

Unlike the annual Queen’s speech to parliament, the Christmas address is 
written without the help of government advisers.

The theme of this year’s broadcast was “inspiration”. She used the word 
“inspire” or its derivates 10 times as she spoke about the achievements of the 
UK’s Olympic and Paralympic athletes, and those from the Commonwealth.

She added: “To be inspirational you don’t have to save lives or win medals. I 
often draw strength from meeting ordinary people doing extraordinary things: 
volunteers, carers, community organisers and good neighbours; unsung heroes 
whose quiet dedication makes them special.”

This year’s message reflected the increasingly devout nature of the monarch’s 
Christmas addresses of the past few years. She repeatedly stressed the 
importance of “small acts of goodness” and she cited Mother, now Saint, Teresa 
of Calcutta, as saying: “Not all of us can do great things. But we can do small 
things with great love.”

Using her own words, the Queen added: “Christ’s example helps me see the value 
of doing small things with great love, whoever does them and whatever they 
themselves believe.”

She continued the theme in paying tribute to the 600 charities of which she is 
patron. “Many of these organisation are modest in size but inspire me with the 
work they do.”

Last week it was announced that the Queen would be stepping down as patron 
from 25 national organisations at the end of her 90th birthday year, with the 
patronages passing to other members of the royal family.

The Queen recorded her Christmas message in Buckingham Palace’s Regency Room 
while seated at a desk featuring a photograph of her with the Prince of Wales, 
released earlier this month to mark the end of her 90th birthday year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fqueen-uses-christmas-message-to-urge-britons-to-take-a-deep-breath%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ab324d359b32964b3729773bfa358c3d72d4b6f%2F12_0_805_404%2F805.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Queen%20uses%20Christmas%20message%20to%20urge%20Britons%20to%20'take%20a%20deep%20breath'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fqueen-uses-christmas-message-to-urge-britons-to-take-a-deep-breath%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Queen%20uses%20Christmas%20message%20to%20urge%20Britons%20to%20%27take%20a%20deep%20breath%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fqueen-uses-christmas-message-to-urge-britons-to-take-a-deep-breath%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ab324d359b32964b3729773bfa358c3d72d4b6f%2F12_0_805_404%2F805.jpg>
 Wordle of the Queen’s Christmas message Photograph: Wordle.net 
Illness forced her to miss the Christmas Day service at Sandringham’s St Mary 
Magdalene church for the first time since 1988.

More than a thousand people had gathered outside the Norfolk church for a 
glimpse of the monarch, including some who had arrived before dawn.

In a brief statement issued before the service, Buckingham Palace said: “The 
Queen continues to recover from a heavy cold and will stay indoors to assist 
with her recovery.”

It added: “Her Majesty will participate in the royal family Christmas 
celebrations during the day.”

The 90-year-old Queen and Duke of Edinburgh, 95, were forced to fly to their 
Sandringham estate in Norfolk by helicopter on Thursday after their initial 
Christmas plans to travel by train were cancelled because of ill health.

The duke was well enough to attend the service. He was accompanied by other 
senior royals, including the Prince of Wales and his wife the Duchess of 
Cornwall, Prince Harry, and Princes Andrew Edward and their families.

The royals showed no sign of concern about the health of the Queen. Prince 
Harry was seen chatting and joking with some of the crowd.

Ada Nesbitt, 93, decorated her wheelchair for the occasion, and also wore 
tinsel and Santa earmuffs. Her daughter Jane Nesbitt, 56, from Norfolk, said: 
“Harry said you expect to get noticed, dressed like that. It’s a pity to miss 
the Queen but if she’s not well, she’s not well.”


The Duke of Cambridge broke with tradition by spending Christmas at his wife’s 
family home in Bucklebury, Berkshire. The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge 
attended a service in nearby Englefield church with their children George and 
Charlotte.
 