
Your response to my request last month for feedback on the Quicks and the 
Quiptics was huge and I am very grateful for it. I regret that there were far 
too many emails for me to be able to answer each one individually. But there 
was a surprising degree of unanimity.

The overwhelmingly predominant view was that the slightly quirky and sometimes 
a bit harder character of the Guardian Quick (as opposed to the quicks in other 
papers that we need not mention) was part of its attraction. For example, only 
a couple of people said that they had not liked the "rhyming clue" device 
(Wall, Fall, Ball, Call), even though it inevitably led to solutions that were 
not always 100 per cent pedantically accurate. In fact, many said that they 
positively liked the fact that such clues caused them to scratch their heads 
for a while. So here "no dumbing down" will remain the order of the day.

With the Quiptics there was an equally clear impression that, over time, these 
had indeed become on average slightly harder. Specifically, the comment was 
quite often made that some puzzles by some Quiptic setters (no names, no pack 
drill) seemed harder than some of the main Cryptics. Given the deliberately 
wide range of difficulty of the Monday-to-Saturday puzzles, I think that there 
is always going to be some overlap, but the point is taken. The Quiptic was 
originally introduced as a nursery slope (with the Genius as the matching black 
run) and I shall try to bear that more in mind in the future. There is no 
reason why Guardian wit and bias has to be lost in the process.

Several of the Quiptic responses were from those who said that they would much 
value the help of a beginners' guide to cryptic crosswords. There are any 
number of them around; some of the best are now out of print but obtainable, 
for example, via www.bookfinder.com. The late Alec Robins (Custos in the 
Guardian) wrote a classic, first published as Teach Yourself Crosswords and 
then as The ABC of Crosswords. The late Ruth Crisp (Crispa in the Guardian) 
wrote Crosswords and How To Solve Them. Brian Greer, then crossword editor of 
the Times, now Brendan in the Guardian) wrote How To Do The Times Crossword. 
Don Manley (Pasquale in the Guardian) wrote The Chambers Crossword Manual, now 
in its fourth edition. I have a particular soft spot (because I wrote it) for 
'Secrets of the Setters: how to solve the Guardian Crossword', available from 
guardianbooks.co.uk or by calling 0845 606 4232 or from Amazon (or, I am sure, 
second hand).

_____

If you missed the barrage of criticism about the Guardian crosswords by a 
puzzle setter called John Pidgeon, which was published in the paper on 2 
February, you can still read it at 
http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/feb/02/crossword-puzzles . His 
thesis was that Guardian puzzles are so full of now uncommon terminology that 
younger solvers don't use and of people who younger solvers have never heard of 
that they risk rapidly becoming as endangered a pastime as morris dancing.

He has a point and it is one that all crossword editors grapple with. Times 
change and we must change with them. But how fast? He made a particular 
criticism of how rarely the names of figures from contemporary pop culture crop 
up, compared with those of old time stalwarts. Here I rather envy my colleague 
on the Times, who inherited the convention that no one should appear as a 
solution before they were dead and decided to stick with it. That would knock 
the pop culture suggestion on the head entirely, except for those who had died 
young. But, against that, the convention produces quite serious anomalies: for 
example, it would allow John Lennon but not Sir Paul McCartney (though Pidgeon 
might think my examples a bit pass�).

My refuge, which I recognise is a cover for shoddy compromise, is to say that 
each case must be judged on its merits. The number of Guardian crossword 
solvers with any serious grasp of Greek or Latin or Spenserian English is 
clearly falling by the day. So, too, is the number of those with any detailed 
familiarity with the Bible, particularly the Old Testament. Crosswords must 
(and have) adjusted accordingly. But, equally, the number of Guardian crossword 
solvers with instant familiarity with the laws of chemistry and physics or the 
stars of Strictly Come Dancing remains small. Or, to put it another way, it is 
true (because I have asked) that typical 22-year-old British graduates (the 
crossword solvers of the future) have no idea what the 1956 Suez Crisis was 
about or who were the principal protagonists. But what guide does that give as 
to whether Eden, Nasser, Aswan High Dam or Eisenhower are fair words to include 
in a Guardian crossword? And Pidgeon's view that W.G. Grace, George Best and 
Pel� should be quietly phased out from crosswords because it is now a very long 
time since they played is, in my view, frankly daft. Any University Challenge 
participant knows who they are, though Pel� (not being dead) would still fail 
the Times test.

_____

I have to admit, however, that I was surprised by the volume of perplexity 
expressed at a clue in Quick No 12,086 (3 February): "Ounce (4,7)". It did not 
even register on my radar as a potential problem. As every dictionary on my 
shelves confirms, ounce is another name for the SNOW LEOPARD and in my mind 
their connection in crosswords borders on being a clich�. But now I wonder 
whether this meaning of "ounce" would also fall under the Pidgeon anathema.

_____

There were 197 correct entries for the February Genius. The first was clocked 
in at 13.19 GMT from Alan in York. There was one earlier entrant but she had 
ROMA not TOGA as the final down clue. There were six other entries on the first 
Monday.
 