
Thanks to all of you who responded to my question about whether the Quick 
crossword has of late become too easy. There certainly was a general perception 
that there had been a run of easy puzzles in June, but equally the majority of 
you did not seem to have detected any change in the average level of difficulty 
over time. For example, Colin B, who does the Quick crossword online each 
morning, reported that it takes him between six and 20 minutes (six being as 
fast as he can fill it in). Then, later in the day, he also does an old Quick 
from thearchive <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/series/quick>. He is now 
back to November 2006 and finds that, for him, these old puzzles fall within 
the same time range.

What came out strongly was a positive vote in favour of having Quick puzzles 
with different levels of difficulty. Jane F complained that the standard of 
difficulty was 'very erratic â€“ on Saturday it was too easy, today too 
difficult! Some of the clues are sensible, some incomprehensible.' But for the 
overwhelming majority this 'erratic standard of difficulty' was a virtue. 'Some 
other papers' quick crosswords are so predictable in their uniformity they 
become boring' was the opinion of Peter S, though Fred P appreciated 'the 
somewhat stiffer level [of clue] (with the added element of wit or word play)' 
and had 'noticed recently that the gap had widened: the easier level has become 
just a little too obvious'. Harry K, though, was not complaining: 'Rightly or 
wrongly, when I do complete one quickly I feel very smug!' Overall, there does 
not seem to be any general call for a change of Quick policy and, with pleas 
from as far afield as Cairns, Queensland and New Plymouth, New Zealand, there 
is certainly no widespread demand for deliberately making these puzzles 
systematically harder.
_____
A Pasquale clue in Cryptic No 25,685 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25685> (11 July) got the pedants 
going. (As I may have said before, in my book in relation to crosswords 
'pedantry' is not a vice.) The clue was: 'Indian food cold? It can be extremely 
cold (8)' for BALTIC [BALTI/C]. 'Balti' does not come from India, was the cry. 
It is, of course, that style of spicy cuisine where the food is cooked in and 
eaten from a sort of two-handled wok. The dictionaries before me describe the 
dish variously as Bangladeshi, Pakistani and Indian. The first question is 
whether, as an adjective describing a style of cooking, 'Indian' can cover all 
parts of the Indian subcontinent. The second is whether a dish cooked and 
served outside the subcontinent can be called 'Indian food'. (By analogy, chow 
mein was invented in the United States but now appears the world over in 
restaurants serving 'Chinese food'.)

The word balti for a pail or bucket is found in both Urdu and Hindi (official 
languages of Bangladesh and Pakistan, on the one hand, and India on the other), 
so that is not helpful evidence. Bangladesh was once the eastern part of 
Pakistan and both were, of course, part of India before 1947, when the British 
first developed their taste for curry. The main point, though, is that balti 
was not a cuisine invented in any part of the subcontinent, but by Pakistani 
(and more recently Bangladeshi) chefs in the West Midlands. For my money it is 
now a popular dish well, established in curry houses of every kind the length 
and breadth of the land and, as such, may safely be referred to in Guardian 
crosswords as Indian food.
_____
The Guardian editorially may still stick to its essentially republican line, 
but its crossword solvers are sharp at spotting any error involving the House 
of Windsor.Paul's cryptic No 25,678 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25678> (3 July) had: 'Ninth in 
line with flipping nice spanners (8,4) for PRINCESS ANNE [NICE SPANNERS 
(anag)]. In fact , as several of you quickly pointed out, ahead of Anne come 
her brother, the Prince of Wales; his two sons; her other brothers Prince 
Andrew and his two children and Prince Edward and his two children. That makes 
her tenth, not ninth, in line, coming immediately after Lady Louise 
Mountbatten-Windsor. Our apologies to the Princess Royal, if she got stuck on 
that clue as a result of our mistake.
_____
This is advance notice of the publication date for Araucaria's August bank 
holiday weekend special offering. It will appear on Saturday 25 August.
_____
The July Genius puzzle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/java/new/0,,-28175,00.html> (No 109 set by 
Araucaria) attracted an unusually large (35) entry on the first day. This time 
Tony at 01:42 pipped Dave (01:48) to the post. The first overseas entry was 
from Brian of Paderborn, Germany. There were 327 correct entries by the 
deadline.

Congratulations to Ken Bowler, who is July's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <>
 