
“I’m warning you, you risk enjoying it.” So said Arsène Wenger to Rémi Garde 
when the former Arsenal midfielder accepted Lyon’s offer to move into 
management in 2011. And Garde did enjoy it but he also found it draining and so 
after three successful years at Lyon – and the day after receiving his final 
coaching badge – he stepped down, explaining he wanted to devote himself more 
to his family and “recharge”. Seventeen months later the 49-year-old has 
decided the time is right to return to management. We will soonfind out whether 
Villa Park is the right place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2015/oct/28/remi-garde-tim-sherwood-aston-villa>
.

Tottenham rapidly expose size of Rémi Garde’s task at Aston Villa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/02/tottenham-aston-villa-premier-league-match-report>
There is no doubt Lyon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> was the 
perfect location for him to begin his managerial career. He was born close to 
the city in 1966 and supported the team as a child before joining their academy 
and progressing to the first team, which he captained to promotion in 1989 and 
thus helped launch the club’s rise to dominance in France.

After leaving and spending three years at Strasbourg and another three at 
Arsenal, he returned to Lyon and worked in all the main sectors of the club – 
as a scout, then director of the academy from which he had graduated and also 
as the assistant manager to firstPaul Le Guen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/jan/15/europeanfootball.parisstgermain>
 and then Gérard Houllier. When he was given the top job it seemed like a 
destiny fulfilled. “He’s a very intelligent guy, he is a visionary and he has 
an approach to football that I think is remarkable … I’ve been saying to the 
president for a while: ‘Rémi is our Guardiola’,” said Bernard Lacombe, the 
long-time adviser to the Lyon president, Jean-Michel Aulas.

Garde transformed Lyon, not quite spectacularly or triumphantly enough to put 
him in the class of Pep Guardiola but noticeably and while operating within 
shackles the Catalan did not have to contend with andAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> do.

Lyon had just missed out on Champions League qualification and were slashing 
their budget so Garde had to integrate a wave of young players while many of 
the team’s assets were sold. His calm, clear and collaborative manner helped 
lift the spirit of a team who had become rather moroseunder his disciplinarian 
predecessor, Claude Puel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/nov/02/champions-league-lyon-liverpool>
, and he fostered a vibrant attacking style while remaining versatile enough to 
use a variety of formations.

Garde fostered a vibrant attacking style at Lyon while remaining versatile 
enough to use a variety of formations

Garde won the French Cup in his first season, had a good run in the Europa 
League and kept the team in respectable league positions throughout his reign 
at a time when money was propelling Paris Saint-Germain and Monaco into another 
dimension.

Lyon lost to PSG in the 2014 League Cup final a month before he announced he 
would not accept the club’s offer of a new contract. Already in that final the 
strain of the job seemed apparent, as a touchline camera detected himinsulting 
the PSG defender Thiago Motta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/22/french-best-quotes-2014-zlatan-barton-nasri-rihanna>
 in a highly uncharacteristic outburst for which he apologised unreservedly the 
next day.

Garde evidently feels revitalised by the sabbatical he has enjoyed since 
leaving, during which his only football-related work has been as a media 
analyst, sometimes alongside Wenger, his friend and virtual mentor.

He will be well aware he is walking into a different and more difficult 
environment at Villa Park. Morale is low, the team’s calibre uncertain and the 
extent of the owner’s ambition, beyond selling the club, unclear despite the 
acquisition of 13 players in the summer. And he will soon find out the Premier 
League is a lot tougher than Ligue 1.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fremi-garde-aston-villa-lyon-humble-visionary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0789a080331f4fcfefaec4d508f8723d267797a6%2F0_24_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=R%C3%A9mi%20Garde%2C%20the%20humble%20visionary%2C%20ready%20to%20do%20the%20hard%20yards%20with%20Aston%20Villa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fremi-garde-aston-villa-lyon-humble-visionary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=R%C3%A9mi%20Garde%2C%20the%20humble%20visionary%2C%20ready%20to%20do%20the%20hard%20yards%20with%20Aston%20Villa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fremi-garde-aston-villa-lyon-humble-visionary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0789a080331f4fcfefaec4d508f8723d267797a6%2F0_24_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Rémi Garde won the French Cup in his first season at Lyon, had a good run in 
the Europa League and kept the club in respectable league positions throughout 
his reign. Photograph: Robert Pratta/Reuters/Corbis 
Garde knows all that but working in England has long been his aim. He perhaps 
believes young players such as Ashley Westwood, Jack Grealish and Adam Traoré 
can be tutored into becoming as influential at Villa as his proteges such as 
Samuel Umtiti, Alexandre Lacazette and Nabil Fékir have become at Lyon. If he 
can identify an experienced player to exert the influence that hismost inspired 
recruit, Steed Malbranque 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2001/jul/31/newsstory.sport1>, did for 
him at Stade Gerland, then so much the better.

It will be a blow to Garde if he has to do the job without some of the tools 
that helped him succeed at Lyon, namely Bruno Génésio and Gérald Baticle, the 
coaches who led the training sessions Garde oversaw at the club. Lyon have been 
refusing to release the pair from their contracts.Villa’s statement confirming 
Garde <http://www.avfc.co.uk/page/NewsDetail/0,,10265~5113718,00.html> as 
manager did not make mention of the backroom staff.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fremi-garde-aston-villa-lyon-humble-visionary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19628a551edf68592faeb83c9a42090617931992%2F0_82_1984_1190%2F1984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=R%C3%A9mi%20Garde%2C%20the%20humble%20visionary%2C%20ready%20to%20do%20the%20hard%20yards%20with%20Aston%20Villa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fremi-garde-aston-villa-lyon-humble-visionary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=R%C3%A9mi%20Garde%2C%20the%20humble%20visionary%2C%20ready%20to%20do%20the%20hard%20yards%20with%20Aston%20Villa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fremi-garde-aston-villa-lyon-humble-visionary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19628a551edf68592faeb83c9a42090617931992%2F0_82_1984_1190%2F1984.jpg>
 Rémi Garde was at Arsenal under Arsène Wenger from 1996-99. Photograph: 
Colorsport/Rex Shutterstock 
“When you work with him, he’s straightforward and honest,” said Baticle of 
Garde in 2012. “He is structured, well-organised and thoughtful in terms of how 
he designs sessions, manages things and, above all, in his discussions with 
players. He has a knack for always knowing the right thing to say to them. He 
rarely gets it wrong.”

“He is humble and has a lot of knowledge,” added Joël Bats, Lyon’s goalkeeping 
coach under Garde. “When you have those two qualities you are capable of 
rallying everyone around you and getting them to buy into what you’re doing and 
get stronger.”
 