
Rémi Garde has not given up hope of bringing Gérald Baticle and Bruno Génésio, 
who were his assistant managers at Lyon, toAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> but the Premier League club 
are planning to do without them in the short term and accept they may have to 
wait until well into next year to get either man.

Garde, who will take charge of his first game as the Villa manager against 
Manchester City on Sunday, has been able to recruit Robert Duverne as the 
fitness coach. Duverne worked under Gérard Houllier at Villa and has rejoined 
the club after Metz released him from his contract because of a verbal 
agreement.

The situation at Lyon is nothing like as straightforward, with Baticle and 
Génésio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/29/aston-villa-remi-garde-assistants-manager>
 under contract and the French club not willing to enter into talks about them 
joining Villa or discuss compensation. Villa do not regard that as final, with 
Garde keen to be reunited with them, but the club’s hierarchy sees little value 
in aggressively pursuing the pair when Jean-Michel Aulas, the Lyon president, 
has adopted such a stubborn stance.

As long as there is no progress on that front – and Villa are aware that 
nothing could change until the end of the season – there remains the 
possibility that Garde, who has brought in Reginald Ray from Bastia to work as 
his No2, will add another name to his backroom staff, if only on a short-term 
basis.

Duverne’s appointment at Villa was confirmed by Bernard Serin, the Metz 
president: “When Robert joined us in August 2014, I gave him my word we would 
let him leave if he were to receive a proposal for a Premier League club to be 
part of the technical staff of Rémi Garde. The conditions are now fulfilled and 
a word is a word. We will end the contract by mutual agreement. We thank Robert 
Duverne for his services over the past year and wish him success in his new 
British adventure.”
 