
The incoming Chelsea head coach, Antonio Conte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte>, has spoken personally to 
Radja Nainggolan in a bid to persuade him to swap Italy for the Premier League 
as doubts continue to surround the Belgium midfielder’s future at Roma.

Nainggolan was an early target for Conte once it was confirmed the Italian 
would move to Stamford Bridge next season, with Roma’s sporting director, 
Walter Sabatini, having entered talks over a potential fee for the combative 
midfielder. The Italian club made it clear they are reluctant sellers and would 
seek at least £32m for his signature if he is to leave, with Chelsea 
subsequently seeing anopening offer of £23m plus performance-related bonuses 
knocked back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/08/radja-nainggolan-chelsea-roma-in-talks-transfer>
.

The player has since gone public stating his desire to stay in Rome – he had 
initially moved to Italy as a 17-year-old spending time at Piacenza and 
Cagliari before moving to theGiallorossi two years ago – to leave Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> concerned over the success of 
their pursuit. Yet, before Monday’s Euro 2016 game against Conte’s Italy in 
Lyon, Nainggolan’s Belgian team-mates Eden Hazard and Thibaut Courtois have 
both attempted to sell a move to west London while with the national squad, 
with Conte having also made clear his desire to sign the 27-year-old.

Manchester United free to pursue Paul Pogba after City’s interest fades
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/08/manchester-united-paul-pogba-manchester-city>
“He already wanted me when he was the Juve manager, but I’d already said I 
would never leaveRoma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> for Juve,” 
said Nainggolan. “Now he tries to get me to Chelsea. Conte told me what he 
expects from me and what type of player I can be for him. I’ll never be a 
player who’ll score 20 goals or give 20 assists, I’m not the one who’ll be in 
the picture all the time. I can be important for a team. A manager who 
appreciates that is important for me. But they [Hazard and Courtois] have also 
told me to join them.”

While Chelsea’s offer to Roma still falls short of the Italian club’s 
valuation of a player contracted through to 2020, the wage to entice the player 
himself will also have to be substantial. “I know Chelsea are a big club, but I 
have to take several things into account,” added Nainggolan. “It’s not easy to 
leave Italy behind after 12 years. I need to become better through a transfer, 
in all ways, so I won’t leave for a small difference.

“People have already been saying for 10 years that I will be joining this team 
or that team, but I’ve only played for three clubs so far. You could say: ‘Why 
not try it in England?’ But you can ask the question the other way too: ‘Why 
would I leave everything behind to fail over there?’“

Chelsea are still confident of completing a complicated deal for the Juventus 
forward Álvaro Morata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/06/chelsea-alvaro-morata-juventus-antonio-conte>
, who would initially re-sign for Real Madrid for around £23m courtesy of a 
buy-back clause in his contract before moving on to London for a fee closer to 
£40m. Morata is currently with the Spain squad in France.
 