
The “waterman of India” will walk across five continents to raise awareness 
for his campaign to have the human rights to river water and access to nature 
recognised by the UN.

“Nature cannot fulfil greed,” Rajendra Singh said on Monday at World Water Week
 <http://www.worldwaterweek.org/>, where he will accept the Stockholm Water 
Prize <http://www.siwi.org/prizes/stockholmwaterprize/> on Wednesday. Singh 
argued that communities facing water crises should resist the money and 
technological solutions offered by corporations. Instead, he told the Guardian, 
they must find ways to help themselves.

The three wonders of the ancient world solving modern water problems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/19/water-scarcity-drought-peru-kenya-india>
“The companies always bother about the profit, they are not bothered about our 
common future,” he said. “They use the name of social corporate responsibility 
– but this is not sufficient for life. This is not sufficient for a better 
common future. They are using very good jargon. But they are only meeting, 
eating and cheating.”

Thirty-five years ago, Singh revived an ancient dam technology in his hot, dry 
home state of Rajasthan in north-westIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>. Working with local people he has 
returned water to more than 1,200 villages. The landscape and climate have been 
transformed; seven long-dead rivers have begun to flow, wells are full and 
once-parched fields are now fertile.

Singh said he would now embark on a five-year odyssey across five continents. 
In the tradition of his hero, Mahatma Gandhi, Singh has long advocated the 
technique of walking through landscapes.

“Walking connects you to the heart of the earth and the heart of the human,” 
he said. Each of hisWorld Water Peace Walks 
<http://www.theflowpartnership.org/water-walks/> will visit grassroots 
solutions to water challenges.

In 2017, Singh will visit the office of the United Nations high commissioner 
for human rights in Geneva to push for the recognition of the right to river 
water and access to nature. The recently recognisedhuman right to water and 
sanitation <http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/human_right_to_water.shtml> is 
dependent on a clean environment and flowing river, Singh said.

“On paper, you have declared water is a human right. But water as a human 
right is only possible after river rights and nature rights. Without the clean 
flow of the river you can’t ensure the human right,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fwaterman-of-india-rajendra-singh-stockholm-water-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440502153137%2F8c5a4fbb-a791-42ba-ba23-d7e034aa4e0e-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rajendra%20Singh%3A%20Clean%20flowing%20rivers%20must%20be%20a%20human%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fwaterman-of-india-rajendra-singh-stockholm-water-prize%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rajendra%20Singh%3A%20Clean%20flowing%20rivers%20must%20be%20a%20human%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Fwaterman-of-india-rajendra-singh-stockholm-water-prize%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440502153137%2F8c5a4fbb-a791-42ba-ba23-d7e034aa4e0e-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Rajendra Singh was part of the successful campaign that halted the 
construction of hydro-power plant that would have affected the Bhagirathi River 
in northern India, the source of the Ganges. Photograph: Wikipedia user Atarax42
A draft text of the rights Singh is campaigning for will be written in the 
coming months. But in practice, Singh said it would require industry to declare 
the resources they used and replace them. Key to Singh’s success in India has 
been areinvigoration of local democracy 
<http://tarunbharatsangh.in/promoting-and-nurturing-gram-sabhas/>, centred on 
the collective ownership and management of river water. He said the government 
of Uttar Pradesh had called him on Sunday to tell him the state would recognise 
river rights by law.

UN special rapporteur 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/WaterAndSanitation/SRWater/Pages/SRWaterIndex.aspx>
 on the right to safe drinking water and sanitation, Catarina de Albuquerque, 
said the right to water implied controls on pollution but human rights law does 
not prefer public or private ownership of a resource.

“Technically speaking human rights apply to people. There are discussions at 
the UN about the recognition of the right to a clean environment. But I’m not 
sure that this position is right,” said Albuquerque.

Singh quietly began the walks in the UK earlier in August. The first took 
place on the island of Lindisfarne, where St Cuthbert is said to have raised a 
spring to save the islanders from a seventh-century drought. He then met locals 
in Belford, Northumberlandwho have developed a cheap, effective system 
<http://www.theflowpartnership.org/belford/> of “bunds” to protect themselves 
from flooding and in the Dearne Valley, Yorkshire where similar work is 
proposed.

“The problem is climate change. Our problem is global, but the solution is 
local. The solution is traditional,” he said.

Minni Jain, director of the Flow Partnership 
<http://www.theflowpartnership.org/>, which has helped Singh plan the walks, 
said the project did not discriminate between the struggles of communities in 
poor or rich countries.

Borewells run dry? Crops failing? The Water Doctor will see you now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/15/water-scarcity-india-gandhi-doctor>
“How can we make this movement - the bringing back of resource ownership into 
the hands of the common man - global? In India it’s possible. Is it possible in 
the west? That’s a tricky question, because it’s a different kind of system 
altogether. You have privatisation of companies, lots of vested interests, lots 
of big corporations. It’s a really stuck system,” she said.

The director of the $150,000 Stockholm Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> Prize, Jens Berggren, said he 
agreed that local people must play a bigger role. However “the private sector 
can contribute with a lot of resources, with a lot of know how. At the same 
time they must be [subject to] regulation and enforcement”.

Singh will now return to India, to the memorial site of Gandhi in Delhi, and 
journey to the Kumbh, a hugely important Hindu religious festival where people 
bathe in the Ganges river.

“I will start my journey from my idol Mahatma Gandhi’s samādhi [the ultimate 
stage of meditation],” he said.

In September Singh goes to the US, followed by Germany and Morocco. He said 
the need for the project was urgent, because water was already driving conflict 
across the globe towards a “third-world water war”. In May,US president Barack 
Obama said <http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/article/2564772> climate-driven 
drought had aggravated conflict and terror in Nigeria and Syria.

Since first picking up a shovel alongside a village elder 35 years ago, Singh 
has been a passionate advocate for community driven, low-tech solutions to the 
global water crisis. A system ofjohads 
<http://www.notechmagazine.com/2015/06/water-johads-a-low-tech-alternative-to-mega-dams-in-india.html>
, earthen dams that hold water and allow it to percolate down replenishing the 
aquifer, had once allowed the region to stay green despite minimal rainfall. 
But thejohads fell into disrepair a century ago during the consolidation of 
British rule and land management in India.

Decade of drought: a global tour of seven recent water crises
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jun/12/decade-of-drought-a-global-tour-of-seven-recent-water-crises>
To repair them had been his life’s work, he said: “You can change history very 
quickly, but changing the geography takes time.”

Now, with Rajasthan green, it was his ambition to spread his techniques across 
the world. “I’m spending the rest of life on this. It’s my motivation to change 
war to peace. I don’t know if it is possible in my life or not. But we will 
try.”

Karl Mathiesen is reporting from SIWI World Water Week 
<http://www.worldwaterweek.org/>.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 