
Rangers endured a difficult start to life in the Scottish Third Division as 
they were forced to scrap for a last-minute 2-2 draw atPeterhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterhead>. Ally McCoist, had few 
positives to take home on the long journey south to Glasgow, criticising his 
side's defending, which he felt cost them dearly in their opening match in the 
lowest professional tier of Scottish football.

"I was relieved to get a point after the game," the Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> manager said. "I thought we 
defended appallingly to be honest. We didn't match their aggression. If the 
boys at any time thought this was going to be a cake-walk, they know where they 
are now.

"It's the first game, we're not going to start panicking. Poor defending is a 
concern but we can certainly create and score goals. I have to give enormous 
credit to Peterhead and [the manager] Jim McInally. They played superbly."

Barrie McKay scored his first Rangers goal, before second-half strikes from 
Rory McAllister and Scott McLaughlin saw Peterhead, the club from the 
Aberdeenshire town with a population of 17,500, surge into the lead. Ranger's 
saviour at the 4,000-capacity Balmoor, Andy Little, scored a late equaliser to 
spare Rangers the ignominy of losing their first match as a newco club, the 
first league fixture they have ever played outside the top flight of Scottish 
football.

Rangers were forced into the bottom tier after the club was liquidated in the 
summer and lost their place in the Premier League after a vote of the 12 clubs. 
Following such a turbulent period in their 140-year history, the meeting with 
the Blue Toon was seen as the first step on the road to recovery.
 