
Captain Lee McCulloch thanked the Rangers fans for their loyalty after his 
first-half hat-trick in the 3-0 win over Airdrie at Ibrox clinched theScottish 
League One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-league-one> title.

The 35-year-old defender scored two from the penalty spot before netting a 
third from open play as his side moved 26 points ahead of second-placed 
Dunfermline with eight games remaining.

The Govan club's ascent back to the top has been backed to the hilt by the 
club's supporters, with the official crowd of 41,343 seeing a comfortable win 
for Ally McCoist's side.

Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>, who started at the 
bottom of Scottish league football after falling into administration in 2012, 
will play in the Championship next season, one title win away from the Scottish 
Premiership.

"From the dressing room's point of view, I would like to thank all the fans," 
McCulloch said. "It is important to let the fans know their support has been 
appreciated this season. They have had to put up with a lot as well and so it 
is good to give them something to shout about.

"I am delighted to have done it with eight games to go. It is 28 games, drawn 
two and won 26, that's a fantastic record and we want to keep it going."

McCulloch was also pleased for McCoist who came in for heavy criticism after 
Rangers drew 1-1 with Albion Rovers in their Scottish Cup quarter-final clash 
at Ibrox on Sunday.

He said: "It is great win for the manager, to repay the faith he has shown in 
some of the boys, by getting his second league title. He has had to deal with 
things that some managers have never dealt with, even those who have been in 
their jobs for 20-25 years."

McCoist was full of praise for McCulloch, saying: "I actually scored a quicker 
hat-trick in Vladikavkaz in a Champions League match than the time Lee scored 
in tonight. But I wasn't playing centre-half to be fair.

"I think the last person to do it here was Paul Gascoigne on the day we won 
the title against Aberdeen â€“ although I draw the line at saying they were 
similar players. But it's an unbelievable achievement.

"McCulloch epitomises the spirit that has been required within the club at the 
beginning of the journey back. I'm absolutely thrilled for him. For a captain 
to score a hat-trick from centre-half on a title-winning day is real Roy of the 
Rovers stuff."
 