
Ally McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> believes 
Rangers will want to make use of Dave King's wealth despite the former director 
of the old Ibrox club claiming he had not heard from the board since offering 
to invest last month.

The South Africa-based Glasgow businessman was quoted in the Scottish Daily 
Mail on Friday morning, stating he had received no contact from the chief 
executive, Graham Wallace, or the club's other directors in the past four weeks.

It was confirmed last Thursday that Wallace had asked McCoist's squad to 
consider a 15% pay cut in an attempt to stem losses reported to be as much as 
Â£1m a month.

The proposal was rejected by the players but King, who lost money when the 
company that ownedRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> was 
liquidated in 2012, says he is still ready to plough in more cash to ensure the 
League One leaders are able to put up a fight on their return to the Scottish 
Premiership. Despite their woes, the ruling Ibrox regime have yet to take up 
King's offer.

McCoist said: "The chief executive has said he is certainly looking for 
investment. I can't speak for Graham but, if there was a potential investor, 
Dave King or whoever, it's safe to say Graham would sit down and talk to them."

Revelations of Wallace's pay-cut offer have sparked fears McCoist may be 
forced to sell players to balance the books. He has held talks with Wallace but 
says there is "nothing concrete" to report on further cuts or player exits.

The manager backed Wallace, who promised to undertake a 120-day review of the 
company at the club's annual general meeting last month, while insisting he 
will do his best to ensure the quality of his squad is not diluted.

"Graham has been completely honest, open and frank in the discussions that we 
have had," McCoist said. "I'm aware of the financial difficulties in the club 
but it's only fair to give Graham his 120 days that he has asked for and I'm 
confident that Graham will be the man to take us forward.

"Rangers face Arbroath on Saturday in their final league match before the 
January transfer window closes. Unsurprisingly, McCoist is not expecting any 
new faces to arrive before then. He said: "It's not been 100% rubbished but I 
have been told it might be very difficult."

The striker Jon Daly insists the reason behind the Rangers squad's decision to 
reject the pay cut will not leave the dressing room. Daly was asked to explain 
why that decision had been reached but declined to detail the squad's thinking. 
"I don't think that is to be spoken about," he said. "Whatever happens in the 
changing room, whether it's to do with finances or to do with tactical 
decisions, stays in the dressing room. As far as I'm concerned, that's the way 
it is going to stay."
 