
Rangers have announced that they have agreed to terminate the contract of the 
midfielderJoey Barton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/joey-barton> with 
immediate effect.

Joey Barton: ‘If someone is looking for conflict I won’t shy away from it – 
ever’ | Donald McRae
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/19/joey-barton-interview-conflict-rangers>
Barton had been signed off work with stress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/joey-barton-rangers-january-transfer-window-burnley>
 since last Friday, as talks over the termination continued.

The controversial midfielder has not played since being suspended following a 
confrontation with manager Mark Warburton in the wake of September’shumiliating 
5-1 defeat to Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/celtic-rangers-scottish-premiership-match-report>
. Bartonresumed training last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/joey-barton-return-full-time-training-rangers-suspension-ban-lifted>
 with Rangers’ under-20 players after the suspension was lifted, but was last 
seen at the complex on Thursday.

His contract was worth £20,000 per week, and had been due to run until the end 
of the 2017-18 season.

The club said in a statement: “Rangers and Joey Barton have agreed to 
terminate his contract with immediate effect. NeitherRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> nor Joey Barton will comment 
further.”

Speaking in September, Barton apologised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/joey-barton-rangers-fallout-after-celtic-defeat>
 for what he called “a full and frank discussion” during training, saying it 
had involved “some sharp disagreement about the game and some harsh words … 
[But] there were only words involved in the disagreement, nothing else. 
Nevertheless, some of the words used did overstep the mark.

“As someone who communicates directly, I accept that some of the things I said 
were inappropriate and for that I apologise unreservedly. I cannot, however, 
apologise for caring deeply about winning and for wanting to perform better 
myself and for Rangers to do much better.”

Barton, who is still due to appear before the Scottish FA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/14/joey-barton-hearing-betting-delayed-november-17>
 on 17 November to answer charges relating to alleged betting on matches, has 
been linked with a return to Burnley, where he starred during their promotion 
campaign.

Asked last month about the prospect of a deal, Burnley’s manager Sean Dyche 
refused to rule it out. “I’ve been asked about that a lot and I’m not going to 
answer,” he said. “Why should I? That’s for another day.

“But he was first class on the pitch – people forget that. His conduct on the 
pitch: exemplary last season. I am telling you now, he was getting smashed all 
over the place. Sometimes it just fits: he fitted with us, we fitted with him.”
 