
Rangers have announced operating losses of £14.4m in their annual accounts 
<http://www.rangers.co.uk/images/staticcontent/documents/AnnualReport2013.pdf>. 
Rangers International Football Club plc announced revenue of £19.1m and staff 
costs of £17.9m.

The club, who raised £22m through a share issue last December 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/rangers-reveal-share-issue-has-raised-1496315>
, revealed they had £11.2m cash in the bank on 30 June, £4.5m of which came 
from season-ticket sales.

"In the last year, key milestones have been passed successfully," said the 
chief executive, Craig Mather. "The first team squad has strengthened 
considerably. The club enjoys a healthy bank balance. The cost base has been 
reduced significantly.Business <https://www.theguardian.com/football/business> 
performance is improving and, most importantly, the club continues to benefit 
enormously from the unwavering commitment of our fans. Without this support, 
the re-establishment of Rangers could not happen.

"As expected, we are reporting significant operating losses, although a 
retained profit. This is consistent with the club's five-year business plan. At 
no stage was it anticipated nor forecast that the business could return an 
operating profit in the first year since acquisition. The full recovery of
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> will take time and I am 
delighted to report that the club is firmly on track to achieve this objective."

The accounts, for a 13-month period, also show that the former chief executive 
Charles Green was paid a total of £933,000.Green stepped down in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/19/charles-green-resigns-rangers-chief-executive>
 following allegations over links with the former Rangers owner Craig Whyte, 
which he denied and were the subject of an internal investigation by the club, 
the results of which were not published.

The club announced that Green no longer had any notifiable interest in the 
company following the sale of shares. Green received wages of £333,000, a 
severance payment of almost £220,000 and a bonus of £360,000.

Other highly paid Ibrox employees included the manager, Ally McCoist, who 
received £825,000. McCoistrevealed on Friday that he had agreed a pay cut 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/rangers-boss-ally-mccoist-coaching-2314024>
. The club's finance director, Brian Stockbridge, received more than £400,000, 
about half of which was a bonus, while the former commercial director Imran 
Ahmad, who has launched legal action against the club over a bonus row, 
received £300,000.
 