
Mark Warburton is deserving of a fresh narrative. The man who enjoyed 
eye-catching success with Brentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/may/13/brentford-mark-warburton-wembley-championship>
 cannot be discussed without the asterisk of his past: as a city trader in 
London, a career he boldly abandoned to pursue one in football. “I understand 
why,” the Londoner said. “I just think people have heard all that now. I had a 
long time in the city and took a lot of things from there. I left there nearly 
11 years ago now. We have to move on.”

Warburton’s disregard for convention was evident again in the summer, when he 
took the manager’s post at Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/15/rangers-appoint-mark-warburton-manager>
 – stuck in Scotland’s second tier – rather than remain in England. The 
53-year-old saw the benefits of a blank canvas as 16 players headed through the 
Ibrox exit door. Now, a team who were ridiculed are trusted with young 
prospects from England’s top flight.

Fanfare for Mark Warburton and future as Rangers hit Hibernian for six
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/25/mark-warburton-hibs-rangers-six>
With 11 wins from as many league games and a fresh confidence blowing through 
a club that had been wrecked by chaos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/25/mark-warburton-hibs-rangers-six>
 off the pitch and regular tedium on it, Warburton has been vindicated. In his 
own mind, that will not fully be the case until a loftier target has been hit.

“Champions League football,” Warburton replies instantly when asked about his 
ultimate Glasgow goal. “Absolutely. Not ‘job done’, but major target achieved. 
This is a Champions League club.

“I think managers and coaches, if they have been out of work for a year, don’t 
go into an interview and ask questions they need to ask because people need to 
work. Sometimes, instead of all the questions you need to ask, it becomes: ‘I 
need this job.’

“For me and David Weir [Warburton’s assistant], we had to go in there and ask 
the blunt questions: obvious ones about the financial stability of the club, 
the long-term health and welfare of the club. Equally, we were asked some 
pretty blunt questions about why we leftBrentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford>.

“I was offered good jobs in England. I was offered three or four more 
Championship clubs, which was very flattering. This job came up and I looked at 
the potential, the opportunity. You look around here, a Champions League 
training ground with hydrotherapy pools, saunas, top-class gyms, 
undersoil-heated pitches. It is magnificent.

“I have seen and watched Ibrox on a Champions League night. What an 
opportunity. If we can get it right here, with the magnificent fanbase the club 
has, it could be a tremendous experience.”

To some, this will all sound incongruous. Rangers’ plunge into administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/18/how-the-mighty-glasgow-rangers-have-fallen>
, liquidation and Scotland’s third division was notable enough without the 
general decline in standards which has seen the country’s clubs and 
international team regress to the realms of the also-ran. It seems deliberate 
that Warburton chose to ignore the gory detail of recent times.

“Everyone tells me about that and sometimes it is good to come in fresh 
because you aren’t bogged down,” he explains. “There is no lack of appreciation 
at all of what the fans, players and others have been through, it would be 
disrespectful to say otherwise, but I can’t turn round and say: ‘I know how you 
were feeling.’ I’d be lying.

“You couldn’t not be aware of what happened. Through media channels, the 
intensity of focus is quite incredible. You couldn’t fail to see what was going 
on. When I was a kid, teams like Rangers, Milan and Red Star Belgrade were 
European giants. It wasn’t that long ago, 1993 or 1994, Celtic andRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> were the sixth and seventh 
highest payers in the UK.

“So you know the size of the club, you know where it has been. We know where 
this club has been over the last four years but we equally know where it has to 
get back to. That’s what we have been tasked with.”

Warburton provides enlightening, enjoyable company. He has been disappointed 
at an apparent “acceptance” that Scotland cannot produce top-level footballers. 
The former Enfield and Boreham Wood player was warned about Glasgow but quickly 
sensed unwarranted scare stories. “This is a great city to live in,” he says.

Warburton is conscious of two things: not being viewed as a new-age, know-all 
revolutionary and not dismissing the extent of Rangers’ task when eventually 
going toe-to-toe with Celtic. “There is no lack of respect or appreciation; 
Celtic have been hugely successful, Champions League football, selling players, 
making money,” he says.

Warburton is fully versed in the ideology attached to the Old Firm. “You are 
expected to win. Rangers don’t lose,” he acknowledges. “Likewise, people said 
to me about just getting back into the Premier League and starting to build. 
David Weir said: ‘No.’ You have to accept that, that’s the challenge.

“When Brentford got promoted from League One, 95% of the media said: ‘Just 
survive.’ Top, top people within the game phoned me up and said: 
‘Congratulations. Now just get through that first season and survive.’ How do 
you go into a dressing room with players and say: ‘Just survive’? It is 
nonsense. Saying to these guys: ‘Just do enough’? It’s not how we work, I don’t 
think anyone can work like that.”

Brentford, too, moved on. Their sacking of Marinus Dijkhuizen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/28/brentford-sack-marinus-dijkhuizen-appoint-lee-carsley>
 in late September seemed to emphasise the notion that dispensing with 
Warburton at the end of last season was an error. The intenselyanalytical 
approach of the London club’s owner, Matthew Benham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/27/how-fc-midtjylland-analytical-route-champions-league-brentford-matthew-benham>
, has itself been subject to criticism.

So did Warburton raise a smile when Dijkhuizen departed? “People keep saying 
that to me but life is too short. The owner gave me a chance, which was a big 
call on his part. I hope I repaid that faith. I wish them well but I have moved 
on.

“There was a frustration for me, that I didn’t want David and I to be painted 
as dinosaurs who didn’t embrace it [theBrentford strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/27/how-fc-midtjylland-analytical-route-champions-league-brentford-matthew-benham>
]. There are some very clever people there, the owner is a very intelligent man 
who is very successful in what he does. He has some outstanding ideas in terms 
of the data and research that they use.”

Quite logically, Warburton would “love” to manage in England’s top league one 
day. “I maybe represent a massive risk because people would say my background 
is not steeped in football,” he says. “All we can do is prove ourselves. It’s 
about more than leagues, it’s about seeing that a club is built on solid 
foundations.”

At that point, Warburton would enjoy backward glances.
 