
Victory tasted sweet in Leipzig on Saturday night. It always does: 
cough-medicine-sickly-sweet, with a hint of molten gummy bear and factory floor 
puddle. A first taurine-infused Bundesliga win fordie Roten Bullen in their 
first ever top-flight home match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/leipzig-borussia-dortmund-bundesliga-match-report>
 went down especially well, however: it came against super-traditional, 
mega-authentic behemoths Borussia Dortmund – a club run on ‘true love’ (as the 
BVB marketing department has it) and supported by principled ultras who 
preferred to turn out in their thousands for the Black and Yellows’ under-23 
fourth division game against Wuppertaler SV (0-0) at the atmospheric, 
ramshackle ‘Rote Erde’ ground next to the Signal Iduna Park instead.

Leipzig get first Bundesliga win with Keïta goal against Borussia Dortmund
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/leipzig-borussia-dortmund-bundesliga-match-report>
Much had been said and written 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/08/why-rb-leipzig-has-become-the-most-hated-club-in-german-football>
 about that unofficial boycott. Some thought the lack of support from the die 
hards was counter-productive as far as Dortmund’s chances at the Red Bull Arena 
were concerned. Others sarcastically pointed to the futility of the gesture: 
the away section tickets (and good few more in the home stands) were quickly 
snapped up by local Dortmund fans eager to see their team in the flesh anyway. 
‘The most hated club in Germany‚‘ the newspaper WAZ predicted, would not be 
hurt by the protest in the slightest: ‘The stadium will be full, Red Bull will 
continue to invest, Leipzig will continue to play their part.’

In a piece for 11 Freunde 
<http://www.11freunde.de/artikel/rb-leipzigs-erstes-heimspiel-der-bundesliga>, 
the German football magazine at the vanguard of traditionalism and 
mullet-adorned nostalgia, Uli Hesse compellingly argued that fans, in Dortmund 
and elsewhere, don’t need such lectures from the media or football people; they 
are perfectly capable of deciding for themselves who they like and dislike and 
how to make their voice heard in a peaceful manner. ‘The supporters’ role is 
not be told what the role of supporters should be,’ he wrote. There is, in 
other words, nothing wrong with not turning up at a club whose business model 
you dislike. Unlike Bayer Leverkusen and Wolfsburg, whose teams have emerged 
rather organically, RB Leipzig brazenly bought themselves a place in the higher 
echelons of German football by taking over and rebrandingfifth division SSV 
Markranstädt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/mar/06/rb-leipzig-sending-shockwaves-through-german-football>
 in 2009. It doesn’t get anymore artificial: the club solely exists as a 
vehicle for the Red Bull group.

How RB Leipzig became the most hated club in German football
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/08/why-rb-leipzig-has-become-the-most-hated-club-in-german-football>
Will other corporations follow suit and circumvent the 50 plus 1 rule 
restricting direct investment into professional teams by systematically 
propping up lower league sides in a similar manner? Critics warn of a dystopian 
future where Germany’s top flight will be contested by Coca-Cola Cottbus, 
Snickers Offenbach and The Lenovo Lederhosen. But, as Saturday night’s 
‘explosion’ (as Süddeutsche Zeitung phrased it) of joy after Naby Keïta’s 
89th-minute winner in front of the 43,000 capacity crowd showed, there’s 
another side to this story: that of the Leipzig supporters. If Hesse is right – 
and he surely is – than the right for supporters to enjoy their football any 
way they like must necessarily also apply to those in Saxony.

Leipzig, a former football powerhouse of a city, hasn’t had anything to shout 
about since VfB Leipzig were relegated in 1994. RB might have been born in sin, 
in the sports franchise division of Red Bull’s Austrian headquarters, but the 
club has since unquestionably been adopted, wholeheartedly, by locals proud to 
have a stake in the first division again. They want Leipzig in the Bundesliga. 
They want to be in theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball>. Red Bull is only the 
means to that particular end.

Deep down, this too is about football as an expression of identity and 
communal pride; a real, genuine sentiment that 11 Freunde and ultras everywhere 
would undoubtedly approve of – if they were able to look past the wretched name 
and inglorious ownership structure. ‘One could feel the force of football – 
even though it came from a can,’ wrote Frankfurter Allgemeine about the 
impressive home debut of Ralph Hasenhüttl’s men. It is patently acceptable to 
turn your nose up at the upstarts, to dismiss them as plastics etc etc. 
Supporters of other RB-owned entities, namely at Salzburg, Leipzig’s feeder 
team, have valid concerns about the business model. Whether the hate and 
visceral anger directed at RBL and their supporters is really warranted, 
however, is a question worth asking.

Robert Lewandowski on target again as Bayern Munich steal late win at Schalke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/09/bayern-munich-schalke-bundesliga-match-report>
There is something disturbingly nativist about the backlash, a reactionary ‘us 
and them’, ‘true and false’ pattern of thought that would be abhorred in other 
walks of life. Should those unlucky enough to live in a city without a 
successful big, historic club simply accept their bad fortune? Is the 
(questionable) purity of the German model really more important than a chance 
of upward mobility for those born in the wrong town? And why isn’t smart 
investment, innovation and ambition preferable to the ossification of the 
status quo? No wonder foreign observers find it very hard to understand why RBL 
are so despised.

It might take decades for the dislike to wane but RB Leipzig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/red-bull-leipzig> will have become a 
sizeable force Germany and perhaps beyond long before that. The manner of the 
1-0 victory over Dortmund, a tactically-sophisticated battle of wits won 
without much of the ball by a cast of young, hard-running players, suggested 
that Europa League qualification at the first time of asking might not be 
beyond Leipzig’s finest. We’d all better deal with it.

Results: Schalke 0-2 Bayern, Darmstadt 1-0 Frankfurt, Ingolstadt 0-2 Hertha 
Berlin, Wolfsburg 0-0 Köln, Leverkusen 3-1 Hamburg, Freiburg 3-1 Borussia 
Mönchengladbach, Leipzig 1-0Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund>, Werder Bremen 1-2 
Augsburg 1-2, Mainz 4-4 Hoffenheim.
 