
The Toad Knew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/26/the-toad-knew-review-kings-theatre-edinburgh-festival-james-thierree>

 King’s theatre, Edinburgh 

James Thiérrée’s show did things that I have never seen on stage before – and 
may never see again. I was seduced into a world that I didn’t truly understand 
but never wanted to leave. Two of the most astonishing hours of my life.Sandy 
Thin

The Damned United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/01/the-life-of-brian-clough-the-damned-united-play-david-peace-interview>
 West Yorkshire Playhouse, Leeds

I took my son, who understood the football, while I marvelled at the 
storytelling and the movement of the performers. By the end, I was hooked by 
the football story and he was hooked by the drama.Helen Cadbury

The Cheviot, the Stag and the Black, Black Oil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/11/cheviot-stag-black-black-oil-review-dundee-rep>
 Citizens theatre, Glasgow

Poignant, powerful, thought-provoking. This play sent me home through the 
dark, rainy streets of Glasgow feeling utterly hopeless and despondent at the 
state of things, but with enough of a defiant spark (and one that grew the more 
I thought back on the play) that the next day I felt like we could be the 
audience to change the world. This play inspired the activist in me, and 
reminded me that a great play can jump right off the stage and plant itself 
into your life in a way that changes how you see everything.Katie J 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b0292e6d857ff890bcd877e4f68be1bcb729f5b%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20favourite%20stage%20shows%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20favourite%20stage%20shows%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b0292e6d857ff890bcd877e4f68be1bcb729f5b%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Astonishing … Valerie Doucet in The Toad Knew. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for 
the Guardian 
The Grinning Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/23/the-grinning-man-review-victor-hugo-musical>
Bristol Old Vic

Stunning music, great design and outstanding performances in a highly 
original, stimulating and entertaining piece of work. It had a slight whiff of 
Weimar, Weill and even Richard Peaslee (who did the music for Peter Brook’s 
Marat Sade and A Midsummer Night’s Dream) yet thrillingly it was very much its 
own strange blackly comic beast. Brilliant to see such bold new work 
originating from the Bristol Old Vic.Daisy Tucker

The Intelligent Homosexual’s Guide to Capitalism and Socialism … 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/30/the-intelligent-homosexuals-guide-to-capitalism-and-socialism-review>
 Hampstead theatre, London

A huge exploration of humanity. At over three hours long, Tony Kushner’s iHo – 
masterfully directed by Michael Boyd – demonstrated that we need big plays more 
than ever and that the special ability of theatre to entertain and inform must 
be supported.Iain McClure
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F822ddcc26870c49dd11a3dd3518bc2968bb0c068%2F0_256_5140_3083%2F5140.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20favourite%20stage%20shows%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20favourite%20stage%20shows%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F822ddcc26870c49dd11a3dd3518bc2968bb0c068%2F0_256_5140_3083%2F5140.jpg>
 ‘A huge exploration of humanity’ … The Intelligent Homosexual’s Guide to 
Capitalism and Socialism… at Hampstead theatre, London. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
Unreachable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/10/unreachable-review-matt-smith-anthony-neilson-royal-court>


Royal Court, London

Incredible theatre: hilarious, touching, clever. I run a community theatre 
company who devise theatre and it was exciting to see how the professionals do 
it. The cast really drew the audience in and it felt really collaborative.Clare 
Fry

Blackthorn
 West Yorkshire Playhouse, Leeds

Blackthorn was a meticulously composed two-performer show by a young Yorkshire 
playwright named Charley Miles. The story was simple; a tale of a boy and girl 
growing up together, falling in love, becoming almost incompatible adults yet 
still feeling the pull towards home and each other. The dialogue was pointedly 
regional, genuine and very witty. It was a rare example of romantic, rural 
writing and, although the story was a simple tale of young love, it resonated 
beautifully with anyone who has ever known Yorkshire, a small village, or a 
childhood sweetheart. A cracking good story and dialogue to make your heart 
ache.Evelyn O’Neill

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdad4a848969cd4ba7ecdf770c5a335a29f83881c%2F234_361_1593_2006%2F1593.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20favourite%20stage%20shows%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20favourite%20stage%20shows%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdad4a848969cd4ba7ecdf770c5a335a29f83881c%2F234_361_1593_2006%2F1593.jpg>
 An actor for the ages … Aoife Duffin in A Girl is a Half-formed Thing. 
A Girl is a Half-Formed Thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/13/a-girl-is-a-half-formed-thing-eimear-mcbride-theatre-young-vic>
 Young Vic, London

A wrenching, transformative story played with immense force and commitment by 
the magnificent Aoife Duffin. No set, no flash distractions, just taut writing, 
effective direction and lighting, and brilliant acting. This wasn’t just the 
best theatre of 2016, it was the best theatre of the last 25 years, and Duffin 
is an actor for the ages.Chris Lilly

The Flick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/20/the-flick-review-dorfman-national-theatre-london-annie-baker-cinema-play>

National Theatre, London

I miss this play. Each time I saw it I wanted to give the three characters a 
hug and tell them everything would be OK.Tarquin Grossman 

Don Quixote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/04/don-quixote-review-swan-theatre-stratford-rsc-david-threlfall-rufus-hound-james-fenton-sancho-panza-cervantes>
 The Swan, Stratford-upon-Avon

Great adaptation of an impossibly extensive book, brilliantly staged with 
humour, but above all heart and featuring a surprisingly moving Sancho (Rufus 
Hound), a fine foil for David Threlfall’s Lear-esque performance as Don Quixote.
Bette Ashley

Thon Man Molière 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/25/thon-man-moliere-review-liz-lochhead-royal-lyceum-edinburgh>
 Lyceum Theatre, Edinburgh

It was brilliantly written by Liz Lochhead and performed masterfully by a 
small cast. It brought Molière and his company to wonderfully funny and 
poignant life.S Moir 

Imogen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/02/imogen-shakespeares-globe-observer-review>

Shakespeare’s Globe, London

Once-in-a-generation Shakespeare. It reimagined the text (Cymbeline) and the 
space, transforming the Globe from a dry historical experiment into a living, 
throbbing theatrical reality. Utterly breathtaking; shockingly immediate; 
vibrantly real. It terrified the living daylights out of those who believe that 
Shakespeare should speak at rather than to or with us, and who want to deny the 
breathing reality of his texts to anyone but a self-selecting elite. The 
diversity of the cast and the boldness of the theatrical vision were a 
triumphant shout about what theatre can do and be.Sarah McCormack 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff685b72b4369511163714bd0b195ebc55322392c%2F333_19_2862_1718%2F2862.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20favourite%20stage%20shows%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20favourite%20stage%20shows%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff685b72b4369511163714bd0b195ebc55322392c%2F333_19_2862_1718%2F2862.jpg>
 Right balance of comic and tragic … Paul Thornley, Noma Dumezweni and 
Cherrelle Skeete in Harry Potter and the Cursed Child. Photograph: Charlie 
Gray/PA 
Harry Potter and the Cursed Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/26/harry-potter-cursed-child-review-palace-theatre-london>
Palace theatre, London

The dynamic choreography brought the magic to life, and it had just the right 
balance of comic and tragic. I’m the generation that grew up with Harry and 
seeing him grown, now that I am also an adult, was always going to be an 
experience. The themes of the play felt as relevant to my current stage of life 
(worries about career and family) as the books did when I was younger.Elizabeth 
Pearson

Iris <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/08/iris-review-live-theatre>
Live theatre, Newcastle upon Tyne 

A great full-scale professional debut play for an up-and-coming writer who 
deserves national prominence. Alison Carr has a distinct, quirky and engaging 
voice that she developed working on the Edinburgh fringe. Her whimsical take on 
the bitter relationship between two sisters in the aftermath of their mother’s 
funeral is at once darkly humorous and bitterly emotional. Harold Pinter meets 
Jeremy Kyle.Christopher Goulding
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F190a399e79225b7d641bc4524b1d46b8e08ac503%2F0_181_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20favourite%20stage%20shows%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20favourite%20stage%20shows%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F190a399e79225b7d641bc4524b1d46b8e08ac503%2F0_181_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Bitterly emotional … Katy Cavanagh and Sam Neale in Iris at Live theatre, 
Newcastle 
The Man in the Woman’s Shoes
Tricycle, London

Mikel Murfi is special, very special. Whenever he comes to town it’s to show 
us something extraordinary and beautiful about ourselves. The Man in the 
Woman’s Shoes is as simple and as complex as it gets. A wonderful story full of 
humanity and with the most delicious of performances. A master at work. 
Jonathan Shields

This is Living
 Trafalgar Studios, London 

A startlingly honest two-hander exploring love and grief without recourse to 
cynicism or sentimentality. As funny as it was heartbreaking. Michael Socha and 
Tamla Kari were utterly extraordinary in their energy, truthfulness and depth. 
I’d seen Kari excel on stage before, but Socha was a revelation. A truly 
unforgettable experience.Shauno Butcher
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f1e3924c3b375cd5511ac4242467867ea980aad%2F0_382_5759_3457%2F5759.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20favourite%20stage%20shows%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20favourite%20stage%20shows%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Freaders-favourite-stage-shows-2016-imogen-damned-united-grinning-man%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f1e3924c3b375cd5511ac4242467867ea980aad%2F0_382_5759_3457%2F5759.jpg>
 Daring … The Suppliant Women at the Lyceum in Edinburgh. Photograph: Stephen 
Cummiskey 
The Suppliant Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/06/suppliant-women-review-royal-lyceum-edinburgh>
 Royal Lyceum, Edinburgh

Never seen anything like it before – a daring approach, brilliantly realised 
and, given it was one of the oldest plays in the world, shocking to find so 
much of direct contemporary relevance.Susannah Jeffries

Miss Nightingale: The Musical
Theatre Royal, Margate

A touching tale, beautifully and originally told. Being a musical not based on 
a book or a film, or a film of a book, made it even more captivating.Philip Bray

Yerma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/07/yerma-review-young-vic-billie-piper-simon-stone>

Young Vic, London

It’s the only play that has made me openly sob. Blake Harrison
 