
It was the outstanding tie to emerge from the FA Cup third‑round draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/fa-cup-third-round-draw> made 
at the top of the BT Tower: Jaap Stam’s return to Manchester United, where the 
Dutchman helped them win the treble in his first season.

Stam, the Reading manager, left United a little more than 15 years ago after 
beingsold to Lazio by Sir Alex Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2001/aug/27/newsstory.sport4>. The last 
time the former centre-half was at Old Trafford, in June, he shared the stage 
with the actor Michael Sheen, the X Factor winner Shayne Ward and the former 
jockey Sir AP McCoy for a charity match.

“This is different,” Stam says as he contemplates going back to United again. 
“When you go back for a charity game there’s a lot of people coming to see 
famous artists kick a ball, too. This is a great occasion, in the FA Cup, and 
we want to show people howReading <https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading>
 play and what we can do.”

Stam spent three seasons at United, during which time he played 127 games and 
was a member of the 1999 Champions League-winning team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/1999/may/26/newsstory.sport>. He is 
beginning to forge quite the reputation as a manager, having guided Reading 
towards the top of the Championshipsince taking charge in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/13/reading-appoint-manchester-united-ajax-jaap-stam-manager-championship>
. How his standing would be embellished if his team were to gain more than just 
praise on Saturday.

Arsenal set to be without Francis Coquelin for up to four weeks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/arsenal-set-to-be-without-francis-coquelin-for-up-to-four-weeks-arsene-wenger>
“It’s going to be a difficult one – they’ve got a lot of quality and they’re 
one of the biggest teams in the world,” Stam says. “To play against them in 
front of 80,000 fans at Old Trafford, it will be a great adventure for the 
fans, a lot of players and myself as well. You need to enjoy it but you enjoy 
it even more if you get a result. We need to give it our best shot and work 
very hard. I’m sure we can do well against them but it’s not going to be easy.”

Manchester United have won their past six Premier League matches and in Zlatan 
Ibrahimovic, who duelled against Stam a decade ago for Juventus in Serie A, 
they have one of Europe’s most feared strikers. José Mourinho is almost certain 
to make changes and Stam, whose team werebeaten 2-0 at Arsenal in the EFL Cup 
in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/arsenal-reading-efl-cup-match-report>
, is wary of how the FA Cup holders will approach the fixture.

“They will want to finish the game as quick as they can – because that’s how 
people talk about smaller teams,” Stam says. “We need to be prepared in what we 
can expect. They’ve got a lot of quality.”

Mourinho has steadied things after a nervy beginning in which United lost 
against Manchester City, Feyenoord and Watford across nine September days. 
United look formidable once more and are unbeaten in 13 matches, the longest 
run since March 2013 under Ferguson. “I think José is a great manager,” Stam 
says. “He’s proven himself at other teams, he’s won a lot of trophies and 
that’s what he’s trying to do at United.

“I think if you work for a club like United then you need time to build your 
team if you want to play in a certain way. The players need to understand and 
get confident with what the manager wants.

“There’s a lot of pressure at the club and on the manager as well – everybody 
wants United straight away back at the top of the table. But you do not always 
need to start there and it’s important at the end of the season if you are 
there to win trophies. I think Mourinho knows that as well and I think he’s 
working towards that.

“All of the teams that play against you – and it was the same when I played 
there – everybody wants to beat United and they are the team to beat. Everybody 
is focused on getting a result against United.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Freading-jaap-stam-manchester-united-treble-old-trafford-fa-cup-third-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88190d7b427839aa4bb2f8306148133114135593%2F0_70_1376_826%2F1376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%E2%80%99s%20Jaap%20Stam%20ready%20for%20return%20to%20Manchester%20United%20in%20tie%20of%20the%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Freading-jaap-stam-manchester-united-treble-old-trafford-fa-cup-third-round%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%E2%80%99s%20Jaap%20Stam%20ready%20for%20return%20to%20Manchester%20United%20in%20tie%20of%20the%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Freading-jaap-stam-manchester-united-treble-old-trafford-fa-cup-third-round%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88190d7b427839aa4bb2f8306148133114135593%2F0_70_1376_826%2F1376.jpg>
 Alex Ferguson unveils Jaap Stam upon the Dutchman’s arrival at Old Trafford. 
Photograph: Daily Mail/Rex/Shutterstock 
For weeks Stam warned his players to put any thoughts about the match firmly 
on the back burner. Until now. Off the field, there has been the distraction of 
a potential takeover, with the Chinese brother and sister Dai Yongge and 
Dai Xiu Li in talks over buying the majority share of the club from the 
controlling consortium of Thai owners.

Reading are again riding high and sit third in the Championship, after 
finishing 17th in the league last season. The comeback win against Bristol City 
on Monday, a third successive league victory, will have heightened the mood 
before the Cup tie. In the summerStam played down expectations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/01/jaap-stam-player-talks-dressing-room-good-manager-reading-alex-ferguson>
 and to date has refrained from talking about promotion.

The squad was tickled during the close season, with the exciting pair John 
Swift and Liam Moore arriving from Chelsea and Leicester City respectively, and 
the previous overreliance on the loan market has been scrapped. Stam and the 
technical director, Brian Tevreden, have been savvy in the market but there is 
room for improvement. “All of the teams have got the ambition to go up and most 
of the teams have invested a lot to go up – compared to us, who have invested 
nothing,” Stam says. “If you look at the other teams, if you want to stay up 
there and want to go for that top six then I think it will be good to bring 
some extra quality into the squad.”

It was only seven months ago that the Reading co-chairman Sir John Madejski 
made his feelings known over the brave appointment of an untried manager on a 
two-year contract to replace Brian McDermott. “I wish that Brian had been given 
a bit longer but the shareholders decided it was time for change,” he said at 
Stam’s unveiling. “The Thai board are very anxious to see success at Reading 
football club, and that’s what we all want.”

It would be premature to label Stam’s short tenure as a success but the next 
six months or so, starting at Old Trafford, are sure to prove exciting.
 