
Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> maintained their 
two-point lead at the top of La Liga heading into November’s international 
break as a Lionel Messi-inspired Barcelona came back to beat Sevilla.

All the Real Madrid conversation on Sunday evening was about Cristiano 
Ronaldo’s new deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/cristiano-ronaldo-signs-new-five-year-real-madrid-contract>
, which keeps him at the Bernabéu until 2021. But it was another superstar who 
recently committed his future to Los Blancos, Gareth Bale, who put them on the 
path to a 3-0 victory againstLeganés.

Sevilla 1-2 Barcelona: La Liga – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/06/sevilla-v-barcelona-la-liga-live>
First the Welshman latched on to Isco’s pass and, with the aid of a lucky 
ricochet, took the ball past Jon Ander Serantes and slotted into the unguarded 
net, before pouncing to stab in a second from close range just before half-time.

Álvaro Morata added a third in the 76th minute to secure Real’s fourth 
straight win and leave Leganés just outside the bottom three.

Barcelona looked set to lose ground on their rivals when Vitolo deservedly put 
Sevilla ahead at the Estadio Sánchez Pizjuán after some poor defensive play 
from Sergi Roberto but Barça hit back just before half-time through Messi.

The Argentinian side-footed past Sergio Rico from the edge of the area, though 
there was a suspicion of offside against Ivan Rakitic, and he laid on Luis 
Suárez’s 61st-minute winner.

Gareth Bale scores twice as Real Madrid swat aside Leganés
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/real-madrid-leganes-la-liga-match-report>
Villarreal are up to third after a 2-0 victory at home to Real Betis. The 
Yellow Submarine have taken 13 points from a possible 15 at El Madrigal and 
were on top after a wonder strike from Manu Trigueros after 21 minutes, with 
Roberto Soriano adding another from long range in the 52nd minute.

Celta Vigo moved up to eighth with a 2-1 home victory over Valencia. Dani 
Parejo put the visitors in front from the penalty spot in the 33rd minute but 
Facundo Roncaglia levelled just before the break and John Guidetti headed in 
the winner with 14 minutes remaining.

The result leaves Valencia one point above the relegation zone and the new 
coach, Cesare Prandelli, with plenty to think about over the international 
break.

The day’s other match between Espanyol and Athletic Bilbao finished goalless.
 