
Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> claimed a third 
straight La Liga victory after a thrilling late show at Las Palmas ended in a 
2-1 win for the visitors.

Sergio Ramos and Casemiro punished slack Las Palmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laspalmas> marking from corners, the 
Brazilian’s 89th-minute header coming only moments after the former Real player 
Willian José had levelled for the hosts.

Ramos was sent off in stoppage time after picking up a second yellow card but 
Real held on to close the gap on second-placed Atlético Madrid to four points. 
Barcelona lead the table with 75 points and Atlético have 67.

Valencia’s Gary Neville vents fury on players after Levante derby defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/13/gary-neville-valencia-levante-la-liga>
Real were making their first trip to the Canary Islands since a side featuring 
Zinedine Zidane were beaten there 4-2 in October 2001.

Zidane was in the Madrid dugout this time and, with Cristiano Ronaldo having 
an off night, his side were often second-best after Keylor Navas denied José 
early on.

Ramos thundered home an Isco corner after 24 minutes but Las Palmas had 
chances to equalise through Nili, Momo and the substitute Sergio Araujo.

Gareth Bale almost wrapped up the points with a 25-yard shot which whistled 
just wide but Las Palmas equalised three minutes from time when Momo pounced on 
Mateo Kovacic’s sloppy free-kick and slipped in José.

But Casemiro scored a rare goal in the 89th minute to hand Real three points 
they barely deserved.

Sevilla moved into the top five with a 4-2 home victory over fourth-placed 
Villarreal. The gap between the two sides was cut to five points after 
Villarreal’s Cedric Bakambu cancelled out Vicente Iborra’s goal and then scored 
a second to give the visitors a 2-1 half-time lead.

The Villarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> defender 
Victor Ruiz put through his own net before Yevhen Konoplyanka’s long-range 
effort gave Sevilla a 3-2 lead in the 65th minute. Ever Banega was sent off for 
a second booking on 80 minutes but José Antonio Reyes sealed the points by 
scoring in stoppage time.

Athletic Bilbao also stayed in the hunt for the fourth Champions League place 
with a 3-1 home victory overReal Betis. It was Athletic’s fourth consecutive 
win and they are a point behind Sevilla in sixth. Villarreal have 53 points and
Sevilla <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> 48.

Athletic had their top scorer, Aritz Aduriz, on the bench but Sabin Merino 
scored either side of half-time and Mikel Rico added a third. Ruben Castro 
grabbed a late consolation goal for Betis, who remain in 11th place.
 