
As 23-year-old student Zarina watches Real Housewives of Isis on a phone amid 
the bustle of Whitechapel market in the east end of London, she puts her hand 
to her mouth and gasps before bursting into laughter.

On the screen a hijab-wearing character models a suicide vest for her fellow 
jihadi wives. “What do you think?” she asks. “Ahmed surprised me with it 
yesterday.” The pal reacts by excitedly posting a picture on Instagram, saying: 
“Hashtag OMG. Hashtag Jihadi Jane. Hashtag death to the west, ISIS emoji.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJHGgv6p7uVI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJHGgv6p7uVI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJHGgv6p7uVI&media=>
 Real Housewives of Isis 
The comedy sketch – aired this week as part of BBC2’s new comedy series 
Revolting – has come under fire from some viewers who have called it “morally 
bankrupt” and insensitive, while others have accused the BBC of making “Hijabis 
feel more isolated [and] targeted by Islamophobes”. Comedians, however, have 
said that reaction to the sketch is part of a growing culture of offence which 
– alongside stories that overhype the reaction – are in danger of stifling one 
of Britain’s most successful exports: its satire.

“Some people say that they are offended, some people are offended on others’ 
behalf, others are offended and they don’t even know why. Being offended is 
very popular these days,” says comedian and writerShazia Mirza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/shaziamirza>. 

The stand-up, who is currently touring her show 
<http://www.shazia-mirza.com/2016-tour-dates.html> The Kardashians Made Me Do 
It, inspired by the jihadi schoolgirls who joined Isis, said reports of outrage 
often amounted to a small collection of opinions scooped from social media. 
“The rightwing press might be offended, and maybe the leftwing liberals, but 
Muslims aren’t offended – it’s like they want us to be offended but we aren’t. 
We’re OK, thanks,” she says.

“There’s a long history of people from different religions mocking themselves 
– Christians, Jews, Catholics – why can’t Muslims make jokes about themselves? 
If we are going to continue that proud tradition of satire that has to be 
allowed.”

Real Housewives of Isis – a satire of the successful reality TV format – has 
been attacked by some viewers for being a waste of taxpayers’ money, but also 
for being culturally insensitive.


Comedians are facing increasing criticism from both the right and left, which 
could have crippling consequences, saysShaun Pye 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0701445/>, the co-creator of the dark satirical 
animation Monkey Dust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/feb/21/next-box-set-monkey-dust>
, shown on BBC3.

“In the old days you’d get criticism from the right wing, but now so much 
comes from what you would have called the left, who in the old days would have 
been celebrating free speech – and that can be more limiting,” he says.


Pye says he has spoken to younger writers who are wary of getting a barrage of 
social media abuse if they stray into controversial areas. “Twitter is so 
personal, it’s easy to ignore a critical news story but if you suddenly have a 
Twitter feed full of people having a go at you, that can be more intimidating.”

Real Housewives of Isis, which lasts a little more than a minute and a half, 
is only one of a series of sketches inRevolting 
<https://www.comedy.co.uk/tv/revolting/>, written by the Bafta-winning writers 
Heydon Prowse and Jolyon Rubinstein, the creators ofThe Revolution Will Be 
Televised <https://www.comedy.co.uk/tv/revolution_will_be_televised/>. The 
sketch depicts one woman mopping a floor, muttering: “Didn’t have to do this in 
Birmingham”, while another explains that she has been given a chain as a 
present from her husband. “Ali’s brought me a new chain,” she says, before the 
viewer sees she is attached to a cooker. She adds: “Which is 8ft long so I can 
almost get outside, which is great.”

The satire of the piece could be a powerful tool in preventing the 
radicalisation of young women, arguesShaista Gohir, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/shaista-gohir> the chair of the Muslim 
Women’s Network UK <http://www.mwnuk.co.uk/>. 


“[When trying to combat Isis] everyone just uses the same old approach, 
telling terrible stories of girls who went, but this is very different and it 
gets the message across in a satirical way,” she says.

Teenagers are far more likely to share humorous videos than didactic messages, 
she adds. “We need different strategies and this is one of them. If it gets the 
message across, then great.”

Sara Khan, writing in the International Business Times 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/real-housewives-isis-why-shouldnt-we-mock-female-jihadists-1599517?utm_source=social&utm_medium=facebook&utm_campaign=%2Freal-housewives-isis-why-shouldnt-we-mock-female-jihadists-1599517>
, agrees: “Terrorists ultimately seek to change the way we live our lives by 
creating a climate of fear. Satire is a long-standing British trait, which 
helps to neutralise fear through such ridicule.”

The sketch also speaks to a long British comedic history of mocking one’s 
enemies, saysRichard Gadd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/22/richard-gadd-edinburgh-festival-fringe-comedy>
, who won the Edinburgh comedy award with a painfully personal show about his 
difficulties overcoming a sexual assault.


“Satire is so important as an art form. It cuts right to the heart of an 
opponent: against all the violent tropes of Isis, mockery can have a 
devastating effect,” he says. “Mockery done well can cause real instability in 
your opponent. It is such a fundamental part of British culture, it’s part of 
the fabric of our country.”


Real Housewives of Isis seems to cause little offence to shoppers at 
Whitechapel market. “It’s just a joke,” saysIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> Fokrul, 29, working on a stall 
selling scarves. “As long as it is not trying to intentionally hurt someone, 
why not? In comedy you can get a message to the people that this is the wrong 
thing to do.”

Zarina, a student who does not want to give her surname, agrees: “There’s 
always going to be people who get upset about something. But I don’t find this 
offensive – it’s a bit silly, but definitely funny.”

A BBC spokeswoman said: “This show is satire, and the BBC has a rich history 
of satire.” The corporation would not comment further.

 