
5.56pm BST 

Bye!

And with Sky switching their attention to Barcelona v Málaga, that's all I can 
offer you. Thanks for your eyes and emails, and have a wonderful 
rest-of-weekend.

5.53pm BST 

Mourinhowatch latest

Mourinho takes a few steps out of the shade of his bench to applaud the fans, 
and to accept their applause, and then he's gone, never to return (at least 
until next season's Champions League quarter-final, or whenever).

5.52pm BST 

Final score: Real Madrid 4-2 Osasuna

90+2 mins: With one more off-target Osasuna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/osasuna> shot from just outside the 
penalty area – Omwu with it – followed by a Real break that ended with 
Callejón's inexplicable miss, the final whistle blows.

Updated at 5.52pm BST

5.49pm BST 

90 mins: José Mourinho's Madrid career goes into stoppage time, of which there 
will be two minutes.

Updated at 5.49pm BST

5.47pm BST 

GOAL! Real Madrid 4-2 Osasuna (Callejón, 87 mins)

Real break, Higuaín sprints at surprising speed down the left, passes infield 
to Benzema, who plays in Callejón, whose low shot beats Osasuna's veteran 
gloveman, and that's the game won.

5.46pm BST 

86 mins: That's a Llorente on each side today. I see it's the 36,761th most 
common surname in the US, but is it much more common in Spain, or are Lorrentes 
just uncommonly good at football?

5.44pm BST 

85 mins: Arbeloa lays the ball back to Benzema, who tries a left-footed curler 
and finds only Ricardo's midriff. And that's Arbeloa's final action, Diego 
Llorente replacing him.

5.42pm BST 

82 mins: Interesting stat this one, raising as it does the possibility of 
players performing multiple unintentional assists in a single game. Which 
sounds like fun.
OptaJose (@OptaJose) 
3 - Mesut Özil has made two intentional assists in a single game for 3rd time 
in this league, more than any other player this season. Unique
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJose/statuses/340870592632868865> June 1, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJose/statuses/340870592632868865> 
5.40pm BST 

80 mins: Ozil's lovely left-wing cross is cleared for a corner, from which 
Benzema collects the ball on the far corner of the penalty area and curls a 
left-foot shot just wide. At which, Ozil comes off and Omar Mascarell comes on.
Infostrada Sports (@InfostradaLive) 
2-2 (63') Only once in Mourinho era have Real Madrid failed to win a #laliga 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23laliga&src=hash> match after a two goal lead, 
last week's 3-3 at Real Sociedad.
 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/statuses/340867542975389697> June 1, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/statuses/340867542975389697> 
5.37pm BST 

78 mins: Another Osasuna substitution, Fracisco Silva replaced by Mesa Maikel. 
Or is it Maikel Mesa?

5.36pm BST 

77 mins: Disallowed goal! Essien carries the ball 50 yards before passing to 
his left to Callejón, who slides the ball across goal for Benzema to score. 
Callejon, though, is correctly ruled offside.

5.35pm BST 

76 mins: Ricardo replaces Asier Riesgo in the Osasuna goal, becoming at 41 and 
however many days there have been since 30 December the second-oldest player 
ever to take aLa Liga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laligafootball> 
field.

5.34pm BST 

74 mins: Benzema passes to Modric, who scampers clear and ignores a potential 
pull-back to instead curl a shot just wide of the far post. "Having developed 
an attachment to Osasuna since emigrating to Spain, could I take issue with 
your description?" asks Justin Horton. Um … well … I'd prefer it if you didn't 
to be honest, but … well … I suppose just this once. "There's no such thing as 
humdrum opponents, merely humdrum matches. And from the score, it doesn't 
appear that you're watching either. Osasuna's struggle against relegation this 
season, by the way, has been just as dramatic as Real Madrid's struggle against 
themselves." Yes, I can see how the word "humdrum" might nark those who hold 
Osasuna dear.

5.31pm BST 

72 mins: David Timor shoots from distance. Osasuna have absolutely peppered 
Jesus today, but his handling has been extremely assured.

5.30pm BST 

GOAL! Real Madrid 3-2 Osasuna (Benzema, 69 mins)

Ozil passes to Benzema on the edge of the penalty area, and while the 
Frenchman's first touch is very good, his second – just a moment later – is 
better still, and blasts the ball into the net. The keeper got a good touch on 
it, mind.

5.28pm BST 

68 mins: Jesus savews another speculative effort – Osasuna lead 18-8 in shots 
on goal. Rich Foden seeks further clarification. "What i really meant was, is 
he still up to it?" he asks of Essien. Essien was once a phenomenon, an 
incredible physical specimen, possessing a stamina and thirst for work I have 
only ever seen one player regularly emulate (Andy Hessenthaler, since you ask). 
Those days are gone. He is now human. He's still a perfectly decent midfielder, 
mind, just in a slightly less lung-busting mould.

5.23pm BST 

GOAL! Real Madrid 2-2 Osasuna (Cejudo, 64)

A cross from the left, Omwu meets it at the near post but gets his header 
hopelessly wrong, so wrong that the ball bounces off his back to Cejudo at the 
far post, and his header goes back across goal and in.

5.20pm BST 

60 mins: Osasuna bossing proceedings here, though Jesus seems to have an 
answer for everything they throw at him. This statistic doesn't seem remotely 
surprising:
OptaJose (@OptaJose) 
7.8% - Osasuna have the lowest shot conversion rate in La Liga this season; 
Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> have the 
second-highest figure (18.5%). Hitting
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJose/statuses/340861905642086400> June 1, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJose/statuses/340861905642086400> 
5.17pm BST 

58 mins: The free kick is wasted. If you got half a goal for a decent move 
that brings you one good pass or proper shot away from a certain goal, Osasuna 
would be 8-4 up here.

Updated at 5.18pm BST

5.16pm BST 

57 mins: Essien fouls Silva just inside the penalty area, and gets away with 
it. Free kick.

5.15pm BST 

56 mins: Higuaín is played through again, and he tries an identical finish to 
the one in the first half that went in – but this time it's saved!

5.13pm BST 

54 mins: And that's nearly an equaliser! Oier Sonj crosses from the right – a 
very nice cross indeed – and Emiliano Armenteros heads over from six yards!

5.11pm BST 

GOAL! Real Madrid 1-2 Osasuna (Roberto Torres, 52 mins)

52 mins: Eventually one of Osasuna's 20-yard pot-shots was going to be good, 
and that one certainly was. Torres shifted the ball onto his right, earns a 
yard of space against Arbeloa, and his 20-yard effort arrows into the far 
corner.

5.09pm BST 

50 min: Omwu's first effort is a loopy 20-yard volley that dips over the bar.

5.08pm BST 

48 mins: Ozil's over-casual shot is saved. "Just wondering If you could tell 
me how Essien is actually doing over at Real?" asks Rich Soden. "Save the 
Champions League I've seen no Spanish football at all this year. I read a 
rumour that Mourinho wants him to come back to Chelsea and take Ramires' 
box-to-box position … please tell me this is all fantasy." Well he's still 
Chelsea's player, and Mourinho clearly still likes him – he's played 20 times 
in the league this season, and seven more in Europe – so I wouldn't be at all 
surprised if he returns to active duty at Stamford Bridge next season. I remain 
unconvinced about his abilities as a full-back, mind.

Updated at 5.08pm BST

5.05pm BST 

46 mins: Also off is Osasuna's Joseba Llorente, with Manuel Omwu replacing him.

5.00pm BST 

Peeeeeeeeeep!

46 mins: They're off! Again! Except for Angel Di María, who is off in the 
other sense after being replaced by Nacho. "Being pitted against three former 
assistants just about cements Mourinho as one of the greats," writes Nicholas. 
"I suspect in 10 years we will see at least three, maybe more, of his Chelsea 
team managing in the League as well. Terry, Lampard, Ferreira, Cech and here is 
the shock, Cole, look like they will manage one day. (There aren't many players 
who have been exposed to so many great coaches as that five.)" If Ashley Cole 
goes into management I'll eat my shoes.

Updated at 5.04pm BST

4.54pm BST 

Half-time: Those two first-half goals takes Real Madrid's tally to 101 for the 
season. They thus become the first Spanish side to achieve that feat on five 
occasions, and Mourinho becomes the first manager in the entire history of all 
of Spain to coach teams that have done it three times. Higuaín has also become 
the 14th-highest goalscorer in Real's history. All of that from @2010MisterChip 
on Twitter.

4.49pm BST 

45+1 mins: Peeeeeeeeeeeep! The referee only plays 51 seconds of his minute, 
and the first half is over.

4.49pm BST 

45 mins: As the fourth official prepares to tell the world that there'll be 
one minute of stoppage time, Mourinho disappears down the tunnel.

4.48pm BST 

43 mins: Higuain manages to turn a potential goalscoring opportunity into a 
yellow card, after getting narked at the quality of the tackle that 
dispossessed him, from Osasuna debutant Unai Garcia.

4.43pm BST 

40 mins: Osasuna have another optimistic shot from just outside the penalty 
area, gathered by Jesus.

4.42pm BST 

GOAL! Real Madrid 2-0 Osasuna (Essien, 38 mins)

It's another! And just like Real's first corner, Ozil curls the ball onto 
Essien's head. But unlike the first corner, the header is kept low and directed 
perfectly inside the near post.
 Michael Essien celebrates with Mourinho. Photograph: DANI POZO/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Updated at 4.54pm BST

4.41pm BST 

37 mins: "It has just hit me, Simon, that if Mourinho does indeed join Chelsea 
as head coach in the coming season, he will have three ex-members of his 
backroom staff setting their teams against him – Villas-Boas, Clarke and 
Rodgers," writes Charlie Fineman. "That has to be a first, right?" It may very 
well be. Ferguson has come up against many former coaches and players – 
McClaren, Kidd, Robson, Hughes, Bruce etc etc – but I'm not sure how many there 
have been at any one time.

4.39pm BST 

GOAL! Real Madrid 1-0 Osasuna (Higuain, 35 mins)

Real go ahead, after Di Maria's dummy allows Higuain to turn and run clear on 
goal. He shoots low and confidently wide of the keeper and in.
 Gonzalo Higuain, left, celebrates his goal. Photograph: DANI POZO/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Updated at 4.54pm BST

4.37pm BST 

34 mins:Real run down to the other end, where Di María should have done 
considerably better when found free, running on goal, 40 yards out. His first 
touch though is weak, and forces him uselessly wide.

4.36pm BST 

33 mins: The chance of the match so far falls to Osasuna, but their striker 
opts to send his shot low and central, and Jesus saves.

4.35pm BST 

31 mins: Perhaps the most interesting things about this match so far are the 
pro-Mourinho chants, and the anti-Mourinho reaction to them. Di María's shot is 
blocked, when there werea lot of Real players forward – I think it was 6 v 4 by 
the end there.
 Fans of Real Madrid display placards reading "Thank you Mou" during José 
Mourinho's final game in charge, against Osasuna. Photograph: PIERRE-PHILIPPE 
MARCOU/AFP/Getty Images 
Updated at 4.35pm BST

4.32pm BST 

29 mins: Higuain's cross is very well plucked out of the air by Asier Riesgo 
as Benzema prepared to nod home.

4.29pm BST 

26 mins: Osasuna are playing pretty well, doing a roughly equal amount of 
attacking as their hosts, even if it seems less likely to be rewarded with an 
actual goal.

4.28pm BST 

24 mins: Real Madrid twice come close, first as Ozil feeds Higuain, then when 
Modric tricks his way through only for his shot to be well blocked by Ruben.
 A fan of Real Madrid displays a placard reading "See you never Mou" during 
José Mourinho's final match as coach. Photograph: Pierre-Philippe 
Marcou/AFP/Getty Images 
4.25pm BST 

22 mins: "With all this fuss about Mourinho to Chelsea and Pellegrini to Man 
City, I feel that Jupp Heynckes is being ignored," moans Gideon Nachman. 
"What's he doing after this season? In my mind he is a fair sight better than 
either Mourinho or Pellegrini and I think Chelsea/City would do better with him 
at the helm than anyone else." According to rumour he's likely to end up right 
here at the Bernabéu, though reports that the deal had been done were denied 
this week.

4.23pm BST 

20 mins: Lovely ball from Di Maria on the right wing, across for Higuain well 
wide of the far post, whose low volley is saved. He was offside anyway, but the 
cross and the volley were both excellent.

4.22pm BST 

19 mins: Ozil escapes down the left, but his ball to the unmarked Higuain is 
slow and loopy enough to allow defenders to get back before it drops.

4.22pm BST 

19 mins: Sky's commentators are discussing Monaco's tax affairs.

4.19pm BST 

17 mins: Osasuna attack, and an overhit cross from the left finds the guy on 
the right, who overhits it back to the left again.

4.18pm BST 

14 mins: Chance for Osasuna! A cross from the left, Joseba Llorente gets his 
head to it and the keeper pushes it away for a corner. In truth, it was from 15 
yards out and was never really going to go in, but that won't stop me using an 
exclamation mark.

4.16pm BST 

13 mins: Looks like a lovely day in Madrid. The teams take it in turns to 
overhit potentially goal-supplying through-balls.

Updated at 4.16pm BST

4.14pm BST 

11 mins: Neither side has bothered with their full allocation of substitutes 
today.

Updated at 4.20pm BST

4.13pm BST 

10 mins: So who has been the manager you've been happiest to see the back of? 
Me, I must admit to never having liked Trevor Francis much. I don't think there 
was any one incident that led to my antipathy, I just didn't like him, and 
thought his television co-commentaries particularly inane. He's still doing 
those.

Updated at 4.20pm BST

4.11pm BST 

8 mins: Callejon gets down the right and pulls the ball back, but it's just 
behind Higuain.

4.10pm BST 

7 mins: Down the other end Real win a corner of their own, from which Essien 
musters the day's first effort on goal. It's a loopy header that floats over 
the bar.

Updated at 4.10pm BST

4.08pm BST 

4 mins: Osasuna make eight changes to the side that won last week, strangely. 
Still, they just had an attack and won a corner.

4.05pm BST 

2 min: If the purpose of Mourinho's late exit from the tunnel was to avoid 
attention, it didn't work. The match has just been stopped to allow overexcited 
photographers to be cleared from the technical area.
 Photographers crowd around José Mourinho at the start of his final match as 
Real Madrid's coach, against Osasuna. Photograph: Juanjo Martin/EPA 
Updated at 4.57pm BST

4.04pm BST 

Peeeeeeeep!

1 min: The referee blows his whistle just as Mourinho skips out of the tunnel. 
And the teams in full are:

Real Madrid: Jesus Fernandez; Essien, Carvalho, Albiol, Arbeloa; Ozil, Modric; 
Di Maria, Callejon; Benzema, Higuain.Substitutes: Adan, Nacho, Morata, Fabinho, 
Llorente, Omar.
Osasuna: Riesgo, Ruben, Armenteros, Llorente, Oier, Cejudo, Nano, Silva, 
Roberto Torres, Timor, Unai Garcia.Substitutes: Ricardo, Maikel, De las Cuevas, 
Kike Sola, Manu Onwu.

4.01pm BST 

Mourinho has now joined Ronaldo in the tunnel/staircase area, where the pair 
are engaged in a heated battle to appear more nonchalant than the other. 
Incredible scenes.

3.59pm BST 

Action is already imminent at the Bernabéu, with the players gathering in the 
tunnel/staircase area. And there's Cristiano Ronaldo, in a tight-fitting white 
T-shirt with some sunglasses tucked into the neck.
OptaJose (@OptaJose) 
99 - Real Madrid, who are currently on 99 league goals this season, have 
always reached three figures under Jose Mourinho. Intimidating
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJose/statuses/340844189866663938> June 1, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJose/statuses/340844189866663938> 
3.57pm BST 

Madrid will come second, whatever happens today. Osasuna will come either 15th 
or 16th, with Granada also vying for those two hotly-contested spots.
Infostrada Sports (@InfostradaLive) 
Real have won 274 points in La Liga during Mourinho's spell, 10 fewer than 
Barcelona in this period.#laliga 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23laliga&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/statuses/340842692374315009> June 1, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/statuses/340842692374315009> 
3.48pm BST 

The team!

José Mourinho's last first XI looks like this: Jesús, Arbeloa, Carvalho, 
Albiol, Essien; Modric, Özil, Callejón, Di María, Higuaín, Benzema.

3.42pm BST 

Hello world!
 He's gone! Photograph: Li Ding/Alamy  A party on the streets of Madrid today 
as residents celebrated the departure of José Mourinho. Photograph: 
Popperfoto/Getty Images Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPy5NfEv6c6s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPy5NfEv6c6s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPy5NfEv6c6s&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPy5NfEv6c6s&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPy5NfEv6c6s>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPy5NfEv6c6s&media=>
close 
Welcome to the Farewell José party, live from the Spanish city of Madrid. The 
bad news is … now he's coming to London [TBC].

Still, let's look on the bright side. It could work out well for Chelsea. 
After all, look at how his last few jobs have ended: an emotional farewell from 
Porto on the night of their Champions League triumph, and then a spell at 
Chelsea which ended with a humdrum match against humdrum opponents (Rosenborg, 
in this case), then an emotional farewell from Internazionale on the night of 
their Champions League triumph, and then a spell at Real Madrid which is about 
to end with a humdrum match against humdrum opponents (Osasuna, in this case). 
There seems to be a theme developing, a theme which sees every other employer 
love him, and weep when he leaves. By which logic, nice signing, Chelsea.

So then, today. Real have won their last 10 home games. When they visited 
Osasuna in January they drew 0-0 in a nasty little match that featured nine 
yellow cards, two of them waved at Kaká. Of the teams’ last 10 meetings at the 
Bernabéu Real have won eight, drawn one and lost 3-0 in April 2004. Cristiano 
Ronaldo won’t be involved, having been left out of the squad, and he will be 
joined on the sidelines by Xabi Alonso, Sergio Ramos, Pepe and – even though 
Diego López is out – the fit-again Iker Casillas. Instead Ricardo Carvalho and 
Michael Essien will apparently be in his first XI, as they so often were at 
Chelsea. The curtain goes down on Mourinho's time in Spain after 995 days, 
precisely 210 fewer than he lasted in London.

Today Mourinho released a statement. “I wish all of Real Madrid’s supporters 
much happiness in the future,” he said. “I want to thank many fans for their 
support, and I respect the criticism of others. I repeat, happiness to all, and 
above all, good health. Hala Madrid!” Hala Madrid, and hello London. Whatever 
you think about the man, we can at least look forward to the party when he goes…

Updated at 4.15pm BST

2.49pm BST 

Simon will be here shortly. In the meantime, here's what has already gone down 
today in Madrid: a special farewell:

José Mourinho has bid farewell to Real Madrid's fans ahead of his last game on 
Saturday. The Portuguese coach says in a statement: "I wish all of Real 
Madrid's supporters much happiness in the future. I want to thank many fans for 
their support, and I respect the criticism of others. I repeat, happiness to 
all, and above all, good health. Hala Madrid!"

Mourinho is expected to return to Chelsea in the Premier League next season. 
After winning the Copa del Rey in his first season and the Spanish league in 
his second, Mourinho and the club agreed to part ways following a third season 
without a major title. Mourinho has been heavily criticised for his benching of 
captain and goalkeeper Iker Casillas this season.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmay%2F21%2Freal-madrid-fans-jose-mourinho-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Real%20Madrid%20fans%20react%20to%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho's%20early%20exit%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmay%2F21%2Freal-madrid-fans-jose-mourinho-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Real%20Madrid%20fans%20react%20to%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%27s%20early%20exit%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmay%2F21%2Freal-madrid-fans-jose-mourinho-video&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmay%2F21%2Freal-madrid-fans-jose-mourinho-video&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Real%20Madrid%20fans%20react%20to%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho's%20early%20exit%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmay%2F21%2Freal-madrid-fans-jose-mourinho-video>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Real%20Madrid%20fans%20react%20to%20Jos%C3%A9%20Mourinho%27s%20early%20exit%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.guardian.co.uk%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fmay%2F21%2Freal-madrid-fans-jose-mourinho-video&media=>
close  