
Performers often remark on the reserve of British theatre audiences compared 
with the whooping of their US counterparts. But whenRebel Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/28/rebel-wilson-australia-comedy-actor-guys-dolls>
 tottered on stage in London on Thursday night as Miss Adelaide inGuys and 
Dolls, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/dec/29/guys-and-dolls-musical-lady-luck-america-damon-runyon-frank-loesser>
 it might as well have been Broadway. Before she had delivered a single line, 
the crowd could not contain itself.Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/14/rebel-wilson-ive-been-practising-my-transgender-face-so-i-can-win-oscars>
 spent the next two and a half hours proving she deserved the hysteria.

Guys and Dolls review – expert revival plays its cards right
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/07/guys-and-dolls-review-jamie-parker-savoy>
The 36-year-old Australian actor’s emotional openness on screen, in hits such 
asBridesmaids <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bridesmaids> and the two Pitch 
Perfect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/23/pitch-perfect-review-jason-moore> 
movies, has always been simultaneously monstrous and moving, terrifying and 
tender. That quality converts easily to the stage. She has perfected the 
distinctive nasal squawk required to play Adelaide, who has a permanent cold, 
which it is suggested is caused by having been engaged for 14 years without any 
sign of a wedding. She looks as if she could tear her fiance, Nathan Detroit 
(Simon Lipkin), limb from limb as easily as she plucks the petals from the 
dancers’ costumes in a game of he-loves-me, he-loves-me-not. One of the show’s 
highlights comes during the songSue Me 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pw6eKxa0puY> when she mimes choking him to 
death, dragging out the crime to ridiculous lengths. But she also makes it 
clear that Adelaide is missing important protective layers.

The director Gordon Greenberg <http://www.gordongreenberg.com/> cast her as a 
way of returning the show to its audacious origins. “These days it seems 
quaint,” he explains. “But I wanted to recapture the danger and the racy tone 
that it had in 1950, when the language and the sheer exposure of flesh made it 
pretty bold. I needed someone who would bring a fresh, young, vital energy to 
the show. Rebel is very smart and strategic about the work she does and you can 
see instantly that she connects with the audience in the way the youngBette 
Midler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/15/bette-midler-this-much-i-know>
 did. She’s amazingly perceptive. She’s that interesting creature who always 
knows what’s happening in every corner of the room.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebel-wilson-west-end-guys-dolls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40ad10e4dcbafb94866291b1f7170ffbe45997e6%2F0_702_3456_4309%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebel%20Wilson%3A%20from%20Pitch%20Perfect%20to%20a%20pitch-perfect%20West%20End%20debut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebel-wilson-west-end-guys-dolls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebel%20Wilson%3A%20from%20Pitch%20Perfect%20to%20a%20pitch-perfect%20West%20End%20debut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebel-wilson-west-end-guys-dolls%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40ad10e4dcbafb94866291b1f7170ffbe45997e6%2F0_702_3456_4309%2F3456.jpg>
 ‘She’s amazingly perceptive’ … Rebel Wilson in Guys and Dolls. Photograph: 
Johan Persson 
It has been hard to escape her this year. She was very winning within her 
natural habitat – the female-oriented buddy-movie – inHow to Be Single 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/12/how-to-be-single-review-rebel-wilson-dakota-johnson>
, where she brought the odd moment of rage to her over-sharing, cheerfully 
disinhibited shtick. Then she popped up in two British comedies: Sacha Baron 
Cohen’s dismal spy caperGrimsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/22/grimsby-review-sacha-baron-cohen-mark-strong>
, in which she was wasted in a tiny role, andAbsolutely Fabulous: The Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/03/absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-review-jennifer-saunders-joanna-lumley>
, where she had heaps more fun as a budget airline flight attendant who squares 
up to the indomitable Patsy (Joanna Lumley).


Mandie Fletcher, who directed Ab Fab, was immediately impressed by Wilson. “I 
found her rather touching,” she says. “It’s not easy to come on to a set at the 
end of a shoot where everyone already knows one another. But she’s incredibly 
self-possessed. She knows herself very well and has lots of ideas. Then once 
she gets in front of the camera – well, she lights up like a flipping candle. 
She’s one of those people whom you know is absolutely in the right job.”


Guys and Dolls: how lady luck smiled on the seedy side of America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/dec/29/guys-and-dolls-musical-lady-luck-america-damon-runyon-frank-loesser>
 Wilson, who was born in Sydney and trained as a lawyer, carved out a 
successful comedy career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/02/rebel-wilson-pitch-perfect-2-bridesmaids-comedy-boys-club>
 for herself on Australian television. Her legal background stood her in good 
stead for negotiating contracts and protecting her business assets. Working on 
an Australian TV sketch show, for instance, she was the only person who made 
sure she owned the rights to all her characters.

She first came to the attention of international audiences in the 2011 hit 
Bridesmaids, in which she played the mildly unhinged sister of Matt Lucas. 
Another newcomer might have been daunted by the prospect of appearing alongside 
talents such as Kristen Wiig and Melissa McCarthy but Wilson made this small, 
odd role her own. The otherworldly inflections of her accent, best described as 
sedated English, combined with the character’s brazenness, left viewers reeling 
slightly from shock. Her evident ease with her larger-than-average size was 
also an undoubted part of the charm. “I saw my size as being an advantage,” she 
said, “whereas so many women see it as a disadvantage.”

With that brief, startling appearance a career was born. From that point on, 
Wilson became prized as the obliviously uncouth party girl, at once cuddly and 
abrasive, who says what no one else would dare – the ball of fun with a core of 
steel. She carried the out-of-control persona with her from Bridesmaids into 
the 2012 comedy Pitch Perfect, where she played Fat Amy, one of a group of 
young women who enter an a capella tournament; she stole the film and its 
sequel from her co-stars and will doubtless do so again in the third 
instalment, which starts shooting as soon as her eight-week stint in Guys and 
Dolls is up. The one departure from the Wilson narrative of good-natured 
raucousness has been her decision to sue parts of the Australian press over its 
accusations that she embellished stories of her ordinary middle-class 
upbringing and lied about her age. It’s hard to know whether Wilson has a 
strong case with her claim that the coverage cost her work. With her sharp 
legal mind, though, it would be foolish to rule it out.


Wilson’s career so far has been dominated by films that have used her to 
provide a brief, electrifying jolt, fromWhat to Expect When You’re Expecting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/22/what-to-expect-when-youre-expecting-film-on-tv-recap>
 to the third Night at the Museum movie. But she has been frank about her 
ambitions to win an Oscar. “I have to transition into drama,” she said 
recently, “because I can’t fucking win an Oscar for Pitch Perfect 3, can I?”

For many of her fans, this move will be overdue. “She does this wonderful job 
of undercutting, coming in and stealing the scene,” says Fletcher. “But now I 
think it’s time for her to take the lead in something.” Greenberg thinks an 
Oscar is perfectly within Wilson’s grasp. “She’s still evolving as an artist 
and the fact that she has her sights set on a very highfalutin goal is a good 
thing. She certainly has the soulfulness, intelligence, curiosity and talent to 
get herself there. This is just the beginning.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebel-wilson-west-end-guys-dolls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b0ac9f36121d5c90d81867b7c8f4c3394b59ae%2F0_0_5140_3425%2F5140.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebel%20Wilson%3A%20from%20Pitch%20Perfect%20to%20a%20pitch-perfect%20West%20End%20debut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebel-wilson-west-end-guys-dolls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebel%20Wilson%3A%20from%20Pitch%20Perfect%20to%20a%20pitch-perfect%20West%20End%20debut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Frebel-wilson-west-end-guys-dolls%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b0ac9f36121d5c90d81867b7c8f4c3394b59ae%2F0_0_5140_3425%2F5140.jpg>
 Scene-stealer … Rebel Wilson in Pitch Perfect. Photograph: Alamy 
Potted profile

Born 2 March 1980

Age 36

Career Sydney-born actor, graduated from the Australian Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> for Young People in 2003, became a 
homegrown TV star before moving to Los Angeles and landing a part in 
Bridesmaids. Since then, she has been the go-to girl for any film needing a 
rejuvenating shot of comic wildness.

High point Playing Fat Amy in the Pitch Perfect comedies. Presenting at this 
year’s Baftas (“I have never been invited to the Oscars because, as you know, 
they are racist …”).

Low point Suing Australian publications that accused her of lying about her 
age.

What she says “There’s something about me that people like laughing at.”

What they say “You feel because she’s so good at playing hot messes on film 
that that’s what you’ll get in real life. What you get is a woman who doesn’t 
drink when she goes out with the cast after the show. She has a Coke, talks for 
a bit and then goes home to work on her craft.” Gordon Greenberg, director of 
Guys and Dolls.

 * Rebel Wilson plays Adelaide in Guys and Dolls at the Phoenix theatre, London
 <http://www.phoenixtheatrelondon.co.uk/>, until 21 August. The production is 
booking until 30 October. Box office: 0844 871 7629.
 