
In the 11-and-a-half seasons of the A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> nobody has scored more goals 
than Besart Berisha. Melbourne Victory’s centre forward overtook Archie 
Thompson’s tally of 90 when he converted a fittingly controversial penalty in 
the 30th minute of Monday night’s encounter with Newcastle Jets.

Since arriving at Brisbane Roar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brisbane-roar> in 2011 Berisha has 
dominated the A-League. He scored in his second game, bagged the competition’s 
fastest hat-trick in his fourth, and capped his debut campaign by proving the 
decisive figure in the most controversial of grand finals. His goalscoring 
exploits have contributed to three championships, two premierships and an FFA 
Cup winner’s medal.

We can rhapsodise about Berisha’s many virtues as a footballer, but it is his 
unconcealed willingness to win at all costs that sets him apart. His hunger for 
the ball, for goals, and for success is insatiable. Simply, winning football 
matches matters more to him than most people.

David Squires on ... the A-League year that was 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/dec/29/david-squires-on-the-a-league-year-that-was-2016>
During the first half of the recent Melbourne derby, Berisha missed a cluster 
of chances he would have expected to take. He was one finish behind Thompson’s 
record at the time. “I smashed chairs. The bin. The rubbish bin. Maybe some 
doors. I really smashed everything to relax a little bit,” Berisha explained 
afterwards about his state of mind at half-time. “I wanted it too much. I 
wanted to score too early. I had to smash some stuff inside and then I was 
fine. It was relieving.”

Thirty-three minutes later he tucked away the winner. After which he 
celebrated like the scorer of the most important goal in football history. Most 
of the strikes that contributed to that record equalling moment were treated 
with similar rapture.


To supporters of Berisha’s rivals such naked ambition can seem gauche. But 
it’s a desperation with context. Berisha’s family fled Kosovo for Germany when 
he was a boy. Their lives in east Berlin were hard but football offered an 
escape. A child prodigy, by his mid-teens he was playing for money to 
contribute to his family’s well-being. Every match in his formative years was 
loaded with meaning and purpose. For as long as he can remember, football has 
been more than just a game.

“The game is my life and I take it so seriously,” he told Guardian Australia 
in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/21/besart-berisha-brisbane-roar-interview>
. “Even at 14 I was so serious. I didn’t want to lose any game.” A statement 
that prefaced an explanation of how, at 17, he fought tooth and nail to secure 
his first professional contract, fearing failure would see him returned to 
Kosovo. If Berisha appears to play as though his life depends on it, that’s 
because at times it has.

“You must understand me,” he implored The Australian in 2012, “this is not 
just a game for me. I did not learn nothing else. I did not finish school. This 
is my life. I don’t have anything else. I always wanted to be a professional. I 
am very passionate about what I do. I don’t go into a game saying ‘this is just 
a game’. This is everything for me because it helps me and my family to try and 
have a better life than before.”

That Berisha and his family have a better life in Australia is the product of 
a happy accident. Roar assistant Rado Vidosic was in Germany during the 2011 
pre-season watching his son Dario train with Arminia Bielefeld. Berisha, a 
team-mate at the time, caught his eye. He soon became the focal point of one of 
the great club sides in Australian football history.

This is the natural entry point to laud Berisha’s potency; his composure in 
front of goal or the expert timing of his runs, perhaps. But in breaking 
Brisbane’s goalscoring records it was his teamwork and defensive play that 
earned him the most considered praise. The goals were a byproduct of Berisha 
doing his job.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Frecord-breaker-besart-berisha-plays-like-his-life-depends-on-it-because-it-does%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F728fb62ace405e47938714ece70f2ef4eac04397%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Record-breaker%20Besart%20Berisha%20plays%20like%20his%20life%20depends%20on%20it%2C%20because%20it%20does%20%7C%20JP%20Howcroft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Frecord-breaker-besart-berisha-plays-like-his-life-depends-on-it-because-it-does%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Record-breaker%20Besart%20Berisha%20plays%20like%20his%20life%20depends%20on%20it%2C%20because%20it%20does%20%7C%20JP%20Howcroft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Frecord-breaker-besart-berisha-plays-like-his-life-depends-on-it-because-it-does%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F728fb62ace405e47938714ece70f2ef4eac04397%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Berisha in action against Western Sydney earlier this season. Photograph: 
Jason McCawley/Getty Images 
Ange Postecoglou’s method relied on an overwhelming dominance of possession. 
To achieve this he required a lone striker that could set the defensive tone 
and force quick turnovers. Berisha was tailor made for such a selfless role. At 
each opening whistle he would morph into Liam Neeson (with whom he shares more 
than a passing resemblance) and turn his maniacal focus on regaining possession 
into a Hollywood hostage situation. He possessed the particular set of skills 
required for the job and it made him a defender’s nightmare.

As Vidosic explained earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/15/friday-focus-the-two-no9s-currently-setting-the-standard-in-the-a-league>
: “He loves to press on his own. He likes to press a defence to one side so 
that the rest of the team can adjust for the second pass which goes into a 
crowded area. For someone to work so hard for the team like that is priceless.”

Watching Berisha in action for Victory remains exhausting. He involves himself 
in every phase of play, be it hunting down opponents, offering to receive a 
clearing pass with his back to goal, or finding space between defenders to be 
in the right place at the right time to put the ball in the back of the net. 
All the while his facial expressions and body language betraying the wildly 
vacillating emotions he is unafraid of hiding.

These emotions have at times proven destructive. His bare-chested offering 
outside of Pascal Bosschaart in 2012 went beyond the bounds of acceptable 
passion and his three red cards during the 2013-14 season remain a league 
record. But these outbursts are increasingly rare as the wild eyes and bleached 
fauxhawk give way to a 31-year old at ease with his status and accomplishments. 
Nonetheless, he remains the player opposition fans love to hate, a status he 
relishes.

As he approaches veteran status Berisha shows no signs of winding down. Never 
outside the top four goalscorers in a season, he is again leading the race for 
the golden boot. With only three goals from open play before round 10 there 
were murmurings his intensity had dropped off and he was on the decline. He 
responded with a perfect hat-trick, a riposte worthy of the greatest goalscorer 
the A-League has ever seen.
 