
Hundreds of refugees stranded in Serbia have begun walking from Belgrade 
towards the border withHungary <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hungary> to 
protest against its closure for most people trying to reach the European Union.

More than 6,000 people remain stuck in Serbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/serbia> following Hungary’s introduction 
this summer of strict limits on the number of refugees allowed to cross into 
the EU-member country and reinforced a razorwire border fence with heavy 
patrols.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fserbia-refugees-hungarian-border-macedonia-bulgaria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F671ac4f2ec2dbeb4f45d0166858b5b6c4fe27b11%2F0_73_3382_2029%2F3382.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugees%20stuck%20in%20Serbia%20begin%20marching%20towards%20Hungarian%20border&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fserbia-refugees-hungarian-border-macedonia-bulgaria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugees%20stuck%20in%20Serbia%20begin%20marching%20towards%20Hungarian%20border&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fserbia-refugees-hungarian-border-macedonia-bulgaria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F671ac4f2ec2dbeb4f45d0166858b5b6c4fe27b11%2F0_73_3382_2029%2F3382.jpg>
 People hold up signs as they approach the Hungarian border in Serbia. 
Photograph: Marko Djurica/Reuters 
The Balkan migration trail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/tens-of-thousands-migrate-through-balkans-since-route-declared-shut>
, used by nearly one million people fleeing wars and poverty last year, 
formally closed in March, forcing people to use alternative routes and pay 
smugglers to get them across.

Hungarian Jews concerned about toxic referendum discourse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/hungarian-jews-concerned-about-toxic-referendum-discourse>
On Tuesday, about 400 refugees chanted “open Hungary’s borders” and held 
banners saying “we don’t need food, water or anything, we want you to open the 
borders” as they marched north in a long column from Belgrade along a road 
leading toward the Hungarian border about 120 miles away.

Most of the refugees appeared to be young men and boys who stood little chance 
of getting into Hungary or other EU nations. Hankrim from Afghanistan, who gave 
only his first name, said he had been on the road for six months, sleeping on 
roads and parks. “Excuse me please, Hungarian government, please Hungary, open 
the border,” he said.

Serbia said on Tuesday it would not erect a wire border fence, but would 
deploy its army to seal off the borders withMacedonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/macedonia> and Bulgaria to stop refugees 
from coming in from those countries. “We will block the migrants the same way 
as the countries which did not erect the border fence,” said the Serbian 
president, Tomislav Nikolić.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fserbia-refugees-hungarian-border-macedonia-bulgaria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16d3561b4cfd235c0d99e7a7ff78e14fe6afcffc%2F0_0_4096_2644%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugees%20stuck%20in%20Serbia%20begin%20marching%20towards%20Hungarian%20border&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fserbia-refugees-hungarian-border-macedonia-bulgaria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugees%20stuck%20in%20Serbia%20begin%20marching%20towards%20Hungarian%20border&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fserbia-refugees-hungarian-border-macedonia-bulgaria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16d3561b4cfd235c0d99e7a7ff78e14fe6afcffc%2F0_0_4096_2644%2F4096.jpg>
 Most of the refugees appeared to be young men and boys who stood little chance 
of getting into Hungary or other EU nations. Photograph: Andrej Cukic/EPA 
Hungary has refused to accept any of the people the EU is trying to relocate 
from Italy and Greece. On Sunday voters there overwhelmingly rejected any 
future mandatory quotas for accepting refugees. The referendum wasrendered 
invalid, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/hungarian-vote-on-refugees-will-not-take-place-suggest-first-poll-results>
 however, because of low turnout.

Meanwhile, Romanian border police said they were investigating 16 Iraqi 
citizens, including six children, they found in two boats on the Danube river 
early on Tuesday. The Danube forms the border between southern Romania and 
Bulgaria. The people told police they had travelled through Turkey and then into
Bulgaria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bulgaria> and wanted to reach 
Germany. They said each family had paid €35,000 (£31,000).
 