
Earlier this month, Barking and Dagenham was voted the worst place to live in 
Britain.The survey, carried out by property website Rightmove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/06/harrogate-home-happiest-people-britain-according-study>
, asked residents in 130 places to rate their neighbourhoods and the borough 
came 130th. It’s perhaps not the most groundbreaking piece of research ever 
carried out (rich people are happier with their surroundings than poor people!) 
but, still, it’s another kick in the teeth for an area that has had more kicks 
than most.

The survey is only the latest in a long line of bad news stories: the UK’s 
most burgled town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/23/dagenham-and-becontree-head-list-of-burglary-claims>
, the highest rate of teenage pregnancies and thehighest level of unemployment 
<http://www.londonspovertyprofile.org.uk/indicators/topics/work-and-worklessness/unemployment-map/>
 in the capital. While a wave of gentrification has swept through other parts 
of London, leaving a trail of artisan bakeries and craft beer breweries in its 
wake, Barking and Dagenham has remained on the margins, its invitation to the 
party lost in the post.

I grew up in the area in the 1980s and my strongest memory was a sense of 
being on the edge of things. It was neither Essex norLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, an anomaly, a sprawling manufacturing 
town dropped into the suburbs, its only landmarks of distinction the white 
water towers and wind turbines of the Ford motor plant.

Dagenham has been described as a mining town without the mines and, in terms 
of its dependence on one major employer, it is not that far-fetched a 
comparison. Since the 1930s, Dagenham has been synonymous with the car 
manufacturer, which at its peak was employing 40,000 people. After Ford, the 
next biggest employer was the pharmaceutical company Sanofi, which used to be 
known as May & Baker. If you didn’t work for one or the other, the chances were 
you knew someone who did. As a student, I’d get summer jobs in the canteen at
Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> and would often come face to 
face with my former classmates.

It’s impossible to overstate how these factories shaped the area’s social and 
cultural landscape. Not only did they provide a job (and, if you worked for 
Ford, a subsidised car) but your social life, leisure facilities and your sense 
of identity. When the factories wound down – Ford closed its last vehicle 
assembly line in 2002 (although engine production continues) and Sanofi shut 
down its plant in 2013 – the impact on the area was devastating. Nearby shops 
and pubs went out of business overnight. Within five years of the Ford 
closures, it’s estimated that 25% of the borough’s homeowners had sold up and 
moved out, kickstarting a demographic shift that only gathered pace in the 
ensuing years. The low point came in 2006 when the BNP won 12 seats on Barking 
and Dagenham council.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440075125664%2F14711e3b-2feb-461e-a6aa-611f0a16c5de-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remade%20in%20Dagenham%3A%20how%20the%20arts%20are%20helping%20the%20borough%20celebrate%20its%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remade%20in%20Dagenham%3A%20how%20the%20arts%20are%20helping%20the%20borough%20celebrate%20its%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440075125664%2F14711e3b-2feb-461e-a6aa-611f0a16c5de-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Ford works in Dagenham, Essex in the late 1960s. 
I’ve not been back to the area since Sanofi moved out, so it comes as a bit of 
a shock to step out of Dagenham East tube station and see a big hole where many 
of the factory buildings used to stand. Surrounded by blue hoardings, the land 
is about to be redeveloped as a business and science park, Londoneast-uk, but 
that is not what has brought me here. It is also the latest focal point for an 
exciting arts initiative that is transforming the borough’s cultural landscape.

Creative Barking and Dagenham  <http://www.creativebd.org.uk/>(CBD) is a 
three-year project funded by the Arts Council for England that was set up in 
response to a survey that found the borough had some of the lowest levels of 
engagement with the arts in the country. It is built on a network of “cultural 
connectors” – volunteers recruited from the area – who have the final say on 
which artworks are commissioned and it has led to a radical transformation of 
the nature and quality of art appearing in the borough. Whereas before money 
was being ploughed into strange concrete sculptures on roundabouts along the 
A13 or municipal events in parks that no one went to, the last year has seen a 
flourishing of innovative, grassroots projects.

“It’s about working-class people taking control of the arts and owning it, 
creating their own narrative, celebrating their own heritage,” says CBD’s 
programme director, Miriam Nelken. “There’s a real sense of disempowerment here 
with the closure of the factories and all the headlines about Barking and 
Dagenham. This is about enabling people to think that they can do stuff, they 
do matter and they are part of history.”

One of the first projects, commissioned by arts company Create 
<http://createlondon.org/> in partnership with CBD, was a mural in Valence Park 
that tells the story of the Becontree estate. Built to provide housing for East 
End slum-dwellers and soldiers returning from the first world war, it was the 
biggestsocial housing project in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/oct/09/bartons-britain-becontree-estate>
, with some 27,000 homes. The mural by Chad McCail, calledThis Used to Be Fields
 <http://createlondon.org/event/this-used-to-be-fields/>, illustrates key 
moments in the estate’s history, such as the opening of the Ford plant in 1931, 
thesewing machinists’ strike for equal pay in 1968 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jun/06/dagenham-sewing-machinists-strike>
 and residents chasing BNP candidate Richard Barnbrook, dressed as St George 
and riding a horse, off the estate in 2010.

Another project has seen the film-makers Close and Remote driving around the 
local estates in a customised Ford Transit van making a series of 50 one-minute 
films that will look at the impact of globalisation on Barking and Dagenham and 
how the residents’ working lives have changed. The finished work will be shown 
at a number of open-air screenings in the autumn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440075338499%2Fe05d9902-d406-4067-8849-b8c4520d4be3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remade%20in%20Dagenham%3A%20how%20the%20arts%20are%20helping%20the%20borough%20celebrate%20its%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remade%20in%20Dagenham%3A%20how%20the%20arts%20are%20helping%20the%20borough%20celebrate%20its%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440075338499%2Fe05d9902-d406-4067-8849-b8c4520d4be3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Geraldine Pilgrim’s Well will give its audience at the former Sanofi factory a 
run-through of the history of pharmaceuticals. 
But the latest commission is perhaps the most radical yet. At the entrance to 
the Sanofi site, I meet up with the artist Geraldine Pilgrim, who has been 
invited to create a “performance journey” that will tell the story of the 
pioneering pharmaceutical firm. Pilgrim is known for her atmospheric and 
haunting works that “bring the ghosts out of the walls” of landmarks such as 
the former Midland Grand hotel at St Pancras (before its recent restoration) 
and the disused Marshall Street baths in Westminster. As soon as she stepped 
inside the factory, she knew she wanted to tell its story: “I usually work in 
derelict buildings but this isn’t derelict, it’s asleep and it’s waiting to 
wake up and that’s what’s so exciting about it,” she says.

The production is called Well and it will entwine the story of the factory and 
its workers with the history of medicine and pharmaceuticals, taking the 
audience on a journey through a series of dream-like encounters with a choir of 
chemists, line-dancing packers, a recreation of an Ebola isolation unit, 
interspersed with some poignant observations about illness and recovery.

Pilgrim takes me on a tour of building D31, the heart of the old Sanofi 
factory and one of the few parts of it left standing. It was here that the 
“wonder drug” sulfapyridine, which famously cured Winston Churchill’s 
pneumonia, was discovered. In the silent corridors, automatic doors open with a 
sigh as we approach them, lists of drug batches to be tested are still written 
in black marker pen on whiteboards and in the rooms where the lab workers used 
to change into their protective clothing, the name labels are still stuck to 
the lockers. The building has lain empty for two years, but there’s an eerie 
sense that the employees have just stepped out for a fire drill and could come 
filing back in at any moment. “I walk into buildings and I immediately get the 
atmosphere. People have been so happy working here, it’s imbued in the walls,” 
says Pilgrim.

The production is unusual in that the cast is largely made up of locals and 
former Sanofi employees. I meet some of the participants after my tour and it’s 
fair to say that no one is more surprised than they are to find themselves 
taking part in a piece of groundbreaking theatre. “I don’t know how I got into 
this really,” says Mike Blagojevitch, who used to work for Sanofi “in tablets 
and capsules”. “We came on one of the tours and Pilgrim said she could tell how 
passionate we were about it all and she said she’d really love us to be part of 
it. You can’t really say no, can you?”

Joyce Crowly was recruited via one of the local line-dancing groups (line 
dancing is huge in Dagenham). A machinist for Ford in the 1950s, she came along 
because she thought it would be “a bit of fun”. I say that she seems remarkably 
unfazed by her forthcoming 15 minutes of fame, but then she confides that she’s 
already made a video with Paul McCartney. “I’m line dancing in the background 
on Brown-Eyed Handsome Man. I’m the one with the funny hat. Don’t tell anyone 
or they’ll think I’m showing off.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440075433763%2F607a07aa-fe89-4f4d-964c-0927e08964a6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remade%20in%20Dagenham%3A%20how%20the%20arts%20are%20helping%20the%20borough%20celebrate%20its%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remade%20in%20Dagenham%3A%20how%20the%20arts%20are%20helping%20the%20borough%20celebrate%20its%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440075433763%2F607a07aa-fe89-4f4d-964c-0927e08964a6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dagenham’s May and Baker pharmaceuticals factory which, after various 
takeovers, was shut down by its last owner, Sanofi, in 2013. 
It’s this have-a-go attitude that has made the CBD initiative such a success, 
according to Liza Vallance, artistic director ofStudio 3 Arts 
<http://www.studio3arts.org.uk/>, a charity that has worked in the borough for 
some 30 years and which is overseeing the project. “Getting involved in an arts 
project is risky you know, but there’s nothing quite like the people here and 
their ability to embrace a new idea,” she says.

Her headquarters is a community centre on the edge of Barking’s Gascoigne 
estate, which made headlines last year for having Britain’s largest primary 
school, with almost 1,300 pupils. The neighbourhood is in a state of flux with 
several of the big tower blocks being demolished and residents being “decanted” 
(that terrible word) to other parts of the borough, but the centre feels like a 
hub of cheerful productivity. When I call in, a group of young performers is 
rehearsing for a forthcoming comedy show in the studio and volunteers are 
manning the front desk and gallery space and watering the flowers in the 
community garden.

Vallance is currently scouting for an A-list actor to take the lead role in a 
promenade production ofThe Merchant of Venice, which she is developing for 
Barking town centre next summer. It will start on the quayside of the river 
Roding and end in the council chamber at the town hall. She believes the play’s 
themes of economic hardship, money-lending, seeking sanctuary and tolerance 
will have resonance in an area where the issue of race is never far from the 
surface and where it can seem as though every other shop is a Cash Converters 
outlet.

Vallance is full of praise for the new leader of Barking and Dagenham council, 
Darren Rodwell, for getting behind the project: “He is really bold actually, 
relentless in his pursuit of raising the profile of this place. He’s a local 
boy born and bred and he’s on it.”

I meet Rodwell later that afternoon. He’s come straight from a meeting with 
London mayoral candidate Tessa Jowell and is still buzzing from the recent 
visit of the Queen to mark the borough’s 50th anniversary. It seems churlish to 
bring up the Rightmove survey, but of course I do.

Rodwell’s sunny mood darkens instantly: “How dare they? How dare they do that? 
It’s very insulting, because quite frankly no one knows the stories of the 
people in this borough; no one knows that in two weeks’ time we’re taking 750 
people to the seaside because that may be the only holiday that some of the 
kids round here get; no one understands that we’ve gone from one food bank to 
14 because of the way this government is destroying vulnerable people’s lives. 
This borough is a good borough, the people in it are good people and we don’t 
need some jumped-up company telling us what we’re not.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440075558394%2Fbe2e18cc-a9a1-4491-b410-42eb2d9ae5bf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remade%20in%20Dagenham%3A%20how%20the%20arts%20are%20helping%20the%20borough%20celebrate%20its%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remade%20in%20Dagenham%3A%20how%20the%20arts%20are%20helping%20the%20borough%20celebrate%20its%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440075558394%2Fbe2e18cc-a9a1-4491-b410-42eb2d9ae5bf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Darren Rodwell, leader of Barking and Dagenham council, and no fan of Good 
Morning Britain. Photograph: Lucy Young/Rex 
He was particularly incensed by a follow-up clip on Good Morning Britain in 
which two women were brought down from Harrogate (voted the best place to live 
for the third year running) so they could be filmed walking along Dagenham 
Heathway, one of the borough’s busiest shopping streets, looking unimpressed at 
the litter, shuttered shop fronts and lack of pavement cafes. It was a 
patronising stunt and one to which Rodwell responds with another entertaining 
tirade, which ends with him inviting Harrogate “to stick their Bettys tea rooms 
up their backsides”.

Rodwell seems genuinely put out, but it’s about time someone got angry on 
behalf of this place. For almost a century, the area has been a convenient 
dumping ground for all the things that London didn’t want in its backyard: the 
heavy industry, the sewage works, the power stations, the oil refineries. And 
people too. Dagenham’s relatively cheap housing has given other London boroughs 
an affordable way of cutting their waiting lists, offloading people via rental 
agreements with private landlords that the council has no say over. Inevitably, 
this has led to squalid living conditions for some tenants and tensions within 
the community.

Rodwell grew up on the Becontree estate and remembers a time when residents, 
as part of their tenancy agreement, would have to adhere to a strict set of 
standards, such as cleaning their front steps, keeping their net curtains white 
and cutting their hedges. The rise of right to buy and then buy to let has put 
paid to that and many of the streets now look scruffy and unloved. “The first 
generation of people moving into these properties, they remembered the hardship 
of where they came from, they had pride, but that has worn away over the 
generations,” he says. His priority as council leader, he tells me, is to 
restore a sense of “civic pride” and he enthusiastically lists measures he’s 
introducing, ranging fromDNA-testing dog poo to track down irresponsible owners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2015/apr/28/dna-testing-dog-poo-have-to-be-barking-council>
 to cracking down on slum landlords.

Rodwell says the arts have a central role to play in creating pride and 
community cohesion. “The arts are the glue that brings people together and if 
we don’t make people think they’re part of something, you get isolationism and 
then you get extremism, and you get the situation we had with the BNP.”

Perhaps the biggest challenge now facing the borough (or “opportunity” as 
Rodwell prefers to call it) is that London is expanding ever eastwards and this 
is one of the few urban areas left that still has land to build on. A huge 
brownfield site formerly owned by Barking power station was earmarked for 
development in 1994 and planning permission for 10,800 homes granted. Twenty 
one years later, only 1,200 homes have been built and the residents ofBarking 
Riverside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/17/no-cafe-pub-doctor-londons-most-isolated-suburb-barking-riverside>
 are still waiting for a rail link to connect them to the rest of the city. 
Until the transport infrastructure is improved, no further homes can be built. 
It’s just another example of how this borough is expected to mop up the 
overspill from London, but has yet to be given the means or the infrastructure 
to support it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440075671800%2F9b89a019-36b8-4b32-97e4-4ae472216fc4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remade%20in%20Dagenham%3A%20how%20the%20arts%20are%20helping%20the%20borough%20celebrate%20its%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remade%20in%20Dagenham%3A%20how%20the%20arts%20are%20helping%20the%20borough%20celebrate%20its%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fremade-in-dagenham-how-arts-celebrate-boroughs-industrial-heritage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440075671800%2F9b89a019-36b8-4b32-97e4-4ae472216fc4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Barking Riverside, which is still waiting for some proper rail links many 
years after the development was begun. 
When I ask Rodwell if he thinks the area could eventually see the same kind of 
gentrification that has transformed Tower Hamlets or Hackney (not always for 
the better) he’s ambivalent: “Gentrification is one thing, but why not ambition 
and aspiration for the working class because there is a difference between the 
two? We’ve got to keep the essence of what is Barking and Dagenham, that is 
what makes us unique.”

Half a mile away from Barking Riverside is Dagenham’s Sunday market. If you’ve 
ever wondered, while walking through one of the more gentrified corners of 
London, what happens to all the people and stuff that gets pushed out when 
house prices and business rents rocket skywards, here it is. In the middle of 
an industrial estate, downwind of the Beckton sewage works, is the last bastion 
of the old East End. It is every cheap-and-cheerful market stall that was 
priced out of Hackney’s Broadway Market or the Brixton arches. It is foot-long 
hot dogs and churning vats of rainbow-coloured slush puppies and things you’ve 
never seen on sale in a market before: “affordable headstones” sold out of the 
back of a van, bejewelled harnesses for Staffordshire bull terriers and a kiosk 
offering advice on “no win, no fee” injury claims.

I ask stallholders Gillian Cooper and Mark Coleman whether they can see this 
area becoming gentrified and they look at me as though I’m slightly mad. Will I 
come back in two years and find you selling ostrich burgers? “No, because we 
won’t be here. It will have been bulldozed to make way for houses that no one 
wants to live in,” says Cooper.

I’m not so sure about that. After years of stagnation, property prices in the 
area have started to creep up. Last year saw the opening of the Ice House 
Quarter in Barking, a group of old warehouses on the Roding that have been 
converted into studio and performance spaces. And there are rumours of an 
arthouse cinema coming to the area.

In Valence Park, I bump into Verity-Jane Keefe, an artist from Hackney who is 
touring the borough in a bus she has converted intoa mobile museum 
<http://www.verityjanekeefe.co.uk/>. Her work documents and celebrates the 
social histories of the area’s estates, places such as Goresbrook Village, a 
trio of tower blocks known locally as “Legoland” that were demolished two years 
ago.
 Verity-Jane Keefe and her mobile museum. 
“I really like how the area seems to represent everything that’s happening in 
London,” she tells me. “All eyes are moving east, people are getting priced out 
of the centre. This is the edge lands and as an artist it feels like a really 
good place to thrash things out.”

She’s right. The edge lands are where it’s at. Once upon a time, if you lived 
in Dagenham and wanted to see something exciting, you got on a train and went 
into London. Now it’s the other way around. “It’s about changing the narrative, 
isn’t it?” says Liza Vallance. “For years, we’ve had stigma and stereotypes 
about what Barking and Dagenham is. But there is a culture of ambition and 
aspiration here and it feels as though we’re finally stepping out of the wings 
and grabbing what’s rightfully ours.”

Well runs from 31 August to 6 September at the former Sanofi factory, 
Dagenham. Box office: 0208 507 5607 orthebroadwaybarking.com 
<http://www.thebroadwaybarking.com/event/well/>.
 