
The crowning of Ismail as king of Iran in Tabriz in 1501 was low-key, as was 
his announcement that ShiaIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> would 
henceforth be the official state religion. And yet this was a turning-point in 
Iranian history, with repercussions up to the present day.


Like most Iranians the Safavids (1501-1722) were Sunni, although like many 
outside Shi’ism they venerated Imam Ali (601-661), the first of the 12 Shia 
imams. The Sufi orders, sometimes based on trades or guilds, were the main way 
religion was organised, and they encouraged self-discipline, spirituality and 
mysticism in varying degrees.

Historians have differed on the nature of Iran’s ‘conversion’ under the 
Safavids: wasIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> ripe in some way for 
Shiism? But they generally agree that the motivation of the new dynasty was 
political rather than religious.

Making Shi’ism the state religion served to distinguish Iranians from subjects 
of the rival Sunni-ruled Ottoman Empire. And importing what was largely a 
foreign creed restricted to centres in Bahrain, Iraq and Syria lessened the 
risk of any state religion exacerbating rivalries among Iranian tribes or the 
Safavids’ supporters.

In creating a new order the Safavids looked to Shia Islamic law and to the 
jurists (mujtahids) specialised in it. This suited their aim of giving Iran 
cohesion, rules and a strong state, but they also turned their backs on their 
own origins as Sufis and put in train tensions that have persisted for 
centuries. In Converting Persia, issued in paperback last year, Rula Abisaab, 
of McGill University, notes:

Even though distinguished jurists were in general revered and emulated, the 
clerical community as a whole, with its varying judicial ranks, were at times 
the center [sic] of ridicule and disdain among common Persians. Proponents of 
folk Sufism attracted a significant following along the lower classes, which 
perceived them as more genuine, altruistic, austere and generous than the 
jurists. These contradictory developments reflected a social protest against 
state support of the mujtahids, who manipulated the power to ‘discipline’ for 
self-interest and greed.

Iran today still shows a popular scepticism about mujtahids, or clerics, 
commonly called mullahs: think ofMarmoulak (the Lizard), the 2004 film directed 
by Kamal Tabrizi, or indeed of everyday shared-taxi conversations. This long 
predates the Islamic Republic, and its roots may go back longer than clerical 
establishment instated by the Safavids.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Firan-shia-islam-matter-of-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44ab59d1c16326d06eb682a85d3e231deda6b610%2F0_0_3352_5243%2F3352.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Removal%20of%20the%20heart%3A%20how%20Islam%20became%20a%20matter%20of%20state%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Firan-shia-islam-matter-of-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Removal%20of%20the%20heart%3A%20how%20Islam%20became%20a%20matter%20of%20state%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Firan-shia-islam-matter-of-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44ab59d1c16326d06eb682a85d3e231deda6b610%2F0_0_3352_5243%2F3352.jpg>
 Portrait of Shah Abbas, Iran, 17th century, who was the 5th Safavid Shah. The 
Safavids descended from Sheikh Safi, a Sufi who had died in 1334. Photograph: 
Alamy 
In Islam without Allah?, published in 2000, Colin Turner, of Durham 
University, argued the Safavid dynasty in its haste to establish a strong state 
not only assigned priority to Islamic jurisprudence over all other branches of 
knowledge like philosophy or science, but thereby abstracted public adherence 
to rules from internal religious belief.

For Turner, this Safavid ‘externalism’ gave the Iranian state a deep-seated 
character that has persisted ever since:

The designation ‘internalist’ is intended to denote any Muslim writer or 
thinker whose scholarly attention was focused primarily on the fundamentals of 
belief (usul al-iman)…and dissemination of knowledge of God and His attributes (
ma’rifa). In this sense, internalism has often been articulated best by those 
attached in some way or other to Sufism and Sufi orders…By contrast, the term 
‘externalist’ is used to signify those Muslim scholars…whose primary 
consideration was the acquisition and promulgation of the ‘secondary sciences’
[including both jurisprudence and studying hadith, sayings of the prophet].

Turner traces the dichotomy back to the Quran, which he argues makes a 
distinction - oddly clearer in English because unlike Arabic it has capital 
letters - between ‘islam’ (small i), which is internal submission to God based 
oniman (belief), and Islam (capital I), the public submission to God’s laws. The
faqih (jurist), who would become a cornerstone of the Safavid system, studies 
the interpretation and implementation of these rules, and does not necessarily 
seek to fosteriman among the people. 

But throughout Islamic history, writes Turner, some thinkers have emphasised 
the limited nature of jurisprudence and its practitioners, thefuqaha (plural of 
faqih). Among these was Abu Hamad Muhammad al-Ghazali, the Tus-born 12-century 
philosopher who tried to balance different aspects of Islam.

According to Ghazali, writes Turner, jurisprudence is connected with religion 
only indirectly…The regulation of social life and form of government are 
secondary – albeit indispensable – adjuncts to the fundamentals of belief, and 
it is the regulation of social life and government, with its myriad rules and 
laws, that form the domain of the jurist. The heart is removed from this 
domain, since attention is focused only on the outward confession (Islam) and 
not the inward intention.

Turner illustrates Ghazali’s jaundiced view of many jurists in a quote that 
they disdained other disciplines like medicine because they did not involve 
“the management of religious endowments (awqaf), execution of wills, possession 
of the money of orphans, and appointment to judicial and government positions 
through which one exalts himself above his fellow men and fastens his yoke on 
his enemies”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Firan-shia-islam-matter-of-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54b721865f0b00ffc830cfd9780f3a8626ec4ee1%2F0_0_4138_2878%2F4138.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Removal%20of%20the%20heart%3A%20how%20Islam%20became%20a%20matter%20of%20state%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Firan-shia-islam-matter-of-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Removal%20of%20the%20heart%3A%20how%20Islam%20became%20a%20matter%20of%20state%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Firan-shia-islam-matter-of-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54b721865f0b00ffc830cfd9780f3a8626ec4ee1%2F0_0_4138_2878%2F4138.jpg>
 A couple lies in the Naqsh-e Jahan Square in Isfahan, surrounded by buildings 
from the Safavid era. Photograph: John Moore/Getty Images 
Initially, the Safavids brought clerics from the Arab world, particularly 
Jabal Amil in what is now south Lebanon, but gradually a new breed of Iranian 
Shiafaqih emerged. Of these, Mohammad Baqir Majlisi, appointed to the 
state-sponsored posts of Friday prayer leader in the Safavid capital Isfahan in 
1660s andshaykh al-Islam in 1687, was particularly important.


According to Turner, “it was under Majlisi that Twelver Shi’ite externalism 
became truly orthodox, while all other views were rejected and often forcibly 
repressed”:

One of Majlisi’s first acts was to destroy the idols of a Hindu temple that 
had been set up by Indian merchants in the capital…the heartbroken Hindu keeper 
of the temple consequently committed suicide…Majlisi also obtained a decree for 
the expulsion of Sufis from the capital, which was rigidly enforced …Majlisi 
wrote several decrees on the correct way of performing the canonical prayer (
salat), on the treatment of zakat [alms-giving] and on the rules of fasting. 
Such works of jurisprudence were the stock-in-trade of the externalists.

Majlisi wrote mainly in Persian rather than Arabic, giving his works a wider 
audience. In these he didn’t just clarify issues of prayer and alms giving, he 
strongly condemned Sufi practices like singing, dancing, vegetarianism and 
seclusion.

The question raised by works such as Turner and Abisaab is where popular, 
internal religiosity went. For Turner, identification with the 12 Shia Imams 
was encouraged to fill the gap:

Conveying simple, uncluttered dogma in the language of the common people – 
whom he was said to despise – he [Majlisi] was able to…fill the spiritual 
vacuum that had appeared as a result of the decline of Sufi brotherhoods with 
treatise after treatise on the lives, sayings, trials, tribulations, miracles 
and powers of the Imams…Twelver Shi’ism under the auspices of Majlisi became 
truly orthodox, and all other views were rejected and often forcibly repressed. 
True to his externalist ideals, Majlisi preached thatiman was incomplete 
without belief in the Imam …

Even before Majlisi, who lived in the latter part of the Safavid dynasty 
before its overthrow by Afghan invaders in 1722, the Safavids fostered the
mourning rituals of Ashura 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/18/iran-ashura-muharram>, in which 
believers were encouraged to invest deep personal feelings in re-enacting the 
680 Battle of Kerbala when Imam Hossein was killed. The state also encouraged 
the development of imamzadehs, shrines to the relatives of the Imams. The 
shrines, especially the most frequented inMashhad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/may/07/prayer-food-sex-and-water-parks-in-irans-holy-city-of-mashhad>
 and Qom, channelled religious belief in a direction well-guarded by the 
clerics.


But not completely. There often has been those challenging officialdom and its 
rulings. Many Iranians, including Mohammad Shah (1834-48), were attracted by 
Sufism in one form or another, and in the 19th century Mirza Husayn-Ali Nuri – 
known as Bahaullah - gained many followers for the mysticism of what became the 
Bahai sect, which today claims 5 million adherents worldwide but has faced 
consistent persecution in Iran.

The clerics still show nervousness over popular spiritualism, even when it is 
related to the 12 Imams. In his 2005 presidential election campaign Mahmoud 
Ahmadinejadplayed off 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2010/07/mahdi-slideshow.html>
 religious practices evoking age-old piety and mysticism. He “rode a wave using 
mosque-based organisations and evenmaddahs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2014/nov/05/iran-high-cost-business-mourning>
 (religious singers) to gain support,” asMohammad-Ali Abtahi 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/showdown/interviews/abtahi.html>, the 
former reformist vice-president, once put it.

But the most successful figure in linking Shia jurisprudence to popular 
religiosity has surely been Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. In a 1993 essay, Said 
Amir Arjomand noted, “Khomeini’s interest in theosophy (erfan) made him a very 
atypical Shi’ite jurist”.

Khomeini’s lifelong interest in erfan – ‘intimacy with God’ – reflected a 
personal mysticism that fuelled his interest in Ibn Arabi (1165-1240) and 
Mullah Sadra (1571-1640) as well as the poets Rumi and Hafez. These are among 
the figures Safavid ‘externalism’ had tried to break from, and they remained 
out of favour among clerics in the twentieth century to the extent that 
Khomeini as a young man rising through the religious ranks was discrete over 
his interest.

For Turner, Mulla Sadra was a “notable example” of an ‘internalist’ with a 
focus on “the fundamentals of belief (usul al-iman)”. But despite Khomeini’s 
interest iniman, Turner argues that neither he nor Ali Shariati 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2011/10/ali-shariati-and-the-ideologization-of-religion.html>
, the sociologist who shaped Iranian revolutionaries’ thinking in the years up 
to the 1979 Revolution, really broke with Safavid externalism.

…In Safavid Shi’ism, says Shariati, intizar [waiting for the return of the 
hidden Imam] entails spiritual and practical submission to the status 
quo…Shariati was able to identify the problems of externalism yet, instead of 
advocating a return to fundamentals in the manner adumbrated by Ghazali and 
Mulla Sadra, set about prescribing a whole new set of values which, although 
appearing to be totally divorced from what he calls the stagnation of Safavid 
Shi’ite externalism, in practice amount to little more than a variation on the 
same theme …

Reaction against the political quietism of Majlisi and his fellow fuqaha can 
be seen as a major factor in the acquisitions by twentieth-century Twelver 
Shi’ism of a new and revolutionary face…a Shi’ism that, by stressing politics 
rather thanfiqh [jurisprudence], and revolution rather than weeping over the 
death of Husayn, continues, deliberately or unwittingly as the case may be, to 
champion the externalism discourse and obfuscate the eternal truths and 
realities ofiman.

The seeds had been sown by the Safavids. In her 2002 Mystics, Monarchs and 
Messiahs, which sought to highlight the rich diversity and intense religiosity 
the Safavids lost, Kathryn Babayan wrote:


…with the Safavid patronage of Shi’i scholars, judges and preachers, the 
foundations of a religious establishment were actualized (sic) … These Shi’i 
scholars challenged charismatic mystics…in the absence of the hidden Imam, 
these specialists not only claimed direct access to God; some…would argue that 
political rule was reserved for them as well. With the Islamic Republic in Iran 
in 1979, themujtahid would eclipse the figure of the monarch.

 * Rula Abisaab, Converting Persia: Religion and Power in the Safavid Empire, 
IB Tauris paperback edition 2015

 * Colin Turner Islam without Allah? The Rise of Religious Externalism in 
Safavid Iran, Curzon 2000

 * Said Amir Arjomand ‘Millennial Beliefs in Shi’ite Iran’, in The Political 
Dimensions of Religion, edited Arjomand, State University of New York Press, 
1993

 * Kathryn Babayan Mystics, Monarchs and Messiahs: Cultural Landscapes of 
Early Modern Iran, Harvard University Press
 