
Windfarms and solar power could soon lose the privilege of getting priority 
over other energy sources on European electricity grids, leaked documents show.

Paring back the “priority dispatch” system could increase carbon emissions by 
up to 10%, according to a confidential EU impact assessment seen by the 
Guardian. But the document goes on to model four scenarios for doing just that, 
in a bid to make Europe’s energy generators more flexible and cost-competitive.

Some industry sources have told the Guardian they are alarmed and think it 
highly likely that priority dispatch for clean energy will be scrapped from the 
EU’s renewable energy directive, which is currently being redrafted for the 
post-2020 period.

Oliver Joy, a spokesman for the WindEurope trade association, said: “Removing 
priority dispatch for renewable energies would be detrimental to the wind 
sector, which would face more curtailment across the continent. It also seems 
to be at odds with Europe’s plans to decarbonise and increase renewables 
penetration over the next decade.”

“Investors took priority dispatch into account when projecting revenues in the 
original investment decisions, and it could have a bearing on existing projects 
if they are not protected from the change.”

The issue of retroactive changes to  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/01/uk-renewable-energy-industry-warns-of-legal-action-over-subsidies>
funding rules for renewables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/01/uk-renewable-energy-industry-warns-of-legal-action-over-subsidies>
 in Europe has been a cause for disputes and cutbacks in the wind and solar 
sectors of several countries,notably Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/30/new-europe-spain-solar-power>.

Senior industry sources say they will push for financial compensation and 
access to balancing markets to help prevent a significant industry contraction, 
if priority dispatch is ended.

“We have had enough instability and retroactivity in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and going forward, the 
difference between existing and future assets should be well distinguished,” 
said one industry source.

“I would be extremely worried if they just removed priority of dispatch and 
did not touch other key issues around market design. It would mean that the 
commission was taking measures against the same renewable industries that they 
defend in public.”

Fossil fuel power providers argue that renewables have the lowest operating 
costs and so would anyway receive priority access to the grid network.

They also say that taking the clean energy sector out of priority dispatch 
would prevent “negative prices” - where more energy is produced than can be 
sold – and eliminate anti-competitive subsidies.

The EU’s assessment views the abolishing of priority dispatch as a step 
towards the creation of a “level playing field” for energy generators.

But without such a system, renewable sources may be the most likely to be 
taken offline because of the relative ease of switching off a wind turbine 
compared to a coal or nuclear plant.

The energy source with the lowest marginal cost - almost always renewables - 
is usually the first in line to be shut down by power grid operators.

As things are, a Europe-wide trend towards ending financial support has 
constrained the forward march of renewables on the continent, and siphoned off 
investment to elsewhere in the world.

 “Everyone is investing in renewables outside Europe right now,” said one 
industry source. “If you want to bring investors back you have to send very 
relevant signals.”

Renewables made up half of net electricity capacity added last year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/renewables-made-up-half-of-net-electricity-capacity-added-last-year>
 Removing wind and solar power from priority dispatch may be intended to help 
reform the capacity market system, which currently pays gas generators to 
remain idle. Ironically though, it could lead renewable generators to demand an 
extension of the same mechanism to their own sector.

 “If priority dispatch is removed, then renewables must be given a fall-back 
option of access and renumeration in the balancing markets to help stabilise 
the system, or clear levels of compensation in the event that curtailment is 
necessary,” Joy said.

 Priority dispatch is supposed to be mandatory under current EU rules, 
although the UK, Sweden and the Netherlands are among countries that do not 
comply.

The study says that “the biggest impacts on generation [from ending priority 
dispatch] would be observed in Denmark, Great Britain and Finland, where 
biomass holds a large share of generation capacity”.

But this would be felt more in terms of bioenergy’s “expensive” production 
costs than its carbon emissions reduction potential, which isdisputed  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/apr/02/eu-renewable-energy-target-biomass>
inside and outside the commission. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/apr/02/eu-renewable-energy-target-biomass>

“The removal of priority dispatch for biomass would indeed, in the first 
instance, imply an increase in GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions,” the paper says.

 The four scenarios for scaling back priority dispatch involve an increase in 
CO2 emissions of 45m-60m tonnes.
 