
Investment in windfarms will fall off a “cliff edge” over the next three years 
and put the UK’s greenhouse gas reduction targets at risk, a thinktank has 
found.

More than £1bn of future investment in renewable energy projects disappeared 
over the course of 2016, the Green Alliance found when it analysedthe 
government’s latest pipeline of major infrastructure 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-infrastructure-and-construction-pipeline-2016>
plans.

Investment in wind, solar, biomass power and waste-to-energy projects will 
decline by 95% between 2017 and 2020, it added.

Related: Cornish village marks 25 years of UK wind power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/03/cornish-village-delabole-25-years-of-uk-wind-power>

While a slowdown in green energy investment had been expected after ministers 
cut several subsidy schemes over the last 18 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/24/the-9-green-policies-killed-off-by-tory-government>
, the figures lay bare the dramatic extent of the decline.

“This cliff edge needs to be avoided if the UK is to meet its world leading 
carbon budgets and Paris agreement pledge,” Green Alliance said in its analysis.
 See the full visual 
Shortly after the EU referendum, the government committed to cutting carbon 
emissions by 57% by 2030 on 1990 levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/30/uk-sets-ambitious-new-2030s-carbon-target>
, but has so far failed to spell out how it will support low-carbon energy, 
such as offshore windfarms, beyond 2020.

“Renewables will be cheaper than new fossil power stations by 2025 at the 
latest if we allow companies to build, learn, and cut their costs. But the 
government has been holding back the final bit of support needed to make 
renewables subsidy free. It’s also blocked the cheapest renewables from being 
built,” said Dustin Benton, acting deputy director at Green Alliance, referring 
to thegovernment ending subsidies for onshore wind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/18/tories-end-onshore-windfarm-subsidies-2016>
. “Unsurprisingly, the result is a 95% fall in investment.”

The thinktank’s analysis found that high carbon infrastructure, which it 
defines as fossil fuel power stations, airports and road building, was faring 
little better. For the first time since 2012, high carbon investment had 
stopped growing, and will be down by two-thirds by 2020.

“The picture of private sector investment is very clear: it is rapidly moving 
away from high carbon infrastructure. In contrast, public sector high carbon 
investment is rising, although slowly,” the authors wrote.

RenewableUK, which represents the wind power industry, said the government 
needed to set out its vision on energy to enable investor confidence.

Emma Pinchbeck, the group’s executive director, said: “The energy sector is 
changing. The infrastructure pipeline shows that the private sector understands 
the smart money is on the renewables industry – that is why they are moving 
from high carbon assets to low carbon ones.”

But the infrastructure pipeline showed the government had managed to cut £2bn 
from the cost of decommissioning old nuclear power plants. The thinktank said 
that was good news as it could free up money to spend on encouraging people to 
switch to lower carbon heating, whichministers have admitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/09/energy-minister-expects-uk-to-miss-renewables-target-leaked-letter-shows>
 is progressing slowly.

A government spokesman said: “We are fully committed to a low-carbon future 
and the Office for Budget Responsibility recently projected that £8.4bn will be 
spent on renewable projects in the UK in 2020/21.

“We are one of the best countries in the world at tackling climate change with 
£52bn invested in renewable projects in the UK since 2010. Last November we 
reaffirmed our commitment to spend £730m of annual support on renewable 
electricity projects over this parliament.”
 