
A waterlogged pitch, a bolshie referee, Jean-Michel Aulas throwing his toys 
out of the pram (twice) and a new celebrity fan at Rennes: it would have been a 
great weekend of action inLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> but for one missing 
ingredient: goals. There were only 11 of them in nine games, and Lyon, Bordeaux 
and Marseille all drew 0-0. All of which meant the big winners were Rennes, who 
beat Paris Saint-Germain 1-0 to move up to second place.Samuel Eto'o  
<http://www.football.fr/footballfr/cmc/scanner/rennes/200848/eto-o-debarque-a-rennes_57940.html?popup>
was at Stade de la Route de Lorient to watch his mate, the Rennes midfielder 
Stéphane M'Bia, hobble off injured after half an hour only for his replacement 
Bruno Cheyrou to score thewinner  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MyaEp7reXvY>.

As usual, the Lyon game, against Valenciennes, was the one with the controversy
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0HSwSC7XAAc>: first Aulas had a wobbly when 
Juninho was suspended for two games following last week's red card against PSG; 
then referee Bruno Coué declared a sodden Gerland pitch playable despite 
evidence to the contrary. "It was like playing in a paddling-pool," said VA 
midfielder Rudy Mater. "It was more like water polo," said Lyon's Jean Makoun. 
"I thought it would be suspended," said Fred, who came closest to scoring from 
one of Lyon's 24 shots with an effort that hit the post. The image of Kim 
Källström running up the wing, only able to dribble the ball by chipping it 
forward, summed up the conditions.

If the pitch was playable before the first half, it did not seem that way an 
hour later, with the rain still lashing down. It only stopped raining with nine 
minutes left to play. "The game should have been stopped after half-time for 
the sake of the players' safety," said RMC's ex-refereeJoël Quiniou 
<http://www.rmc.fr/edito/sport/65368/quiniou-on-aurait-du-arreter-le-match/>, 
now a pundit and famous not for officiating the most World Cup finals matches 
(eight) but for showing the quickest red-card in a World Cup game, to José 
Batista after 56 seconds ofScotland v Uruguay  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/jul/23/newsstory.sport11>in 1986. 
"There was a bit of water on the pitch but I'm sorry, were you actually out 
there playing?" responded Coué in a bizarrepost-match interview 
<http://www.lyoncapitale.fr/index.php?menu=05&article=6771>.

When L'Equipe <http://www.lequipe.fr/Football/> quoted Aulas as saying that 
Puel had wanted the match to go ahead, he had a second tizzy in as many days. 
"That is a lie," the club responded in an official statement on theirwebsite 
<http://www.olweb.fr/index.php?lng=fr&a=42303&pid=101002>. "The journalist who 
wrote that twisted his words, showing a lack of ethics and a desire to cause us 
harm."

Just like last week, neither (Gourcuff-less) Bordeaux nor Marseille could take 
advantage of Lyon's latest slip, as they drewaway to Sochaux  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9a4SaaeRUes>and Toulouse  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l18pQbSgOWA>respectively. "It was a dull match 
and it looked like both teams were afraid of losing," said L'OM president Pape 
Diouf, going some way to explain whyLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football> is consistently Europe's 
lowest-scoring: this season, French matches average 2.13 goals per game, 
compared with 2.34 in Italy, 2.58 in England, 2.85 in Spain, and 3.08 in 
Holland and Germany.

Toulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse> games average 1.5 
goals per match and they are not alone in making defensive tactics their 
priority. "There are too many cautious coaches in the division," said 
Lyon-based reporter Xavier Cerf. "Elie Baup [Nantes], Guy Lacombe [Rennes], 
Paul le Guen [PSG] and even Claude Puel all put not conceding ahead of their 
attacking principles."

There are plenty of other theories for the lack of goals: Uefa president 
Michel Platini has bemoaned "training academies that are more interested in 
runners and strongmen rather than technically-gifted players" whileLyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> winger Sidney Govou, a touch 
generously, said, "I think there are fewer goals because French teams have 
reached a very high level in term of tactics and teams are extremely 
well-organised defensively."

The fact that France won the 1998 World Cup playing their last three games 
with a five-man midfield behind (non-scoring) lone forward Stéphane Guivarc'h 
has also been blamed. Many ofLigue 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football>'s bosses were learning 
their trade 10 years ago and, according to one senior writer atFrance Football 
<http://www.francefootball.fr/>, "an Aimé Jacquet culture has given French 
football the current defensive outlook". A look at the top-scorers' chart 
suggests another alternative: apart from Karim Benzema, Fernando Cavenaghi and, 
perhaps, Guillaume Hoarau and Jimmy Briand, the depth of quality strikers is 
fairly limited.

Briand and Hoarau were both quiet in Sunday night's Rennes v PSG match, 
although the fact that Rennes No1 Nicolas Douchez was named Man of the Match, 
after keeping out efforts from Jérôme Rothen, Sylvain Armand and Mateja Kezman, 
tells its own story.Rennes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rennes> are 
unbeaten in 14 games and second in the table for the first time in 37 years. 
"It's great to be second now but we want to be there after 38 games," said 
coach Guy Lacombe, "and why not think of first place? Lyon are a machine and it 
will be very tough to haul them back, but you never know."

Mikaël Pagis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/oct/07/ligue1football.lille> and 
Briand may be the joint-most prolific partnership in the division — their 
combined tally of 12 goals matches that of Benzema and Juninho at Lyon, and 
Hatem Ben Arfa and Bakari Koné at Marseille — but Rennes have built their 
success on a solid defence, conceding just 11 goals in 16 games. Right-back Rod 
Fanni has become a France international, while Senegalese centre-back Kader 
Mangane, a converted holding midfielder, has been a revelation alongside Petter 
Hansson and could be a target for teams in the January transfer window. Rennes 
are five points behind Lyon and face neighbouring sides Caen, Nantes and 
Lorient next up. "They're all teams from around this area and they will want to 
bring down the region's big club," warned Cheyrou.

Elsewhere, Lilian Thuram's 20-year-old cousin Yohann Thuram-Ulien 
<http://www.maxifoot.fr/articles/6238/index.htm> made his Monaco debut as a 
first-half replacement for injured goalkeeper Flavio Roma ina 1-0 win at Auxerre
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dtdRjqxFjUc,> while Saint-Etienne ended a run 
of seven straight losses with a 2-1 win at Nancy to lift them out of the 
relegation zone. Despite the draws against top teams, Valenciennes and Sochaux, 
whose coach Francis Gillot was this week handed a contract extension until 
2012, are still propping up the table. What with the lack of goals and the 
events at Lyon, this weekend was a bit of a damp squib all round.

Results, Week 16: Lyon 0-0 Valenciennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valenciennes>, Lille 1-1 Lorient, Le Mans 
2-0 Caen, Auxerre 0-1 Monaco, Le Havre 0-2 Nantes, Sochaux 0-0 Bordeaux, 
Toulouse 0-0 Marseille, Nancy 1-2 Saint-Etienne, Rennes 1-0 PSG, Nice P-P 
Grenoble
 