
They say a week is a long time in politics, but not in Spain it’s not; not 
where 78 days after the general elections there’s still no government and no 
sign of one, either. Which, on reflection, may not be such a bad thing. It can 
be a long time in Spanish football, though. This, after all, is the world where 
Joaquín Caparrós – the man one sports paper has just declared the standout 
candidate for the Spain job, two days after it was revealed that he once
motivated his players with a pre-match porn video 
<http://www.elespanol.com/deportes/futbol/20160303/106739636_0.html> – says you 
can go “from whore to nun in five minutes”. Or, if you’re Rafa Benítez, from 
“solution” to sacked. Where Cristiano Ronaldo can go from whistled to 
worshipped in 82 seconds.

A lot can happen in a week, and a lot can change too. Especially if it’s like 
last week, one of only three all season with a full round of midweek fixtures 
wedged in between two weekends. Just ask David García. “It was all dark, all 
black,” the captain of Unión DeportivaLas Palmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laspalmas> admitted on Saturday night on 
Vila-Real. He can say that again. “It was all dark, all black,” David García 
says. “We were very pessimistic,” agreed team-mate Ángel López. And another 
player privately went further, describing the team as “dead”. And now? “Now,” 
García added, “we’ve taken a step forward.” Now, they’re alive. They’d hit rock 
bottom, one Canarian daily claimed, but now they’re “a team to make us dream”.

The best goals of the week: Felix Kroos, Federico Higuaín and a 75-yard 
free-kick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/07/best-goals-week-federico-higuain-felix-kroos-crystal-dunn>
David García is 34 and has spent his entire career at Las Palmas, but he had 
never played in the first division before. López had, once: for a single season 
back in 2002. On Saturday night, García scored his first goal inprimera, while 
López, injured in the final training session before the season began, came 
running on for six minutes: his first minutes with Las Palmas in the top flight 
for 13 years. The fear was that they would be among his last. Instead, García’s 
goal secured what even their manager described as “an unexpected victory”. A 
vital one, too.

Las Palmas went into last weekend, week 26, in the relegation zone, three 
points from safety. The problems were mounting for the club for whom pretty 
much every away game is a 4,000‑kilometre round trip, further than Madrid 
travelling to Rome, Atlético to Eindhoven or Barcelona to London. Carnival was 
over and so, it seemed, was their time in the first division.

Nauzet Alemán was suspended after an unauthorised night out at a disco ended 
with the midfielder needing 18 stitches in his face. The father of the 
under-performing, rarely playing striker Sergio Araujo, last season’s top 
scorer, had threatened to take him elsewhere, prompting the coach Quique Setién 
to reply: “I won’t give in to blackmail.” The injury list was growing. And they 
just weren’t winning.

At the same time almost everyone else in trouble seemed to have something; not 
much, admittedly, but something. Las Palmas, on the other hand, had won just 
once in eight games.

And then it happened: on Saturday night, García’s header enabled them to 
defeat Villarreal. More importantly, it was not just Saturday night. 
“Unexpected victory”? Unexpected victories, more like, all at once.

Week 26 began with a 1-0 win at Eibar; week 27 continued with a 4-0 hammering 
of Getafe; and week 28 closed with a 1-0 win at the Madrigal.

In week 29 they face Madrid on Sunday. They have changed their tune in Gran 
Canaria. “Bring them on!” ran one headline on Sunday morning. And why not? No 
one had beaten Villarreal in 14. Hell, no one had even scored against them in 
620 minutes until Las Palmas came along.

Las Palmas had not managed to string together two wins before; now they’ve won 
three in a row and by arriving now, all together, the impact is greater still, 
the shift more dramatic: eight days, nine points. They headed into week 26 in 
the relegation zone three points from safety and headed out of week 28 four 
points clear of it, up in 14th, three points ahead of 15th and with three other 
teams between them and the drop.

Around them are teams who are struggling, too. More so, it seems, than Las 
Palmas are, although life remains unpredictable down where only Levante are 
starting to get cut off, three points adrift at the bottom, where only three 
points separate the next five teams – Sporting, Granada, Rayo, Getafe and 
Espanyol – and where Las Palmas, three points above that, have Deportivo, 
Málaga, Valencia and Betis within four points, and the chance to climb even 
higher.

It’s shifting constantly at the bottom. On Saturday night, Getafe got a late 
equaliser against Sevilla that may yet be huge, emotionally at least, after a 
seven-game run of defeats, six of them without scoring. Three days before,
midfielder Mehdi Lacen had said 
<http://www.marca.com/futbol/getafe/2016/03/01/56d61e6a268e3e1a258b462e.html>: 
“Right now, we’re a real piece of shit and if we carry on like this, we’re 
going head first into the second division.” At the same time, the Sporting 
manager Abelardo Fernández hadlaunched a wild rant at the refereeing at Granada 
<https://uk.search.yahoo.com/search;_ylt=A9mSs28nj91WgnoA_opLBQx.;_ylc=X1MDMj 
ExNDcxNzAwMwRfcgMyBGZyA21jYWZlZQRncHJpZANCNGlnc0ZZcFE0MnVsQmsxcm5Tb2ZBBG5fcn 
NsdAMwBG5fc3VnZwMwBG9yaWdpbgN1ay5zZWFyY2gueWFob28uY29tBHBvcwMwBHBxc3RyAwRwcX 
N0cmwDBHFzdHJsAzIyBHF1ZXJ5A3ZpZGVvIEFiZWxhcmRvIHJhamFkYSAEdF9zdG1wAzE0NTczNj 
E3MzE-?p=>, where he said his players, “fighting for their lives”, were “in 
tears in the dressing room, devastated”.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
16 Getafe 28 -18 27 
17 Rayo Vallecano 27 -21 26 
18 Granada 28 -24 26 
19 Sporting Gijon 28 -20 24 
20 Levante 28 -26 21 
Granada have sacked their manager, but that remains their only win in eight. 
And Sporting have not won in seven and the rant didn’t do much good. Watching 
from the stands – he is suspended from the dugout for two games, not the 50 he 
said he would happily serve to denounce the “disgrace” – Abelardo on Sunday 
night saw his team lose 2-0, despite having the referee on side this time.

Levante’s point at Real Sociedad helps a bit, but not much. Deportivo – who 
drew 3-3 with Málaga thanks to Arribas’s last-minute own goal, their 15th draw 
of the season and their 14th game without a win – shouldn’t get dragged into 
trouble, but might. Espanyol, whose players intervened to prevent the manager 
Constantin Galca getting sacked – take note, you lot – beat them in week 26 and 
Sporting in week 27 to give themselves a bit of breathing room, but were 
defeated by Betis on Sunday night.

Under the “interim” manager Juan Merino, who won four out of four last time he 
temporarily took over last season, Betis have now won three and drawn three of 
the past six. Merino, though, says that “fear” means he is still “looking 
down”. And while Rayo were hammered by Barcelona in midweek, they had gone 
seven games unbeaten before that. On Monday night, they face Espanyol.

So it was that no one came out of this nine-point week better than Las Palmas. 
“We were very pessimistic,” Ángel López said. “It’s all happened this year: 
injuries, off-field problems, bad moments. In any case, though, it would be 
stupid to think we’re on track now. We have to think about what happened to 
Eibar last year or Depor this: two teams that looked safe but found themselves 
in problems.” True, but for a team who were “dead” eight days before, survival 
looks probable now; there is a cushion, comfort and confidence for the first 
time. Four points clear of relegation, they have 30 points. Three wins in 10 
should be enough; they may not even need that many.

It has been so unexpected, yet this was no fluke and it was not a one‑off, 
either. Three wins in a row is a surprise but some success has been coming.

The game before this run was a 2-1 defeat against Barcelona from which they 
deserved more, they destroyed Getafe and they were impressive against 
Villarreal.

Characteristically so: organised, well-positioned, keen to have the ball and 
pass it. “We did a lot well today,” Setien said. “All of the players deserve 
the highest marks.” Marca’s report described them as a “triangle factory” – and 
while that might be odd thing to be, it certainly isn’t pointless. They’ve been 
among one of the better sides to watch, keen to have possession, prepared to 
attack. Built in the image of their manager, Setien, in fact. In his image and 
in theirs. Or so it goes.

When Setien took over from Paco Herrera, the first coach to get sacked this 
season, back in week nine, Las Palmas had picked up five points and won just 
once. Most considered the sacking deeply unfair and there was a kind of sorrow 
in the way the decision was taken, and an apologetic tone to the way Setien 
spoke. He even said that he would stick with much of the work his predecessor 
had done. Herrera, universally liked and respected, had brought the team up in 
his first season, beating Zaragoza in the play-offs. Survival was the best that 
anyone could hope for and, deep down, many did not expect it. Replacing him did 
not seem likely to change that.

Dortmund v Bayern may not have delivered goals but it had everything else | 
Raphael Honigstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/07/dortmund-bayern-no-goals-but-had-everything-else-honigstein>
And yet in the 20 games under Setien since then, Las Palmas have picked up 25 
points.

Setien is a little different. As a player, he was skilful, creative, a member 
of Spain’s 1986 World Cup squad, a footballer who never had much of a problem 
speaking out about directors (later he wasone of the few speaking out against 
Ali Syed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/apr/27/racing-santander-la-liga>
), and who reckons that the game has become so fast that these days he wouldn’t 
have made it. Back then, there was interest from Real Madrid, although it never 
happened. Jorge Valdano called him a “dissident”, a creative, slight 
footballer, all finesse, rebelling against a physical game.

Setien cheerfully admits that one of the reasons that this is his first 
managerial job inprimera, aged 57, is that he’s never had the ambition to 
really pursue a coaching career. “I don’t aspire to be a famous coach,” he 
said. “I just hope to be honourable and leave good memories.” He claims to have 
only taken over at Racing Santander, his home town club, back in 2001 because 
they needed him, and his career path is a curious one, Poli Ejido and 
Equatorial Guinea included. He complains that football has been distorted by 
money and doesn’t seem to much like the way the game has gone, saying in one 
interview that he’d sometimes rather play chess than watch a game on telly. But 
then needs must, so here he is.

Before this, he was at Lugo for six years, because he said it felt right.

He needs that, he says; he talks, too, about needing to feel close to his 
players. He needs to connect. As coach, he says that touch and combination, 
technical football, the kind of game he represented when he was a player, are 
non-negotiable. He admitted that watching Juan Carlos Valerón made him cry, 
that when he met Johan Cruyff he told him he would have given his little toe to 
have played in a team like his, and that when he went to watch Barcelona train 
he met Lionel Messi afterwards and asked him: “Please keep playing until you’re 
60 ... or at least until the day I die.”

Las Palmas felt like the right place, somewhere where youth-teamers of a 
certain profile are prevalent. There’s a touch of the cliché about it but 
Canary Islanders are usually assumed to be skilful, creative, fun players.

“It’s implicit in the island’s life, spent on the street; the climate brings 
people outside,” the sporting director insists. “How can we tell players not to 
dribble? Dribblers are an endangered species.”

There’s something in that, but only something. Setien has made Las Palmas one 
of the most attractive sides to watch in Spain; when they are good, they are 
very good. Tidy, precise, with the ambition to create more than destroy. 
Patient with the ball, rarely resorting to hoofing it. In one newspaper, Diego 
Maradona’s famous phrase was trotted out again this weekend to refer to them: 
“They could have ‘the ball is the one thing that never gets stained’, written 
on their shirts,” the report ran. The game against Barcelona a fortnight ago 
was a good example: there they were, pressing high, having a lot of the ball, 
making chances, but lacking a cutting edge, finding themselves caught out. Some 
players admitted wondering if they were naive. Or maybe unlucky.

Old flames Mario Balotelli and Milan start to regret rekindling the affair | 
Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/07/old-flames-mario-balotelli-milan-regret-rekindling-affair>
Not any more. “A high percentage of football is chance and right now we’re 
getting that luck,” Setien said. With injuries and results have come changes, a 
touch of pragmatism. Maybe it was always there – Setien loves Valerón, who is 
40, yet rarely plays him – but now it is clearer. This is not exactly the story 
that some are selling of a steadfast commitment to a puritanical footballing 
cause. There has been a philosophy, sure, but also open-mindedness and 
adaptation too: a shift towards 4-1-4-1, more emphasis on protection, 
full-backs who attack less. As García put it this weekend: “We have found the 
balance now between attack and defence.”

The goalkeeper Javi Varas described the last three games as the ones in which 
he has “taken part the least”.

With those changes, Las Palmas have found the win they needed; they may have 
found survival, too. Setien was proud when he said: “In the first half we 
controlled the ball.” He was proud, too, when he added: “In the second half we 
struggled a bit more but we defended well.” In a week, everything changed; they 
have 10 weeks to ensure it doesn’t change back, to secure this place inprimera. 
“You can’t come here to El Madrigal and not expect to suffer,” Setien said. 
“Frankly, it is going to be very hard still, but this result takes us closer to 
our objective and gives us an enormous boost. I don’t know if this is our best 
moment, but it is our most effective.”

Talking points

• A Beatles week, anyway.

• “I would like to remind you that it’s not normal to go 14 games without 
losing. At times I think that escapes people, including the fans. I don’t 
understand how people can start whistling after 15 minutes. I go home sad 
because there are things that I find it hard to understand.” Marcelino is 
right, too.

• Atlético aren’t giving up. They could perhaps still win the league; although 
they’re not talking about it, they certainly aren’t going to let it go easily. 
Their last three games read: a win at the Bernabéu, a win at Mestalla (where 
neither Madrid nor Barcelona won) and a hammering of Real Sociedad. They were 
superb on Sunday night, too: fast and precise in possession, with Antoine 
Griezmann playing a role that the commentators likened to Messi – dropping 
deeper, passing, running, involved in everything they did.

Scoring, too. His excellent opener was equalised by Denis Cheryshev, who 
finished Paco Alcácer’s lovely lay-off, before Fernando Torres scored in his 
300th game. Carrasco added a third. And it was deserved, too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fresurgent-las-palmas-la-liga-relegation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34b1f551863209e9f1d6e74bc1e9720ffa8f9593%2F0_0_2351_1419%2F2351.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Resurgent%20Las%20Palmas%20prove%20a%20Beatles%20week%20is%20long%20time%20in%20La%20Liga%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fresurgent-las-palmas-la-liga-relegation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Resurgent%20Las%20Palmas%20prove%20a%20Beatles%20week%20is%20long%20time%20in%20La%20Liga%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fresurgent-las-palmas-la-liga-relegation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34b1f551863209e9f1d6e74bc1e9720ffa8f9593%2F0_0_2351_1419%2F2351.jpg>
 Fernando Torres celebrates his goal at Valencia. Photograph: Juan Carlos 
Cardenas/EPA 
• The problem for them is that Barcelona aren’t giving up either and nor is 
Messi, superb at Vallecas on Thursday and superb at Ipurua four days later. 
Munir got the opener against Eibar, while Messi scored twice. One of them was a 
great run and finish (so what?), with Ander Capa backing off and doing a kind 
of can-can, knowing that the shot was coming but not knowing when, and hoping 
to block it. The other was a penalty (wow!), clipped in semi-Panenka style. 
Then Luis Suárez scored a fourth that was so very Suárez: nutmeg, bumper car, 
and a thumping finish.

Not that it was about the goals with Messi: it was the passing again, the 
passing that doesn’t actually get picked up in the stats. Suárez gave the 
assist for the first, but it was his run and Messi’s pass that made it.

• So, about those 82 seconds. Cristiano Ronaldo had just played a pass that 
ran straight out of play and the Bernabéu began to whistle him, the frustration 
growing after a desperately bad first half … so the next time he got the ball, 
82 seconds later, he found a bit of space, took a run up and absolutely belted 
it, dipping and swerving his shot past the goalkeeper from 30 yards, and down 
into the net. As he ran to celebrate, he reached for his ear. “What now?!” What 
now? Now, for some more. Suddenly, he was Superman, all over the place, 
hyperactive and impossible to stop. A moment later, he smashed in a superb 
free-kick. And a moment after that he took another one from the same angle 
which came flying back off the bar via Ruben Blanco’s hand. Two more goals 
followed for him, four in total, plus one for Jesé and another for Gareth Bale, 
both of them subs, as Celta collapsed and Madrid stuck seven past them.

• Getafe were 10 games away from eight successive wins and Sevilla were 10 
minutes away from a first away win all season, only for Velázquez to get an 
86th-minute equaliser. So, the team who have won the past 12 at home still have 
not won at all away. “It’s nine draws, and when you look at them one by one 
that’s not so bad, but when you look at them together it is,” Emery admitted. 
“It’s hard to explain. The reality is that every team is stronger at home: 
Madrid are, even Barcelona. But we have to improve to turn some of those draws 
into wins. The approach is no different.”

• For Getafe, the goal was huge. They’d not scored since 23 January – and that 
day they had lost 3-2 – and had lost seven games in a row. At least that run 
has stopped. “We had entered into a phase of mental block,” Fran Escribá said. 
“This point does us a lot of good. Not in terms of the number of points but 
emotionally. We were not so good before [when people talked about them being 
European candidates] but nor were we so bad as to have gone through this. We’ve 
tried to work on the mental block but it’s hard.

“This will help. However much you talk to players, real confidence comes from 
results, like this one. You talk to them, you explain, you encourage, but this 
is where it happens, in moments like this. At the end of the season we might 
look back on this as a big moment.”

• This week’s golazos: De Marcos for Athletic, Deyverson for Levante, and Fede 
Cartabia for Depor.

• Gracias Gaspar.

Results: Real Madrid 7–1 Celta, Villarreal 0–1 Las Palmas, Getafe 1–1 Sevilla, 
Deportivo 3–3 Málaga, Betis 2–0 Granada, Eibar 0–4 Barcelona, Real Sociedad 1–1 
Levante, Sporting 0–2 Athletic, Valencia 1–3 Atlético.Monday: Espanyol-Rayo 
Vallecano.

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Barcelona 28 55 72 
2 Atletico Madrid 28 30 64 
3 Real Madrid 28 54 60 
4 Villarreal 28 14 53 
5 Sevilla 28 10 45 
6 Athletic Bilbao 28 4 44 
7 Celta Vigo 28 -11 42 
8 Eibar 28 -1 36 
9 Real Sociedad 28 -2 35 
10 Real Betis 28 -10 34 
11 Valencia 28 -1 34 
12 Malaga 28 -1 33 
13 Deportivo La Coruna 28 -2 33 
14 Las Palmas 28 -10 30 
15 Espanyol 27 -27 28 
16 Getafe 28 -18 27 
17 Rayo Vallecano 27 -21 26 
18 Granada 28 -24 26 
19 Sporting Gijon 28 -20 24 
20 Levante 28 -26 21  