
Ninety years ago last month, AA Milne’s Winnie-the-Pooh was published; The 
House at Pooh Corner followed in 1928.

They proved hugely successful, with worldwide sales of the books – including 
the books of poetry, When We Were Very Young (1924) and Now We Are Six (1927) – 
of more than 50m. Milne’s biographer, Ann Thwaite, notes that the animals in 
the Hundred Acre Wood “have become part of the English language”. The 
commemoration of Pooh’s first book-length appearance is now being celebrated 
with anofficial sequel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/oct/14/why-winnie-the-pooh-is-still-the-best-bear-in-the-world>
, including a new character.

Yet there are awkward footnotes to this tale of success. Winnie-the-Pooh 
cruelled 
<http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/magazine/the-curse-of-winnie-the-pooh> AA 
Milne’s career as a playwright and comic writer and Christopher Milne grew to 
hate the stories that immortalised him. He oncedeclared 
<http://www.express.co.uk/expressyourself/131385/Winnie-the-Pooh-ruined-my-life>
 it seemed to him “almost that my father has got to where he was by climbing 
upon my infant shoulders, that he had filched from me my good name and had left 
me with the empty fame of being his son”.

Winnie-the-Pooh at 90: still the best bear in all the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/oct/14/why-winnie-the-pooh-is-still-the-best-bear-in-the-world>
The estrangement of father and son and difficulties in the Milne marriage make 
for a rather sad ending, and it will be interesting to see whether these 
uncomfortable details make it into thebiopic 
<http://www.indiewire.com/2016/09/margot-robbie-domhnall-gleeson-aa-milne-biopic-winnie-the-pooh-1201731845/>
 that is set to come out next year.


Furthermore, not everyone is a fan of the Bear of Little Brain and the keenest 
critiques of the books have focused on their sentimentality. Writing under her 
Constant Reader pseudonym in 1928, Dorothy Parker famouslyobserved 
<http://www.todayinliterature.com/stories.asp?Event_Date=10/20/1928> of The 
House at Pooh Corner that the word “hummy” marked “the first place … at which 
Tonstant Weader fwowed up”. All that honey and condensed milk can be sickly 
after a while and readers’ tolerance for poetry involving the phrase “tiddely 
pom” will vary.

The stories are almost parodically genteel and upper middle class; come the 
revolution it’s doubtful that Pooh will be first against the wall but he won’t 
be manning the barricades either.Some of the quotes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/oct/14/the-wit-and-wisdom-of-winnie-the-pooh>
 made famous by the books are also perilously close toinspiration-speak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/18/inspirational-quote-business-read-feel-better>
 and the impression that Pooh is simply a cutesy tug at the heartstrings was no 
doubt reinforced by the deeply disappointing Disney version, which has all the 
subtle nuance of a sugared sledgehammer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Frevisiting-winnie-the-pooh-more-cutting-than-we-thought-when-we-were-six%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b689cc8685364dd37e9f9b207152006a944eef1%2F0_0_1728_2383%2F1728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revisiting%20Winnie-the-Pooh%3A%20more%20cutting%20than%20we%20thought%20when%20we%20were%20six&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Frevisiting-winnie-the-pooh-more-cutting-than-we-thought-when-we-were-six%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revisiting%20Winnie-the-Pooh%3A%20more%20cutting%20than%20we%20thought%20when%20we%20were%20six&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Frevisiting-winnie-the-pooh-more-cutting-than-we-thought-when-we-were-six%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b689cc8685364dd37e9f9b207152006a944eef1%2F0_0_1728_2383%2F1728.jpg>
 One of the original illustrations by EH Shepard from the book Winnie-the-Pooh. 
Photograph: EH Shepard/Hardie Grant Egmont 
However, to read the books and only see treacle is to miss the point. 
Certainly they are sweet, and if you can read the final story without feeling 
sad you must be the kind of person unmoved by the most manipulative of Pixar 
movies; that is, a monster. But Milne is also the sort of narrator who will 
coolly write that “Owl looked at [Rabbit] and wondered whether to push him off 
the tree”.

Revisiting the stories, I was surprised to find them as funny as I had at age 
eight. The Rather Twee Capitalising Of Everything can be grating but it 
certainly drives the point home: when Pooh, trapped in Rabbit’s front door, 
requests to be read a “Sustaining Book, such as would help and comfort a Wedged 
Bear in Great Tightness”, you really feel his pain.

Milne is an acute observer of human behaviour. One story opens: “It was going 
to be one of Rabbit’s busy days. As soon as he woke up he felt important … It 
was a Captainish sort of day, when everybody said, ‘Yes, Rabbit’ and ‘No, 
Rabbit’, and waited until he had told them.”

We have all, I feel, worked with someone like Rabbit.


The stories also gently mock adults’ capacity to say one thing while doing 
another. Consider the irony in this observation: “‘Pooh,’ said Rabbit kindly, 
‘you haven’t any brain.’” Reading the books as a small child, I learned that 
something might be said kindly but still be unkind; that anything said 
“carelessly” is probably anything but; that the people most proud of their 
intellect might just not be that clever. (Owl, who feels it’s “rather beneath 
him to talk about little cake things with pink sugar icing” is such a deft 
skewering of pomposity that he’s a cautionary tale for anyone in public life.)


Winnie-the-Pooh makes friends with a penguin to mark anniversary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/19/winnie-the-pooh-penguin-anniversary-aa-milne>
Milne also gives us a character as complex as Eeyore, a bitter and frankly 
unlikable recluse. The gloomy donkey reminds me perversely of The Simpsons’ Moe 
Szyslak: such a tragic character that it’s difficult to follow a whole 
storyline involving him. But Eeyore has appealing moments: think of him 
contentedly putting a burst balloon in and out of an empty honey jar or 
frolicking happily when reunited with his tail.


It’s inadvisable to eat honeycomb at every meal but it’s fine in moderation; 
so it goes with sentimentality. In the Previously Mentioned and Extremely Sad 
final Pooh story, the narrator concludes that “in that enchanted place on the 
top of the Forest a little boy and his Bear will always be playing”. Good.

 