
The real protagonist of Herbert Fritsch’s play Pfusch 
<http://www.volksbuehne-berlin.de/praxis/pfusch/>, a dada cabaret revue in 
repertoire atBerlin’s Volksbühne theatre <https://www.volksbuehne-berlin.de/>, 
is a seven-metre-long wooden tube. At the start of the play, the tube funnels 
the cast of 13 men and women in Minnie Mouse dresses on to the stage, then gets 
pushed back and forth like the cylinder of a monstrous steamroller, and 
eventually triples up as the drum of a human hamster wheel.


Open letter turns spotlight on Berlin Volksbühne theatre's offstage drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/23/open-letter-turns-spotlight-on-berlin-volksbuhne-theatres-offstage-drama>
 During last Thursday’s premiere, a collective gasp rippled through the 
audience as the tube came careering towards the orchestra pit, threatening to 
flatten not just a couple of actors but the entire front row. It was the kind 
of smash-the-fourth-wall-with-a-sledgehammer moment that has helped build the 
theatre on Rosa Luxemburg Square a loyal fanbase in the German capital, and a 
reputation for artistic anarchy across the globe.

Pfusch means “botch” in German, and some critics have read the play’s title as 
a nod to the off-stage farce that has distracted from real stagecraft at the 
prestigious theatre over the last 20 months. Since the Belgian ex-director of 
London’s Tate Modern, Chris Dercon,was announced as the successor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/24/tate-modern-boss-chris-dercon-berlin-volksbuhne-theatre>
 of the Volksbühne’s veteran director Frank Castorf in spring 2015, staff have 
been in open revolt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0238088cf8fa70a8ff20853cf5d918f251ba1c17%2F0_0_5473_3649%2F5473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin's%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin%27s%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0238088cf8fa70a8ff20853cf5d918f251ba1c17%2F0_0_5473_3649%2F5473.jpg>
 The set for Pfusch is put together in the Volksbühne’s workshop. Photograph: 
Christian Jungeblodt 
In the months after the announcement, several of the theatre’s star directors 
and performers announced their departure, and in an open letter the remaining 
staff decried Dercon’s appointment as “an irreversible turning point” that 
represented a “historical razing of identity” in favour of a “globalised 
consensus culture”. A counter-letter in defence of Dercon, signed by architect 
Jacques Herzog, photographer Wolfgang Tillmans and artist Olafur Eliasson, 
among others, dismissed the theatre’s protest as “alarmist sensationalism”. 
Why, it asked, was a city as proud of its openness as Berlin so afraid of 
change?

Now that a Left party politician, who campaigned for Dercon’s deposition 
during September’s Berlin election, has been installed as the new culture 
senator, the Volksbühne’s future looks more of a botch-job than ever. But 
anyone who wants to understand how a theatre can arouse such strong emotions 
need only take a closer look through that gigantic wooden tube.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F840130b90755a42adb2eea205b9bc999d70cc434%2F0_0_5695_3797%2F5695.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin's%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin%27s%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F840130b90755a42adb2eea205b9bc999d70cc434%2F0_0_5695_3797%2F5695.jpg>
 The exterior of the Volksbühne’s workshop. Photograph: Christian Jungeblodt 
for the Guardian 
Founded in 1890, the Volksbühne <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/volksbuhne> 
or “people’s stage” was born out of an eponymous movement with the express 
mission to bring art to the working classes, an ideal that continued to be held 
aloft during the theatre’s 40 years on the eastern side of the Berlin Wall. 
Manual workers and intellectuals were to have an equal stake in the institution 
and its artistic output; the star performer and the cleaner would be considered 
equally important members of the ensemble.

 The central pillar of this philosophy was arguably not the stage itself, but 
a workshop where craftsmen and artists collaborated on sets and props. 
Initially located in the theatre, it has since 1939 been based on a 
purpose-built site in Berlin’s Pankow district and is now the only set-building 
factory of its kind (all of the city’s other theatres have in recent years 
outsourced their stage sets to a centralised agency).

 A tour around the premises reveals a curiosity shop of props from productions 
past: Australian phone boxes, a replica of an 18th-century machine that creates 
the sound of thunder, wind and rain, a giant pterodactyl. It brings to mind 
Wolfgang Becker’s 2003 comedyGood Bye, Lenin! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2003/jul/25/artsfeatures.dvdreviews>, in 
which a family try to keep alive the illusion of a triumphant socialist 
republic in rapidly westernising post-Wall Berlin. By the entrance, a sign 
bearing the GDR-era motto “We work for peace” has been freshly repainted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba0fa36c9e471c6283e0a89737e1f94d18196d0e%2F0_0_4734_3156%2F4734.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin's%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin%27s%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba0fa36c9e471c6283e0a89737e1f94d18196d0e%2F0_0_4734_3156%2F4734.jpg>
 A giant pterodactyl from a past production hangs over the Volksbühne workshop. 
Photograph: Christian Jungeblodt 
In the carpentry workshop where the wooden tube was put together, there are 
portraits of Wilhelm Pieck and Walter Ulbricht, the first two leaders of East 
Germany’s ruling party, both carpenters by training (things were bound to go 
awry, one old east German joke goes, when Ulbricht was replaced by Erich 
Honecker, a roofer).

The workshop also doesn’t strictly live up to what a management consultant 
might call “operational efficiency”. The Volksbühne is a repertoire theatre, 
which means plays can stay part of the programme for years at a time and sets 
have to be built, disassembled and ferried back and forth between the workshop 
and the stage on a daily basis. Partly as a result, it receives one of the 
highest state subsidies of Berlin’s spoken-word theatres.

The workshop’s manager, Frank Mittmann, who has worked for the Volksbühne 
since 1974, recalls how since the fall of the Berlin Wall, there has been talk 
of privatisation, “but then people changed their minds again”. “The market 
economy has a logic that escapes me,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bc24ba4ab659baba1a680e8b9585e04104b2b22%2F0_248_3726_2236%2F3726.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin's%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin%27s%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bc24ba4ab659baba1a680e8b9585e04104b2b22%2F0_248_3726_2236%2F3726.jpg>
 Pfusch at the Volksbühne. Photograph: Christian Jungeblodt for the Guardian 
Wouldn’t it make things much easier for him and his workers if they had to 
build for a non-repertory theatre where one play at a time gets a clean run? 
“You can answer that question yourself, can’t you?” Mittmann retorts. “Of 
course you wouldn’t need 26 employees … And once those jobs are gone, they are 
gone.”

“If we had to switch, that wouldn’t be without risk for us. Repertory theatre 
is our thing: the Volksbühne has done it this way for over 100 years, and all 
our structures are adjusted to that way of working. It’s like clockwork.”

 But to describe the Volksbühne as pure ostalgie, a nostalgia for the east’s 
good old ways, would be to do it a disservice. When Castorf, an east German who 
had started directing on west German stages before the fall of the Wall, took 
over in 1992, he and his set designer Bert Neumann started to wed Soviet-era 
aesthetics with a Hollywood-sized appetite for showmanship.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff869f7a7e959f49c75b1b7f803e1bcc36d23a0a6%2F0_0_3698_2745%2F3698.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin's%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin%27s%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff869f7a7e959f49c75b1b7f803e1bcc36d23a0a6%2F0_0_3698_2745%2F3698.jpg>
 The main entrance to the Volksbühne. The theatre was founded in 1890. 
Photograph: Tobias Schwarz/AFP/Getty Images 
The old rules of ensemble theatre, whereby actors were strictly tied to one 
theatre, were abandoned and many of the Volksbühne’s star performers were 
allowed to pursue parallel careers in film, TV and at other stages. A fear 
frequently voiced by Dercon’s critics is that he could turn the prestigious 
theatre into a “commercial events shed”, but arguably Castorf had already done 
that: by the end of his 25-year reign only a minority of productions were 
traditional spoken-word theatre, with the theatre also hosting concerts, dance 
works and readings.

 Prop-maker Mittmann describes the early years of working with Castorf as 
“exhausting”. “It was madness at first. There was a premiere practically every 
month!” He was ordered to build a replica of London’s Globe theatre, a giant 
orca whale, an old-fashioned hot-air balloon, and a tank made entirely out of 
wood that had to be able to drive and fire rounds. For Castorf’s production of 
The Idiot, the audience was placed on a rotating platform on the stage and a 
fake city was built around them, including fully furnished apartment blocks, a 
supermarket, a brothel and a bar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77a1e7246dae7192764e5b2a50f65e7f1e46c8a6%2F0_0_5060_3373%2F5060.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin's%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin%27s%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77a1e7246dae7192764e5b2a50f65e7f1e46c8a6%2F0_0_5060_3373%2F5060.jpg>
 ‘It was madness at first’ … prop-maker Frank Mittmann. Photograph: Christian 
Jungeblodt for the Guardian 
For a take on Georg Büchner’s Danton’s Death, Mittmann had to get a blacksmith 
to build medieval armour costumes. When he noticed during rehearsals that the 
actors were struggling to control their movements in their heavy outfits, he 
told the director: “Isn’t that a bit dangerous? What if they slide down into 
the orchestra pit?” Castorf replied that that was precisely what he liked about 
it. “He thought the risk of an accident made it more interesting. Things 
spinning out of control – that fascinates him.”

The Volksbühne workshop has been at the heart of the row between the senate 
and the theatre’s staff, who explicitly called for safeguarding its future in 
their open letter – yet it appears Dercon himself had already made its 
continued existence a condition of a signing a contract with the theatre in the 
first place. When Mittmann showed Dercon around the theatre, he described the 
workshop as “a factory that builds things you cannot buy”. “I think Dercon 
understood that. And I think he liked it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79eca3c6e9460097b1ca8c3e333b3d7168c2369b%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin's%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revolt%20at%20the%20Volksb%C3%BChne%3A%20behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20Berlin%27s%20troubled%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Frevolt-at-the-volksbuhne-berlin-theatre-chris-dercon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79eca3c6e9460097b1ca8c3e333b3d7168c2369b%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Entrance to the Volksbühne workshop. Photograph: Christian Jungeblodt for the 
Guardian 
So did the old guard big up the threat, a last great melodrama to make life 
harder for their successors? Or did the politicians who hired the Tate boss 
simply botch their lines of communication?

In mid-September, Left party politician Klaus Lederer was appointed as 
Berlin’s new culture senator. During the election campaign he had put his name 
to a leaflet that declared Dercon part of a “neoliberal art world with a global 
jet-set attitude” and called for a U-turn on the appointment. But the Belgian 
director is tied into a five-year contract, cancelling which would cost five to 
eight million euros.

One proposal floated in the German press recently is that Dercon could be 
asked instead to focus on a new Volksbühne offshoot at Tempelhof, Berlin’s 
abandoned inner-city airport. A design for a “mobile amphitheatre” has already 
been proposed by Burkinabé architect Francis Kéré. The solution has at least 
one clear advantage. It could be built at the workshop in Pankow.
 