
A British company has announced plans for an array of unique marine turbines 
that can operate in shallower and slower-moving water than current designs.

Kepler Energy <http://www.keplerenergy.co.uk/index.html>, whose technology is 
being developed byOxford University’s department of engineering science 
<http://www.eng.ox.ac.uk/>, says the turbines will in time produce electricity 
more cheaply than off-shore wind farms.

It hopes to install its new design in what is called a tidal energy fence, one 
kilometre long, in the Bristol Channel − an estuary dividing South Wales from 
the west of England − at a cost of £143m.

The fence is a string of linked turbines, each of which will start generating 
electricity as it is completed, until the whole array is producing power. The 
fence’s total output is 30 megawatts (MW), and 1MW can supply around 1,000 
homes in the UK.

It’s like one small nuclear reactor’s worth of electricity being generated 
from the tides in the Bristol Channel
Peter Dixon, Kepler Energy 
Power outputs

Peter Dixon, Kepler’s chairman 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/08/05/us-tidal-energy-idUSKCN0QA1IX20150805>
, told Reuters news agency: “If we can build up to, say, 10km worth, which is a 
very extended fence, you’re looking at power outputs of five or six hundred 
megawatts. And just to visualise that, it’s like one small nuclear reactor’s 
worth of electricity being generated from the tides in the Bristol Channel.”

The new Transverse Horizontal Axis Water Turbine (THAWT) − whose design is 
compared to that of a water mill − will use the latest carbon composite 
technology, and should be suitable for the waters around Britain, as well as 
overseas.

Because the turbines sit horizontally beneath the surface of the sea, they can 
be sited in water shallower than the 30-metre depth typically required by 
current designs. And because the water is slow-moving, the company says, fish 
can safely avoid the turbines’ blades.


Although the technology is regarded as environmentally benign, Kepler says it 
will still undergo a rigorous environmental impact assessment during the 
planning process to ensure that it poses no significant risk to marine life and 
to other users of the sea.

There is more good news for proponents of renewable energy after the UK 
government − which is no longer encouraging onshore wind and solar energy − 
gave thego-ahead for a large offshore wind farm 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/offshore-wind-farm-gets-the-go-ahead> that 
could provide power for up to two million homes.

The new wind farm is to be built near the Dogger Bank 
<http://www.forewind.co.uk/dogger-bank/overview.html> in the North Sea and will 
have 400 turbines.

World's biggest offshore windfarm approved for Yorkshire coast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/17/worlds-biggest-offshore-windfarm-approved-for-yorkshire-coast>
Its developers say it could create almost 5,000 jobs during construction. And, 
earlier this year, they obtained planning consent for another installation 
nearby which, with the new development, will form one of the largest offshore 
wind farms in the world.

North Seas assets

But the fossil fuel industry is far from abandoning its own interest in 
British waters as the energy giant BP has announced that it is to invest about 
£670m to extend the life of its North Sea assets.

It said it would be drilling new wells, replacing undersea infrastructure, and 
introducing new technologies to help it to produce as much as possible from the 
area, whose future would be secured “until 2030 and beyond”.

In November, delegates to the UN climate change convention 
<http://newsroom.unfccc.int/> annual negotiations will gather in Paris to try 
to conclude an ambitious and effective agreement on preventing theglobal 
average temperature rise <http://www.cop21.gouv.fr/en> caused by greenhouse gas 
emissions exceeding 2C above its pre-industrial level.

Last year, the Convention’s executive secretary, Christiana Figueres, said the 
world’s long-term goal was to reduce greenhouse gases to zero by 2100 − a 
target she said would require leaving three-quarters of fossil fuels in the 
ground. “We just can’t afford to burn them”, she said.
 