
“It is impossible to translate the Qur’an,” writes Kader Abdolah, at the start 
of his translation of the Qur’an. Prior to 9/11, Abdolah – then a popular 
émigré Iranian novelist in the Netherlands – had never even read the Qur’an, 
despite being raised in a Muslim family. But with the fall of the twin towers 
came the necessity to do so; the new focus on Islamic extremism in the West 
meant that suddenly everyone had opinions about the book, although most had not 
read it. As a leading voice in the liberalNetherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands>, Abdolah was expected to have a 
view.

When Abdolah read the Qur’an for the first time, he read it as a novelist: in 
it he recognised not only a text of faith, but also a work of literature of 
such elegance and style that it had the potential to speak to writers all over 
the world. His Dutch translation was published in 2008 alongside The Messenger, 
a novelisation of Muhammad’s life intended to be read before tackling the holy 
book; the pair were immediate bestsellers. Eight years on,they can now be read 
in English 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/index/?dir=desc&order=date_published&q=Kader+Abdolah>
, thanks to translators Nouri and Niusha Nighting.

In his most bold move, Abdolah adds a extra chapter to the Qur'an, in which 
Muhammad’s death is described

So how does one tackle a task as weighty as translating a religious text? 
Something must be lost in the transition fromQur’anic Arabic 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classical_Arabic> to first Dutch and now 
English. Abdolah laments the loss of “the beauty”, “the flavour, smell and 
feelings” of Muhammad’s language: in his introduction, he declares that he 
“knows nothing” and that he has made many mistakes. On first impression, these 
statements could suggest an understandable fear of backlash; Abdolah’s 
translation, which alters, cuts and adds to the original text, could appear 
sacrilegious. However, Abdolah’s statements reflect not fear, but reverence – 
his respect for Muhammad’s original prose. Abdolah sees himself not as a 
translator but as an interpreter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Frewriting-the-quran-kader-abdolah-and-his-controversial-interpretation-of-islams-holy-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b8cc9f069a1ea978337f3dfd6f3548bf7b67009%2F0_217_4992_2995%2F4992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rewriting%20the%20Qur'an%3A%20Kader%20Abdolah%20and%20his%20controversial%20interpretation%20of%20Islam's%20holy%20book&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Frewriting-the-quran-kader-abdolah-and-his-controversial-interpretation-of-islams-holy-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rewriting%20the%20Qur%27an%3A%20Kader%20Abdolah%20and%20his%20controversial%20interpretation%20of%20Islam%27s%20holy%20book&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Frewriting-the-quran-kader-abdolah-and-his-controversial-interpretation-of-islams-holy-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b8cc9f069a1ea978337f3dfd6f3548bf7b67009%2F0_217_4992_2995%2F4992.jpg>
 Defying the extremists: Kader Abdolah. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the 
Guardian 
Prioritising accessibility over religious mystery, Abdolah makes several 
weighty, and perhaps controversial, changes. The original compilers of the 
Qur’an ordered the suras - or chapters – by length, making the text difficult 
to navigate, in order to reflect something of the unfathomable nature of Allah. 
Instead, Abdolah reorders the suras into a chronological order, allowing for 
Muhammad’s journey to be traced alongside the story explained in The Messenger.

In his most bold move, Abdolah also adds an extra sura – number 115 – in which 
Muhammad’s death is described. This addition,Abdolah explained in a recent 
interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2016/apr/01/kader-abdolah-a-little-life-hanya-yanagihara-books-podcast>
, emphasises the importance of Muhammad in the Qur’an, a book usually 
attributed solely to Allah. Abdolah wished to bring into focus the “writer” of 
the Qur’an, a man who was a “dreamer” and “poet”. This addition, however, was 
also for Abdolah himself: “The last chapter is mine. Three people have written 
this book: Allah, Muhammad and Kader Abdolah.”

The frequent repetition, intended for the mostly illiterate audience of 
Muhammad’s time, is omitted in Abdolah’s translation. He also omits the Arabic 
alphabet letters that begin some of the suras, believed by some to be part of 
the Qur’an’s “sacred code”, a mathematical structure that proves it was not 
written by humans.

But if the Qur’an has lost anything in this rewriting, The Messenger provides 
new context, enabling non-Muslim readers to approach the Qur’an with an 
otherwise impossible level of familiarity. The Messenger’s narrator is Zayd ibn 
Thalith, Muhammad’s adopted son, who sets out to chronicle the life of his 
father. Zayd’s unique position in Muhammad’s life humanises him; we read of 
Muhammad’s illiteracy, his messy handwriting (“Hard to decipher. Like the 
scribbles of a child”) and his self-doubt when waiting to receive messages from 
Allah (“Who was Muhammad anyway? He was an orphan nobody wanted”). Muhammad 
becomes someone we can sympathise with and relate to.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Frewriting-the-quran-kader-abdolah-and-his-controversial-interpretation-of-islams-holy-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdfab7193795a0d3a0747fd571e0a485bc389144%2F0_27_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rewriting%20the%20Qur'an%3A%20Kader%20Abdolah%20and%20his%20controversial%20interpretation%20of%20Islam's%20holy%20book&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Frewriting-the-quran-kader-abdolah-and-his-controversial-interpretation-of-islams-holy-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rewriting%20the%20Qur%27an%3A%20Kader%20Abdolah%20and%20his%20controversial%20interpretation%20of%20Islam%27s%20holy%20book&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Frewriting-the-quran-kader-abdolah-and-his-controversial-interpretation-of-islams-holy-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdfab7193795a0d3a0747fd571e0a485bc389144%2F0_27_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
 A Hajj pilgrim prays while others read the Quran on Gebel Rahmah (Mount of 
Mercy), where Muhammad gave his last sermon. Photograph: Mike Nelson/EPA 
As time passes, Muhammad the prophet becomes a politician, a warlord, a 
conqueror. Abdolah does not deny his violence

The two books work in tandem, The Messenger providing context and story; the 
Qur’an, poetry and mystery. But The Messenger also allows for discussion of 
Muhammad’s more problematic behaviour – like the episode in the Qur’an where, 
at the height of his power, he burns the trees and fields of the Jews and 
exiles them from Medina. In The Messenger, Zayd speaks to a rabbi who angrily 
exclaims, “no prophet ever used as much violence as your Muhammad […] he 
ravished young women and thought up suras to justify eliminating us.”

As time passes, Muhammad the prophet becomes a politician, a warlord, a 
conqueror. Abdolah does not deny Muhammad’s violence, instead arguing that such 
violence is inherent to political leadership. “[Muhammad] has done the same 
thing many leaders do. The same as Bush, […] Obama, […] Churchill,” he told the 
Guardian. “Even if they are good people, they have [started] big, big wars and 
they have used violence.”

Reading and writing the unwritable with Kader Abdolah – books podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2016/apr/01/kader-abdolah-a-little-life-hanya-yanagihara-books-podcast>
The controversies of Abdolah’s project cannot be denied and have not been: in 
many countries, publishers have published The Messenger but rejected Abdolah’s 
Qur’an, for fear of a backlash. But considering the increase of Islamophobia in 
the West, there has arguably never been a more important time for moderate, 
analytical Islamic voices to be heard. Abdolah says he is “not afraid” of 
reprisals by extremists: “If those crazy people want to kill me, let them kill 
me. It is an honour to be killed for literature.”

Abdolah believes that the Qur’an, like other holy books, is not inherently 
violent or dangerous. “It is a dangerous book if you use it as [a set of] 
rules,” Abdolah says, but as literature, it is “beautiful.”
 