
The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, has hit back at 
a new hard left group within his party’s rank and file with a stated aim of 
bringing about the end of capitalism – telling them to consider finding a new 
political home.

Established in the past few days, Left Renewal 
<https://www.facebook.com/LeftRenewal/?fref=ts>’s stated aim is to bind its 
members in a formal faction system – something that the Greens have publicly 
rejected in the past.

The new group reflects the anger in a section of the New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> organisation over 
the direction of the party, some of whom have been engaged in a bitter dispute 
over preselections and policy influence.


The split is between those who believe the organisation who should stay as 
protest party and those who believe the Greens should move towards a party of 
government.

Marginal Coalition electorates among the hardest hit by pension changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/marginal-coalition-electorates-among-the-hardest-hit-by-pension-changes>
Left Renewal’s recently posted manifesto 
<https://www.facebook.com/notes/left-renewal/statement-of-principles/101438823691099>
 says: “Capitalism is a violent and antagonistic relation between workers and 
those who exploit them.

“As workers, whether or not we are waged, we experience perpetual violence and 
this violence must be brought to an end. We therefore fight to bring about the 
end of capitalism.”

 Di Natale described the overthrow of capitalism as a ridiculous notion and 
said the Greens’ policy platform had been established through a democratic 
grassroots process.

“The Greens have never had factions and, like the overwhelming majority of 
Greens members and voters, I will never support going down the Labor route of 
establishing formal factions within the party,” Di Natale said. “Of course the 
Greens do not support the overthrow of capitalism or any other ridiculous 
notions of the sort.

“Unfortunately, there is always a small minority in every political movement 
who are more concerned with infighting than with working together to advance 
agreed upon goals.

“If the authors of this ill-thought through manifesto are so unhappy with 
Greens policies, perhaps they should consider finding a new political home.”

The battle has spilled into the open recently because of the success of two 
candidates, Justin Field and Dawn Walker in recent NSW preselections who were 
not supported by the hard left.


But the dispute also came to the fore after the July 2016 election when the 
former leaderBob Brown attacked the Greens senator Lee Rhiannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/greens-acrimony-bob-brown-unloads-on-lee-rhiannon-and-nsw-party>
, who has traditionally drawn support from the left.

At that time, Brown said the NSW Greens party was a “long-term 
disappointment”, which “lags right behind” and had consistently opposed simple 
party reforms that the public expected. He said Rhiannon was holding the party 
back.


“The incumbents in NSW – certainly that’s Lee in the Senate – have given great 
service but are not hitting a chord with the voters at the moment and we need 
to move on,” he told the ABC’s 7.30 program.

Rhiannon is currently returning from Germany and was unavailable for comment. 

The Left Renewal is taking expressions of interest 
<https://docs.google.com/a/guardian.co.uk/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfRVggwQmactEfB6dnDlRtUuF2rpJRlRF_NupqknUA7N-SDsg/viewform?c=0&w=1>
 for membership, which will be decided via a collective decision making process.

None of its members have been named or confirmed as Greens members as yet and, 
when Guardian Australia asked for comment via Facebook from a spokesperson, the 
group messaged back, saying there was no individual spokesperson as they were a 
collective.

Take basic income and short working week seriously, Greens think-tank urges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/basic-income-short-working-week-green-institute-report>
But, in unsourced answers via Facebook, the group claimed to be rank and file 
members unaffiliated with any current or former MPs or senators. It said 
current and former MPs and senators were not eligible for membership at this 
stage.

The message claimed there was already a culture of factionalism in the Greens. 

“We are a tendency within the Greens NSW which looks to return the party to 
its radical roots and away from the opportunistic push which places our party’s 
principles in jeopardy,” the message said.

“Left Renewal will operate within the factional setup that already exists 
within the Greens NSW. The party already has a culture of factionalism in its 
local group structure and among staffers in the NSW parliament.

“The difference is Left Renewal are being open about our goals and intentions, 
and engaging with transparent political concerns instead of double-speak about 
‘unity’ that allows very few voices.”


The group invoked the “long history of socialism in Australia” in the 
foundations of both the Greens and the ALP “and across the world there is a 
revival in the form of Bernie Sanders, Jeremy Corbyn,Iglesias’ Podemos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/15/podemos-pablo-iglesias-jeremy-corbyn-spain-election-radicalism-labour>
 and others”.

As well as calling for the end of capitalism, the group’s statement of 
principles calls for the end of artificial borders and global imperialism and 
it rejects consensus between business and environmental groups to work towards 
solutions on climate change.

It says: “Solutions to climate change cannot come from green-capital 
partnerships and top-down market solutions but must come from people organising 
in their workplaces and their communities.

“We thereby oppose consumer taxes, like ‘cap and trade’ mechanisms, and 
cross-class compromises with big business and capital.”
 