
The plot of Hungry, the latest drama from the playwright Richard Nelson, could 
be scribbled on a sticky note. “A meal is cooked,” Nelson explained over the 
phone from his home in upstate New York. “And when the meal is cooked, the play 
is over.”

Yet Hungry, which opened on 4 March at the Public Theater in New York and is 
the first in a planned trilogy similar to his recentApple Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/04/apple-family-plays-brighton-festival-review>
 plays, is also a startlingly incisive political drama – one that reflects and 
refracts the anxieties of liberal America, even as a middle-class family does 
nothing more than prepare a dinner of ratatouille, fresh bread, salad and an 
apple crisp. (That the production doesn’t then share the meal with the audience 
has been a source of minor discontent – the smell of that bread is tauntingly 
delectable.)

The Apple plays, which opened in 2010, describe four siblings – two teachers, 
a lawyer, a writer – who gradually move from New York City to Rhinebeck, the 
same quaint upstate New York town that Nelson has inhabited since 1982. Hungry 
looks a lot like the Apple plays, intentionally so. The setting is familiar, so 
is the tone, so are two of the actors. Yet Nelson believes that “details are 
everything and the details should tell huge and deep and different stories”.

Hungry and the two plays to follow, What Did You Expect and Women of a Certain 
Age, encompass The Gabriels: Election Year in the Life of One Family, a trilogy 
about a different clan of longtime Rhinebeck residents. The subsequent two 
plays will debut over the next seven months, with the last opening on election 
night later this year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Frichard-nelson-hungry-gabriel-family-plays-liberal-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F826cf7d9550ba9544713b1ab550cf8e43b96b7d0%2F0_0_2748_1649%2F2748.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richard%20Nelson's%20Gabriel%20family%20plays%3A%20reflecting%20the%20anxieties%20of%20liberal%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Frichard-nelson-hungry-gabriel-family-plays-liberal-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richard%20Nelson%27s%20Gabriel%20family%20plays%3A%20reflecting%20the%20anxieties%20of%20liberal%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Frichard-nelson-hungry-gabriel-family-plays-liberal-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F826cf7d9550ba9544713b1ab550cf8e43b96b7d0%2F0_0_2748_1649%2F2748.jpg>
 Maryann Plunkett, Lynn Hawley and Meg Gibson in Richard Nelson’s Hungry at the 
Public Theater. Photograph: Joan Marcus/2016 Joan Marcus 
A writer with a résumé that encompasses half a century, Nelson wrote his first 
play as a theatre-mad adolescent. His career encompasses radio plays in 
Philadelphia, sweeping historical works for the Royal Shakespeare Company, a 
Tony-winning book for the musical version of The Dead, and the Apple and 
Gabriel plays – these recent, achingly intimate pieces.

Premiering seven plays in seven years is no easy feat, even for a prolific 
writer. The acute contemporaneity of each play, which is set on the night that 
it opens, and the political discussions each includes mean that Nelson was and 
is in a state of constant revision.

“It’s very scary,” he said. “You wake up in the middle of the night thinking, 
‘What are you doing?’ That’s very frightening. At the same time it’s very 
exhilarating and makes you feel extremely alive.”

The emotions around Trump run so hot, that Nelson has restricted himself to 
only one use of his name

Hungry underwent considerable changes just before its opening. Comments about 
Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio had to be excised once their candidacies were 
suspended and lines about Megyn Kelly added after what Nelson termed, “a rather 
infamous debate, a Republican debate that was incredibly mean and nasty”. He 
has drafts of the next two plays prepared and he will adjust them as the 
political climate alters.

Already there have been turnabouts that he never could have predicted when he 
began work on the Gabriel plays, most particularly the sustained and somewhat 
baffling rise of Donald Trump. “I had conversations just three months ago where 
people said he doesn’t even want to be president. This is just about improving 
his brand and making more money,” said Nelson. “We didn’t take him seriously.”

Is he interested in a Trump candidacy or a Trump presidency? Surely a 
character so outlandish is a gift to any writer. “I’m a citizen before I’m a 
writer,” he said. “I don’t think I’m looking for gifts in that way.” In fact, 
the emotions around Trump run so hot, that Nelson has restricted himself to 
only one use of his name, very early on in Hungry.

Because his plays depend on it, he is following this election cycle closely 
and observed that it feels “more chaotic” than the last one. As one character 
in Hungry says, perhaps echoing his own thoughts: “We are so damn confused 
right now.”

He won’t say whom he’ll vote for in the primaries, though he confirmed that 
both of his adult daughters are Bernie Sanders supporters. Writing, he said, 
has helped him face the polls and debates with greater equanimity. “I can 
invest my thoughts and anxieties or questions,” he said. “I’m able to find an 
outlet for them in a way that’s not shouting or getting upset or getting red in 
the face. So these plays have been very helpful for that. It’s therapy.”

Though the conversations in the Apple plays and in the Gabriel plays all 
revolve around politics he isn’t sure he would call these plays political. He 
has strong opinions about what constitutes a political play at all. The works 
of Tony Kushner make the cut. “I think he tries to change things by his 
writing,” said Nelson. But Hamilton, a musical that he loves, doesn’t. “Not 
sure I’d call it a ‘political play’. It’s a generous, big-hearted, spirited 
inclusion play.”

The aims of his own plays are, he said, ultimately social rather than 
political. “They don’t hope to change anything,” he said. “They are descriptive 
and for me that is enough.” Yet he trusts that the act of watching them – of 
hearing these voices, of smelling that bread, of breathing the same air as the 
bodies onstage – will help to remind us about the importance of relating to one 
another, intimately and immediately.

“The heart of theatre is human being with human being,” he wrote in a 
follow-up email. Trying to convey the ineffable, indescribable complexity of 
that, all in the course of preparing one modest dinner, is his goal.

Hungry, the first play in The Gabriels: Election Year in the Life of One 
Family runs until April 3 atThe Public Theater <http://publictheater.org/> in 
New York City
 