
A small Rochdale sports carmaker, which lists the rock legend Rick Wakeman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rick-wakeman> among its directors, has lined 
up a bid for Blackpool Automotive, the former TVR Manufacturing, which went 
into administration late last year.

Melling Sports Cars is keen to build its own Hellcat and Wildcat cars 
alongside TVR models in Blackpool, according to its founder, Al Melling, who 
confirmed last night his firm had given a guarantee it had Â£1.75m available - 
an assurance Mr Melling said had been sought by the administrators. Even if his 
bid fails, Mr Melling is keen to attract some of the former TVR workers to join 
him in Rochdale.

He said: "If we are successful we will keep the factory in Blackpool. We will 
produce some of the existing TVR sports cars and introduce new models. The 
Blackpool factory is already set up to produce sports cars and has the staff. 
The main reason in going to Blackpool would be the staff."

Melling Sports Cars employs only a few workers but Mr Melling said his firm 
planned to expand. "The main thing is to get the workforce. If we're not 
successful with the purchase maybe we could look at special transport between 
Blackpool and Rochdale." He said Mr Wakeman was not involved in the day-to-day 
running of the business. "He's an honorary director, he's a very good friend. 
He's not a sports car man, he's a luxury car man."

The administrators, PKF Partners, advertised the sale of Blackpool Automotive 
this month. The successful buyer will acquire the TVR trademarks for the UK, 
European Union and the US, the leasehold on the factory, plant equipment and 
tooling for TVR models.

TVR was bought by the Russian businessman Nikolai Smolensky in 2004. Last year 
he announced plans to outsource TVR production of car bodies abroad with engine 
manufacturing staying in the UK. But the bulk of TVR's assets were transferred 
to Blackpool Automotive before it went into administration.
 