
The former Texas governor Rick Perry, who could not remember the name of the 
Department of Energy when listing those he would scrap as president, has 
emerged as a leading candidate to lead it underDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/intelligence-agencies-cia-donald-trump-russia>
, a transition official said on Sunday.

Intelligence figures fear Trump reprisals over assessment of Russia election 
role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/intelligence-agencies-cia-donald-trump-russia>
Perry’s proposal to scrap the energy department caused what has gone down in 
history as his “oops” moment,during a November 2011 Republican debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/10/rick-perry-vow-gop-debate>.

“It’s three agencies of government when I get there that are gone,” he said. 
“Commerce, education and the, um, what’s the third one there? Let’s see.”

His debate adversaries tried to jog his memory, suggesting the Environmental 
Protection Agency, which Perry said needed to be rebuilt, not scrapped. He then 
gave up.

“I can’t,” he said. “The third one, I can’t. Sorry. Oops.” 

It was the energy department, which is responsible for US energy policy and 
oversees the nation’s nuclear weapons program.

The Democratic US senators Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota and Joe Manchin of 
West Virginia are also reportedly in the running for the job as Trump continues 
to fill key positions in his administration before taking office on 20 January, 
according to the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.

Perry served as governor of Texas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>, 
a leading oil-producing state, from 2000 when he succeeded President George W 
Bush, until 2015. In two unsuccessful presidential runs, he touted his record 
of job creation in the second-most-populous state.

Perry also ran for the 2016 presidential nomination against Trump but dropped 
out in September 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/11/rick-perry-drops-out-republican-presidential-election>
. He was initially a fierce critic of Trump, saying he represented a “cancer on 
conservatism” that should be “clearly diagnosed, excised and discarded”.


He later endorsed Trump and called him “the people’s choice”.

This fall, he appeared as a contestant on Dancing with the Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/30/dancing-with-the-stars-rick-perry-latest-attempt-to-shimmy-up-a-poll>
, competing against disgraced Olympic swimmer Ryan Lochte and novelty rapper 
Vanilla Ice.

Rex Tillerson: an appointment that would confirm Putin's US election win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
An appointment of Perry, a known climate change denier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2011/aug/18/rick-perry-scientists-climate-data>
, would be further indication that the incoming Trump administration may be 
friendly toward the fossil fuel industry.


 Trump is set to pick US representative Cathy McMorris Rodgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/cathy-mcmorris-rodgers-department-interior-trump>
, a climate change denier and an advocate for expanded oil and gas development, 
to head the interior department.

 Trump’s pick for the Environmental Protection Agency is Oklahoma attorney 
general Scott Pruitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/epa-scott-pruitt-disaster-environment-senate-democrats>
, an ardent opponent of Barack Obama’s measures to curb climate change who has 
sued the EPA in a bid to undo a key regulation to curb greenhouse gas 
emissions, mainly from coal-fired power plants.

Trump is also expected to name Rex Tillerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
, chief executive of oil giant Exxon Mobil Corp, as secretary of state.
 