
It seems reasonable to assume that the Livingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> players will spend much of 
the coming week brushing up on their technique for dealing with set pieces 
after yesterday's abject display.

Three times Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> punished 
slipshod defending to extend their unbeaten run to 11 games, 10 of which have 
been victories, and close to within four points of the Premierleague leaders 
Celtic. Fernando Ricksen was the architect of the first three goals scored by 
Peter Lovenkrands, Nacho Novo and Steven Thompson.

Livingston set out to frustrate Rangers, with Jim Hamilton assigned the 
thankless task of playing alone up front with five in midfield. He was 
effectively policed by Marvin Andrews, the former Livingston player; Jean-Alain 
Boumsong was free to mop up and build creatively from defence on those rare 
occasions when Livingston ventured into the Rangers half of the pitch.

The first of Rangers' goals came after 37 minutes, by which time Novo had also 
seen a header hooked off the line by the Spanish defender Rubio. When Andrews 
then challenged Emmanuel Dorado for Ricksen's corner from the right, 
Lovenkrands lunged for the loose ball and hooked it past Roddy McKenzie in the 
Livingston goal.

The second came from Dorado's failure to hold off Hamed Namouchi after Ricksen 
had won the ball and played it through to his team-mate. Namouchi struck the 
crossbar and the ball was scrambled behind for a corner which was delivered by 
Ricksen to Novo at the back post who fired in with ease.

Livingston rallied briefly on the hour when Stefan Klos was 
uncharacteristically careless with an attempted clearance and Craig Easton 
converted a spectacular overhead kick to reduce the deficit. But Thompson 
restored Rangers' two-goal advantage when he headed in Ricksen's corner at the 
back post in the 67th minute, and Namouchi applied extra polish with a fourth 
goal six minutes from time after Gr√©gory Vignal had sprung Livingston's offside 
trap.

"The most important target is to win," said the Rangers manager Alex McLeish. 
"The goals today were a bonus but it was good to see them spread around. The 
players' confidence is very good."

 Man of the match:  Fernando Ricksen (Rangers)
 