
On stage, a brash political correctness coach is explaining the importance of 
wishing each other a “happy Winterval” before confusedly proclaiming that “all 
lives matter”. A call-centre worker with a high-pitched screech croons velvety 
Adele songs in between calls. Talk show host Windy Le Fontaine L’Doeuf 
dispenses dubious life advice and recipes for increasingly improbable dishes, 
not least of which is her “big pot of glams”.

This sequence of surreal characters is vividly brought to life by 26-year-old 
south LondonerLolly Adefope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/16/lolly-adefope-edinburgh-festival-review-pleasance>
, whose own persona occasionally makes an onstage appearance to undercut the 
jokes with equally funny barbed asides. The fourth wall is also broken to 
incorporate viewers in unwinnable game shows. It’s a thrilling experience, 
often playing on audience awkwardness about race and the fear of living in an 
echo chamber.

A white comedian won’t get told: ‘oh, you never mentioned your race'

Inspired by an early love for Brass Eye and The Day Today, and more recently 
US shows likeAtlanta and Insecure,Adefope developed a taste for bizarre but 
topical humour. After an English degree at Loughborough university followed by 
an unfulfilling job (“it was so boring you’re going to regret asking”), she 
started doing open mic nights and getting small roles on TV shows. In her 
Edinburgh debut, 2015’sdouble Chortle award-nominated 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/news/2016/02/12/24169/vote_in_the_2016_chortle_awards>
 andJon Ronson-endorsed 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/jonronson/status/631615418277490688> Lolly, she 
impersonated various characters who were part of a talent show. Critics praised 
her performance but a number of reviews remarked on the fact that she hardly 
referenced her race, with some suggesting she should talk about it more.

“I feel like a white comedian won’t get told ‘oh you never mentioned your 
race,’” she says when we meet in a crowded central London cafe. “But that’s not 
what the show was about.” Its follow-up,Lolly2, was written partly in response 
to these reviews – some of which are quoted on a screen – and race is a central 
theme (in one memorable scene, an aspiring actor auditions for the role of 
“Black Hermione”). At the end there’s a standing ovation from the (mostly 
white) crowd.

Using characters gives Adefope a way of expressing anger and addressing 
politically charged subjects such as Brexit and#OscarsSoWhite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/25/oscarssowhite-right-and-wrong-academy-awards-audience>
 at one step removed. “If I was doing standup I would worry that someone would 
think I was being preachy, whereas, with a character, it always tends to be the 
opposite of what I think. You can get away with things.”

But none of the more serious points would be effective if the characters 
didn’t work. Adefope steps from one persona to the next with ease, adopting 
finely tuned mannerisms, pitch-perfect accents, and a lot of sheer silliness. 
Between her standup, acting and increasingly frequent TV appearances, we can 
expect to see a lot more of her.

“Comedy is changing,” she says. “The appetite for more diverse stories is 
getting bigger. After my gig last week some people came up to me and said it 
was great to see themselves reflected. It was so nice because that’s exactly 
what I feel like.”

Lolly2 is at the Soho theatre 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/lolly-adefope-lolly-2-extra-show/>, 
London, on 16 January 

Three more to watch


■ Bilal Zafar <http://www.bilalzafarcomedy.com>’s satirical material about 
prejudice and Jaffa cakes, in which he takes on Islamophobic Twitter trolls, 
earned him a nomination for best newcomer at Edinburgh last year.

■ Also nominated was Jayde Adams <http://www.jaydeadams.co.uk> for her 
Edinburgh debut,31. The sweary Lycra-clad performer has been on the circuit for 
a couple of years, and won the Funny Women award in 2014.

■ Harriet Braine’s 
<http://funnywomen.com/2016/10/04/meet-funny-women-awards-winner-harriet-braine/>
 effervescent musical comedy and talent for accents won her last year’s Funny 
Women award. An archives assistant by day, she sings pithy numbers about art 
history set to familiar tunes.
 