
In her professional debut, Morfydd Clark 
<https://www.curtisbrown.co.uk/client/morfydd-clark> was upstaged by a lamb. 
She’d nabbed the title part inBlodeuwedd – “it’s the Welsh Juliet” – staged on 
a Snowdonian hillside in 2013. But as if elaborate Welsh-language poetry and 
swarms of midges weren’t challenging enough, one evening “this lamb came on – 
it was in July when they’re really not little and cute anymore – and baaa-ed 
loudly through the love scene.”

Lamb aside, Clark has had little problem holding her own on stage, and these 
days her fellow performers include Glenda Jackson, Dominic West and Rhys Ifans. 
She’s played the actual Juliet opposite Freddie Fox’s Romeo, won praise from 
critics in Gary Owen’sViolence and Son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/09/violence-and-son-review-royal-court>
 at the Royal Court, and starred inLes Liaisons Dangereuses at the Donmar. She 
rounded off 2016 by playing Cordelia opposite Glenda Jackson’sKing Lear at the 
Old Vic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/13/king-lear-review-glenda-jackson-old-vic>
.

“I knew her as a politician and found her fascinating; she wiped the floor 
with anyone, because she can perform,” says Clark, who was thrilled to play her 
daughter, especially getting a “cuddle” each night while playing dead.

I’ve done two Shakespeare tragedies, so I’d desperately like to do comedy. It 
would be nice not to die

Do we need to see more gender-blind casting? “With Shakespeare, there’s no 
reason not to,” Clark insists, before adding that it’s no substitute for 
writing towering parts for women. “I want men to be asking to play great female 
parts!”

Still, she’s had no problem winning juicy roles, and they keep her coming back 
to the theatre. Clark has given notable screen performances inThe Falling and 
opposite Kate Beckinsale inLove & Friendship, but while she loves films, “as a 
girl, often the characters you’re auditioning for in the theatre are more 
significant”. She was raised inCardiff <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/cardiff>
, and dropped out of school at 16, having struggled with dyslexia and ADHD. “I 
had zero confidence, I didn’t do well, I was in trouble a lot.”

Her mother, who works in child development, told her: “You’re not sitting 
here, wasting your life”, and so Clark applied to the National Youth Theatre of 
Wales, the National YouthTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> of 
Great Britain and Welsh National Youth Opera. She got in to all three. “It was 
totally life-changing. Not just being on stage, but spending time with adults 
who didn’t just tell me off.”

After attending the National Youth Theatre of Wales, she studied at Drama 
Centre London – a wrench to leave her beloved Cardiff, but now very much home. 
In 2017, she will be seen inInterlude in Prague, a film about Mozart, and is 
currently auditioning for plays. She says: “I’ve done two Shakespeare 
tragedies, so I’d desperately like to do comedy. It would be nice not to die.”

Three more to watch

■ Though not long graduated from Rada, Tamara Lawrance has been busy: after 
Unreachable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/17/unreachable-review-royal-court-matt-smith-anthony-neilson>
 at the Royal Court andMa Rainey’s Black Bottom at the National, in February 
she returns to the NT to play Viola inTwelfth Night 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/twelfth-night> to Tamsin Greig’s 
Malvolia.

■ Women’s Hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/14/womens-hour-edinburgh-festival-review-feminist-summerhall>
 putSh!t Theatre <http://www.shittheatre.co.uk/home.html>’s Louise Mothersole 
and Rebecca Biscuit on the radar with their lively take on modern feminism, 
while their showLetters to Windsor House, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/17/letters-to-windsor-house-review-daffy-attack-londons-housing-crisis-edinburgh-festival>
 a sideways look at the housing crisis, was a big hit at Edinburgh.

■ Alexander Zeldin 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/features/interviews/2016/alexander-zeldin-i-want-audiences-to-experience-intensity-and-forget-their-phones/>
’s play about zero-hours contracts,Beyond Caring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/07/beyond-caring-review-zero-hours-contracts>
, proved potently timely at the Yard theatre in 2014. His second,Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/14/love-review-homelessness-drama-alexander-zeldin-dorfman-national-theatre>
, set in temporary accommodation over the festive period, is at the National 
until 10 January.
 