
He was the most mesmerising player his compatriots had ever seen. He made his 
international debut aged 17 and ran rings around World Cup finalists. He led 
his hometown club to consecutive league titles and earned 25 full caps before 
he was old enough to vote. His ability was acknowledged by the most successful 
British manager of all time. He had a horse race named after him. And he died, 
aged 44, still wearing his football boots and old national team shirt. His 
nickname was “The Garrincha of the Nordics”, but few football fans outside of 
his home country and the Scottish club he graced are likely to have heard of 
him. This is the story of Roald “Kniksen” Jensen.

Brash and fiercely independent, Bergen ticks all the traditional second-city 
boxes. Once a member of the Hanseatic League, the northern European trading 
block formed in the 13th century by the region’s most important merchant towns, 
the “city between the seven mountains” was for centuries Norway’s main gateway 
to the world, taking no small amount of pride in its cosmopolitan, 
quasi-separatist outlook, enshrined in the popular song and slogan “I’m not 
from fromNorway <https://www.theguardian.com/football/norway>, I’m from Bergen!”

This peculiar local identity, of course, is also frequently reflected in the 
mirror of football. Bergen’s undisputed powerhouse is Brann, which translates 
as “Fire”, and rarely can a football club have been more appropriately named. 
Famous for the passion of its fans and the perpetual volatility of its 
boardroom, the club has more often than not struggled to live up to its 
undoubted potential, which – paradoxically, perhaps – accounts for a great deal 
of its popularity. Inspiring blind faith and blind fury in equal measure, this 
is an institution both defined by and defining of the city it calls home.

Born in Bergen in 1943, Jensen grew up in an austere post-war 
Marshall-planned, sugar-rationed society, with limited scope for individual 
self-expression. Nonetheless, he developed into the ultimateKjuagutt – local 
slang for the archetypal street-smart, irreverent, flamboyant kid, essentially 
a Scandinavian, social-democratic version of the Argentinian cult of thePibe 
(if such a concept is imaginable).

At the age of four, he was given his first football by his father and there 
was no turning back. Honing his skills by spending untold hours doing 
keepy-uppies and smashing the ball against the wall of his childhood home, he 
soon made a name for himself. His first club – formed with friends with whom 
he’d play in Bergen’s narrow alleyways – was called Dynamo in honour of the 
Muscovite idols who had bewildered British crowds during the Russian club’s 
famous tour of 1945. The Bergen version routinely won games by twenty-plus goal 
margins, with the tiny, frail dribbling wizard either scoring or making most of 
them. He quickly became known as “Kniksen”, after the verbknikse, to do tricks 
with the ball.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Froald-kniksen-jensen-football-genius-norway-hearts-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F358f34e4c05c4202df5e5d2e19d6b66fb4943ec7%2F0_298_3867_3867%2F3867.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roald%20Jensen%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Garrincha%20of%20the%20Nordics%E2%80%99%20you%20may%20never%20have%20heard%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Froald-kniksen-jensen-football-genius-norway-hearts-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roald%20Jensen%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Garrincha%20of%20the%20Nordics%E2%80%99%20you%20may%20never%20have%20heard%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Froald-kniksen-jensen-football-genius-norway-hearts-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F358f34e4c05c4202df5e5d2e19d6b66fb4943ec7%2F0_298_3867_3867%2F3867.jpg>
 Roald Jensen. Photograph: Holm Knut Edvard/VG/NTB/PA 
Eventually, he joined Brann’s youth set-up alongside several of his Dynamo 
pals. He was 10. Younger than most and smaller than all of his team-mates, he 
nonetheless continued to dominate games, despite opponents often deploying 
brutal tactics to stifle him. In 1959 he was the star of the junior side that 
reached its second consecutive Norwegian Youth Cup final. The game was played 
at Brann Stadion and a 10,000-plus crowd turned up to watch the boy wonder who, 
according to contemporary press reports, won the semi-final “on his own”. (He 
later said he could never accept such praise as it was also “an implicit 
criticism” of his team-mates.) Brann retained the trophy and a few weeks later 
14,000 Bergeners showed up to worship their new idol when he turned out at home 
for Norway’s juniors. To put those figures into context, the entire population 
of Bergen at the time was approximately 115,000. This was Kniksen-mania.

It was evident, then, that young Jensen had to be accommodated in the 
first-team without delay. Appropriately, it was a coach known as Saint Peter 
who opened the pearly gates. Upon arrival his in Bergen in 1960, the Hungarian 
coach Tivadar Szentpetery opted to introduce a Magical Magyaresque formation, 
with the centre-forward and wingers withdrawn and the nominal inside-forwards – 
Kniksen on the right and his great friend Rolf Birger Pedersen on the left – 
playing alongside each other up front. Although Szentpetery failed – mainly 
because he had no common language with the players – his thinking was 
innovative by Norwegian standards and helped lay the foundations for future 
success.

Meanwhile, Kniksen impressed enough to be called up for senior national duty 
after only a few months in the first team. His call-up was controversial, both 
because of his youth and because one of the three men on the selection 
committee was also a Brann director. The national coach, an Austrian 
disciplinarian called Willy Kment, said that “Jensen is merely a child”. Still, 
he had no qualms about putting the child in his side.

Kniksen made his debut against Austria, scored his maiden international goal 
against Finland and then, in September 1960, won the collective heart of the 
nation with a masterful performance against eternal arch-enemies Sweden. Some 
36,000 spectators in Oslo saw the youngster humiliate a side that had been 
World Cup finalists only two years earlier. “Kniksen drew more applause than 
the National Theatre gets through an entire season,” claimed one excited 
scribe; meanwhile, Dagens Nyheter, Sweden’s largest newspaper, anointed him 
“Norway’s new King!”

In the spring of 1961, an extraordinary story appeared in the now-defunct 
Bergen broadsheetMorgenposten. The paper revealed that Jensen had signed a 
contract with Real Madrid. There was one catch, however: the “news” was 
reported on April Fool’s Day and the “Real Madrid manager” pictured and quoted 
in the paper was in factLászló Papp 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L%C3%A1szl%C3%B3_Papp>, the Hungarian triple 
Olympic boxing champion. Still, the fact that the story was deemed plausible 
enough to publish as a joke spoke volumes about the esteem in which the 
teenager was held. And more was yet to come.

Because of a change in the league format, the 1961-62 season was a 16-team, 
18-month marathon affair, and during this period Jensen, Pedersen and Roald 
Paulsen developed into one of the most potent attacking forces the nation had 
ever seen. Combined, the trio scored a stunning 75 goals, powering Brann 
towards their first title, which was eventually secured with an away win over 
Rosenborg that also saw the Trondheim club relegated. The triumph was marred by 
an incident in which a frustrated home supporter attacked Kniksen with an 
umbrella, knocking him out cold. Still, it was a remarkable achievement and the 
party, predictably, went on for days.

Pitches, coaches and iPads: what are the reasons for Scotland’s talent 
decline? | Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/scotland-talent-decline-kenny-dalglish-england-wembley>
For Jensen, though, the most important event of the season had arguably 
occurred a few months previously, when Heart of Midlothian arrived in Bergen to 
play an exhibition match. The Scottish professionals defeated their amateur 
Norwegian counterparts 4-0 but Kniksen’s performance left a lasting impression. 
“From that moment,” he later claimed, “I knew I could go to Edinburgh anytime I 
wanted to.” (Later, Norway’s sensational 4-3 defeat of a Scotland side 
featuring Kniksen’s great hero Denis Law merely confirmed the instincts of the
Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> directors.)

Having already rejected an offer from an unnamed Italian club, Kniksen decided 
to stay put for the time being and Brann won the now-restructured league again 
in 1963. The following season, however, the double champions suffered a barely 
comprehensible relegation and the team’s undisputed superstar began to realise 
his future lay abroad. Even so, the decision to move was not one to be made 
lightly, for, trapped by its self-defeating amateur ethos, the Norwegian FA 
still forbade professionals from representing the national team. As it 
happened, in 1965 Norway enjoyed one of their best seasons since the war, only 
missing out on qualification for the upcoming World Cup in England after a 
narrow home defeat to France. If their best player had been available, who 
knows what might have happened?

Kniksen arrived at Tynecastle in January 1965, midway through what would 
eventually prove to be the most dramatic season in his new club’s history. He 
was the first foreigner to wear the maroon shirt and managerial legend Tommy 
Walker was not exactly stingy with his praise: “Jensen is the greatest talent 
[to join Hearts] in ages”.

The 22-year-old made his debut against Dunfermline and earned rave reviews. 
“Jensen’s five-star show!” roared the headline in the Edinburgh Evening News. 
Norwegian footballers had excelled abroad before – Asbjorn Halvorsen captained 
Hamburg to German titles in the 1920s and Per Bredesen won the Scudetto with 
Milan in 1957 – but Kniksen was the first to play professionally in Great 
Britain, which was a source of enormous pride to the most Anglophile of all 
nations (the distinction between England and Scotland counted for little).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Froald-kniksen-jensen-football-genius-norway-hearts-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe50433a56e47103c6c9ee38f7e7bc1256e4b3468%2F0_0_4871_3227%2F4871.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roald%20Jensen%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Garrincha%20of%20the%20Nordics%E2%80%99%20you%20may%20never%20have%20heard%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Froald-kniksen-jensen-football-genius-norway-hearts-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roald%20Jensen%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Garrincha%20of%20the%20Nordics%E2%80%99%20you%20may%20never%20have%20heard%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Froald-kniksen-jensen-football-genius-norway-hearts-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe50433a56e47103c6c9ee38f7e7bc1256e4b3468%2F0_0_4871_3227%2F4871.jpg>
 Roald Jensen in 1965, brushing the dust off one of his prizes. An image of his 
fiancee Eva is in the background. Photograph: Sverre A Boerretzen/Aktuell/NTB/PA
The celebrity magazine Aktuell, predictably, published a photo of the smiling 
young star in full Highlander regalia, and his every move was reported by the 
adoring Norwegian press. Meanwhile, his performances continued ŧo impress 
Scottish scribes. “Jensen keeps Hearts in title race,” reported Ian Rennie 
after a 3-1 defeat of Third Lanark.

On 17 January, Hearts ascended to the summit of the table by beating Celtic 
2-1: “Jensen saves the day,” said the Sunday Evening Post, and went on: “The 
new boy who stole the show was Roald Jensen, Hearts’ new import from Norway. He 
was the man who took the steam out of Celtic. Who tamed the ball. Who never 
made a move that didn’t have intelligence behind it.” For Kniksen, who despite 
his immense popularity had never felt accepted as a team player by the sports 
press in his homeland, this was vindication.

Alas the season was to end in heartbreak for Hearts. Famously, on the final 
day of the campaign Hearts lost 2-0 to Kilmarnock at Tynecastle, conceding the 
title to the visitors on goal average. Their luckless Norwegian inside-right, 
so decisive in earlier games, contrived to hit the post not once but twice. 
Still, despite this cruel setback, Kniksen was now recognised as a star in his 
new home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Froald-kniksen-jensen-football-genius-norway-hearts-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F770c89806a44a60afbd740813df00ff617665e30%2F0_0_4872_3228%2F4872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roald%20Jensen%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Garrincha%20of%20the%20Nordics%E2%80%99%20you%20may%20never%20have%20heard%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Froald-kniksen-jensen-football-genius-norway-hearts-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roald%20Jensen%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Garrincha%20of%20the%20Nordics%E2%80%99%20you%20may%20never%20have%20heard%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Froald-kniksen-jensen-football-genius-norway-hearts-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F770c89806a44a60afbd740813df00ff617665e30%2F0_0_4872_3228%2F4872.jpg>
 Roald Jensen signs autographs for some young fans in January 1965. Photograph: 
Sverre A.Boerretzen/Aktuell/NTB/PA 
Among the many impressed by his skill was a battling Dunfermline 
centre-forward of the day. “Our tactics [when facing Hearts] were basically 
‘stop Super-Jensen’,” said Alex Ferguson many years later. However, although he 
continued to dazzle in flashes, Kniksen’s subsequent seasons at Tynecastle were 
marred by injuries and managerial conflict. After 15 years in charge, Walker 
was relieved of his duties in 1966 and his replacement, John Harvey, was less 
than impressed by his flamboyant, yet fragile winger. “I guess he just didn’t 
like me,” Jensen said later, while maintaining that he had “been treated very 
unfairly.”

Strangely, for such a firm fans’ favourite, he made almost as many reserve- 
and B-team performances combined as he did for the first team during his 
six-and-a-half years in Scotland. (As testimony to his popularity, more than 
30,000 fans would sometimes turn up to watch reserve games when he was 
playing.) Being routinely kicked pillar-to-post did not help and – being a 
Bergener and thus not lacking temper – he would on occasion retaliate, which 
led to disciplinary problems.

It sounds vindictive but relegating your rivals can be as good as winning a 
trophy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/06/football-rivals-relegation-celebrate-dundee-united-scotland>
When fit and on song, he could still create moments of magic. Many older 
Hearts fans regard his goal against Partick Thistle as the finest in club 
history. Receiving the ball on the left wing, he bamboozled five defenders and 
the goalkeeper before striking home. He was in fine fettle that year, scoring 
nine goals in 22 games, leading the team on a glorious cup run and scoring the 
decisive penalty in the semi-final against Morton. In trademark fashion, 
however, Hearts surprisingly lost the final to the team against whom Kniksen 
had made his Scottish league debut three years previously: Dunfermline. Around 
this time, Feyenoord allegedly wanted to sign him but he politely declined 
their offer as he felt he still had something to prove in Scotland. Two years 
later, the Dutch club won the European Cup.


Ankles swollen, tendons aching, Super-Jensen – like many another gifted 
maverick of his era – went into relatively early decline. In 1969, as the ban 
on professionals was belatedly abolished, he returned to Norwegian national 
team but, despite a wonderfully composed performance in his comeback against 
Mexico, ultimately he could not dazzle as he did in his early-1960s heyday.

Eventually, he left Hearts and rejoined his beloved Brann – as he had always 
said he would – inspiring them to win the cup in 1972. But he retired from the 
game the following year, settling for a quiet life in Bergen – fishing, tending 
to his cabin, spending time with his wife and children. He remained a staunch 
critic of the way the game was run in his homeland, once saying: “We will not 
have professional football in Norway until they get it on the moon!”

Professional football did eventually come, though not, sadly, in Kniksen’s 
lifetime. On 6 October 1987, while playing in a veteran’s game at Brann 
Stadion, he collapsed and died from an undetected heart defect, aged only 44. 
Tragically, yet somehow appropriately, he departed this world wearing his old 
Norway shirt, the one he should have worn so many more times had it not been 
for the Norwegian FA’s short-sightedness.

Thousands turned out for his funeral. In memoriam, Brann commissioned a statue 
by Per Ung, Norway’s finest sculptor, which stands outside Brann Stadion. 
Norway’s annual Player Of The Year award was named after him but, bizarrely and 
dismayingly, this honour was revoked in 2013. Thieves broke into his wife Eva’s 
home and stole most of the medals and mementos from his career – including his 
Golden Watch, the traditional gift presented to all Norwegian players who reach 
the milestone of 25 caps, and which he remains the youngest man to have 
received.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Froald-kniksen-jensen-football-genius-norway-hearts-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd15479b99d27c4397d0a8f1d33aa43b1ebcc3a3e%2F0_0_1920_2715%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roald%20Jensen%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Garrincha%20of%20the%20Nordics%E2%80%99%20you%20may%20never%20have%20heard%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Froald-kniksen-jensen-football-genius-norway-hearts-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roald%20Jensen%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Garrincha%20of%20the%20Nordics%E2%80%99%20you%20may%20never%20have%20heard%20of&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Froald-kniksen-jensen-football-genius-norway-hearts-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd15479b99d27c4397d0a8f1d33aa43b1ebcc3a3e%2F0_0_1920_2715%2F1920.jpg>
 This article is from the first edition ofNutmeg magazine 
<https://www.nutmegmagazine.co.uk/>. 
His son Sondre, who briefly turned out for Brann in the early 1990s, said he 
was “the perfect father,” adding: “He just wanted to be kind and help people. 
Often those who were not like everyone else. He just wanted to be an ordinary 
guy. And he was.” Perhaps that’s as fitting an epitaph as any: an ordinary guy 
who wasn’t ordinary at all. Roald Jensen may not have enjoyed the success and 
wealth his talent merited but, as he no doubt would have agreed, talent, 
somehow, is its own reward. Nearly three decades have passed since his untimely 
death. However, they still remember and adore him in two great cities either 
side of the North Sea.

• This article is from Nutmeg magazine <https://www.nutmegmagazine.co.uk/>. 
The print edition of Issue 1 has sold out but it’s still possible to buy a 
digital version. Issue 2 will be out in December.
• Follow Nutmeg on Twitter <https://twitter.com/nutmegmagazine> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/NutmegMagazine>
• Follow Nils Henrik Smith <https://twitter.com/nilshenriksmith> on Twitter
 