
Ian Cathro was given a tough introduction to management as his Hearts side 
went down 2-0 againstRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> on 
his dugout debut.

Cathro, the 30-year-old former Valencia and Newcastle coach, was taking charge 
ofHearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> for the first time since 
being appointed on Monday.

However, goals from Rob Kiernan and Barrie McKay either side of the half-time 
break ensured the dominant home side extended their cushion in second spot to 
four points, with Hearts now a point behind third-placed Aberdeen.

Cathro resisted the urge to stamp his authority over his new side as he went 
with the same starting XI as predecessor Robbie Neilson sent out in his final 
three games.

Rangers grabbed their first win against top-six opposition last week with 
victory against Aberdeen, but that did not stop Mark Warburton tinkering with 
his team.

James Tavernier – culpable for both of goals in Hearts’ 2-0 Tynecastle win 10 
days ago – returned in a midfield role while Danny Wilson came in for the 
suspended centre-back Clint Hill.

The new management team have had just four days with the Hearts players and it 
looked as if their message had not quite sunk in by the time kick-off arrived.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Frangers-hearts-scottish-premiership-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4259df6fe191a9d92418a45956c83b29c8ade123%2F0_168_1810_1085%2F1810.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rob%20Kiernan%20scores%20for%20Rangers%20as%20Ian%20Cathro%E2%80%99s%20Hearts%20suffer%20defeat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Frangers-hearts-scottish-premiership-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rob%20Kiernan%20scores%20for%20Rangers%20as%20Ian%20Cathro%E2%80%99s%20Hearts%20suffer%20defeat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Frangers-hearts-scottish-premiership-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4259df6fe191a9d92418a45956c83b29c8ade123%2F0_168_1810_1085%2F1810.jpg>
 Ian Cathro could not inspire his Hearts side to victory at Ibrox. Photograph: 
Andrew Milligan/PA 
They flirted with danger a couple of times playing out from back and were glad 
to see Lee Wallace and Kenny Miller pass up decent chances in the opening 
quarter-hour.

The visitors soon found their rhythm, though, and thought they had the opener 
after 17 minutes when Don Cowie bundled into the net after Callum Paterson 
fired the ball back into the box following a stunning reflex stop by Wes 
Foderingham.

However, in a mirror image of the incident which cost Rangers a Joe Dodoo goal 
at Tynecastle, Hearts were left frustrated when the assistant referee Stuart 
Stevenson took time before raising his flag for offside.

The controversial call added further spice to an already entertaining game. 
Jamie Walker fired wide soon after before Wallace was denied by a decent block 
from the Hearts goalkeeper Jack Hamilton.

It was Rangers, however, who struck first after 29 minutes. Paterson’s foul on 
Jason Holt at the corner of the box gave Tavernier the chance to send in a 
free-kick and his delivery was perfect for Kiernan, who headed home his first 
Rangers goal. They added a crucial second six minutes into the second period.

No matter how innovative Cathro’s methods turn out to be, he will never be 
able to legislate for Igor Rossi and Facyal Rherras allowing Wallace’s simple 
long throw to bounce in the middle of the box and over their heads to McKay, 
who could not believe his luck as he slammed past the helpless Hamilton.

The Hearts goalkeeper did brilliantly to ensure bad did not become worse after 
Cathro’s decision to throw on the strikers Tony Watt and Conor Sammon left his 
side exposed late on.

A sensational McKay pass sent Martyn Waghorn racing clear, but Hamilton stood 
up well to block the Rangers substitute’s effort.

The Ibrox side are now eight points behind the league leaders Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/partick-celtic-scottish-premiership-match-report>
, with the Parkhead side holding three games in hand.
 