
Yes, I knew Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-dies-star-wars-princess-leia>
. She played my mom onCatastrophe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/20/catastrophe-review-sharon-horgan-rob-delaney-channel-4>
, the sitcom I write and star in with Sharon Horgan. Or should I say, “plays my 
mom”, since we just finished shooting last week and Carrie’s scenes haven’t 
been seen by anyone yet. Except for me and Sharon that is, and our director, 
producer and editor. We’ve seen them and they’re amazing. I played some early 
cuts for my dad the other day and he was roaring. She’s a bigger part of series 
three than she was of the first two series. We couldn’t help but write more for 
herbecause she’s so brilliant 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2015-01-14/star-wars-carrie-fisher-in-new-sharon-horgan-comedy-catastrophe---first-look>
.

So yes, I knew her, but like you, I was a fan first and a fan for ever. Don’t 
feel worse for me today than you feel for yourself. Actually feel a little bit 
worse for me, since I won’t get to have her act right into my face any more or 
goof around with her between takes.

Carrie was the only cast member Sharon and I would let improvise. (I say 
“let”; as if we could stop her. Shelet us put her in our show.) We’re a bit 
despotic and inflexible with our dialogue because we’re insane, but Carrie was 
more insane and would always, always make it funnier and better. In episode one 
of series two you can hear her singing an improvised song about areolae in the 
background of our daughter’s christening party.

And she was kind too. One day I was having a hard time because I was feeling 
guilty about being on set pretending to have a hard time managing a young 
family while my real-life wife tended to our three kids under the age of five, 
one of whom was a newborn. She was very sweet and understanding and the next 
day she brought me a tin of biscuits shaped like syringes and thermometers and 
other medical things and said she was “prescribing me cookies”.

Of course I loved her in Star Wars 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FTBAeXPd8nk> and When Harry Met Sally 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tj7MZE6y9K4> but the thing I watched her in 
the most wasThe Blues Brothers <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2gzFnyyLM3A>, 
where her character repeatedly tries to creatively and violently murder Jake 
and Elwood, played by John Belushi and Dan Aykroyd respectively. Jesus was she 
beautiful in that movie, with her long chestnut hair, her impossibly beautiful 
brown eyes and her irresponsibly shiny lips. The per-scene budget for her lip 
gloss in The Blues Brothers must have been $25! (That movie came out in 1980, 
so $25 works out to roughly $830 in 2016 money.)

I spent my teenage years fantasising about a shiny-lipped Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> trying to murder me and my 
fugitive brother one day … So naturally I tried to seduce Carrie when we 
finally did work together, especially after Variety called me “the poor man’s 
Harrison Ford, who is also fat”. I’d like to report that I was successful, but 
despite my begging her on many occasions, we never had sex, even though our 
onscreen mother/son chemistry was off the charts. We made her and Adam Driver’s 
sterile scenes in The Force Awakens look like bank transactions. Adam, if 
you’re reading this, you might want to consider spending some of your Star Wars 
money on acting lessons instead of Lamborghinis.

What I’m getting at here is that I revered Carrie until I met her and then I 
loved her. I’m smiling thinking about her. I hope you are too.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carrie%20Fisher%2C%20actor%20and%20writer%2C%20dies%20at%2060%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carrie%20Fisher%2C%20actor%20and%20writer%2C%20dies%20at%2060%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fcarrie-fisher-video-obituary&media=>
Carrie Fisher, actor and writer, dies at 60 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-video-obituary> 