
The Hearts head coach, Robbie Neilson, is set to become the new MK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons> manager after the two clubs 
agreed compensation.

MK Dons make official approach for Hearts head coach Robbie Neilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/mk-dons-approach-robbie-neilson-hearts>
The Scottish Premiership club have also given permission for the assistant 
manager, Stevie Crawford, to discuss personal terms with the League One side, 
who have been managerless sincethe departure of Karl Robinson on 23 October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/23/league-one-karl-robinson-leaves-mk-dons-by-mutual-consent>
.

Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> have already begun 
searching for Neilson’s successor, according to a statement on the club’s 
official website. It read: “The club can confirm that we have agreed terms with 
Milton Keynes Dons FC in relation to head coach, Robbie Neilson, and assistant 
head coach, Stevie Crawford.

“Ann Budge [owner], the board of directors and everyone at Heart of Midlothian 
Football Club would like to sincerely thank Robbie and Stevie for the enormous 
part they have played in helping to re-establish the club in the upper echelons 
of Scottish football.

“The record-breaking 2014-15 Championship-winning season, which secured our 
promotion back to the top flight at the first time of asking, will long live in 
the memory of Hearts supporters, as will the highly impressive third-place 
finish and the return to European football which was achieved the following 
season.

“They leave us in an enviable position, sitting second in the Premiership 
table with a healthy playing squad, rich with talent and promise. We wish them 
every success in their new challenge with Milton Keynes Dons FC.

“We will now begin the formal process of recruiting a new head coach and 
assistant head coach.”

Earlier in the day Neilson, 36, evaded waiting media at the club’s Riccarton 
training ground with the help of a masked decoy. The former Hearts full-back 
gave journalists the slip when a member of his coaching staff, believed to be 
the head of sports science, John Hill, donned a Neilson face mask along with 
the outgoing head coach’s initialled coat as he got into his car and drove off 
in front of the cameras.

Neilson is expected to be announced as Dons manager before their FA Cup tie 
against Charlton on Saturday. The English club said Neilson and Crawford would 
finalise personal terms on Friday. “A further statement will be made once the 
appointments are completed,” they said in a statement.

Meanwhile Newcastle say they have had no approach from Hearts for Ian Cathro, 
who is the favourite to succeed Neilson at Tynecastle. While both clubs 
discussed compensation, the Newcastle managerRafael Benítez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rafael-benitez> revealed he was in the 
dark over reports that Hearts had made his assistant coach their top choice to 
replace Neilson.

Benítez said: “Ian is a great coach. We don’t have any official approach. We 
are happy with him and we will continue with that. He is a young coach, he has 
some experience and has a great future.

“The media is telling me Hearts will come but it depends on the head coach 
they have at the moment if he goes or not. That is football. It is just 
speculation.”

Hearts will release a further statement confirming interim arrangements for 
Saturday’s game against Ross County on Friday morning.
 