
In Robbie Keane, Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> at least 
have one player who will not be going through the motions for the rest of this 
season, with the club's hopes of regaining the Scottish Premier League title 
almost extinguished. Keane will be motivated by the desire to kick-start his 
career in England's Premier League during his loan spell, whether that be at 
Tottenham Hotspur or elsewhere.

He was the difference between the teams here today, two smart finishes the 
highlights of an otherwise drab contest. "It has not crossed my mind," said the 
Celtic manager, Tony Mowbray, of any suggestion Keane could join his club 
full-time in the summer. The player has virtually dismissed that notion. "I 
don't know what Robbie's thoughts are," he added. "You saw today why he is 
here. When chances come along, he is there to take them."

Keane's goals were welcome for the simple reason that there was little else to 
get excited about here. The game started in mild controversy because of the 
pre-match spat which had broken out between the clubs after Celtic were accused 
of complaining to the SPL about the state of the pitch. Although the surface 
lacked grass, it proved adequate enough.

Afterwards the Falkirk <https://www.theguardian.com/football/falkirk> manager, 
Steven Pressley, did his best to talk up his team with such adjectives as 
terrific, brilliant and scintillating, in what was essentially a 
morale-boosting exercise.

Keane had already passed up a one-on-one opportunity by the time he opened the 
scoring. Morten Rasmussen, Keane's burly, unorthodox yet effective strike 
partner, played a fine pass into his path; the 29-year-old did the rest with an 
angled shot. Falkirk, whose SPL survival hinges on the next 10 games, had Enoch 
Showunmi to blame for a failure to restore parity. The striker supplied a 
comedy moment, miskicking when six yards from the Celtic goal seconds before 
half-time and headed wastefully over after 68 minutes.

Keane promptly demonstrated why his Â£68,000-a-week salary equates roughly to 
what Showunmi collects in a year. Marc Crosas was the supplier this time with a 
quick free-kick and Keane showed speed of legs and mind to nip between 
Falkirk's central defenders before clipping the ball over the advancing Robert 
Olejnik.

Mowbray was left to hail "a professional performance" before diverting his 
attention once again towards the Scottish media. The manager has what is 
rapidly descending into a mini-obsession with the fourth estate.

"If anything there was more pressure on us today than [for the Old Firm game] 
last week," Mowbray said. "The team had to get a result because, if not, the 
media keep piling it on."

Man of the match Robbie Keane (Celtic)
 