
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> truly 
represents the final convergence of politics and showbusiness. He ruled The 
Apprentice on television for more than a decade. His election campaign rallies 
feature songs by Elton John and the Rolling Stones and, incongruously, Luciano 
Pavarotti’s rendition of Nessun Dorma. He flies in by helicopter to the theme 
music from Air Force One.

Trump is the latest protagonist in an age-old affair between Hollywood and 
Washington. There was actor-turned-president Ronald Reagan. There was 
actor-turned-governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, and new host of the Celebrity 
Apprentice. While on television the US capital is fascinated by a glamorous, 
distorting mirror of itself:The West Wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/23/the-west-wing-weekly-podcast-is-a-tonic-to-trumpmania-presidential-race-us>
 (liberal fantasy), House of Cards (the devil as president) and Scandal 
(preposterous melodrama).

Bryan Cranston to play Lyndon B Johnson in new HBO TV biopic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/sep/03/bryan-cranston-lyndon-johnson-hbo-tv-biopic>
That is about to change with something more serious and scholarly, a drama as 
unashamedly highbrow as Michael Frayn’s Democracy and described by one critic as
“a mighty slab of history” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/07/theater/bryan-cranston-as-president-johnson-in-all-the-way.html>
. Pulitzer prize-winning playwrightRobert Schenkkan 
<http://www.robertschenkkan.com/> drew on oral transcripts, film footage, 
newspaper coverage, privately recorded White House phone calls, speeches and 
FBI files to portray the first year of Lyndon B Johnson’s presidency following 
the assassination of John F Kennedy. All the Way opened at theArena Stage in 
Washington 
<http://www.arenastage.org/shows-tickets/the-season/productions/all-the-way/> 
on 7 April and is on HBO next month. It is a rare chance for the politicos of 
DC to see themselves, warts and all.

At opening night on Broadway, where the play won a Tony, Schenkkan found 
himself sitting in front of film director Steven Spielberg and behind the House 
minority leader, Nancy Pelosi. Bill and Hillary Clinton came to the show and 
met the cast, led byBryan Cranston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/bryan-cranston> as LBJ. “I felt that 
a lot of the political class was very taken with the play for all the right 
reasons, so to bring it to Washington just feels entirely appropriate,” 
Schenkkan said.

“I think that the play is so excruciatingly relevant today because so many of 
the issues that the Republican and Democratic parties and the nation continues 
to fight over – race, institutional violence against black bodies, Medicare, 
immigration and foreign wars – had their origin in 1964, and in many ways the 
positions have not changed a lot,” he said.

“The language has changed. The language of race became very codified in the 
United States. What’s interesting about Trump, of course, is that he’s thrown 
off any pretence of not talking about what he’s talking about.”

All the Way finds Johnson fighting for re-election and cajoling his way to the 
1964 Civil Rights Act. It features 17 actors playing more than 60 historical 
figures, including Martin Luther King, J Edgar Hoover and Governor George 
Wallace. In the Washington production, Johnson is played by Jack Willis, who 
originated the role in 2012 at the Oregon Shakespeare Festival.

Schenkkan, 63, grew up in Austin, Texas, the heart of LBJ country. His father, 
a pioneer in public TV and radio, knew Johnson. Family lore holds that, when he 
was a boy, the family station wagon got bogged down in the mud and then Senator 
Johnson came out in his own truck and put his shoulder to the wheel. Schenkkan 
doesn’t remember but his brother says it happened and told him: “It’s funny, I 
don’t really remember LBJ so much as how incredibly respectful our father 
became around this strange man.”

The playwright does have a clearer memory of where he was and what he was 
doing on 22 November 1963. “I got into the car and my mother was crying and I 
was so stunned. I said, ‘What’s wrong?’ She said, ‘Some damn fool has shot the 
president.’ I never heard my mother curse; she was a southern lady. The shock 
of her anger and her outrage and her despair, coupled with the obscenity: 
that’s my memory.

“And then of course watching television for the next 48 hours. All those 
images: the cortege, Jackie [Kennedy’s widow] behind the coffin, John 
[Kennedy’s son] saluting. Oh my God. I remember all of that stuff vividly as 
everyone in my generation does.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Frobert-schenkkan-lyndon-b-johnson-all-the-way-bryan-cranston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5775021573fbc8d97eac871b23f2db4f91ba965b%2F483_0_3379_4221%2F3379.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Schenkkan%20on%20LBJ%3A%20'People%20loved%20or%20hated%20him%2C%20often%20in%20the%20same%20moment'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Frobert-schenkkan-lyndon-b-johnson-all-the-way-bryan-cranston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Schenkkan%20on%20LBJ%3A%20%27People%20loved%20or%20hated%20him%2C%20often%20in%20the%20same%20moment%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Frobert-schenkkan-lyndon-b-johnson-all-the-way-bryan-cranston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5775021573fbc8d97eac871b23f2db4f91ba965b%2F483_0_3379_4221%2F3379.jpg>
 President Lyndon B Johnson in the White House in January 1965. Photograph: 
Bettmann/Corbis 
Johnson took the oath of office aboard Air Force One at Love Field in Dallas, 
Texas. His accidental presidency would go on to be full of tensions and 
contradictions – a gift to a playwright. “People loved him or hated him and 
often in the same moment,” Schenkkan explained. “He was a complicated guy. Bill 
Moyers [Johnson’s press secretary] says the best description of LBJ ever heard, 
something to the effect of: ‘The 11 most interesting people I ever met was 
Lyndon Johnson.’ Then he would go on to say, maybe even more revealingly: ‘I 
didn’t like him but I loved him.’ I think that really gets at the complexity of 
this guy.”

Johnson’s complexity as a personality is matched by the complexity of his 
legacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/10/lyndon-b-johnson-robert-caro-biography>
. He signed the 1965 Voting Rights Act, guaranteeing African Americans the 
right to vote, and appointed Thurgood Marshall as the first African American 
supreme court justice. His “great society” agenda included strides in education 
and the introduction of Medicare. But for decades all these achievements have 
been overshadowed by his escalation of the war in Vietnam.

“There’s no excuse to be made for Vietnam: the man bears a terrible burden 
there,” Schenkkan commented. “It’s not his alone, by any means: he inherited a 
war from two previous presidents and of course Richard Nixon would famously 
come in and extend the war for another seven years. But he certainly bears his 
share of responsibility for that.

“Unfortunately, I do feel that has overwhelmed most people’s memory of him, or 
did for a long time. For the longest time we used to say in the Democratic 
party LBJ was the love whose name you dared not speak. But I think enough time 
has passed and people are beginning to re-evaluate his presidency and his 
extraordinary legislative accomplishments, which are really almost unmatched.”

He added: “Particularly nowadays when the government is in such complete and 
deliberate gridlock, I think people look back at this time when shit got done 
with a great deal of yearning and, ‘Why can’t we do that?’ If you could 
magically separate Vietnam from his legacy, I think he’d be up there on Mount 
Rushmore. But you can’t, you’ve got to take him as he is.”

Unlike Kennedy, who exuded Hollywood-style charisma, Johnson would have been 
ill-suited to the age of mass media and social media. Schenkkan reflected: “He 
was a very self-conscious guy and very thin-skinned in many ways. You pull up 
these speeches and they’re terrible, even when the writing is great – and he 
had some wonderful writers. [The] delivery is so solemn and pedantic and just 
deathly. Well, that’s not how he spoke at all. The private LBJ was, by all 
accounts, the life of the party: funny, mimic, great sense of humour, wonderful 
raconteur, just a live wire.

President Johnson's war on poverty was about more than feeding and housing the 
poor | Ana Marie Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/08/war-on-poverty-more-than-feeding-poor>
“Why the difference? He was so insecure, so worried that he didn’t appear 
presidential that he created this public persona for these televised moments, 
and it used to drive his press people crazy because it was boring and it wasn’t 
him. But it was a measure of his personal insecurity that a man who was 
otherwise so shrewdly attuned to political nuance could have such a blind eye 
to his own performance in this regard.”

Yet as a southerner with pragmatism and patience, he got legislation through 
Congress that the patrician Kennedy maybe never could have. Schenkkan believes 
he also had a distinct strength that Barack Obama sorely lacks. “The one thing 
about Johnson that I wish Barack had: Johnson was a real people guy and 
politics is personality, politics is people.

“He didn’t just know everybody; he knew their families, he knew their hobbies, 
he knew their virtues, he knew their vices, he knew what their districts 
needed, and he really worked that hard and that’s not who Barack Obama is. 
Barack is a much cooler, detached individual and that’s been a problem in the 
management of his own party and that would not be a problem for LBJ.”

Schenkkan has written a sequel, The Great Society, which again stars Willis 
and which he hopes will reach Broadway in the next year or two. More 
immediately, he and Spielberg are among the executive producers ofthe HBO 
adaptation <https://youtu.be/uP7Q1xYRFeM>, starring Cranston. Having spent so 
much time in LBJ’s metaphorical company, Schenkkan believes LBJ would have been 
“thrilled” to see a black president and supportive of Hillary Clinton.

But Trump would have evoked the ghost of Wallace 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/daily/sept98/wallace.htm>, the 
extremist, populist governor who came to personify resistance to the civil 
rights movement. “LBJ was a student of politics, it was all he cared about, he 
had no hobbies, no other interests. He would have found this fascinating. I 
think he would have regarded Trump in the same way he regarded George Wallace: 
as a demagogue who’s entirely self-serving and a very dangerous individual.”

All the Way plays at Fichandler Stage, Washington DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/washington-dc>, until 8 May
 