
Robert Lewandowski’s hat-trick helped give Carlo Ancelotti a flying start to 
his first Bundesliga campaign as Bayern Munich cruised to a 6-0 win overWerder 
Bremen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/werderbremen> at the Allianz Arena 
on Friday.

Can anything stop Bayern making it five Bundesligas in a row? Only complacency 
| Raphael Honigstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/25/bayern-munich-bundesliga-season-dortmund>
The champions went ahead with a stunning ninth-minute volley from Xabi Alonso 
before the Poland striker Lewandowski opened his account four minutes later 
from a Franck Ribéry through-ball. Lewandowski then to all intents put the game 
beyond Werder’s reach one minute into the second half.

The captain, Philipp Lahm, and Ribéry made it 5-0 before Lewandowski completed 
his treble with a 77th-minute penalty, his second hat-trick of the season after 
he also bagged one in the German Cup last week.

Ancelotti, who replaced the new Manchester City coach, Pep Guardiola, at 
Bayern in the close season, said before the game that the Bavarians were aiming 
to win every competition this season.

Alonso opened the scoring against an outclassed Werder team when the Spanish 
midfielder was given time to control the ball before smashing it into the top 
corner of the net from 20 metres.

Ribéry then cut the Werder defence wide open to set up Lewandowski’s first 
goal of the night. Better finishing could have given the Pole his hat-trick 
before half-time but he failed to convert on the rebound after a 25-metre shot 
by Thomas Müller hit the post and in the 38th minute his close-range effort 
struck the crossbar.

Bayern have won the Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> for the past four 
seasons and they showed no signs of easing up in the second half. Lewandowski 
made it 3-0 when he met Müller’s cross to prod the ball in from waist height.

Lahm struck the fourth after a one-two with Müller before Ribery, who was 
excellent throughout, also found the net. Lewandowski rounded off the scoring 
after Thiago was fouled from behind in the box.
 