
The Bundesliga leading scorer Robert Lewandowski’s 25th goal of the season was 
enough forBayern Munich <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> to 
beat Köln 1-0 and provisionally stretch their lead to eight points on Saturday.

Internazionale end Roma’s eight-match winning run in race for third
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/19/roma-internazionale-serie-a-match-report>
“When you only win 1-0 it’s dangerous to the end. It’s a pity because we had 
chances, but we have the three points,” Lewandowski said.

Lacklustre defending allowed the Poland striker to score in the 10th minute, 
firing inside the far corner after Xabi Alonso and then Thiago Alcântara 
encountered a similar lack of resistance. With seven games remaining, 
Lewandowski already has one more than his previous season-best of 24 for 
Borussia Dortmund, in 2012-13.

“There are still lots of games and goals to score, I hope. The number I need 
for the top scorer’s trophy is not an issue for me,” said Lewandowski, 
competing with Dortmund’s Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang (22 goals) and his Bayern 
team-mate Thomas Müller (19).

With the lead in the bag, Bayern comfortably dominated the rest of the half 
without too much exertion.

Leonardo Bittencourt had the home side’s first shot on goal in the 50th 
minute, straight at Manuel Neuer. Anthony Modeste had Köln’s best chance with 
Neuer stranded but David Alaba came to his goalkeeper’s rescue with a crucial 
block.Alaba extended his Bayern contract to 2021 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/18/bayern-munich-david-alaba-new-contract>
 on Friday. Neuer also saved from Bittencourt in injury time.

Dortmund can restore the five-point gap with a win at Augsburg on Sunday.

Japan’s Genki Haraguchi scored one and set up another for high-flying Hertha 
Berlin to beat Ingolstadt 2-1 and consolidate third place.

Atlético Madrid trip up in title race after Sporting Gijón fight back to win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/19/sporting-gijon-atletico-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
Haraguchi shot the home side ahead in the 54th and crossed for Salomon Kalou 
in the 69th. Lukas Hinterseer pulled one back to make it exciting with 15 
minutes remaining, but John Anthony Brooks cleared off the line to safeguard 
Hertha’s three points.

“It’s typical for us after we go 2-0 up [to concede]. We have to change that,” 
said the Hertha coach, Pal Dardai, whose side are enjoying its best season for 
seven years.

André Schürrle scored in injury time to salvage a 1-1 draw for Wolfsburg 
againstDarmstadt, while Hoffenheim boosted their chances of avoiding the drop 
with a 3-1 win atHamburg.

Mainz drew 1-1 at Werder Bremen, Claudio Pizarro’s 12th goal of the season for 
Bremen, a penalty, cancelling out Julian Baumgartlinger’s 38th-minute opener.

Eintracht Frankfurt were hosting Hannover in a relegation battle later on 
Saturday.
 