
Robin van Persie has admitted he could have been lining up against Fenerbahce 
in the Europa League on Thursday night had Sir Alex Ferguson still been in 
charge ofManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>.

Van Persie was voted United’s Player of the Year in his first season at Old 
Trafford in 2012-13 as the Red Devils secured the Premier League title by 11 
points.

Ferguson announced his retirement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/08/alex-ferguson-retires-manchester-united>
 at the end of that season and Van Persie struggled under the guidance of the 
new manager, David Moyes, and then the striker’s fellow Dutchman Louis van Gaal.

Van Persie left for Turkey in July 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/09/robin-van-persie-fenerbahce-manchester-united>
 and has scored 17 goals in 35 appearances for the club so far.

Manchester United have no untouchables, insists José Mourinho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/manchester-united-no-untouchables-jose-mourinho-pogba-ibrahimovic>
When asked if he felt he would still be at United had Ferguson stayed on, Van 
Persie said: “We will never know. It could have been that I could have been a 
player for Manchester United today.

“When I signed that was the idea, that Sir Alex would stay on for a few more 
years, but in football things change, you can’t plan your own path or your 
coach’s path. In this world you have to deal with how it comes.”

The 33-year-old was keen to play down the significance of his return to Old 
Trafford, adding: “What happened happened. I don’t think you have to make it 
bigger than it is.

“You shake hands and move on to the next chapter. I’m not that romantic, 
thinking ‘that was the moment’. I will just do my lap, go in and prepare for 
tomorrow.”

Van Persie is focused on helping his current club take three points against 
José Mourinho’s men and insists there is no extra motivation on his part. “I 
have to find the right balance of having fun, enjoying the moment of being back 
here and doing my work,” he said.

“I have to try and do my best for Fenerbahce. I give my all. I don’t really 
follow the daily opinions in the papers or social media because to me, if you 
start doing that, I don’t think it brings you forward.

“I know what I have to do – train well, be positive – and I know as well that 
I can’t play fantastic every single game or in training. That’s the football 
world and I do respect other opinions but I know what I want and I try to give 
everything I have.”

The former Arsenal striker was oblivious to the incident which forced the 
plane transporting Fenerbahce from Turkey into an unscheduled landing in 
Budapest.

A message posted on the club’s official Twitter page just before midday on 
Wednesday said a forced landing was made in the Hungarian capital after a bird 
struck the aircraft’s windscreen.

The message was accompanied by photographs apparently of the plane’s 
windscreen, with the glass covered in cracks.

That delayed the Turkish club’s pre-match press conference and prevented the 
team from training on the Old Trafford pitch on Wednesday evening but Van 
Persie said of the episode: “Everything is OK. I didn’t realise [what was going 
on] until I was told, I was watching a series. Then I found out. It’s been a 
long day, we’ve been travelling since 10am, so almost 13 hours now, but it’s 
been OK.”
 