
The famous dance troupe the Rockettes will perform at Donald Trump’s 
presidential inauguration celebrations on 20 January, as the highlight of a 
ticket so far devoid of showbiz A-listers. Some dancers, however, may be 
reluctant to take part.


Alec Baldwin offers to play inauguration of Trump: 'I wanna sing Highway to 
Hell'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/23/alec-baldwin-donald-trump-inauguration-performance-offer-twitter>
Barack Obama’s two inaugurations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2009/jan/18/obama-inauguration-we-are-one>
 featured performances from Beyoncé, Stevie Wonder, Aretha Franklin, Jay Z, U2 
and others.

The lineup for Trump’s inauguration in Washington includes the likes of the 
Mormon Tabernacle Choir, a finalist on America’s Got Talent called Jackie 
Evancho and,possibly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/23/beach-boys-donald-trump-inauguration>
, the Beach Boys.

Famous names such as Elton John, Katy Perry, Bruno Mars, Garth Brooks and 
Celine Dion were reportedly asked to perform butdeclined 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/12/22/trump-s-inauguration-nightmare-all-the-musicians-who-have-turned-down-invites.html>
.

On Thursday, it was announced that the Rockettes had been signed up for the 
big day, when they will be fresh from their annual Radio City Christmas 
Spectacular.


However it quickly emerged that some of the performers, while kicking and 
smiling on the outside, might be kicking and screaming on the inside.

James Dolan, executive chairman of the Madison Square Garden company, which 
produces the Rockettes and their shows at Radio City Music Hall in New York 
City,announced 
<https://twitter.com/alex_mallin/status/812042713365352448/photo/1?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 that he was honored that the troupe, which has performed since 1925, will 
“participate in inauguration festivities in Washington”.

The Rockettes performed for George W Bush at his inauguration celebrations in 
2001 and 2005.

As speculation began flying on social media that their participation in 2017 
was proving distinctly unpopular within the troupe, however, an email surfaced 
from the union representing them, the American Guild of Variety Artists.

Theater news website Broadwayworld.com reported 
<http://www.broadwayworld.com/article/Update-Rockettes-Union-Calls-Boycotting-Inauguration-Invalid-20161223#>
 that it had verified the authenticity of an email from the guild “to what 
appears to be Rockettes in its membership as a response to the announcement 
that some Rockettes do not want to participate in the auguration of 
President-elect Donald Trump”.

According to the report, the email from an unnamed guild leader read: “We have 
received an email from a Rockette expressing concern about getting ‘involved in 
a dangerous political climate’.

“I must remind you that you are all employees, and as a company, Mr Dolan 
obviously wants the Rockettes to be represented at our country’s presidential 
inauguration, as they were in 2001 and 2005.

“Any talk of boycotting this event is invalid, I’m afraid.”

'Let it be an arms race': Trump appears to double down on nuclear expansion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/23/donald-trump-nuclear-weapons-arms-race>
Phoebe Pearl, reportedly a current Rockette, posted a picture on Instagram of 
the dancers with a drawn-on bubble coming from one performer saying: “Not my 
president.”

She wrote that it was appalling that they would have to dance for “a man that 
stands for everything we are against” and that the Rockettes had been 
performing “with tears in our eyes and heavy hearts” since hearing the news.

“Finding out that it has been decided for us that Rockettes will be performing 
at the Presidential inauguration makes me feel embarrassed and disappointed,” 
she wrote.

The Instagram post was taken down, but not before social media platforms lit 
up.

“What could be more fitting for this inauguration than forcing a group of 
women to do something with their bodies against their will?” one commentator
wrote 
<https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=10153981376705740&id=731305739>
 on Facebook – an oblique reference to Trump’s track record ofboasting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 about being able to grab women’s genitals without consent, andmany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/list-of-donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-allegations>
 women who haveaccused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/20/donald-trump-sexual-assault-allegations-jill-harth-interview>
 him of sexual assault.

MSG and AGVA did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

Ivy Elrod, who performed as a Rockette in New York 20 years ago, told the 
Guardian she had heard from contacts within Radio City that many of the 
Rockettes who will be required to perform for Trump are angry and upset.

“Some are absolutely outraged, others are not pleased but think it’s more 
important to get in line and do their jobs,” she said.

She added that the union and the company would be unlikely to brook dissent 
from full-time employees.

Trump New York co-chair makes racist 'gorilla' remark about Michelle Obama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/23/donald-trump-carl-paladino-michelle-obama>
“I believe that if you refused to do this you would find you were no longer a 
Rockette,” she said.

According to a report 
<http://www.onstageblog.com/columns/2016/12/22/dont-be-fooled-the-rockettes-dont-have-much-of-a-choice>
 at the theater news website onstageblog.com, Rockettes not on full-time 
contracts with MSG would be able to choose whether or not to sign up for the 
inauguration.

The Madison Square Garden company issued a statement on Friday, which said “to 
be considered for an event” all Rockettes “must voluntarily sign up and are 
never told they have to perform at a particular event, including the inaugural”.

“It is always their choice. In fact, for the coming inauguration, we had more 
Rockettes request to participate than we have slots available. We eagerly await 
the inaugural celebrations.”

Elrod said that the New York-based Radio City Rockettes troupe is considered 
to be prestigious. “It’s very competitive,” she said, “and there is someone 
waiting to take your job in a moment”.


If she was still a Rockette, she said, she would refuse to dance for Trump and 
would be prepared to lose her contract over it. If the dancers were given free 
choice, she said, “there might be left with almost no one performing at the 
inauguration”.

“I think this is specifically about him, about his misogyny,” she said. “The 
anti-LGBT track record of his running mate [Mike Pence], his controversial 
cabinet picks. This is the most divisive outcome of an election in my lifetime.”
 