
Quique Setién said he was a Rolling Stone, but not which one. Keef, probably. 
An errand boy at a pharmaceutical college at 14, a beach football international 
and a proper football international too, somewhere on the bench at Mexico 86, 
he said he’d have cut off his little finger to play under Johan Cruyff, claimed 
that Juan Carlos Valerón made him cry, asked Leo Messi never to retire, 
excitedly sought out Luka Modric to tell him how much he loves watching him and 
bemoaned dribblers becoming an “endangered species.” A chess fanatic who gave 
Garry Kasparov a game, Deep Blue too, he said what happened on the board was 
too often better than what happened on the pitch – and then did something about 
it.

He’s a man of his word, after all. “It’ll be a lovely game; one of the nicest 
of the weekend,” he said on Saturday morning, and on Sunday night it was. Not 
just the nicest of the weekend, one of the nicest of the season. A wild and 
wonderful 3-3 draw between his Unión Deportivo de Las Palmas – and it really is
his Unión Deportiva de Las Palmas – and Eduardo Berizzo’s Celta de Vigo in Gran 
Canaria. A festival of goals and another reminder of something easily 
forgotten: that football is fun, that beyond the table and the targets, there’s 
glory in every game; joy, happiness, moments. Matches mean somethingeven when 
they don’tmean anything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/14/sevilla-live-in-the-moment-to-show-la-liga-there-can-be-glory-in-every-game>
.

This match was always likely to be good. Setién said that the truth is he 
lacked ambition, that he never really dreamed of being a coach, and the 
suspicion was that some directors lacked nerve, but after being in charge at 
Racing, Poli Ejido, Equatorial Guinea, Logronés and Lugo, who he took to 
promotion, a little over a year ago he finally became a manager inprimera – 
just turned 57. At first the question was: why? Sacking Paco Herrera, who’d 
broughtLas Palmas <https://www.theguardian.com/football/laspalmas> back after 
13 years away from the top flight, hardly seemed fair. Yes, they were 
second-bottom but wasn’t like there was much more at could be done. Or so they 
thought. Soon, though, there was a new question, directed not at the board but 
at the manager: Quique, where have you been all our lives?

Rafinha grabs acrobatic winner as off-colour Barcelona edge past Granada
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/barcelona-granada-la-liga-match-report>
From the relegation zone in autumn 2015, they survived easily and a year later 
they were top – for the first time in 38 years. It was only week two, sure, but 
still: Las Palmas were top of the league. And it wasn’t just their position, it 
was their play. It was fleeting, sure, but it was no fluke; it had been coming. 
In the summer, Las Palmas signed Kevin Prince Boateng. His arrival was a shock, 
Setién admitted. “Why Las Palmas?” Boateng was asked. “Why not?” he said. It 
turned out he’d spoken to Ghana team-mate Wakaso Mubarak, at Las Palmas last 
season, and Wakaso told him that Setién was a bit special, a manager who liked 
to play. That sounded good to him.

Jesús Gil once accused Setién of hanging around with “ostentatious” women, 
which was a bit rich coming from the man whose TV show featured him, a 
gelatinous blob in a jacuzzi, surrounded by women in bikinis, and which was 
just as excuse to get rid of a midfielder who dared say what everyone else 
thought. Quique spoke, alright; he also listened, when it was worth listening 
to: Luis Aragonés was forever shouting at him and he was forever grateful. But 
he went his own way, knew his own mind. A midfielder who was different and a 
manager who’s something else, he later admitted one or two might have been 
ostentatious, yes. But if it’s really ostentatious you’re after, try his team.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Frolling-stone-quique-setien-shows-theres-glory-in-every-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9336e367c46c2f19ce6be50685c151a1e850a722%2F0_75_1512_906%2F1512.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rolling%20Stone%20Quique%20Seti%C3%A9n%20shows%20there's%20glory%20in%20every%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Frolling-stone-quique-setien-shows-theres-glory-in-every-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rolling%20Stone%20Quique%20Seti%C3%A9n%20shows%20there%27s%20glory%20in%20every%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Frolling-stone-quique-setien-shows-theres-glory-in-every-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9336e367c46c2f19ce6be50685c151a1e850a722%2F0_75_1512_906%2F1512.jpg>
 Las Palmas’ coach Quique Setien gestures from the sideline. Photograph: Jose 
Jordan/AFP/Getty Images 
A purist and a preacher man, at Las Palmas Setién has found his kind of place 
and his kind of club; “the kind of place where they understand me, and that’s 
not easy.” The cliché talks of the Canaries – dry hot, land of beaches – as a 
kind of Spanish Brazil: a place where football is more fantasy and finesse than 
fitness. And watching Las Palmas is just like watching Brazil. When Brazil were 
good. The ball is usually theirs and the football is usually fun. This season 
started continuing the trend set last season. They got four against Valencia, 
five against Granada, and when they turned up at the Sánchez Pizjuán in week 
three, their flag flew in first place onthe roof-top league table 
<https://twitter.com/sidlowe/status/774658733691564032>.

The next day it was taken down and it hasn’t gone back up. They lost 2-1 to 
Sevilla and although they beat Málaga 1-0 the following week, Las Palmas 
haven’t won since. Six weeks have passed. Knocked off the top, where no one 
expected them to stay, that day Setién was asked: “what now?” “Our target has 
to be survival,” he said, “but then we’ll see if we can do anything beyond 
that, if we can be comfortable enough to play some nice games for our fans to 
enjoy.”

Rafa Benítez's record as a promotion specialist bodes well for Newcastle fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/31/newcastle-united-rafa-benitez-promotion-extremadura-tenerife-championship>
They’ve done that. Even when they stopped winning, which they did swiftly, it 
was well worth watching. There were 2-2 draws with Osasuna and Real Madrid. If 
they were a little fortunate then, against Sevilla they were superb for an hour 
but lost to a goal in the 89thminute – a questionable penalty – and another in 
the 94th. At Villarreal last week they scored the most beautiful goal you could 
wish to see, 18 passes from one end to the other ending with a lovely dinked 
ball, a lovelier volleyed backheel assist, and an even lovelier volleyed 
finish, Prince leaping to guide it in, a metre and a half off the floor. Only 
to be defeated by a 92nd minute goal, having conceded another questionable 
penalty. “It’s not the first time. And I’d like to know, if it was the other 
way around, whether the referee would have the balls to give it?” Setién said.

And so it came to this. Las Palmas versus Celta. Even in boring, predictable 
Spain where things that only happen in the Premier League seem to happen quite 
a lot, where there are goals every week, this promised to be pretty good. AS 
said it was a “ballroom” game in which the teams would wear tuxedos – which 
sounds ridiculous and,as Cultural Leonesa proved 
<http://media.foxdeportes.com/photos/cache/640x360/photos/2014/08/01/53dbeb57241bf.jpeg>
, looks ridiculous too. “It will be an aesthetic show,” they said. Goals 
guaranteed. Las Palmas’s results, after all, included a 5-1, two 2-2s, a 1-4 
and a 2-4. As for Celta, their last three games read: 4-3, 0-5, 4-1. And if Las 
Palmas are very much Setién’s side, Celta’s are just as much Berizzo’s.

 “We’re two teams who look forwards instead of backwards,” Setién said. 
Berrizzo insisted: “Las Palmas are a good team”. So, Setién responded, are 
Celta. Two good teams; two goalkeepers who, truth be told, contributed too. “It 
will be a nice game,” Setién promised.

 It was better even than that. The kind of game where, as one Canary Island 
daily put it: “You want to kill them, but you can’t help but love them too.” 
The kind of game that that closed with socks down by ankles and cramp creeping 
up claves, ball flying from one end to the other, and left you wishing there 
could be extra time. The kind of game where it wasn’t just the players who were 
exhausted but the fans too, a match of “faith and madness” as one headline had 
it, “total madness” another said, and which was nicely summed up in Momo’s 
face, a grin stretching across it just after he ran on.So, it really is a wild 
in here as it looked from out there.

“We had the ball, which is what we like,” Setién said, but they did not have 
the goals. At half time, the stat read: 73%-27% in possession, 384 attempted 
passes to 157 (just 65 of them completed for the visitors) and 0-3. Three 
chances, three goals. “They went one on one with us all over the pitch,” Las 
Palmas striker Jonathan Viera admitted, and it worked: Tucu Hernández on him, 
Daniel Wass on Roque Mesa, Nemanja Radoja on Vicente Gómez. Rob and run: fast, 
direct, aggressive. From either side, Pione Sisto and Fabián Orellana tore into 
Las Palmas every chance they got, which was often. In twenty-five minutes, 
Celta scored three times, Wass hitting a free kick through the wall and Iago 
Aspas twice lifting over the keeper – that’s six in six for him now.

Rafa Benítez's record as a promotion specialist bodes well for Newcastle fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/31/newcastle-united-rafa-benitez-promotion-extremadura-tenerife-championship>
Las Palmas hadn’t won in five, but it wasn’t over. They were still playing, 
still passing, still attacking, only quicker now. And as long as it took them 
to lose it, they got it back again: three goals in sixteen second half minutes. 
The first a penalty, sure but beautifully made. The second a header from Pedro 
Bigas. The third, built on the right and finished by Prince, diving in, the 
comeback completed.

Yet still it wasn’t over. Between the first and the second, Celta had hit the 
post. It had gone from 0-3 to 3-3 but it wasn’t all one way and from there it 
could have gone to 4-3 or 3-4 or 4-4. A graphic in AS marks the shots on goal 
with a minute-by-minute bar chart: this game’s graphic was the Manhattan 
skyline. “The result was reward for their intentions,” Berizzo said. “And yet 
we almost won it too.” In the 91stminute, Marcelo Díaz Celta hit the bar, 
another collective coronary. A moment later, the whistle went, Aspas gave up 
his shirt and the fans gave it up for the players, smiles on their faces.

“This tastes like glory,” Viera insisted; Berizzo reckoned it tasted 
“bitter-sweet”. “We foresaw a mad game, because they always make things 
happen,” Setién said. “The game went mad,” Berizzo said. As for everyone else, 
there wasn’t much that could be said, except: thanks.

Results and talking points

Leganés 0–2 Real Sociedad, Sporting 1–1 Sevilla, Alavés 1–4 Real Madrid, 
Atlético 4-2 Málaga, Barcelona 1–0 Granada, Eibar 2–1 Villarreal, Athletic 1–1 
Osasuna, Betis 0–1 Espanyol, Las Palmas 3–3 Celta Deportivo-Valencia.

 * Barcelona beat Granada 1-0. And, erm, that’s about it. 
 * Black shoes, black suit, black tie. Diego Simeone was back in black … and 
Atlético were back winning again. Coincidence? Maybe. Or maybe not. Another day 
at the Calderón, another four goals for the team that are more attacking than 
ever before, two each for Kevin Gameiro and Yannick Carrasco. Not that Simeone 
necessarily saw it like that. Asked what he made of the fact that some people 
say thatnow they’re an attacking team, that now the score goals, the Atletico 
manager replied: “I laugh.” 
 * On Thursday night, one TV channel asked whether Ronaldo was past it. On 
Saturday afternoon, he scored a hat-trick. Of course. 
 * The ridiculous thing was not that the referee gave the penalty to Madrid 
for the handball(?) from Deyverson, nor would have been that he didn’t. It 
wasn’t that some thought it was a penalty and some thought it wasn’t. It was 
that some claimed it was ‘clear’, either way. And that you knew beforehand 
exactly who would say what. 
 * Friday night is cinema night, and Leganés provided the popcorn – free for 
fans at the gate. At least they were fed as they were fed up. They were beaten 
2-0 by Real Sociedad, leaving Butarque waiting for its first ever win inprimera.
 * “Keep off the grass.” There is a patch of grass at the Villarreal training 
pitch, just by the corner, where no one was allowed to tread as they prepared 
to travel to Eibar. After all, that space does not exist at Ipurua, they were 
told. And so it was that on Thursday they practiced corners without a run-up, 
Samu Castillejo turning to one team-mate to say “no, mate, that’s a wall … and 
those are cameramen and photographers,” as he took a step back onto the 
astroturf beyond. The first time they got a corner in the match, it was exactly 
as they had planned it in training too, played short and played back again, but 
ultimately it didn’t help much. That corner came to nothing and although 
Villarreal went 1-0 up, Bruno hopping to score a penalty, Eibar came back to 
win 2-1, the second scored by Pedro Leon with four minutes to go – and on the 
eleventh anniversary of his brother’s death. It was Villarreal’s first defeat 
in twelve games. “That can happen in football; we can’t lose hope,” Fran 
Escribá said, quite rightly. 
 * “Poyet, come out your cave!” chanted the Betis fans, but Gus wasn’t moving 
off the bench. He later explained that he didn’t want to take the attention 
from the players but most fans thought that he just didn’t want to face them on 
the night they lost to Espanyol, thanks not least to an astonishing late save 
from Diego López. So they carried on chanting: “Poyet, go now!”. “The fans are 
free to chant what they like but please don’t keep asking me about it every 
week or we’ll still be here in June,” Poyet said afterwards. Well, they will be 
anyway. Whether he makes it that far looks like a very different matter. 
Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Real Madrid 10 18 24 
2 Barcelona 10 18 22 
3 Atletico Madrid 10 19 21 
4 Sevilla 10 5 21 
5 Villarreal 10 10 19 
6 Real Sociedad 10 4 16 
7 Athletic Bilbao 10 2 16 
8 Eibar 10 2 15 
9 Celta Vigo 10 -4 14 
10 Las Palmas 10 2 13 
11 Malaga 10 0 12 
12 Espanyol 10 -4 11 
13 Real Betis 10 -9 11 
14 Alaves 10 -5 10 
15 Leganes 10 -10 10 
16 Valencia 9 -5 9 
17 Sporting Gijon 10 -11 9 
18 Deportivo La Coruna 9 -8 8 
19 Osasuna 10 -8 7 
20 Granada 10 -16 3  