
There has been an explosion in contemporary circus at Edinburgh in recent 
years.Circa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/16/circa-london-cemetery-depart-lift>
 have taken up residence every August for the past few years with a string of 
hits, including this year’s Closer. The huge success of Knee Deep has seen 
Assembly putting on more circus shows including, this year,Attrape Moi 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/attrape-moi> and Grace at Assembly 
Checkpoint. The arrival of Underbelly’sCircus Hub 
<http://www.underbellyedinburgh.co.uk/your-visit/venues/circus-hub> on the 
Meadows in 2015 sealed the deal: circus is now mainstream on the fringe. For 
the last two years, theTotal Theatre awards 
<https://twitter.com/TotalTheatreAwd?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 have recognised circus in its own category. It’s not just the fringe: this 
year theEdinburgh international festival <http://www.eif.co.uk/> hosts the 
extraordinaryJames Thiérré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/24/james-thierree-chaplin-tabac-rouge-clown-sadlers-wells>
e with The Toad Knew, a fantastical new creation that mixes circus, dance and 
theatre.

James Thierrée: 'Baryshnikov told me to get used to pain. It's part of a 
dancer's life'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/12/james-thierree-the-toad-knew-edinburgh-international-festival>
Some have suggested that circus might have reached saturation point in 
Edinburgh, but I rather doubt it. James Thiérrée, for example, will attract a 
theatre audience as much as he attracts a circus audience, and those crossovers 
are evident elsewhere.

Joli Vyann’s Imbalance 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/joli-vyann-imbalance> at the Circus Hub 
pushes aside the boundaries between acrobatics and dance with a graceful and 
elegant show that considers our digitally obsessed world, and what it does to 
personal relationships, with intelligence and impressive skill. Emma Serjeant’s 
one-woman circus show,Grace <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/grace>, at 
Assembly Checkpoint may struggle with dramaturgy and needs to find more clarity 
with its storytelling, but its impetus to use acrobatics to explore the trauma 
and confusions of a woman who has been hit by a car is a good one that, with 
less repetition and surer direction, may yet deliver.


Edinburgh audiences are up for anything. People who wouldn’t go near a 
particular genre for the rest of the year will take a chance in Edinburgh and 
this allows circus to thrive. One of the best circus sequences I’ve seen at 
this festival is a straps act about domestic violence in the subversive hip-hop 
and burlesque showHot Brown Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/aug/14/feminist-revolution-edinburgh-stage-fringe-2016-burlesque>
 at Assembly Roxy.Perhaps Hope 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/perhaps-hope> in the Circus Hub, 
meanwhile, is themed around climate change as Rockie Stone and Vincent van 
Berkel seesaw their way to oblivion. There is an extraordinary sequence in 
which Stone builds a tower out of bottles, which rises upwards and leaves her 
stranded like a crop-haired Rapunzel.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Froll-up-for-circus-at-the-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47af8182cc5204404182715bf560b615d6131c4e%2F0_139_4246_2547%2F4246.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roll%20up%2C%20roll%20up!%20Edinburgh%20festival%20circus%20roundup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Froll-up-for-circus-at-the-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roll%20up%2C%20roll%20up%21%20Edinburgh%20festival%20circus%20roundup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Froll-up-for-circus-at-the-edinburgh-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47af8182cc5204404182715bf560b615d6131c4e%2F0_139_4246_2547%2F4246.jpg>
 Subverting expectation … Hot Brown Honeyat Assembly Roxy, Edinburgh. 
One of the issues for circus in Edinburgh is context. As it proved last year 
withSmoke and Mirrors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/17/smoke-and-mirrors-edinburgh-festival-review-circus>
, the Assembly Checkpoint space is good for aerial work. But it doesn’t suit a 
show like Grace, which takes place largely on the floor. The audience just 
can’t see enough of what’s going on. The Circus Hub may provide a home for 
circus and works perfectly well for traditional shows such asThrowback 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/silver-lining-jacksons-lane-throwback>, 
the likeable but unchallenging young British circus show structured around the 
loose theme of twentysomethings’ nostalgia for their childhoods, but the 
unshowy thoughtfulness of shows such as Perhaps Hope and Imbalance doesn’t 
necessarily thrive when competing with the disco beat of the fairground. Or 
when it’s presented in a Big Top context in which the audience are looking for 
thrills and spills rather than introspection.

There is a bigger issue around gender, too, both in terms of balance within 
companies and of representation. Hot Brown Honey subverts expectation, but many 
of the circus shows I’ve seen this fringe perpetuate traditional roles. Casus’s 
latest show,Driftwood <https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/driftwood>, in 
Assembly George Square, is as skilled up as you could want, if a little generic 
and soft focus, but unlike their previous piece,Knee Deep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/aug/14/knee-deep-edinburgh-festival-assembly-george-square>
, it does little to challenge ideas around female strength and physical prowess 
in a company of three man and two women. Likewise, the eponymous star of Grace 
comes a cropper while eyeing up a man she fancies. And in Throwback the men 
wear jeans and shirts while the women are kitted out in tight little shorts and 
dresses and drenched with glitter.

This year’s circus shows ask thought-provoking questions, but those behind the 
shows need to think more about how they present themselves on stage and the 
messages they send out about what contemporary circus is and wants to be.
 