
Five days after a humiliating 6-1 rout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/barcelona-roma-champions-league-match-report>
 by Barcelona in the Champions League,Roma’s defensive deficiencies were 
highlighted again in an alarming 2-0 defeat at home toAtalanta in Serie A on 
Sunday.

Alejandro Gómez intercepted a poor pass from the Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> defender Lucas Digne to score from 
outside the area before half-time. Then the substitute full-back Maicon was 
sent off for tripping Gómez to set up a penalty for Germán Denis eight minutes 
from the end.

Roma remained fourth, wasting a chance to pull level with the leaders, 
Internazionale, who visit second-place Napoli on Monday.

Juventus won 3-0 at Palermo for their fourth straight victory and moved into 
fifth, three points behind Roma.

Mario Mandzukic scored with a decisive header early in the second half to 
follow up his key goal in Juve’s 1-0 win  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/25/juventus-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
over Manchester City in the Champions League.

Paulo Dybala, facing his former squad for the first time after a €32m transfer 
in the summer, provided the cross for Mandzukic’s goal.

Stefano Sturaro sealed it for Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> from the edge of the area after 
being set up by Paul Pogba in the 89th minute and the substitute Simone Zaza 
added another in stoppage time.

Roma have scored a league-best 29 goals, after 14 games but have conceded 17, 
more than twice as many as Inter and Napoli.

Defence was also a problem in a 3-2 defeat at BATE Borisov and a 4-4 draw with 
Bayer Leverkusen in the Champions League – results that have put the status of 
the coach, Rudi Garcia, in question.

“I’m not giving up. I’m disappointed and angry but I’m not used to giving up,” 
Garcia said. “We’re all responsible, me above all. It’s been an ugly week but 
I’m sure that behind the clouds the sky is blue.”

There has been speculation that Sassuolo’s Eusebio Di Francesco, who played in 
the Roma side that wonSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> in 2001, has already been 
lined up as a possible successor for Garcia. But Roma’s sporting director, 
Walter Sabatini, confirmed before Sunday’s match that the club plans to stick 
with Garcia for the long term.

“Roma is not a failure, because it’s a construction project that is still 
being built,” Sabatini told Mediaset Premium. “We respect [Di Francesco] but 
nobody has contacted him and nobody will because our manager is Garcia.”

While Roma’s attack has been unmatched in Italy, the squad is currently 
without several key forwards with Mohamed Salah, Gervinho and Francesco Totti 
injured.

In defence Kostas Manolas has often had to fend off attackers by himself with 
his fellow centre-back Antonio Rudiger struggling. Leandro Castan, who is still 
regaining his form after brain surgery last year, replaced Rudiger in the 
starting line-up againstAtalanta <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta>
. But it was the full-backs who caused the biggest problems.

Roma ended with 10 men and Atalanta finished with only nine after Guglielmo 
Stendardo and Alberto Grassi were sent off near the end, as Roma fans filled 
the Stadio Olimpico with whistles.

Elsewhere Empoli beat Lazio 1-0 with an early goal from Lorenzo Tonelli. 
Miroslav Klose had several late chances but Lazio lost for the sixth time in 
seven away matches.

Cyril Théréau scored twice, including an 81st-minute winner, as Udinese won 
3-2 atChievo Verona; and Carpi came from behind for a 2-1 victory at 10-man 
Genoa with Marco Borriello scoring one goal and setting up another for former 
Italy international Cristian Zaccardo.

Verona remain winless after a 3-2 defeat at Frosinone after their goalkeeper, 
Rafael, was sent off near the start for elbowing an opponent’s head. Matteo 
Ciofani scored twice for Frosinone, who moved one point above the drop zone.
 