
The United States midfielder Michael Bradley scored late to help 10-man Roma 
beatUdinese <https://www.theguardian.com/football/udinese> 1-0 and set a Serie 
A record by winning their first nine matches of the season.

Bradley came on as a substitute and broke the deadlock with his first touch of 
the match eight minutes from time to keep Roma five points clear of Napoli and 
Juventus.Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> played the final 24 
minutes with 10 men after Maicon was sent off for a second yellow card.

Udinese were unbeaten in 22 home games and they almost got off to the perfect 
start when Luis Muriel's effort crashed off the left upright with less than 
three minutes on the clock. Roma clearly missed their injured captain, 
Francesco Totti, and Udinese had another fantastic chance in the 38th minute 
when Gabriel Silva chipped the goalkeeper, Morgan De Sanctis, but Leandro 
Castan cleared off the line acrobatically.

A Roma victory appeared even more unlikely when Maicon was given his marching 
orders in the 66th minute. However, Bradley scored the winner minutes after 
being brought on for Marco Borriello. Kevin Strootman was given too much time 
on the ball and he spotted Bradley's run, allowing the US international to 
drill the ball into the bottom left corner.

Juventus recorded eight opening victories in 1930-31 and 1985-86 and also won 
nine straight matches to start 2005-06 but were stripped of their title-winning 
season in the calciopoli match-fixing scandal.

Elsewhere Gonzalo Higua√≠n converted two controversial penalties to help Napoli 
beat 10-man Torino 2-0 while Juventus beat Genoa by the same scoreline.

A stoppage-time winner handed Parma a 3-2 victory over Milan, who had fought 
back from two goals down. Parma have moved above Milan into seventh. Fiorentina 
moved fifth, nine points behind Roma, after coming from behind to win 2-1 at 
Chievo Verona thanks to a double from Juan Cuadrado.
 