
Roma suffered another European humiliation on Tuesday when they had two 
players sent off, lost 3-0 at home toPorto and missed out on the Champions 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group stage.

After drawing 1-1 in Portugal in the first leg of the play-off tie, Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> started as favourites but never 
recovered after Felipe gave the visitors an eighth-minute lead.

They imploded completely when Daniele De Rossi and his replacement Emerson 
Palmieri were shown straight red cards before and after half-time.

Monaco joined Porto when they beat Villarreal 1-0 after a late penalty by 
Fabinho sealed a 3-1 aggregate win, andLegia Warsaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/legiawarsaw>, Celtic and Ludogorets 
Razgrad also qualified, although none won on the night.

Ten-man Legia drew 1-1 at home with the Irish part-timers Dundalk but 
progressed 3-1 on aggregate to become the first Polish side to reach the group 
stage of Europe’s premier club competition for 20 years.

The former European champions Celtic squeezed past Hapoel Beer Sheva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/hapoel-beer-sheva-celtic-champions-league-qualifier-match-report>
 5-4 on aggregate despite a 2-0 defeat in Israel andLudogorets held Viktoria 
Plzen 2-2 away to secure a 4-2 aggregate win.

Roma became the third successive Serie A team, and the sixth in the last eight 
seasons, to lose in the play-off round, leaving Italy with only two 
representatives, Juventus and Napoli, in Thursday’s group-stage draw.

Roma have had their fair share of recent European disasters after losing 6-1 
to Barcelona last season and 7-1 at home to Bayern Munich two years ago, but 
not even they could not have imagined how Tuesday’s game would unfold.

Their initial confidence was shattered when Felipe headed Porto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/porto> in front from Otavio’s cross but 
the real trouble began in the 39th minute when midfielder De Rossi was sent off 
for a high tackle on Maxi Pereira.

Amid angry Roma protests he was replaced by Palmieri, who lasted only 11 
minutes before he was dismissed for a shocking lunge.

Roma’s goalkeeper, Wojciech Szczesny, booked his place the in rogue’s gallery 
with a reckless charge out of his goal which allowed Miguel Layun to slot 
Porto’s second into an unguarded net. Almost immediately Jesus Corona turned 
his marker inside out before scoring the third.

Dundalk <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundalk>, beaten 2-0 at home, 
made a brave effort in Poland and went ahead when Robert Benson thundered home 
an unstoppable volley in the 19th minute.

The Irish side were given further hope when Legia’s Adam Hlousek was sent off 
in the 67th minute but they were caught on the break as Michal Kucharczyk 
levelled in stoppage time, ending their dream.

Michy Batshuayi leads Chelsea past Bristol Rovers and into third round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/chelsea-bristol-rovers-efl-cup-match-report> 