
Arachne's cryptic puzzle No 25,600 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25600> (3 April) raised two 
points on which several people commented. At 6 down her clue was: "Two 
individuals support girl, 8 (4)" for VIII (as in Henry VIII). The construction 
of the clue, once the penny drops, is simple enough [Vi/1/1] but some objected, 
reasonably enough, that VIII (though Latin for 8) is not a word. My view was 
that the clue and solution were fair enough, because once you had twigged the 
answer there could be little or no doubt that it was right.

The other comments, though, raised a more general point about the letter 
count. The principle that I have tried to stick to over the years is that 
commonly used acronyms, like NATO, LASER or UNESCO, are treated as honorary 
words and indicated as (4), (5) or (6); but that non-acronym initials, like 
BBC, FAO or GCHQ, get clued as (1,1,1) or (1,1,1,1). In this case I was not 
consistent with my avowed principle, for the reason that (1,1,1,1) for VIII 
looked plain silly. Setters universally dislike the (1,1,1) approach for 
non-acronym initial letters on the quite legitimate grounds that they make the 
clue too easy by telegraphing the nature of the solution. So I am beginning to 
wonder whether the time has not come for a change of policy that would shift to 
BBC being (3) and GCHQ being (4). But this is not the kind of change that 
should be made lightly and I can sense the disapproving presence of my late 
predecessor, John Perkin, at my shoulder even as I question the principle he 
passed on to me. So I should be grateful for your views before taking such a 
major step.
_____
We are still getting a trickle of complaints asking why the Genius puzzle is 
not available, when in fact it is there on the website all the time and most 
people can access it (as the large number of online entries for theApril puzzle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/java/new/0,,-27971,00.html> testifies). It 
seems that certain browsers are not interacting properly with the Guardian 
website, but the exact nature of the problem is proving hard to identify. If 
you are one of those who is continuing to have such a problem could I ask you 
to write not to me but to the User Help Desk at the email address below, 
indicating: whether you use Mac or Windows and which version you are on; 
whether you are getting a java error message; what browser you normally use and 
whether you have tried another one; and whether the crossword comes up at all 
on your screen. This information should help us to identify the source of your 
particular problem.
 _____
Meanwhile please forgive me if there is a more than usual delay in my replying 
to your emails. I am going away for a couple of weeks and will be unable to 
access my computer remotely during most of that time.
_____
The April Genius puzzle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/java/new/0,,-27971,00.html> (No 106 set by 
Paul), surprisingly to me, seems to have been rather easier than usual. There 
were three correct answers between 01:23 and 01:40 (from Dave, Tony and Ian, in 
that order) and no fewer than 62 entries on the first day. The total by the 
deadline was 425.

Congratulations to Roland Rance, who is April's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>
 