
Group A

Ajax's Europa League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> 
campaign got off to a disappointing start as they were held to a goalless home 
draw by Romania'sFC Timisoara. Martin Jol's side dominated possession and had 
the better of what chances there were but could not find a way past the 
Timisoara goalkeeper Costel Pantilimon.

That result allowed Anderlecht to take an early lead of the group courtesy of 
their 2-0 win atDinamo Zagreb. Victor Bernardez and Jonathan Legear struck late 
on as the Belgian side snatched an impressive away win.

Group B

Genoa made a winning return to Europe with a 2-0 home win over Slavia Prague. 
Alberto Zapater put theRossoblu ahead after four minutes with an unstoppable 
free-kick from 20 yards and Giuseppe Sculli added a second five minutes before 
the break.

Substitute Gervinho struck a late equaliser to earn Lille a 1-1 draw at home to
Valencia, cancelling out Juan Mata's 78th-minute opener.

Group C

Rapid Vienna got their campaign off to a dream start with a 3-0 victory over 
Hamburg. The Bundesliga team were stunned by first-half goals from Steffen 
Hofmann and Nikica Jelavic before the substitute Christopher Drazan sealed the 
result in the 76th minute. The win gives the Austrian side hope of qualifying 
from a tough pool which includes Hapoel Tel-Aviv of Israel and Celtic.

Group D

Liedson scored all three of his side's goals as Sporting Lisbon bounced back 
from an early deficit to defeatHeerenveen 3-2. The Brazil-born Portugal 
international struck twice in the first half before netting an 88th-minute 
winner to surpass goals from Gerald Sibon and Michael Dingsdag for the hosts.

Hertha Berlin's miserable season continued as they were held to a 1-1 draw by 
the European minnowsFK Ventspils. Lukasz Piszczek opened the scoring in the 
34th minute for the Bundesliga side but Edgars Gauracs levelled matters three 
minutes after the break.

Group E

Basle got their Europa League campaign off to an impressive start with a 2-0 
victory overRoma. Carlitos opened the scoring in the 11th minute before the 
substitute Federico Almerares put the game beyond Roma's reach three minutes 
from time.

Group F

Elano was the star of the show as Galatasaray cruised to a 3-1 win over 
Panathinaikos. The Brazilian scored two and set up the other for Milan Baros as 
the Turkish giants took control of the game. Dimitris Salpingidis got a late 
goal back for the hosts but only after the match was beyond their reach.

Gabriel Tamas's goal 10 minutes from time earned Dinamo Bucharest all three 
points atSturm Graz.

Group G

Marc Janko scored a last-gasp winner to give Salzburg a 2-1 away victory over 
Lazio in their opener at the Stadio Olimpico. Pasquale Foggia gave the hosts 
the lead on the hour but Franz Schiemer equalised in the 82nd minute before 
Janko struck seconds from time to give the Austrian champions all three points 
in Rome.

Villarreal's record signing Nilmar returned to secure all three points in 
their match againstLevski Sofia at El Madrigal. The Yellow Submarine were on 
top from start to finish but had only Nilmar's 72nd-minute winner to show for 
their superiority.

Group H

The Moldovan champions FC Sheriff Tiraspol held out for a famous draw at 
Steaua Bucharest. The Romanian media had expected nothing less than a Steaua 
victory but Sheriff produced a determined performance in their first ever match 
in the group stages of a European competition. The visitors looked the more 
determined side for much of the game and might have won had Robinson Zapata not 
produced a fine save from Alexey Kuchuk early in the second half.

A late brace by Blaise Nkufo saw FC Twente come from behind to beat Fenerbahce
. The substitute Mehmet Topuz put his side in front in the 71st minute but 
their lead lasted only three minutes before Nkufo levelled matters. And the 
Switzerland striker scored the winner 10 minutes from time. Steve McClaren's 
team top the group after the opening round of fixtures.

Group I

Goals from Nu√±o Gomes and Oscar Cardozo late in the first half handed Benfica 
victory againstBATE Borisov. Both sides enjoyed plenty of opportunities in a 
compelling encounter in the Estadio da Luz but it was the Portuguese giants 
that claimed the points.

Group J

Shakhtar Donetsk stunned Club Brugge with three first-half goals en route to a 
comfortable away victory. Oleksiy Gai, Willian and Darijo Srna were all on 
target as last season's Uefa Cup winners clinched a deserved three points in 
Belgium. As if confirmation were needed that it was not to be Brugge's evening, 
Vadis Odjidja-Ofoe saw his 55th-minute penalty saved by Andrei Pyatov.

Toulouse turned around an early deficit to open their campaign with victory 
overPartizan Belgrade in Serbia. Partizan led through Mladen Krstajic's 
24th-minute header but two goals in nine minutes from Pantxi Sirieix after the 
half-hour turned the game on its head against the run of play.Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/toulouse> then added a third through 
Antoine Devaux before the substitute Cordova Cleo got one back for the hosts.

Group K

Sparta Prague's coach, Jozef Chovanec, was left tearing his hair out after his 
side twice went ahead but quickly conceded equalisers toPSV Eindhoven in a 
lively second half in the Czech capital. Roman Hubnik headed Sparta in front in 
the 76th minute but four minutes later the Brazilian forward Jonathan Reis 
equalised for PSV. The impressive Martin Zeman then looked to have won it with 
an 87th-minute strike, only for the 20-year-old Reis to level again from the 
penalty spot.

The CFR Cluj coach, Antonio Conceicao, will heave a sigh of relief after 
seeing his side record a highly creditable victory overFC Copenhagen. 
Second-half goals from Juan Culio and the half-time substitute Lacina Traore 
got Cluj off to a winning start.

Group L

Athletic Bilbao's 16-year-old wonderkid Iker Muniain played a starring role as 
the Basques swept asideAustria Vienna in a comfortable win. Muniain won an 
early penalty and capped the victory with a fine goal after the Spain 
international Fernando Llorente scored twice for the Spaniards.

Claudio Pizarro spared Werder Bremen's blushes after they threw away a 
two-goal lead atNacional. Last season's beaten Uefa Cup finalists were 
deservedly ahead at half-time through a Torsten Frings penalty and doubled 
their lead thanks to Pizarro 10 minutes after the break. But goals from Felipe 
Lopes and Rafik Halliche looked like salvaging a point for Nacional until 
Pizarro scored again five minutes from time.
 