
The millennial division of the internet subsists on a fairly shallow pool of 
nostalgia: endless posts celebrating variously unremarkable anniversaries, all 
intended to make reasonably young people feel reasonably old. “Can you believe 
it’s been a decade since Justin Timberlake’s SexyBack came out?” Well, yes, I 
can. “You won’t believe what the cast of Dawson’s Creek looks like now!” Not so 
very different from before, it turns out – is this a trick question?

Why Baz Luhrmann’s The Get Down is a rapper’s delight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/aug/07/baz-luhrmann-the-get-down-rappers-delight>
Yet the announcement that William Shakespeare’s Romeo + Juliet is officially 
20 years old today pulled me up short. Of course, I’m not speaking of William 
Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet at all (coming up to its 420th birthday next 
year, so save your candles), butBaz Luhrmann’s William Shakespeare’s Romeo + 
Juliet, which is a very different thing entirely – beginning with that 
oh-so-formerly-hip plus sign, which no self-respecting fan of Luhrmann’s 
taffeta-and-polyester vision would drop for an ampersand even today. Why am I 
surprised, though? Because 20 years feels an entirely inappropriate anniversary 
for Luhrmann’s glitterbomb of sound and fury and neo-disco and inchoate 
yearning. William Shakespeare’s Romeo + Juliet was never meant to reach this 
age: it might be the single most teenaged film ever fashioned.

I say that with equal parts critical admiration and peer adoration. I was 13 
years old when the film sashayed and spangled its way onto cinema screens in my 
neighborhood (on Valentine’s Day 1997, admittedly, rather than 1 November 1996 
– you can’t accuse South African distributors of not choosing their moment), 
and it felt as new and as dizzy and as overwhelming as the advent of 
adolescence itself.

Romeo + Juliet sent an instant neon shockwave through my high school. Within 
days, it seemed, girls’ English binders were plastered in photos ofLeonardo 
DiCaprio <https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio> from the film, 
with his perfectly curved forelock and glinting rave armor – a 
classroom-suitable image of nascent erotic desire. (I’d like to say some boys’ 
were too, but in that sense, at least, 1997 was a very long time ago.) That 
still-immaculate, all-bases-covered soundtrack – Radiohead! The Cardigans! Er, 
Butthole Surfers! – was on permanent rotation at every hesitant co-ed house 
party, even if the sinuous Des’ree slow dance was awkwardly skipped nine times 
out of ten. Detachable angel wings became a default prom accessory; blue-tinted 
fairy lights were resourcefully draped over household fish tanks.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5ZqxOb2tJIo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5ZqxOb2tJIo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5ZqxOb2tJIo&media=>
I had experienced blockbuster reverberations in my childhood before, of course 
– ubiquitous Jurassic Park T-shirts, Forrest Gump catchphrases – but this was 
new: my first palpable point of awareness that cinema and sex were essentially 
intertwined. Heterosexual sex, foremost, but I can’t be the only person my age 
for whom Luhrmann’s MTV fantasia raised early inklings of alternative sexual 
awareness: the image of Harold Perrineau’s athletic, exquisitely androgynous 
Mercutio, busting (and thrusting) moves to Young Hearts Run Free in a sequinned 
bra, suspenders and candyfloss fright wig, was almost certainly the queerest 
thing I’d hitherto seen at the movies. Yet he, too, was treated by film and 
audience alike as acceptably, desirably cool.

None of this would have seemed especially revolutionary to older viewers long 
accustomed to commodified adolescent hedonism, or indeed to Shakespeare being 
repurposed and restyled for the present day. To a 13-year-old, however, 
Luhrmann’s vision played as an exciting expansion of possibilities and 
pleasures: the shortest, most exhilarating cut on that gem-studded soundtrack, 
Quindon Tarver’s cover of Everybody’s Free (to Feel Good), was taken most 
literally.

So, yes, two decades on, stray sounds and images from Luhrmann’s film remain 
entirely vivid, if not entirely undated. (It’s hard to think of many symbols 
much more 1996 than the giant kinda-Celtic-Gothic crucifix tattoo adorning the 
back of Pete Postlethwaite’s Father Lawrence – what a mercy my classmates and I 
were too young to copy that.) But what of the film itself? Does it hold up as 
more than a whirling mood board of generationally evocative iconography? Did it 
ever? I’m almost afraid to revisit it, but minutes into Luhrmann’s headlong, 
tricked-out dive into the decayed bohemia of fair Verona Beach – where he and 
justly Oscar-nominated art director Catherine Martin don’t so much lay their 
scene as paint-blast it – the surprisingly elegant, elemental pull of its 
storytelling takes hold.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fromeo-juliet-baz-lurhmann-leonardo-dicaprio-claire-danes-20th-anniversary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd488e6ddf261f91e02d1c277efeb5e994fd56cc4%2F0_0_1805_1083%2F1805.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Romeo%20%2B%20Juliet%20at%2020%3A%20Baz%20Luhrmann's%20adaptation%20refuses%20to%20age&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fromeo-juliet-baz-lurhmann-leonardo-dicaprio-claire-danes-20th-anniversary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Romeo%20%2B%20Juliet%20at%2020%3A%20Baz%20Luhrmann%27s%20adaptation%20refuses%20to%20age&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fromeo-juliet-baz-lurhmann-leonardo-dicaprio-claire-danes-20th-anniversary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd488e6ddf261f91e02d1c277efeb5e994fd56cc4%2F0_0_1805_1083%2F1805.jpg>
 Leonardo DiCaprio in Romeo + Juliet. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/20 CENTURY 
FOX 
It’s de rigueur for purists to complain about contemporary Shakespeare 
adaptations stripping back his language to the nub, but the kinetic visual 
translations the film makes for the missing text remain quite startling. We 
tend to remember the hyperactivity of any Luhrmann film foremost, yet so much 
narrative here is articulated through faces and gazes: I can’t think of any 
Romeo and Juliet production I’ve seen, on stage or screen, in which the 
attraction between its eponymous lovers is so viscerally, obsessively instant. 
Franco Zeffirelli’s 1968 version may have caused something of a youthquake with 
its ravishing adolescent casting, but it’s cautiously carnal at best: here, 
17-year-old Claire Danes’ and 21-year-old DiCaprio’s eyes meet in an electric 
blue thunderbolt of sheer, woozywant. 

Bard act to follow: why Romeo + Juliet is still the ultimate film soundtrack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/28/baz-luhrmann-romeo-and-juliet-soundtrack-radiohead>
DiCaprio’s career would go supernova a year later with Titanic, but I’m not 
sure he’s ever worn his alternately chippy and cherubic star quality quite this 
lightly or lithely, or – his recent Oscar for the pained jaw-clenching of The 
Revenant notwithstanding – emoted with quite such open, unstrained anguish. 
Danes’ film career would peak sharply here, of course, but what a summit: 
replacing Natalie Portman (who, at 14, was deemed to look too young opposite 
DiCaprio), she brings the very modern hormonal curiosity of a name-making role 
in TV’s My So-Called Life to Shakespeare’s vision of agitated youth in a way 
that feels quite apposite. (By this point, Shakespeare’s possessive credit in 
that full title no longer feels like a wry in-joke: give or take some tinsel 
and a swimming pool, this is still very much his Romeo and Juliet.)

Neither actor delivers the most mellifluous iambic pentameter you’ve ever 
heard, and nor should they: the lines roll eagerly, earnestly, blushingly off 
their tongues, like eighth-graders reading and writing poetry for the first 
time. (Compare it to the misbegotten Douglas Booth-Hailee Steinfeld update that 
Julian Fellowes attempted three years ago: that film’s leads sound like they’re 
being made to read the play aloud in class with surly reluctance.) The flushed 
sugar rush of Luhrmann’s film-making – not that we’d have believed it then, but 
a positively restrained dry run for the ecstatic excess of 2001’s marvelous 
Moulin Rouge! – worked to conjure the same air of reckless, uncalculated 
feeling. To look at its peach-skinned lovefools’ recent work – DiCaprio grimly 
chomping raw bison liver in Alaskan purgatory, Danes determinedly gurning away 
on TV’s Homeland – is to know that William Shakespeare’s Romeo + Juliet is 
indeed 20 years old. Like its doomed, bullet-bound lovers, however, the film 
refuses to age with us.
 