
In a rehearsal room at the top of the Royal Opera House, three harlots and a 
trio of likely lads are being put through their paces. “Don’t be pretty. Get 
lower and dirtier,” says Christopher Saunders, the ballet master in charge. 
“You need to be a bit more slaggy, with your face as much as with your body.”
The Royal Ballet ballerinas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/22/english-national-ballet-set-to-move-to-new-home-in-east-london>
 –Yuhui Choe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jan/04/hotlist-dance-yuhui-choe>, 
Beatriz Stix-Brunell <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/beatriz-stix-brunell> 
and Camille Bracher – giggle as they try to obey, transforming their features 
into approximations of 16th-century good-time girls, plying their trade in a 
market in Verona.

Across London, in another rehearsal room, another set of dancers is struggling 
to negotiate a sequence of complicated, interwoven steps as they make their way 
into an imaginary ballroom, ducking and diving around each other as they do so. 
“Try to find this little side bend,” suggests Lionel Delanoë, who is coaching 
English National Ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/22/english-national-ballet-set-to-move-to-new-home-in-east-london>
, demonstrating by curving an arm across his body.

Both groups are working on different versions of the same story – Shakespeare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare>’s Romeo and Juliet, which has 
become one of the most celebrated, performed and reimagined ballets of this and 
the previous century. This month, the Royal Ballet continues a lengthy sequence 
of performances ofKenneth MacMillan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/kenneth-macmillan>’s 1965 version, while 
English National Ballet is about to tour a revival of the production created 
for them in 1977 byRudolf Nureyev <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/nureyev>.

The Royal Ballet's Romeo and Juliet: 50 years of star-crossed dancers – in 
pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/oct/02/royal-ballet-romeo-and-juliet-50-years-of-star-crossed-dancers-in-pictures>
So loved are both the story and Sergei Prokofiev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/jan/17/classicalmusicandopera.artsfeatures1>
’s score that virtually every ballet company in the world has a production of
Romeo and Juliet in its repertory. They are different in emphasis and steps, 
but all follow the same lineaments – apart from the one choreographed byMark 
Morris in 2008 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/nov/09/markmorris-ballet>
, which audaciously restored the happy ending of the Russian version, with the 
star-crossed lovers skipping happily away from her deathbed, eloping into a 
sun-kissed future.

The ubiquity of Romeo and Juliet as a ballet is not shared by any other 
Shakespeare play. In fact, although the strength of his stories and characters 
seem to make the playwright a good choice for dance, in practice those few 
ballets based on his other plays have often foundered on dance’s difficulty 
with translating thought into action; narrative alone is not enough to sweep 
the audience along in these plays. Yet somehowRomeo and Juliet is different. It 
was always one of Shakespeare’s most popular works, valued for its romantic 
intensity. The First Folio edition, which was chained to a shelf in Oxford’s 
Bodelian Library for 40 years after its publication in 1623, had pages rubbed 
thin with use by eager readers: the most worn was the parting of Romeo and 
Juliet at dawn, when they have consummated their marriage and he has to flee 
into exile.

It is one of the most touching passages, moving in its simplicity. “Wilt thou 
be gone? It is not yet near day/ It was the nightingale and not the lark/ That 
pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear”. Such poetic density sustainsRomeo and 
Juliet as a play, yet the sheer power of its archetypal tale of young, 
headstrong lovers doomed by their warring families and a society that is 
antithetical to their love, means it has a shape-shifting ability to retain its 
impact in different mediums.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fromeo-and-juliet-ballet-shakespeare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444750680020%2F76a44e9f-41b2-4a7c-8c30-05a89ee22e4c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Romeo%20and%20Juliet%3A%20how%20ballet%20gets%20to%20the%20heart%20of%20Shakespeare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fromeo-and-juliet-ballet-shakespeare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Romeo%20and%20Juliet%3A%20how%20ballet%20gets%20to%20the%20heart%20of%20Shakespeare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fromeo-and-juliet-ballet-shakespeare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444750680020%2F76a44e9f-41b2-4a7c-8c30-05a89ee22e4c-1020x612.jpeg>
 Leonardo DiCaprio in Baz Luhrmann’s film version. Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/20th Century Fox 
West Side Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/08/musicals-we-love-west-side-story>
 may not beRomeo and Juliet as Shakespeare intended it, but it packs a 
devastating punch. Film versions, whether byFranco Zeffirelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/nov/25/italy.classicalmusic> or Baz 
Luhrmann, play fast and loose with the text 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/sep/24/theatre.classics>, yet 
communicate the story’s essential tragedy.

Although it became an opera as early as 1776 and Tchaikovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pyotr-tchaikovsky> wrote his overture in 
1869, it was only in 1935 thatRomeo and Juliet began its journey to becoming 
one of the most famous and popular ballets of all time. That was when Prokofiev 
began working with the librettist Sergei Radlov, one of his regular chess 
partners, on a structure for the score. Political events, including the murder 
of the Communist party’s first secretary for Leningrad, Sergei Kirov, meant 
that the ballet destined for the Mariinsky moved to Moscow’s Bolshoi.

But then Prokofiev’s proposed happy ending and the sheer invention of the 
score fell foul of the taste of Shakespeare scholars and party apparatchiks and 
the project was shelved until a dance company inBrno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/jan/17/brno-czech-republic-travel-tips>
, now in the Czech Republic, gave the work its premiere in 1938. A year later, 
the choreographer Leonid Lavrovsky finally produced his stirring ballet, which 
gave Galina Ulanova one of the greatest roles of her career. In 1956 the 
Bolshoi brought this version, with Ulanova, now 46, to London. It was a 
revelation to everybody who saw it.Margot Fonteyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/margot-fonteyn> was among many who reeled at 
the sight of Ulanova’s famous run, “leaving all behind her”. In the Spectator, 
AV Cotton said: “Romeo and Juliet made its success through its complete 
telling, in wordless action, of the great love story and through the 
personality of Galina Ulanova, a total dance personality … she flows into and 
out of the dance phrases as artlessly and beautifully as a bird flies or a fish 
swims.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn2c6e3n7NOI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn2c6e3n7NOI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn2c6e3n7NOI&media=>
 Galina Ulanova and Yuri Zhdanov 
Today, the choreography looks thin and mannered, yet Lavrovsky’s production 
still has extraordinary emotional sweep – and it led to a deluge of successors. 
Among them was the MacMillan version that the Royal performs today, a work so 
regularly in the repertoire that as Saunders points out, dancers learn it 
almost by osmosis, going on stage as a supporting lord and then working their 
way through the parts.

For Kevin O’Hare, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/14/kevin-ohare-royal-ballet-director>
 the Royal Ballet’s director, this was the ballet that changed everything. “It 
introduced an entirely naturalistic way of dancing,” he says. “There is no 
mime. People walk on the stage entirely naturally. The drama all comes from the 
steps and the interaction between the characters.” It is this that Saunders 
emphasises when he rehearses the dancers today. “You need to be natural and 
allow something of yourself to come through,” he says. “If you try to play 
Mercutio as a cheeky chap, it doesn’t work. But everyone has a bit of cheek 
inside them and to try to bring that into their movement is what matters. You 
have to find your own way through it.”

This is exactly what MacMillan was aiming towards. Inspired partly by 
Zeffirelli’s groundbreaking 1960 production of the play at theOld Vic starring 
Judi Dench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2014/sep/21/british-theatre-great-treasure-aspiring-actors>
 and John Stride, which – in the words of MacMillan’s biographer Jann Parry – 
portrayed Romeo and Juliet as “hotblooded youngsters living in a violent 
society rather than the romantic sonneteers of conventional theatre 
productions”, he went all out to “bring a contemporary vision of the tragic 
story to the stage”.

To this end, he created the ballet with Lynn Seymour and Christopher Gable as 
its stars, young enough to be credible as teenage lovers and entirely open to 
his choreography, which, radically, allowed the music and psychological realism 
to fill spaces where steps might more traditionally have been. The management’s 
ultimate imposition of the more starry pairing of Fonteyn and Nureyev as the 
opening night cast is one of the great scandals of the Royal Ballet’s history – 
and one which led to a rift between MacMillan and the company.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fromeo-and-juliet-ballet-shakespeare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444750979873%2Fe41b9033-d15c-44e9-8fac-ea5aa2c14e47-1303x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Romeo%20and%20Juliet%3A%20how%20ballet%20gets%20to%20the%20heart%20of%20Shakespeare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fromeo-and-juliet-ballet-shakespeare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Romeo%20and%20Juliet%3A%20how%20ballet%20gets%20to%20the%20heart%20of%20Shakespeare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fromeo-and-juliet-ballet-shakespeare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444750979873%2Fe41b9033-d15c-44e9-8fac-ea5aa2c14e47-1303x2040.jpeg>
 The ENB’s Romeo + Juliet. Laurent Liotardo Photograph: Laurent Liotardo/ENB 
I knew none of that when I saw as a teenager the film version of the ballet, 
with Nureyev running towards Juliet’s balcony, sleeves billowing, to dance with 
almost shocking erotic engagement, kissing the hem of Juliet’s skirt as she 
drifted away from him. It might have been bowdlerised MacMillan but it had 
seismic force. Over the years, watching with many different dancers making the 
central roles their own, I have never lost the sense that in its ferociously 
direct engagement with the way that passion can shape events, MacMillan catches 
the essence of Shakespeare in a way that almost trumps the play.

Certainly, his Romeo and Juliet reveals what dance can do better than many 
words; it channels emotion and sculpts the trajectory of a tragedy with 
unparalleled clarity. With the help of the music, it sweeps you along. But not 
everyone agrees.Alastair Macaulay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/charlottehigginsblog/2010/dec/07/alastair-macaulay-jenifer-ringer>
 of the New York Times argues that because Prokofiev ignores “the prime 
characteristic of the play’s hero and heroine … their highly educated 
cleverness, their love of poetic intricacy and paradox … [he] seriously 
misinterprets Shakespeare’s characters.”

When Nureyev choreographed his own version of the story for what was then 
called London FestivalBallet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet>, he 
went back to the play, commissioning a translation in Russian, striving to find 
exact balletic representations of Shakespeare’s imagery (his description of 
Tybalt as “the Prince of Cats”, for example) and meaning.

His version puts the social context fully on stage; it opens with a procession 
following a cart of plague victims. It also borrows techniques from cinema – he 
was actually filmingValentino simultaneously with working on the ballet – to 
attempt to show the psychological turmoil of his protagonists, focusing on and 
slowing the action around them. “Rudolf really wanted something different in 
the mind,” explains Delanoë, who danced Mercutio when Nureyev remounted the 
production for Paris Opera Ballet. “He didn’t want it to be romantic and he 
tried to make it much more realistic.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn5sy8WFd_68&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn5sy8WFd_68>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn5sy8WFd_68&media=>
 Elisabeth Maurin in the Paris Opera Ballet production 
“There is no time for romanticism,” Elisabeth Maurin, also coaching at ENB, 
adds. “It is so physical, so fearless.” She was the first Juliet at theParis 
Opera Ballet <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/dec/08/france.arts> and 
thinks the key to the part is that “Nureyev would have liked to have had her 
danced by a boy. You have to push yourself, she is so demanding and so strong 
and the centre of all the action. Romeo is just a lover. She is the one who 
makes it all happen.”

Ultimately such choreographic notions function as a gloss on the play, like 
literary criticism made flesh – and there are as many ideas as there are 
choreographers. The one constant remains Prokofiev’s score, one of the few 
written for ballet that is worthy of comparison with Tchaikovsky’s masterworks. 
Everyone can sing one of its 52 movements, even if it is only the theme tune to
The Apprentice (“The Montagues and the Capulets”).

For Irek Mukhamedov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1999/feb/18/features11.g21>, who was a 
famously dramatic Romeo in the MacMillan version and is now helping to coach at 
ENB, it is the music that is the key to everything. “It is very dramatic, 
touching and expressive,” he says. “I say to young dancers: ‘You must 
understand the music, learn to sing it, and then the words in your heart or 
your mind will speak through your body.’ ” It might seem a strange way to 
perform Shakespeare – without words. But when dance finds that level of 
expressiveness, it speaks as loudly as any sonnet.

• Romeo and Juliet is in repertory at the Royal Opera House 
<http://www.roh.org.uk>, London WC2 until 2 December; Romeo & Juliet is on tour 
withEnglish National Ballet <http://www.ballet.org.uk>.
 