
Cristiano Ronaldo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> missed a 
penalty as Real Madrid dropped points they could ill afford to squander in a 
1-1 draw at Málaga that allowed Barcelona to build a nine-point lead over their 
great rivals.

Barcelona, who won 2-1 at Las Palmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/20/las-palmas-barcelona-la-liga-match-report>
 on Saturday, have 63 points to Real’s 54 with 13 matches remaining.

Atlético Madrid, who play at home to Villarreal later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/feb/21/atletico-madrid-v-villarreal-la-liga-live>
 on Sunday and visit Real next Saturday, are level on points with their city 
rivals.

Gary Neville’s Valencia beat Granada to extend winning run to three games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/valencia-granada-la-liga-match-report>
Ronaldo put Real ahead when he rose unmarked in what TV replays showed was an 
offside position to head a Toni Kroos free-kick over Carlos Kameni in the 33rd 
minute for his 22nd league goal of the season.

He was denied a second three minutes later when Kameni dived to his left to 
save the striker’s penalty after he had been brought down by Weligton.

Málaga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/malaga> scored a deserved 
equaliser in the 66th minute when the central defender Raul Albentosa, unmarked 
in the middle of the box, volleyed home a cross from the left.

“Málaga are a great team, they made it tactically difficult. Today we failed 
but we won’t surrender, we’ll fight to the end,” the Real left-back Marcelo 
said. “The draw tastes like a defeat.”

The home side would not have been flattered with a victory as Real were 
indebted to good goalkeeping from Keylor Navas to deny Charles twice, Juanpi 
and Duje Cop.

Kameni also made saves from Sergio Ramos and Jesé but Málaga were the more 
cohesive team and Real missed the thrust of a centre-forward with Karim Benzema 
out injured.

The only consolation for the Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> coach, Zinedine Zidane, was 
that the draw at least extended his unbeaten run in his new job to eight 
matches in both La Liga and the Champions League.

“We did a good job, you can see teams find it hard to score against us,” said 
Albentosa, who is on loan at Málaga from Derby County.

Malaga are 10th with 31 points, 10 above the relegation zone.
 