
Ronald Koeman was left cursing poor finishing and “really bad defending” as 
Norwich City of the Championship came to Goodison Park in the EFL Cupand 
inflicted a 2-0 defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/20/everton-norwich-city-efl-cup-third-round-match-report>
, his first as Everton manager.

Norwich stun in-form Everton as Steven Naismith makes mark on return
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/20/everton-norwich-city-efl-cup-third-round-match-report>
The side sitting second in the Premier League could not even blame a 
below‑strength team for the defeat. While Everton made six changes fromtheir 
victory over Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/everton-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
 at the weekend, Norwich made 10 from the side that beat Nottingham Forest, and 
still managed a fourth successive win.

“We’ve just had three really hard games and I knew I had to freshen the squad 
up,” their manager, Alex Neil, said. “We came with a plan to letEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> have most of the ball and see 
what they could do to us, and it worked.

“I don’t know if we were the better team or not, they had all the possession 
but we scored the goals. The main thing is that we won, and that can only boost 
the players’ confidence.”

Koeman said he was not happy about the result but accepted that Norwich had 
been more clinical in front of goal. The Everton manager said: “We had enough 
chances to win the game, and football is about scoring goals.

“I thought Norwich were a little lucky with the first goal but their second 
was really bad defending by four or five of our players. We must recover and 
react now. We don’t organise parties when we win a game at this club and we 
don’t cry when we lose.”

Apart from the shock result the game was notable for the round of applause the 
former Everton forward Steve Naismith received from the home support after 
putting the visitors in the lead. “I think that speaks volumes for how highly 
the lad is regarded here,” his manager said. “The crowd obviously appreciate 
his qualities, and I completely understand why.”
 