
The departing Celtic manager Ronny Deila wants Celtic Park to remain pointless 
forAberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> when the Dons visit 
on Sunday.

The Norwegian has not lost to the Granite City side in the league in Glasgow 
since taking over two seasons ago and, indeed,Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> have triumphed in 21 straight 
league games at home to Aberdeen since a defeat in 2004.

Derek McInnes’s side have won two of the three league meetings this season as 
they have chased the champions-elect but both of them were at Pittodrie.

Deila’s side won 3-1 at home last October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/31/celtic-aberdeen-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 and 4-0 and 2-1 in last season’s fixtures at Celtic Park and go into the match 
in effect champions with a lead of nine points and 35 goals over the visitors 
with three matches remaining.

The Hoops manager is keen to ensure that home record over Aberdeen is not 
broken before his tenure is concluded. “You want to win the league by as many 
points as you can but Aberdeen deserve credit as well as they have had a very 
good season,” he said. “They have been very consistent and pushed us a lot. But 
we haven’t lost against them at Celtic Park as long as I’ve been here and we 
want to keep that stat.”

Deila will surely leave Parkhead at the end of the season with two successive 
title wins as well as a League Cup trophy from last season but he expects the 
visitors to try to spoil the party. “It would be very strange if they don’t 
want to do it but we will be ready and it’s going to be a good game of 
football,” he added.

Deila, who confirmed captain Scott Brown and defender Dedryck Boyata will be 
out for the rest of the season with respective hamstring problems, is pondering 
the prospect of utilising his huge squad in the final three games.

The former Stromsgodset manager said: “We will see what we do but, of course, 
we want to win games and finish off in a good way. We have many good players 
here so we will see if we use the squad more than we have done, or not.”
 