
Ronny Deila is hoping for some domestic bliss against Dundee United on Sunday 
following Celtic’s midweek despair in Europe. The Hoops’3-1 Europa League 
defeat by Molde in Norway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/22/molde-celtic-europa-league-match-report>
 on Thursday night left them at the bottom of Group A with two points from 
three games and put the Norwegian under some pressure.

In addition to taking flak from some of the fans who had travelled to the Aker 
Stadion, and many more who had watched from afar, Deila also had to deal with 
Kris Commons’ reaction to being substituted. In the midfielder’s anger at the 
decision to bring him off for Nadir Ciftci with 15 minutes remaining, he 
berated the assistant manager, John Collins, in the dugout, which subsequently 
led to himissuing an apology through the club’s website 
<http://www.celticfc.net/news/9362> the following day.

While hopes of qualifying out of a group that also includes Ajax and 
Fenerbahce are fragile, Deila turns his attention back to the cosier confines 
of theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>. A home victory 
against bottom-placed United – who have Mixu Paatelainen in charge for his 
second game – would guarantee Celtic stay top of the table.

The former Stromsgodset manager said: “They have changed the manager so it’s 
not so easy to say how they are coming into this game. There’s always a change 
when the new manager comes in. The club has been through a difficult situation 
but they still have talent in the side. It’s going to be a difficult game. They 
have to fight to get points and we need the points to stay top.”

Carlton Cole signs for Celtic until end of 2016-17 season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/22/carlton-cole-signs-celtic-west-ham-united>
One Parkhead positive on Thursday was Carlton Cole signing a contract with the 
club until 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/22/carlton-cole-signs-celtic-west-ham-united>
. The 31-year-old former West Ham United striker, who was a free agent before 
clinching his deal, will not be involved against United as he works his way 
back to fitness following a knock sustained while training with the Hoops. 
Deila, however, is glad to have Cole on board. “I’m very happy about that,” he 
said. “He’s an experienced player and has qualities that we are missing from 
the team. It’s going to be exciting to see him play. He is not yet [ready to 
play]. He has been injured so we need to get him up to his best fitness.”

Across Glasgow, Mark Warburton does not believe Rangers’ opponents in the 
Championship will lose heart if the Light Blues continue on their winning 
streak. The Ibrox side are top of the table with 10 straight victories and on 
course for a return to the top flight. But as he prepared for the trip to St 
Mirren on Sunday, the Gers manager claimed rivals will be watching for his side 
to slip up. “Other teams will be looking for a chink in the armour,” he said. 
“They are looking for some hope from the point of view of seeing if we drop 
points and get sloppy and scrappy. Every other coach and manager will be 
saying: ‘They will slip up.’ Our job is to make sure we don’t. Teams are 
learning how we play and are trying to stop us and we have to find new 
solutions. Our job is to maintain focus and energy.”

After an inconsistent start to the season, Ian Murray’s St Mirren side are 
unbeaten in four games. Warburton, however, expects to see the Paisley club 
continue a defensive strategy he has detected in opponentssince taking over at 
Ibrox in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/15/rangers-appoint-mark-warburton-manager>
. The former Brentford manager said: “I think you will agree, there is a 
certain trend developing in terms of teams playing against Rangers and I fully 
understand that.

“Teams are not going to come and do what we want them to do. They are going to 
sit in with men behind the ball and they will be very hard to break down.

“St Mirren have good quality through the spine of the team and they have 
experience and some good young players as well. They will break and they will 
counter and they are good at set pieces.“There is a real threat for us on their 
home pitch so it will be another tough test. But we go there in good form and 
looking forward to it. The boys are ready for the challenges, they are enjoying 
it.” 
 