
If there is an ideal place to stage a celebration of Arnold Wesker, who died 
in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/12/arnold-wesker-british-playwright-dies-aged-83>
, it is obviously theRoyal Court theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/24/the-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder>
. It was there in 1960 that the Wesker Trilogy was hailed as a defining moment 
in postwar British drama. But at a deeply moving celebration yesterday, in 
which friends and colleagues spoke warmly of Wesker and his work, there was no 
false sentiment. James Macdonald reminded us that George Devine and Tony 
Richardson, the Court’s first directors, had both urged Wesker to rewrite the 
third act of Roots on the grounds that you couldn’t talk endlessly about a 
character, Ronnie Kahn, who never appeared. This, as Macdonald tartly observed, 
only a few years after Waiting for Godot!

Sir Arnold Wesker obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/13/sir-arnold-wesker-obituary> 
One of the striking features of the Wesker celebration was its perceptiveness 
about the plays. Macdonald, who directeda superb revival of Roots at the Donmar 
in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/09/roots-arnold-wesker-review>, 
quoted a review of the original production by an unexpected drama critic, Ted 
Hughes. Writing in The Nation, Hughes described Wesker as “a naive lyrical poet 
full of joy and an analytical realist – in the collision of the poet and the 
analyst lies his suffering”.David Edgar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/13/arnold-wesker-playwright-david-edgar>
 also pointed out that, while Osborne’s Look Back in Anger articulated the 
social fury of the 1950s, it was Wesker “who put that anger into the context of 
history and who tapped into “the political disillusion that is one of the key 
themes of postwar drama”.

Everyone spoke well about Wesker: Janie Dee about the joys of directing a 
musical version of The Kitchen; Pamela Howard about Wesker’s late-flowering 
skill as a visual artist; Mike Leigh about a congratulatory letter he received, 
after the triumph of Secrets and Lies at Cannes, in which Wesker confessed that 
writing and directing movies was what he had always wanted to do. But I was 
especially struck by the testimony of Fiona Laird, who directed Wesker’s 
version of Dava Sobel’sLongitude 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/oct/11/theatre.art> in 2005. She had 
expected to encounter a bitter old curmudgeon. Instead she met a “loving, 
witty, hilarious, charming man”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Froots-arnold-wesker-tribute-forgotten-plays-royal-court-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdb2ddf1cbb1d7e499fa9d4d7546793bde382c1f%2F0_124_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roots%20and%20forgotten%20fruits%3A%20Wesker%20tribute%20reminds%20us%20of%20his%20later%20plays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Froots-arnold-wesker-tribute-forgotten-plays-royal-court-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roots%20and%20forgotten%20fruits%3A%20Wesker%20tribute%20reminds%20us%20of%20his%20later%20plays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Froots-arnold-wesker-tribute-forgotten-plays-royal-court-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdb2ddf1cbb1d7e499fa9d4d7546793bde382c1f%2F0_124_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Superb revival … James Macdonald’s production of Arnold Wesker’s Roots at the 
Donmar Warehouse, London, in 2013. Photograph: Stephen Cummiskey 
That is notable since Wesker had some grounds for bitterness. Of the 44 plays 
he wrote, a large number had their premieres abroad. We tend to focus on his 
early work in which, as Laird pointed out, he finds political resonance in his 
own autobiographical experience. We ignore, however, the later work in which, 
she said, “he looks from the outside in”. He wrote, for instance, a powerful 
play about false memory syndrome, Denial, of which little has been heardsince 
its premiere at the Bristol Old Vic in 2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2000/may/20/1>. Phoenix, Phoenix Burning 
Bright, dating from 2006, also shows Wesker’s ultimate scepticism about 
imprisoning doctrines and endorsement of liberal humanism.

While it is good that we live in a theatrical culture that champions youth, we 
should do more to explore the late work of the living or recently dead. It was 
deeply affecting to attend the Royal Court celebration, which ended with 
Jessica Raine’s ringing delivery of Beatie Bryant’s joyous speech of 
self-discovery from Roots. But perhaps the finest tribute we could pay toArnold 
Wesker <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/wesker> would be to present some of 
his forgotten or totally unknown plays.
 