
The tournament widely recognised as the European Tour’s curtain-raiser does 
not take place on that continent, just as the vagaries of a wraparound campaign 
mean the Abu Dhabi HSBC Championship serves as event No5. Welcome to 
professional golf in 2017; perhaps this sport is not nearly as conventional as 
its detractors would have us believe.

Related: Rory McIlroy battles back pain to hit second-round 68 at South Africa 
Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/rory-mcilroy-south-africa-open-golf-back-injury>

It is the strength of the field that assures Abu Dhabi this status. Rory 
McIlroy’s Masters buildup began this week in South Africa  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/rory-mcilroy-south-africa-open-golf-back-injury>
 but by the time he returns to the desert – where he spent much of his 
off-season – there will be Dustin Johnson, Rickie Fowler, Henrik Stenson, and 
Danny Willett for competitive company.

Jordan Spieth has opted against a repeat trip to Abu Dhabi, where he became a 
high-profile victim of the European Tour’s guidelines on slow play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/jordan-spieth-slow-play-european-tour-abu-dhabi>
 12 months ago. Not that that issue is wholly pertinent to the young Texan’s 
non-appearance: Spieth is opting for an alternative approach to the one that 
led him to cavort around the globe last winter to a level hardly necessary for 
a player with two decades of commercial pull in front of him. And make no 
mistake, commerce is key, hence Johnson is crossing the Atlantic for an 
appearance fee greater than the tournament winner will collect.

“I’ve just had more time off,” Spieth said. “I was able to take more time away 
from the game. I took more time to build my lower body up, get my legs back 
under me and feel like I’m starting this year out ready to play in a lot of 
events. 2016 was almost a rolling-into from ’15, just a couple-week break here, 
a couple-week break there. We went: Korea, back; China, back; Australia, back; 
and then Hawaii to Abu Dhabi, Singapore.

“This year, going back to the States with a couple weeks off coming up is 
going to be really nice and I feel like it’s really, really going to help me 
come the middle of the summer.”

Perhaps the Abu Dhabi lesson is to read little into the outcome. When Fowler 
secured a victory there in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/24/rickie-fowler-hsbc-championship>
, it was assumed the Californian would then batter down the major championship 
door that he had been loitering outside for so long. Fowler was spoken about as 
a key part of the leading quintet, as supposedly detached from all others. The 
reality? Fowler’s best finish in a major last year was a share of 33rd. He did 
not win again in 2016 while, poetically, the man he beat by a stroke in Abu 
Dhabi was to conclude the season of his young life so far witha starring role 
in the Ryder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/ryder-cup-diary-thomas-pieters-rookie>
. That player, Thomas Pieters of Belgium, is worthy of respect in the coming 
days.

So, too, is the European who probably did not get the credit he deserved in 
2016. Alex Noren won four times between July and November. The Swede started 
this year deservedly inside the world’s top 10 and Noren’s goal now is to 
impose himself on major championships and earn a place in the 2018 Ryder Cup 
team.

Fowler’s case is not an isolated one. Gary Stal prevailed in Abu Dhabi in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/18/martin-kaymer-collapse-gary-stal-abu-dhabi>
 but the Frenchman won more than €70,000 in a single tournament only twice for 
the remainder of that year. Pablo Larrazábal,the 2014 champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/19/pablo-larrazabal-rory-mcilroy-abu-dhabi>
, has at least won since but the Spaniard has not progressed to the level 
expected when he brilliantly held off McIlroy and Phil Mickelson.

Johnson’s Abu Dhabi debut carries extra weight because of his US Open triumph 
last June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/dustin-johnson-first-major-us-open>
. Not that the man himself, until then the most gifted player of his American 
generation without a major to his name, will do much reflection. “I’m pretty 
good at not really thinking about what I did in the past because it doesn’t 
really matter,” Johnson said.

“It’s all about what I’m doing right now and what’s coming up because it 
doesn’t matter how good a year I had last year. That doesn’t matter any more; 
it’s this year. It’s a completely new year, so we’ve all got new goals and new 
things that we want to do.”

Johnson says reaching world No1 is high among those targets. “Of course, I 
want to be the best,” the 32-year-old said.

Wider challenges for the European Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-tour> are highlighted by a glance 
at its schedule. Some tournament dates remain blank, with several of those 
confirmed lacking the prize fund to attract global stars. That said, the Tour’s 
chief executive, Keith Pelley, is due credit for pulling in fresh sponsorship 
from China for the French Open, just as the arrival of Tiger Woods in Dubai for 
the Desert Classic at the end of this month will add gloss to the early swing.
 