
Rufus Norris never expected to end up running the National Theatre 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/>. And it’s true that he comes from a quite 
different place to his predecessors. Apart from anything else, he is – what a 
strange and uncomfortable thing this is to write – the firstartistic director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/15/national-theatre-theatre> since 
Laurence Olivier not to have attended Cambridge University. “At first, it was 
very, very weird,” he says, with a sudden grin when we meet. “I really didn’t 
think it would ever happen. I was an associate director here and, after one of 
our weekly meetings, Nick [Nicholas Hytner, his astonishingly successful and 
much-loved predecessor] asked me to stay behind. At the time, I was directing a 
film,Broken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/10/broken-film-review-rufus-norris>, 
and I thought, ‘Oh, that’s it, he’s had enough; he’s going to tell me I’m not 
committing enough and terminate my associateship.’ In fact, what he said to me, 
as he did to several others, was, ‘I’m going to be hanging up my gloves and you 
should think about it.’”

It’s a sign of how far Norris, 51, was from considering such a move that when 
he went home and told his wife, the playwright Tanya Ronder, what Hytner had 
said, they didn’t even discuss it. “And when it came up again later, I said, 
‘No, I’ll never get it.’” But then something shifted. “What play or film could 
you do in the next five years that would make you glad you didn’t take the
National Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre> job if 
you were offered it?” asked Ronder, at which point he began to think. His 
children – he has two – were older and beginning to make their own way in the 
world. He would have plenty of projects on which to work if he failed. It would 
be cowardly not to apply. So he did. “I guess I thought I wouldn’t get it 
because I’m not like people who’ve done it in the past. But if you’re asking me 
if it’s not quite good that I’m not like them, well, yes, this is the first 
step to opening it out. Wouldn’t it be a great if, one day, a black woman was 
doing this job?

“The education [of his predecessors] is enviable. I’m watching my 19-year-old 
son go through all that right now and he has already read 10 times what I had 
at his age. But theatre is a living art form, not an academic one.”

When does a new job stop being a new job? Eighteen months into his tenure, 
Norris thinks he isn’t there yet. “It does still feel new,” he says. “I think 
that will continue for some time. But it’s important to remain on the front 
foot. I hope I never just sit back. I certainly don’t feel any part of me is 
sitting back at the moment. You see …Events. Every day, they come at you. Only 
this morning, two things happened, one of which is an opportunity and one of 
which is an obstacle. That said, I am much more in the groove now. It’s good to 
get the first year out of the way, to build on all the things you’ve learned.” 
What kind of things? “Well, to have a tougher skin is one. But the main thing 
is how to lead. As a freelance director, you’re only as good as your last show 
or film. You’re obsessing about your latest project, not looking at the whole 
programme. My responsibility [in this job] is to the organisation. I directed a 
lot in my first season, but this year is going to be much quieter. It will give 
me time to consolidate, to take that longer-term view. Many big projects take a 
long time to cook.”

When I heard I was to interview Norris, I pictured exciting props: a couple of 
wigs and a battered chaise longue backstage at the Lyttelton. The reality, 
inevitably, is rather more prosaic. In the end, we meet one lunchtime in a tiny 
office on the top floor of its Studio, the place where new work is developed, 
which isn’t even in the same building as the theatre. The room, its bare walls 
dotted with Blu Tack, contains a desk and three chairs, two of which belong in 
an insurance office. Through the open window comes the relentless grind of a 
drill.

Folded, at my insistence, into the third, more comfortable chair, his manner 
is at once impassioned and straightforward. “I’m not a visionary,” he’ll tell 
me later, when I ask him how he sees directing. “The job is about making 
decisions. If you’re working in a group, and you’ve got your ears open, you 
don’t have to have all the ideas.” He is a good listener, as attentive to my 
words as to his own. But he’s wary, too, perhaps because he has yet to come to 
terms with his new visibility (the other night, he and Hytner saw a show 
together, a perfectly ordinary event that was reported in a newspaper as if it 
was big news) and perhaps, too, because some of his productions have been less 
well received than others. Though it would be stupid to make too much of this 
last point. How frustrating it must be for him that some people still cling to 
the perceived failure ofWonder.land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/05/wonderland-review-occasionally-dazzling-often-garbled>
, the musical he created with Damon Albarn and Moira Buffini, when the same 
season brought us, among other amazements, Duncan Macmillan’s extraordinary 
(and extraordinarily successful) new playPeople, Places & Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/06/people-places-things-review-denise-gough-career-changing>
, Patrick Marber’sThree Days in the Country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/02/three-days-country-review-patrick-marber-mark-gatiss-john-simm-turgenev>
, a clever and joyful adaptation of Turgenev’sA Month in the Country and Carol 
Ann Duffy’s dazzlingly modern and pertinent new version ofEveryman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/03/everyman-olivier-national-theatre-review-chiwetel-ejiofor-carol-ann-duffy>
, starring Chiwetel Ejiofor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Frufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d22791ef2a07a203d51d83abc2b0bf05686dcb0%2F0_396_4336_2602%2F4336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rufus%20Norris%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20visionary.%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20have%20to%20have%20all%20the%20ideas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Frufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rufus%20Norris%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20visionary.%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20have%20to%20have%20all%20the%20ideas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Frufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d22791ef2a07a203d51d83abc2b0bf05686dcb0%2F0_396_4336_2602%2F4336.jpg>
 ‘We made a piece for teenage audiences, and they loved it’: Carly Bawden and 
Lois Chimimba in Wonder.land. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
In any case, there’s more than one way to measure success in an institution 
such as the NationalTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>. “There 
is no part of the [first] programme I don’t feel was valid,” Norris says. “I 
stand by it all. Sometimes, things aren’t received the way you want them to be. 
But if you’re talking aboutWonder.land, we made a piece for teenage audiences 
and when it played to that audience they loved it; the box-office figures over 
90 performances were fantastic.” Ticket sales are good – last year, capacity 
was at around 88% – but more importantly, the make-up of audiences is beginning 
to shift: “The number of [people booking tickets] under 35 has improved by 75%, 
the average age has come down significantly and our membership has increased.”

So is he prepared just to ignore the critics? Some of them, puffing up their 
feathers, are convinced he is ruffled; when it was announced earlier this year 
that in future they would be given one ticket on press nights rather than two, 
there were insinuations this was their punishment for having been lukewarm 
about certain shows. “No, I do read them. Often, they’re intelligent and 
knowledgeable; they go to the theatre a lot and they’re very powerful in terms 
of the audience that they bring. But at the same time, you can’t be governed by 
reviews. That’s not what our job is. Our job is to play to the audience.” Like 
anyone, he likes to be praised. “But I’ve seen plenty of shows, and directed a 
few, where I thought, well, we got away with that one. As artists, I think 
we’re far more critical of ourselves than anyone else is.”

It’s hardly a secret that he would like the National’s audiences to be more 
diverse. “It is a big tranche of what I want to do. It all comes from a simple 
belief that theatre is for everyone. We’ve just had a diversity fortnight: 
three events a day just for staff to talk about gender or faith or LGBT or 
disability issues and that has been really profound in terms of understanding 
our responsibilities. Breadth is key, too. But quality is the most important 
thing of all. We have to be a place that great artists come to, to make great 
work. The moment we slip below being world class, we have questions to answer.”

What about the news? To what degree should the National Theatre be staging 
work that responds, with some swiftness, to, say, Brexit? “Well, the first 
brilliant play about Brexit is not going to appear for a while because none of 
us knows yet what is going to happen. But what’s certainly true is that more 
than half of people who voted feel like they have no power and that their 
voices are not being heard. What they really believe is bound to be 
multilayered and complex, but what is clear is that their vote was a strong 
expression of protest. So our initial response is not to say, ‘This is what you 
should be thinking’, but to listen. We’re already running a pilot project, 
which will turn into a bigger project, which involves us going to all parts of 
the country and having conversations, one to ones, all over the place.”

Looking outwards from London is, he thinks, vital: this is the National 
Theatre, after all. It shouldn’t be seen, as so many things in London are, as 
sucking up yet more resources but rather as an engine, one whose generating 
power can be felt far and wide. On his watch, there have already been many more 
co-productions with regional theatres. “It’s not even about supporting theatre 
culture around the country, though we want to do that. There’s a lot of talent 
that we want to nurture. Through our apprenticeship and exchange programmes, we 
want to use our privilege to train people and send them out.”

I always wanted to do a big show, a dramaturgically complex show, that has no 
words

How tight is money, though? On my way here, I saw the wooden temporary 
theatre, AKA The Shed, constructed while the Cottesloe (now the Dorfman) was 
being revamped, swathed in scaffolding ahead of its removal: an unexpectedly 
mournful sight. “Actually, closing it a few months early didn’t feel that 
radical,” says Norris. “We were going to lose it anyway.” He is confident that 
the new energy it brought to the National will now shift to the Dorfman, which 
in the coming months will stage a series of what he calls “not surefire 
anythings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/03/national-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation>
”:Our Ladies of Perpetual Succour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/20/our-ladies-of-perpetual-succour-at-edinburgh-festival-review-lee-hall-alan-warner-sopranos>
, Lee Hall’s musical adaptation of Alan Warner’s cult novel The Sopranos; A 
Pacifist’s Guide to the War on Cancer, an all-singing, all-dancing examination 
of life with a cancer diagnosis created by Bryony Kimmings; and a new play,Love
, by Alexander Zeldin. But he is clear sighted about the challenges ahead.

“We are privileged. We’re supported generously by the Arts Council, 
individuals and corporations. However, this is a huge organisation and it’s not 
hard to imagine a situation where we could get into trouble very quickly. Nick 
[Hytner] and Nick [Starr, the National’s former executive director] were 
phenomenally successful. Thanks toWar Horse and some other shows, they managed 
to significantly increase turnover and that contributed massively towards 
capital projects [ie the £80m redevelopment of the building]. But when I took 
over,War Horse was coming to the end of its [West End] run, we had pretty low 
reserves and a model that was to some degree dependent on commercial income.”

The bottom line is this: hits can’t be manufactured. (Who’d have thought, for 
instance, thatOne Man, Two Guvnors would have been so successful? On paper, it 
was just an update of a creaky 18th-century Italian farce.) The theatre’s Arts 
Council funding has fallen in real terms almost 30% since 2010. Belts will have 
to be tightened.

Norris, who is one of six children, lived in Ethiopia, Malaysia and Nigeria as 
a child, where his father worked in development administration, an experience 
that had a huge influence on him. The family returned to the West Midlands when 
he was 12, where he attended a state school in Bromsgrove. Were they a 
theatrical lot? “No, music was our thing. Our mum taught us all the piano. But 
I think I’ve always been a rich fantasist, seeing things in terms of story. I 
did a bit of theatre here and there at school and then I joined theSwan Youth 
theatre <http://www.swanyouththeatre.co.uk/> in Worcester.” Instead of 
A-levels, he did a theatre foundation course at Kidderminster College of 
Further Education, after which he began trying – and failing – to get into 
drama school. “It wasn’t that I wanted to be an actor,” he says. “I just 
thought that would be a very full, three-dimensional kind of higher education.” 
But it was three years before he finally landed a place at Rada. While he 
waited, he did an apprenticeship as a painter and decorator in Birmingham; it 
was years before he could walk into a room and not notice immediately if its 
walls had been properly prepped, the wallpaper correctly cut.

Did drama school live up to his expectations? “Yes, it was great, though I 
didn’t leave thinking I wanted to be an actor. I had four years as an actor, 
but all of that time I was writing music for shows, too, and some friends and I 
formed a little self-help housing co-op. There were always other things going 
on.” He found directing through a company called Arts Threshold, a basement 
theatre in Paddington, central London, run by Brian Astbury. “He asked me to 
get involved mainly, I think, because I had building experience and he needed 
to build a theatre. But he strong-armed me into being a director. Straightaway, 
it felt right. It was a relief because I don’t think I was a terribly good 
actor.”

His career grew from there. His big break was directing David Rudkin’s Afore 
Night Come <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2001/sep/27/theatre.artsfeatures> 
at the Young Vic in 2001, for which he won theEvening Standard award for best 
newcomer. He made his debut at the National with David Eldridge’sMarket Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/jun/11/theatre1> and went on to direct 
Alecky Blythe and Adam Cork’s astonishing verbatim musicalLondon Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/apr/17/london-road-betty-blue-eyes-precious-little-talent>
, about the effect on an Ipswich community of the murder of five sex workers, a 
show I regard as one of the great theatrical experiences of my life (he looks 
rather pleased, in a cool way, when I tell him that I saw it twice). “You can’t 
blame anyone else as a director, that’s the best thing,” he says. “You chose 
the play. It’s your fault if an actor isn’t happy in a part. You cast them and 
you’re not helping them.”

His job now is all-consuming. He was in the theatre three nights last week and 
it’s tricky, for that reason, to catch work elsewhere. Often, he’ll see a 
matinee. Is his brain always clicking away or can he enjoy it like any other 
punter? “It’s hard not to turn those things off, but before the lights go down 
I’m just like everyone else: a kid; I want it to be brilliant. I suppose I can 
get distracted quicker than people not in the business.” I find this hard to 
believe: audiences are so easily distracted these days. At Marianne Elliott’s 
production ofHusbands & Sons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/01/sons-and-husbands-dorfman-observer-review>
, a suite of plays adapted from DH Lawrence, at the National Theatre last year, 
a woman two rows in front of me stared at her screen even as a miner’s body was 
laid out on a kitchen table less than a yard from the end of her nose. Can’t he 
make this stop?

I wonder for a moment if he’s about to tell me how reactionary I sound. But, 
no. “We had a meeting about it the other day,” he says. “We are wondering if 
there is a palate of recordings we should make giving different instructions to 
the audience. It used just to be ringtones, but people have their phones on 
silent now and that’s visually distracting, the light on their screen brighter 
than the stage. Some shows, it’s fun – maybe essential – to download stuff. God 
knows where augmented reality is going to go in the theatre. We’ve got a whole 
digital department thinking about that. But it can also be a disaster. In the 
theatre, you have to concentrate.”

He’s interested in the relationship not only between the audience and the 
stage, but in the effect of audience members on each other. When I tell him 
that I went through a period, some years ago, of finding the theatre 
embarrassing, he’s suddenly alert: “I think that’s really interesting. It is 
slightly shaming if you’re watching a show that’s terrible. It can make you 
embarrassed or angry. There’s a complicity. The theatre demands something of 
you.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Frufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb22915dae89d67a3f9efae2917344423d5cc49d2%2F0_268_5224_3135%2F5224.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rufus%20Norris%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20visionary.%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20have%20to%20have%20all%20the%20ideas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Frufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rufus%20Norris%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20visionary.%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20have%20to%20have%20all%20the%20ideas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Frufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb22915dae89d67a3f9efae2917344423d5cc49d2%2F0_268_5224_3135%2F5224.jpg>
 We’re Here Because We’re Here, the National Theatre’s collaboration with 
Jeremy Deller. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Reluctant to single out individual shows for praise or criticism, he will 
admit to having been pleased by the response toWe’re Here Because We’re Here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/01/wearehere-battle-somme-tribute-acted-out-across-britain>
, a collaboration between the artist Jeremy Deller and the National Theatre, in 
which around 1,500 volunteers took part in a memorial to mark the centenary of 
the Somme earlier this month. “Oh, I was totally thrilled. We turned up at 7am 
that day. The 450 soldiers who were going out into London were all getting 
kitted up here and we shouted them out. We had no idea if anyone would pay 
attention [the project was secret until the moment it was revealed, without 
explanation, to the world]. That’s a good example of trusting that if you 
process something properly – it took us two years to cook up – it will be worth 
it in the end. Though even if no one had taken any notice at all, for those 
1,500 young men and the 500 volunteers attached to it, it would still have been 
an amazing thing, a fantastic community-building event.”

What are the things he still longs to direct himself? He doesn’t have to think 
for long. “I’ve always wanted to do a big show, a dramaturgically complex and 
fully thought-through show, that has no words.” He smiles. “But that’s not 
going to happen any time soon.” Which leaves him with Shakespeare:The Tempest, 
Macbeth, Romeo and Juliet. In the meantime, though, there is a new season to 
worry about. When I tell him that it’s already quite difficult to get seats on 
certain nights forThe Red Barn 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/red-barn>, a new play by David Hare 
based on Georges Simenon’s novelLa Main, he allows himself a laugh. “Well, 
that’sgood,” he says. His eyes slide, just for a second, in the direction of 
the paper bag that contains his long-delayed lunch.

A life in theatre: Rufus Norris’s career to date


Afore Night Come
Young Vic, 2001
Having previously directed shows at the Royal Court, Birmingham Rep and Theatr 
Clwyd in Wales, it was Norris’s revival of David Rudkin’s 1962 play about a 
group of Black Country fruit pickers that brought him to prominence and earned 
him anEvening Standard award for most promising newcomer.

They said: “Like a slowly tightening noose in Norris’s expertly paced and 
shaded production,Afore Night Come moves by stealthy degrees from surface 
realism to ritual horror and atavistic violence.” (Paul Taylor, theIndependent)

Festen
Almeida theatre, 2004
An adaptation of the 1998 Dogme film, this production cemented Norris’s 
reputation, securing him theEvening Standard award for best director, a 
Critics’ Circle award and, following its West End transfer, the accolade of 
“the year’s best play” by theGuardian’s Michael Billington. Though it later 
flopped on Broadway, in 2008 Norris restored his reputation Stateside with five 
Tony nominations for his staging ofLes Liaisons Dangereuses.

They said: “One of the most powerful and poignant evenings I’ve ever spent in 
the theatre.” (Mark Shenton, BBC)

Market Boy
National Theatre, 2006
Towards the end of an associate directorship at the Young Vic (from 
2002-2007), Norris made his debut at the National withMarket Boy, about market 
traders in Essex in the 1980s. One of his many collaborations with the 
playwright David Eldridge, it had a mixed reception but the vibrancy of 
Norris’s production was highly praised by critics alongside his willingness to 
explore the issues at the heart of contemporary Britain.

They said: “It’s bold, brash, and fabulous. It’s also overlong, and there’s 
little complexity to its parade of characters... But nuance would be out of 
place in a portrayal of an era devoid of subtlety and such audacity means 
you’ll forgive Eldridge and Norris almost anything. This production has a true 
spirit of daring - it’s exhilarating.” (Sam Marlowe, theTimes)

London Road
National Theatre, 2011
Considered by many to be the highlight of Norris’s career so far, the book for 
this musical about the 2006 murders of five prostitutes in Ipswich was drawn 
from interviews with the community by playwright Alecky Blythe. It revitalised 
the form, winning a 2011 Critics’ Choice award. In 2015, Norris directed a film 
version.

They said: “One of the most imaginative, and low-tech, pieces of musical 
theatre of the last 10 years.” (Susannah Clapp, theObserver)

Everyman
National Theatre, 2015
The first production Norris directed at the National after assuming his 
artistic directorship,Everyman was seen as a bold statement of his intentions. 
Carol Ann Duffy’s take on the 15th-century morality play, which cast Chiwetel 
Ejiofor in the title role, was the first to showcase Norris’s determination to 
promote diversity and inclusivity at the National.

They said: “Norris’s virtuosic production... captures both the frantic 
dizziness of a money-driven world and the beckoning finality of death.” 
(Michael Billington, theGuardian)

Wonder.land
Manchester international festival then National Theatre, 2015
This musical version of Alice in Wonderland, created by Norris, Moira Buffini 
and Blur’s Damon Albarn, was his second collaboration with Albarn afterDr Dee 
in 2011. While the play wasn’t particularly well received by critics, Norris 
has said that the teenage audiences it was made for loved it.

They said: “The Alice books are transfixing because, like a dream, they sidle 
between the recognisable and the bizarre...This wonder.land just wheels on one 
strange thing after another.” (Susannah Clapp, theObserver) Jonny Lawrence
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Frufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0cd9095f48c6a8c1f779a02a18d3050942e38ca%2F0_73_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rufus%20Norris%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20visionary.%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20have%20to%20have%20all%20the%20ideas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Frufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rufus%20Norris%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20visionary.%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20have%20to%20have%20all%20the%20ideas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Frufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0cd9095f48c6a8c1f779a02a18d3050942e38ca%2F0_73_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
 Stephen Moore and Jane Asher in Festen. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Frufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdd39f4ccb9694c2171194938dae8749004631f0%2F0_308_4182_2509%2F4182.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rufus%20Norris%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20visionary.%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20have%20to%20have%20all%20the%20ideas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Frufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rufus%20Norris%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20visionary.%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20have%20to%20have%20all%20the%20ideas%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Frufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdd39f4ccb9694c2171194938dae8749004631f0%2F0_308_4182_2509%2F4182.jpg>
 Chiwetel Ejiofor in Everyman Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian  