
Plenty of reality shows reward people with talent, whether that’s cooking, 
sewing, singing or dancing. But there is only one show where the contestants 
are forced to create choreography, write original raps, act in bawdy 
Shakespearean revisions, turn bolts of fabric and mounds of glitter into 
amazing outfits, and, of course, lip-synch for their lives. The effort that it 
takes to stay on RuPaul’s Drag Race to the finish is herculean, and the drama 
and antics that go on before the finale are always entertaining.

Logo’s biggest show (let’s be honest, Logo’s only show) returns on Monday 7 
March at 9pm ET for its second-to-last season, and to get everyone in the mood 
here are 10 of the best moments from the first seven seasons.

Willam’s big exit
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAC7YnPMrhfk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAC7YnPMrhfk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAC7YnPMrhfk&media=>
In one of the craziest episodes of all time, Willam went from winning the 
challenge to barfing on camera to being mysteriously asked to leave the show 
for breaking the rules. This season four stunner was enough to make your head 
turn faster than RuPaul changes outfits. It was later revealed that Willam had 
been receiving conjugal visits from her husband, which was the violation that 
caused her early dismissal. Sort of a lame reason, but boy was that a hell of 
an episode.

Sharon Needles and Phi Phi O’Hara’s smackdown
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2D25oQNFzlo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2D25oQNFzlo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2D25oQNFzlo&media=>
It wouldn’t be a reality show if there weren’t some people who weren’t there 
to make friends getting all up in each other’s faces. It’s even better when 
those faces are only half covered in stage makeup. Here season four winner 
Sharon Needles, er, needles arch rival Phi Phi O’Hara even though she already 
won a challenge. The fight ends with what would become one of the show’s most 
quoted putdowns of all time: “Go back to Party City where you belong.”

Let’s get physical
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXgjh5zL2XuU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXgjh5zL2XuU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXgjh5zL2XuU&media=>
The final portion of each episode, where the two performers in danger of being 
eliminated must “lip-synch for their lives” is always the most dramatic part. 
In season three, Mimi Imfurst tried to inject some comedy into the proceedings 
by picking up rival India Ferrah in a firefighter’s carry. Not only did India 
freak out, the judges were hardly amused. Mimi was one of the first to go.

Little Edie’s big moment
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTLiA1aJ3oFA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTLiA1aJ3oFA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTLiA1aJ3oFA&media=>
One of the most eagerly anticipated episodes each year is when contestants 
play the Snatch Game, a version of the 70s game show Match Game where each lady 
has to impersonate a celebrity. Eventual season five winner Jinkx Monsoon went 
out on a limb and decided to play Little Edie Beale, one of the subjects of the 
classic documentaryGrey Gardens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/06/grey-gardens-documentary-maker-albert-maysles-dies-aged-88>
. Most of the other queens didn’t get the reference, but RuPaul and judges 
Julie Brown and Julie Brown (yes, there were two of them and, yes, they were 
both on MTV) understood and recognized that it was absolutely flawless – and 
staunch.

Wigs stacked
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnGIImEQSfVg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnGIImEQSfVg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnGIImEQSfVg&media=>
One of the most overused tactics to get attention during the final lip-synch 
challenge is for a queen to snatch off her wig. It never manages to impress in 
quite the way performers think it will. Unless that performer is Roxxxy Andrews 
who pulled off her wig to Willow Smith’s Whip My Hair and revealed another wig 
underneath her first. Even the judges had to freak out at that one and it was 
one of the highlights of season five. Both she and Alyssa Edwards both 
performed so well, RuPaul let them both stay for another week.

In the nut house
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db64m5_3_6dY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db64m5_3_6dY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db64m5_3_6dY&media=>
Season four’s Latrice Royale is one of the most beloved contestants of all 
time, even though she didn’t win. She openly discussed her previous stint in 
prison, and that was never more challenging than when she had to play a prison 
warden in one of the program’s comedy theatricals. Latrice pulled it together 
and delivered the scene’s killer punchline, “Get those nuts away from my face.” 
Prison became a place where Latrice could finally triumph.

The Cole enchilada
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAV8pyt9wOHA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAV8pyt9wOHA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAV8pyt9wOHA&media=>
There are plenty of drag queens that lip-synch to their idols’ records, but it 
isn’t very often that a drag queen gets to lip-synchin front of her idol. DiDa 
Ritz got the chance to perform the late, great Natalie Cole’s song This Will Be 
(An Everlasting Love) when Cole was a guest judge on the show. DiDa delivered a 
mind-meltingly perfect performance. She was an otherwise forgettable 
contestant, but thanks to one unforgettable star, she’s earned her place in 
her-story.

Slapped senseless
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUM8jHaO41SE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUM8jHaO41SE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUM8jHaO41SE&media=>
RuPaul often makes the finalists of each season perform in some sort of silly 
skit with her in the last episode. For the show’s second season, RuPaul staged 
a scene where she got to slap each one of her girls. Once she crowned Tyra 
Sanchez the winner, there were plenty of viewers that wished they could turn 
around and slap RuPaul for poor judgment.

Splits screen
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F91484389&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F91484389> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F91484389&media=>
Laganja Estranga was perhaps the most annoying thing on television since that 
never-ending beep that announces a test of the emergency broadcast system. But 
when she and Joslyn Fox did unplanned simultaneous splits while performing 
Pink’s Stupid Girls during season six, it was the kind of moment that made 
everyone watching jump up off the couch and wag their fingers at the screen. 
Also, Laganja was sent packing after this number, so it is a twice blessed 
event.

A Big Ru-veal 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUxYxs_4I_0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUxYxs_4I_0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUxYxs_4I_0&media=>
The only thing Drag Race loves more than a fierce lip-synch and a sickening 
look is some raw emotion. We got it in spades when Ongina won a challenge 
related to HIV advocacy and divulged on national television that she is living 
with the virus. Her teary testimonial had mascara running all over the place. 
Really, this is the only thing worth remembering about Drag Race’s shaky first 
season.

 * This article was amended on 7 March 2016; the eighth season is not the 
second-to-last.  