
A Lokomotiv Moscow <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lokomotivmoscow> 
footballer has tested already strained relations between Russia and Turkey by 
removing his shirt at the end of a match in Istanbul to reveal a picture of 
Vladimir Putin.

Midfielder Dmitri Tarasov’s cut-off T-shirt depicted Putin in a navy cap with 
the words “most polite president” printed below. Putin power did not work in 
this case, as Turkish sideFenerbahçe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fenerbahce> won the match 2-0.

Ties between the two countries deteriorated in November when Turkey downed a 
Russian jet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/nov/24/turkey-downs-russian-jet-what-do-we-know>
 that it said had violated the country’s airspace after a bombing run in Syria. 
Russia responded with economic sanctions, and now the countries arelocked in a 
de facto proxy war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/09/ever-heightening-tension-putin-puts-turkey-in-a-corner>
 in Syria as Ankara backs rebels and Moscow supports president Bashar 
al-Assad’s forces and Syrian Kurds.

The phrase on Tarasov’s T-shirt was an allusion to the unmarked troops who 
occupied Crimea in March 2014 and were popularly referred to as “polite people” 
and “little green men”, before Putin admitted that they had been Russian 
soldiers.Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> has condemned 
Russia’s annexation of Crimea and its treatment of Turkic-speaking Crimean 
Tatars.

Turkey caught between aiding Turkmen and economic dependence on Russia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/turkey-caught-between-aiding-turkmen-and-economic-dependence-on-russia>
Police detained three people on Tuesday after bottles and stones were thrown 
at a bus carrying Lokomotiv fans to the match, which was the highest-profile 
sporting event between the two countries since the downing of the jet. Several 
Turkish news outlets decried Tarasov’s shirt as a “provocation”.

“I didn’t want any provocations, I’m just a patriot of my country, and Putin 
is the president of our country,”Tarasov later told LifeNews 
<http://lifenews.ru/news/185682>, adding that he might wear a Putin shirt “with 
a different caption” at his next match.

But European football’s governing body, Uefa, which forbids political 
statements during matches, is expected to take disciplinary action against 
Lokomotiv. Tarasov could be disqualified for a minimum of 10 matches, R-Sport 
news agency quoted a Uefa source as saying.

The match was in the Europa League’s round of 32. Fenerbahçe will play 
Lokomotiv again in Moscow on 25 February.
 