
I’m a footballer,” laughs Russell Tovey’s character in his new film, The Pass. 
“Of course I’m not gay.” The week we meet, in the London flat where Tovey lives 
with his French bulldog Rocky and a rotating collection of contemporary art, 
Premier League football teams across the UK are playing in rainbow laces to 
supportStonewall <http://www.stonewall.org.uk/>. On Facebook, a cascade of 
homophobia appears under images of the campaign, fans commenting that they are 
withdrawing their support of clubs they’d loved all their lives, that they’re a 
disgrace, disgusting, evil. Seeing this, it’s perhaps unsurprising there are no 
out gay players in the premiership. Tovey’s hope is that one might accidentally 
stumble into a screening of the film and emerge, changed.

A story set in three hotel rooms over 12 years, The Pass was inspired by a 
photograph of Manchester United’s FA Youth Cup-winning team from 1992. Paul 
Scholes and David Beckham stand beside the anonymous boys who dropped out of 
the game soon after. “I started thinking about the notion of a golden period of 
your life,” says writer John Donnelly, “from which you can never quite escape.” 
He wondered whether the boys who don’t make itare always the ones filled with 
regret.

First staged at the Royal Court, The Pass is a game of three halves, a love 
story that nods at the tragedy ofJustin Fashanu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/sep/20/justin-fashanu-problems-gay-sport>
, who killed himself in 1998 after becoming the first player to publicly come 
out. It starts with two boys at the beginning of their career and ends with 
Tovey as a superstar footballer, the other, happy. Tovey was seduced by the 
description of a “sporty Hamlet”; Donnelly wrote the part of Jason with him in 
mind. “He’s such a terrific actor, Russell,” he tells me later, “and a classic 
Essex boy – charming, warm, gregarious, with this incredible sensitivity. And 
Jason really needs that because there are monstrous elements to his character.” 
He needed an actor an audience wanted to like, and Tovey has that special 
gleam, a charisma that fills his huge warehouse apartment like smoke.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUdT4t1mRnB0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUdT4t1mRnB0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUdT4t1mRnB0&media=>
Out in the world, though, he’s fairly anonymous – walking through London he 
says, people only see his dog. “I only get recognised if I wear blue,” Tovey 
confides. “I don’t know why. But if I’m feeling needy I wear an electric blue 
suit.” It helped, too, that for a character who spends much of the story in his 
underpants, he was willing to work out. Today Tovey is fully dressed, bright 
and relaxed after flying in from New York where he’s shooting the crime drama 
seriesQuantico – Google it with his name, and the first page of results are 
blogs about his character going topless. At 35, bounding through the flat, he 
appears more puppyish even than his bulldog.

Born in Billericay to parents who run a coach company, Tovey was first noticed 
for roles inThe History Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jan/11/alan-bennett-history-boys-dr-who>
 and the BBC’sHim & Her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/nov/01/him-and-her-tv-review>. 
But around his 30th birthday, something changed: Tovey (out since he was 18) 
started playing gay. “It wasn’t a conscious decision,” he says, “and it was 
only the other day that I realised it had been important somehow. For so long, 
as a young actor, I had this anxiety about making sure I could get straight 
roles, and now I know that’s not necessary. The gay roles are the best for me. 
Being gay has made my career.” As well asThe Pass, he excelled in HBO’s Looking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/19/andrew-haigh-looking-melancholy-exists-peoples-lives>
, about a group of men in San Francisco discovering the complexities of 
contemporary gay relationships; he plays a gay man inQuantico; next year he 
stars in Angels in America, and recently he appeared on Broadway as Rodolpho in 
Arthur Miller’sA View from the Bridge. “And it’s made me realise that just like 
there’s not just one way to play a straight person, or one story to tell, there 
are a billion fascinating wonderful stories to tell with gay characters. A 
billion adventures to have.”

Last year, he casually suggested he had benefited from not going to drama 
school, suggesting it would have made him “prance around” being “effeminate”. 
He was unprepared for the backlash, for the accusations of internalised 
homophobia, and winces a little as he remembers. Being out, and in the public 
eye, he realised then, “meant I had a responsibility. If I’m going to be seen 
as a ‘pioneer’, a gay man and a performer, I need to make sure I put out a 
positive message.” He raps his knuckles on the table for emphasis. “Things are 
great for me, and I want to show that’s possible.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Frussell-tovey-being-gay-made-my-career%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bff19f0bb127b175fcc00e126372db0e043ea2c%2F0_19_2259_1355%2F2259.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russell%20Tovey%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20gay%20made%20my%20career'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Frussell-tovey-being-gay-made-my-career%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russell%20Tovey%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20gay%20made%20my%20career%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Frussell-tovey-being-gay-made-my-career%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bff19f0bb127b175fcc00e126372db0e043ea2c%2F0_19_2259_1355%2F2259.jpg>
 ‘There’s not just one story to tell’: on stage with Mark Strong in New York in 
A View From The Bridge. Photograph: Jan Versweyveld/AP 
It’s a message that runs through The Pass, too, a film in which Tovey says 
he’s given his best performance yet, despite knowing nothing about football. He 
knew enough, though, to understand that homophobia still runs through the sport 
like a poisoned stream. “If a premiership footballer came out now it would be a 
wonderful thing, and I hope one is brave enough to, but it would inevitably 
eclipse their entire career, wouldn’t it? It would take a brave man to take 
that on, to take on the chants,” Tovey says, shaking his head. Even Greg 
Clarke, the FA chairman, said he doesn’t think football is ready for a gay 
player to come out, adding that it might be a “year or two” before it’s safe.

Rangers midfielder Joey Barton has also admitted that, in the stands, if you 
“pull out of a tackle you’re a ‘poof’,” while players use homophobic insults in 
the training ground. “It’s this off-the-cuff linguistic intolerance and 
thoughtlessness that makes the football industry in general, and football 
stadiums specifically, so intimidating for LGBT fans,” Barton wrote on his blog 
in 2014. “I can’t imagine a gay couple feeling so comfortable that they’d be 
happy to wander down Wembley Way hand in hand, can you?” he continued. However 
it’s one thing for straight footballers to point out homophobia, adds Donnelly, 
but quite another for them to change. “It has the effect of pushing the blame 
on to fans and gay players themselves. Clubs need to be much more active in 
saying the game needs gay fans, it needs gay players at all levels, what can we 
do to change this?”

Russell is a classic Essex boy: charming, warm and gregarious with incredible 
sensitivity

In preparation for the role, Tovey went to an Arsenal game with friends. 
Donnelly, a huge football fan, was relieved when Tovey told him he was blown 
away by the atmosphere – that he got it: the “gladiatorial, visceral thrill”. 
“I had a season ticket to watch Southampton at The Dell,” remembers Donnelly. 
“I grew up never knowing my dad, and on some level it was a place to observe 
men.” If the story started with the photograph, it ended with Donnelly and 
Tovey questioning what it means to be a man. “Rates of depression in young men 
are sky high, and an inability to share who you are is a part of that. The 
extent of how hard that is – for young male athletes to open up emotionally – 
shocked me,” Donnelly says.

“This feels like a really important film,” Tovey says. “My character has it 
all, but is hollow, while the other guy [played byArinze Kene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/feb/25/arinze-kene-gods-property>] can 
sit in the pub and hold hands with his boyfriend. That is the happy ending. 
There is a person who is living his life, knowing who he is. The other man is 
ruined, because he has never accepted it. It’s a tragic thought. And it makes 
me feel even luckier, because I’ve never had to hide who I am.” He gives a 
lopsided smile, embarrassed suddenly.

Today, Tovey says he feels a “calmness”. “When I was younger, towards the end 
ofHistory Boys, my ambition was sky high. For many years I was chasing, 
chasing… Now I let it go and realise things will come to me. Everything’s built 
up to the performance in this film.” There’s still ambition there though. He 
wants to play a superhero. He wants to work with Mike Leigh. He wants to do a 
Pinter play on Broadway. “I want to be pushed into dramatic, painful roles I 
can explore.” He thinks for a second. “I read about an actor who heard an 
accident on the street, and ran down the stairs to help. But on the way down, 
there was a mirror. And he stopped, to see what he looked like. I’m not as bad 
as that, but I do have emotional recall of moments in my life – I want to use 
them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Frussell-tovey-being-gay-made-my-career%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2018ff67da83b8da28ce0f7d2be1c02618e1102d%2F0_288_5906_3543%2F5906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russell%20Tovey%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20gay%20made%20my%20career'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Frussell-tovey-being-gay-made-my-career%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russell%20Tovey%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20gay%20made%20my%20career%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Frussell-tovey-being-gay-made-my-career%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2018ff67da83b8da28ce0f7d2be1c02618e1102d%2F0_288_5906_3543%2F5906.jpg>
 Where the art is: at home in London, where Tovey displays a rotating 
collection of art. Photograph: Sophia Spring for the Observer 
Which moments? “My nan’s funeral. The moment my parents told me she had died. 
When the horse and cart turned up, the noise my auntie made.” His eyes fill 
with tears. “See? We had a dog called Tasha who had to be put down when I was 
five. Dad went into the vet, and when he got back in the car he started 
crying.” His voice cracks, and I wait. “There’s a detachment there, because I 
remember thinking, ‘You’ll have this for ever.’”

Does that mean he wasn’t experiencing it at the time? He was saving it? “I do 
have that ability to compartmentalise my feelings. But you need to live to be 
able to portray someone else living. I live!” It sounds a little like he’s 
boasting, and he chuckles. “I live through art, too.”

My character has it all, but is hollow. It makes me feel lucky as I’ve never 
had to hide who I am

He travels now, not just for work, but to visit small galleries he’s 
interested in – his whole demeanour changes when he talks about art, slowly, 
with purpose. He takes me on a tour of his collection: the ceramics in the 
kitchen, a huge graphite drawing that glitters in sunlight. When he received 
his first cheque forThe History Boys his parents were bemused by his decision 
to spend it on a Tracey Emin monoprint. You get the impression he enjoys 
playing with people’s expectations of him – an Essex boy who is proudly out, a 
six-packed actor obsessed with conceptual art, a pin-up who is looking forward 
to a murder-mystery party on New Year’s Eve. “And I live through my mates, my 
boyfriend, family, my dog. You need the real stuff.”

The other day he was organising a quiz night with his mates, thinking of funny 
names for their team, “And I was like, ‘But we can’t be too rude because 
there’ll be adults there.’” It wasn’t until his friends snorted with laughter 
that he remembered he is 35. “Does anyone really feel like an adult? I mean, I 
have moments. I know who I am now. Having a dog – a responsibility for a living 
thing. I think about him all the time. That’s made me grow up.” At the sound of 
his name, Rocky patters over to Tovey, who lifts him on to his lap. “I worked 
hard on raising him. When he was a puppy, Rocky used to eat his own shit. I had 
to feed him pineapple so the shit would taste citric and he’d stop. But it just 
made him love pineapple.” He giggles.

What matters to him is that people see this film. “How can we get people in?” 
he wonders. “The ones who really need it?” The closeted boys, the people 
terrified to be honest with their families, the famous man dying inside. His 
eyes open wide, and he leans forward. “I know,” he says. “Lie. Write that it’s 
a football hooligan movie. ” OK, I say. It’s a football hooligan movie. You’ll 
love it.

The Pass is out now in cinemas nationwide
 