
When Thomas Pieters struck his first tee shot at 11.26am local time, the 
24‑year‑old became the first European rookie to play in all five sessions since 
Miguel Ángel Jiménez, Paul Lawrie and Sergio García at the Battle of Brookline 
in 1999. After a 3&2 win against JB Holmes, the Belgian became the first rookie 
on either team to win at least four matches at a singleRyder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> since Larry Nelson, who won five 
at the Greenbrier in 1979 (including four against Seve Ballesteros). “I didn’t 
feel like a rookie, so I think that’s good,” he said afterwards. “Especially 
playing with Rory [McIlroy, on Friday and Saturday], it was smooth sailing for 
us – gave me all the confidence going into today.”

USA’s red ruse falls short

The idea of a sports team encouraging fans to wear a single colour to engender 
an intimidating atmosphere first began in 1987 when the National Hockey 
League’s Winnipeg Jets encouraged fans to wear all white in their first‑round 
play-off series against the Calgary Flames. It has since been widely co-opted 
by college football teams, most notably Penn State. The PGA looked to bring the 
trend to Hazeltine for the finale on Sunday, issuing a press release on Friday 
calling for a “Red Out” as part of the “We Are 13” campaign designed to unite 
the nation behind the dozen USA players in their quest to reclaim the Ryder 
Cup. But it seemed many of the 51,000 fans in attendance missed the memo as 
there was scarcely more red visible than on Friday and Saturday.

Ryder Cup celebrates the true spirit of sport
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/02/ryder-cup-celebrates-spirit-sport-hazeltine>
Murray chips in

The tallish figure beneath the bucket hat who bore an uncanny resemblance to 
Carl Spackler slipped into the press grandstand behind the opening tee almost 
unnoticed several minutes before Patrick Reed and Rory McIlroy teed off in the 
first grouping on Sunday. “Are you ready? Are you ready to scream?” he chirped 
excitedly before drumming up a back-and-forth chant of “America!” that was slow 
to start but rose to deafening levels and then vanishing as quickly as he had 
appeared. It is hard to believe Bill Murray can mill about the course 
unattended without being mobbed by fans, but no one said the Ryder Cup was a 
normal event.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fryder-cup-diary-thomas-pieters-rookie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F407ebb964102de262118eac5c43db72865bb9772%2F451_756_3477_2086%2F3477.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryder%20Cup%20diary%3A%20Thomas%20Pieters%20the%20busy%20rookie%20joins%20trio%20of%20European%20greats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fryder-cup-diary-thomas-pieters-rookie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryder%20Cup%20diary%3A%20Thomas%20Pieters%20the%20busy%20rookie%20joins%20trio%20of%20European%20greats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fryder-cup-diary-thomas-pieters-rookie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F407ebb964102de262118eac5c43db72865bb9772%2F451_756_3477_2086%2F3477.jpg>
 Bill Murray mills about by the first tee. Photograph: Megan Blank/PGA of 
America/PGA via Getty Images 
Respect for all

The PGA issued a statement half an hour before Sunday’s play began emphasising 
a “zero-tolerance policy” on the use of vulgar or profane language towards the 
players. The statement, issued to the media and transmitted to fans across the 
grounds through the Ryder Cup app, came one day after McIlroy saw tothe 
ejection of a heckler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/01/ryder-cup-empty-heads-lager-atmosphere-fans-behaviour>
 who had made reference to his former partner Caroline Wozniacki amid 
profanity‑laced taunts during the fourballs on Saturday afternoon – though 
McIlroy has hardly been the only European player to endure verbal abuse at 
Hazeltine. “Rooted in the ideals of sportsmanship and international goodwill, 
the Ryder Cup is about having a spirited passion for not only the victory, but 
for the game of golf,” the statement read. “We are encouraging all spectators 
on Sunday to be passionate and support their team in a way that is respectful 
to those around them, the players, and the Ryder Cup. Our security staff will 
continue to enforce a zero-tolerance policy, removing from the course any fans 
who are disruptive in any way, including the use of vulgar or profane language 
directed at the players.”

Spieth’s damp squib

Jordan Spieth <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jordan-spieth> was given a 
rules refresher during his 3&2 defeat against Henrik Stenson as his singles 
hoodoo in team events continued. The two-times major champion was already 
two-down to the Open champion and Olympic silver medallist when he sent his 
approach into the waterline of a hazard on the par‑five 16th. After inspecting 
the lie Spieth, 23, removed his shoes and rolled up his trousers before 
stepping in to attempt a shot, but he incurred a penalty that effectively cost 
him the match when he caused the ball to move. “Are you sure?” the Texan asked 
the rules official, whose consultation of the rule book suggested he in fact 
was not. Alas, Spieth’s fate was soon confirmed and he dipped to a fourth 
defeat in four career singles matches in Ryder Cup and Presidents Cup play.

Hazeltine on the map

Hazeltine has now played host to the US Open, PGA Championship, US Senior 
Open, US Women’s Open, US Amateur and the Ryder Cup – every major American golf 
event besides the Masters, which is always played at Augusta National. Only one 
other course, North Carolina’s Pinehurst, can boast as robust a résumé. This of 
course is by design. The former United StatesGolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Association president, Totton P 
Heffelfinger, established the suburban Minnesota club with the explicit aim of 
building a course “suitable for the conduct of national championships”. 
Fifty‑four years on, consider that mission accomplished.
 