
It’s your early 20s. You’ve just emerged from higher education. 
Congratulations! Now go and live in a strange city to do a job you don’t like 
or understand, while painfully screwing up your first grown-up relationships. 
The obvious solution to not knowing what you’re doing is to party your way 
through it… but preferably without spiralling down to the point where you’re 
wasted 24/7, taking showers with your suit on, and being sick in your mouth 
during crucial meetings. That’s the fate of Danny, the young office manager 
played by Sacha Dhawan in queasily convincing new Channel 4 dramedy Not Safe 
for Work.

This monstrous, immersive comic turn is a level-up role for the 31-year-old 
Mancunian, who has become dangerously close to ubiquitous in TV drama recently. 
He was a scene-stealing wrong ’un in Line Of Duty and Last Tango in Halifax and 
a bio-terrorist in Utopia, alongside gentler roles provided by his friend Mark 
Gatiss in The Tractate Middoth and Doctor Who biopic An Adventure In Space And 
Time.

Perhaps most memorably of all, 10 years ago, Dhawan was one of the unknowns – 
along with Russell Tovey, Dominic Cooper, James Corden and NSFW co-star Samuel 
Barnett – given a golden ticket byThe History Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/oct/15/comedy.drama>, the National 
Theatre play that became a global theatrical hit and, in 2006, a film.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwvXgpLSRVYQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwvXgpLSRVYQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwvXgpLSRVYQ&media=>
“Alan Bennett! I’d studied him for my GCSEs!” exclaims Dhawan when he meets 
the Guide for coffee and eggs at a cafe near his north London flat, recalling 
the moment when he was lifted out of obscurity. Since then, he’s become one of 
the most visible British-Asian actors on TV, never once typecast by his 
ethnicity. Look again at most of his roles: they could have easily been played 
by a white actor.

“The generation who will watch Not Safe For Work, my generation, don’t care 
who plays a part,” he says. “Sometimes there’s all this baggage: we’ve got to 
have this about his family, we’ve got to mention this. Cliches. There’s no 
freedom to own it.”

Initially, NSFW centres on Katherine (Zawe Ashton), a civil servant exiled 
from London to Northampton, where the immigration think tank she created has 
been relocated and staffed with idiots. Ashton is brilliant as a young woman 
reacting fiercely as her potential glugs down the toilet. But it’s Dhawan who 
gives the show its grotesque comic guts as Katherine’s terrifyingly mashed 
boss: you’ll feel hung over just watching.

Dhawan’s approach was not so much method as methodical. “I’ve seen actors play 
addicts and it can be a little generic,” he says. “But Danny takes a lot of 
different substances – coke, ketamine, pills, marijuana, sweets, chocolate – so 
I wanted to make every reaction specific. I talked to loads of people and 
watched loads of footage. There’s stuff on YouTube where people film their 
mates on ketamine.”

Could he have just spent a weekend trying all the drugs himself? “I did think: 
‘Maybe I’ll do that.’ Then I thought: ‘I might die.’”
 History in the making: Dhawan with Alan Bennett on the History Boys set 
TV has historically struggled to accurately capture the weightless dread of 
realising you’re ill-equipped for adulthood. Not Safe For Work is, unless Being 
Human counts, the first attempt in quite some time. Originally titled Cut and 
promoted with the emphasis on graduates being caught by austerity, it’s 
developed into a more rounded look at characters who have all stalled for 
subtly sad reasons. Writer DC Moore gives the ensemble cast a distinct speech 
pattern: halting, vulnerable, defensively sarcastic. “Everyone’s misplaced, 
searching for some kind of stability,” Dhawan says. “Danny’s basically never 
had any form of guidance. He’s been born and left to his own devices.”

You can understand why Dhawan names Not Safe For Work as his favourite role. 
He professes not to care about how it could promote him from solid supporting 
actor to star. “I’m interested in the dark horse. It’s too scary being the face 
of something, unless it’s really right. A lot of young actors want to get a 
lead role, get into Hollywood. I do everything slow and steady.”

Dhawan has, in fact, been to America already: in 2010 he was cast in 
Outsourced, an NBC culture-clash sitcom set in a Mumbai call centre.

“After the success of Slumdog Millionaire,” he recalls, “America said: ‘We can 
do our Indian thing now. Indian actors are funny! They can dance!’ They saw a 
gap in the market.”

He auditioned for the show in London and, before he knew it, he had signed a 
five-year deal and was living in LA, getting the fear. “I loved the work, but I 
remember being in the hotel, on the top floor. You couldn’t even open the 
window, and I thought: ‘This is my home?’ And I felt so sad. I was going out, 
partying in Vegas, drinking a lot suddenly, being a bit aggressive.”

Outsourced was axed after one season. “Actors are always last to know,” he 
says. “I turned up at an event for Victoria’s Secret, got out of the car. 
‘Ladies and gentlemen, Sacha Dhawan from Outsourced!’ The photographers put 
their cameras down – ‘Guys, that show’s just been cancelled.’ I had to do a 
walk of shame. I came back to the UK and said: ‘Start again.’”

Dhawan’s wobbles have stayed with him. While he might not have self-destructed 
as messily as Danny does in Not Safe For Work, he certainly knows what it’s 
like to be young and lost.

Not Safe For Work begins 30 June, 10pm, Channel 4
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fsacha-dhawan-not-safe-for-work%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435161481840%2Fe71fbd11-e85d-4444-94ea-85f121fd00bd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sacha%20Dhawan%3A%20'My%20generation%20don't%20care%20who%20plays%20a%20part'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fsacha-dhawan-not-safe-for-work%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sacha%20Dhawan%3A%20%27My%20generation%20don%27t%20care%20who%20plays%20a%20part%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fsacha-dhawan-not-safe-for-work%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435161481840%2Fe71fbd11-e85d-4444-94ea-85f121fd00bd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Working it: Zawe Ashton, Sacha Dhawan and Jo Hartley in NSFW. Photograph: 
Brian Sweeney  