
Busy week for

Napoli coach Maurizio Sarri: attacking “embarrassing” prejudice from racist 
Lazio fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/04/lazio-napoli-serie-a-match-halted-due-to-racist-chanting-kalidou-koulibaly>
 – “it left us all upset”; and clarifying why hecalled Roberto Mancini a 
“faggot” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/19/internazionale-napoli-roberto-mancini-maurizio-sarri>
: “I just meant he was a show-off. It was nothing to do with sex.”

• Nailing the line on the racist chants from Lazio’s perspective – president 
Claudio Lotito: “It’s not racism, black lads play for Lazio too 
<http://www.football-italia.net/79439/lotito-%E2%80%98lazio-have-black-players%E2%80%A6%E2%80%99>
.” His previous best:2005 – Lotito on Paolo Di Canio’s salutes 
<https://i.guim.co.uk/img/static/sys-images/Sport/Pix/columnists/2013/4/1/1364816687770/Paolo-Di-Canio-008.jpg?w=620&q=85&auto=format&sharp=10&s=dc9fab819f4b3ea5257f0d57fee81e36>
: “It’s not a political gesture,even the Pope does it 
<http://www.gazzetta.it/Calcio/Squadre/Lazio/Primo_Piano/2005/12_Dicembre/19/lazio.shtml>
.”2013 – Lotito on monkey chants, which ultras dismissed as “banter” 
<http://www.espnfc.co.uk/italian-serie-a/story/1528980/lazio-fans-reject-ridiculous-racism-accusation>
: “This debate is taking a bad turn, Lazio gets seen as racist and it’s not.We 
have black players too 
<http://www.football-italia.net/29117/lotito-lazio-fans-arent-racist>.” 2014 – 
Lotito on FA president Carlo Tavecchio calling black players “banana eaters”: “
Even the priest at the altar can make a mistake 
<http://www.football-italia.net/52696/lotito-tavecchio-not-criminal>. Carlo 
just used a colourful term. You are blowing all this up in the media.”

Also sending a message

Uefa: reassessing Dynamo Kyiv’s two-game stadium ban for racist violence – 
cutting it to one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/02/uefa-dynamo-kyiv-manchester-city>
, and halving their fine to €50,000.

Football family news

• Best clean break: Paraguay’s Alejandro Domínguez, elected unopposed as head 
of Conmebol 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-01-26/south-america-names-new-soccer-leader-following-u-s-arrests>
, pledging “a new era of credibility”. Domínguez, a close ally of extradited 
predecessor Juan Ángel Napout, says he’ll bring a fresh attitude: “Transparency 
in all that we do.” Napout denies wrongdoing.

• Most upbeat: Fifa candidate Tokyo Sexwale, meeting presidential rivals in 
Qatar 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-soccer-fifa-election-qatar-exclusive-idUKKCN0V62LE>
 to discuss “alliances and pacts”. “This is democratic, this is good. We are 
now talking, this one is talking to me, that one is talking to me. But who is 
talking? We are brothers, we are colleagues, comrades in arms.”

• Plus: mystery of the week: Guatemala’s FA accounts, off by $1m according to 
a leaked audit 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-soccer-fifa-probe-guatemala-idUSKCN0V8048>. 
Former head Brayan Jiménez –arrested drunk last month after going on the run  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/17/said-and-done-sebastian-coe-fifa-iaaf>
– and deputy Héctor Trujillo – arrested in Decemberwhen his cruise ship docked 
in Florida 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/08/sports/soccer/hector-trujillo-guatemalan-judge-in-fifa-corruption-case-released-on-4-million-bond.html?_r=0>
 – deny wrongdoing.

Elsewhere: drawing a line

Bayern Munich, moving on from the human rights row over their winter training 
camp in Qatar bysigning Doha’s airport as a “platinum sponsor” 
<http://www.dw.com/en/bayern-munich-need-qatar-deal-to-keep-up-with-epl-money-says-club-president/a-19021986>
. President Karl Hopfner says critics should lay off: “This is an economic 
deal. If politicians want to make a name for themselves with complaints, that’s 
their business.”

Why I walked: Liverpool fan explains protest during Sunderland draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/06/why-i-walked-liverpool-fan-explains-protest-during-sunderland-draw>
Most seamless

Liverpool’s owners Fenway Sports Group, responding to a week of tough PR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/04/liverpool-fans-plan-first-walkout-protest-over-ticket-prices>
 by tweaking their online vision statement. Before: “Transforming fans into 
customers 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20150623192413/http://www.fenwaysportsmanagement.com/portfolio>
”. After: “Transforming consumers into fans 
<http://www.fenwaysportsmanagement.com/portfolio/>”.

Manager news: last week’s moves

• Brazil, 2 Dec: Socorrense president Washington Alcino unveils new coach 
Guidon as “the real deal”.1 Feb: Sacks him for “unforgivable results”. 2 Feb: 
Forgives and rehires him.3 Feb: Sacks him again after a 1-1 draw 
<http://trivela.uol.com.br/tecnico-perde-o-emprego-duas-vezes-em-tres-dias-e-sergipano-ja-tem-cinco-demissoes-em-quatro-rodadas/>
.

• Also making changes: Italy – Palermo naming their sixth coach this season 
after finding out Guillermo Barros Schelottodoesn’t have his badges 
<http://www.football-italia.net/78954/tedesco-new-palermo-coach>; Livorno 
rehiring Christian Panucci 
<http://www.football-italia.net/78985/official-livorno-bring-back-panucci> two 
months after sacking him;Colombia’s Boyacá Chicó sacking Ricardo Pérez after 
one game this season 
<http://laaficion.milenio.com/futbolinternacional/Club-colombiano-despedir-tecnico-torneo-Boyaca_Chico-Ricardo_Perez_0_677332448.html>
; andBrazil’s Portuguesa sacking coach Estevam Soares 
<http://www.atribuna.com.br/noticias/noticias-detalhe/esportes/portuguesa-decide-demitir-o-tecnico-estevam-soares/?cHash=6166296b5504daa63afc6d4ad2886500>
 after two. Soares: “I could have done with more time.”

Most wary

Romania: Steaua owner Gigi Becali, re-signing defender Gabriel Tamas on a 
short-term contract with break clauses including analcohol ban and “compulsory 
church attendance” 
<http://www.sport.ro/liga-1/gigi-becali-si-tamas-intra-intr-o-biserica-nu-e-banc-e-clauza-verbala-pusa-de-patronul-stelei-numai-prin.html>
. In 2013 Cluj released Tamas a week after signing him following “incidents”. 
President Iuliu Muresan: “He came, he drank, he left.”

Spat of the week

France: Montpellier president Louis Nicollin, 72, clarifying his press 
conference attack on the sports editor of local paperMidi Libre as “a big 
dickhead 
<http://www.20minutes.fr/sport/1774967-20160128-video-louis-nicollin-insulte-journaliste-pleine-conf-presse>
”. “That’s not what I meant. It’s not what I think.”Midi Libre: “It’s more 
verbal diarrhoea. One day he’s affable and smart, the next he’s a bad oaf.”

Trip to forget

Bolivia: Atlético Ciclón 
<http://www.romatoday.it/sport/maglie-roma-false-campionato-boliviano.html> – 
turning up to face Real Potosi without a change strip, buying a full set of 
fake Roma shirts from a stall, writing numbers on them in black marker, then 
losing 4-0. Local media: “It seems like a joke, but it is not.”

Superhero news

Brazil: Campeonato Paranaense club Foz do Iguaçu debuting new mascot Fozman. 
Local media reported “an oversized man in a tight Batman outfit 
<https://twitter.com/NSenseFootball/status/695375733456154630>, clinging to his 
frame … Fozman yielded no luck; his team lost 3-0 to Coritiba.”
Non Sense Football (@NSenseFootball) 
.@Fozfutebolclube <https://twitter.com/Fozfutebolclube> v @Coritiba 
<https://twitter.com/Coritiba>: certo, PARA TUDO e alguém explica ESSE BATMAN 
OBESOpic.twitter.com/t7zcbfK9IM <https://t.co/t7zcbfK9IM>
 <https://twitter.com/NSenseFootball/status/695031453520916480> February 3, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/NSenseFootball/status/695031453520916480> 
Plus: best hex


Brazil: Model Bárbara Evans, alleged to have paid a celebrity shaman to curse 
ex-partner Paolo Guerrero.Reports say 
<https://twitter.com/amdeporte/status/692437445820956674> the striker’s 
five-month goal drought was due to “acts performed byFather Sergio de Ogum 
<http://www.paisergiodeogum.com/>, inspired by a woman scorned”.

• Explaining Guerrero’s recent return to form 
<http://peru21.pe/deportes/paolo-guerrero-anoto-golazo-flamengo-y-continua-su-racha-goleadora-video-2237867>
:Father Sergio, telling local media he lifted the hex with a herb-and-yam based 
mix <http://www.meiahora.ig.com.br/noticias/livre-leve-e-soltinho_12244.html>. 
“He now just has to take more care of his spiritual side, so he doesn’t fall 
victim again.”
 