
Sam Allardyce <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sam-allardyce> is the sort 
of man who walks into a packed room and immediately dominates it. If that 
hardly ranks as a rare trait among football managers, particularly those 
standing 6ft 3in, the difference with Allardyce is that he really listens to 
what people are saying – and with a surprisingly open mind.

This approach has helped create one of the English game’s most innovative, 
three-dimensional thinkers whose fascination with, among many other things, 
sports science and statistics is underscored by sure-footed intuition.

At 61, Sunderland’s manager is surely the right man, in the right place, at 
the right time to not only breathe new life into the England team but challenge 
all sorts of dubious received wisdoms currently pervading Football Association 
philosophy. If Allardyce really was the binary, “hoof and hope” manager of 
popular caricature he would not have been able to rescue a deeply flawed 
Sunderland squadfrom a once seemingly inevitable relegation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/11/sam-allardyce-sunderland-escape-route-everton-rafael-benitez>
.

Sam Allardyce to be interviewed for England job this week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/sam-allardyce-interview-england-job>
The difficulty of that job – dubbed “impossible” by his predecessor Dick 
Advocaat, who resigned in despair last October – should not be underestimated 
and is unlikely to be forgotten by any player involved. “I don’t think Sam 
needed much time to analyse us as either footballers or people,” says Younès 
Kaboul, the former Tottenham Hotspur centre-half who morphed from being a 
liability to a big reason whySunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> lost only one of their final 
11 games last spring.

“Sam’s got so much experience that, for him, one week was enough to know us. 
To learn which way we should play and what we needed to do to improve. Sam 
knows football better than he knows his family. He knows exactly how to – how 
can I say it – upset the other team. He made us strong and solid. He’s shown us 
how to stay in games. And how to win. He’s also a very straight guy; you know 
what he’s thinking and, even if you don’t, he’s going to tell you.”

Fabio Borini, the team’s former Liverpool and Chelsea forward, is equally 
positive. “With some managers you switch off,” he acknowledges. “But you always 
listen to Sam.”

Allardyce’s imposing, sometimes misleadingly rough-and-ready presence is 
underscored by the sort of psychological andtactical subtleties that impressed 
Jan Kirchhoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/08/jan-kirchhoff-pep-guardiola-sunderland-manchester-city>
 after a midfielder coached by Pep Guardiola swapped Bayern Munich for 
Sunderland in January. “Pep’s the best coach in the world but Sam’s good,” 
Kirchhoff says. “His treatment of players, the way Sam speaks to us, is very 
good. His video analysis, too. I’ve had really bad coaches – but Sam’s a really 
good one.”

Perhaps it is down to Allardyce having “done the hard yards”. Allied to the 
sort of inquiring mind which has converted him to the benefits of near daily 
transcendental meditation, an impressively solid body of work embracing stints 
at Limerick, Preston, Blackpool, Notts County, Bolton, Newcastle, Blackburn, 
West Ham and now Sunderland dictates that he really does know how to set a team 
up for almost every occasion. Creditably, he has never been relegated from the 
Premier League but, despite leading Bolton into Europe and to the League Cup 
final, lacks the trophies to show for decades of mud-on-boots endeavour.

The absence of silverware is down to sheer lack of opportunity. As one of the 
first Premier League managers to deploy both psychology and Prozone analysis, 
he proved ahead of his time but was not seen as sufficiently “sophisticated” to 
be shortlisted for top jobs.

Increasingly chippy, the boy from Dudley in the west Midlands who had overcome 
undiagnosed childhood dyslexia lamented, repeatedly, how things would have been 
different if only his name were “Allardici”. Yet although those repeated digs 
contained uncomfortable truths about English football’s growing obsession with 
image and branding, there was more to his top‑table exclusion than sheer 
snobbery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsam-allardyce-england-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e9ac7f44a0012518bde942ab5fc1c6ca6d23162%2F0_16_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Allardyce%20is%20the%20regeneration%20man%20who%20can%20rebuild%20England%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsam-allardyce-england-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Allardyce%20is%20the%20regeneration%20man%20who%20can%20rebuild%20England%20%7C%20Louise%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F11%2Fsam-allardyce-england-sunderland-manager%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e9ac7f44a0012518bde942ab5fc1c6ca6d23162%2F0_16_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Allardyce, right, in younger days with his assistant at Bolton, Phil Brown, 
back in 2001. Photograph: Gary M. Prior/Getty Images 
Despite signing some undeniably talented footballers, most notably Youri 
Djorkaeff and Jay-Jay Okocha at Bolton, he had a tendency to limit individual 
players’ potential by restricting them to performing very specific roles, often 
creativity stifling ones. If Bolton’s football was not quite as direct as 
advertised, assorted rival managers – most notably Rafael Benítez and Arsène 
Wenger – did not appreciate Allardyce’s deployment of gamesmanship. One 
notorious “black art” involved his teams’ ability to escape unpunished despite 
repeated indulgence in the Kevin Nolan speciality otherwise known as blatantly 
obstructing opposition goalkeepers.

A sometimes uneasy on the eye, safety-first modus operandi, bigger on 
destruction than construction, contributed to both his downfall at Newcastle 
and a frequently awkward relationship with West Ham fans. Many Upton Park 
regulars were apparently secretly delighted when José Mourinho deemed “Big 
Sam’s” football “19th century”. But people can change and Allardyce appeared to 
undergo an epiphany at West Ham, where he ultimately produced a surprisingly 
multifaceted side featuring the clever use of Stewart Downing in “the hole.”

Similarly, Sunderland proved unexpectedly low on balls crashed into the 
corners last season. Having taken the boldly controversial step of fielding the 
diminutive Jermain Defoe as a lone striker, Allardyce turned tactical chameleon 
and ensured team-mates supplied the low, smartly angled passes a forward capped 
55 times by England craved. “Sam’s 100% good enough forEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england>,” Defoe says. “Football’s about 
results – and he’s a winner.”

Infinitely less chippy and, by his own admission, “much mellowed” – he even 
has kind words for Benítez and Wenger these days – Allardyce is also a man 
finally comfortable in his own skin.
 