
After two huge James Bond blockbusters, Sam Mendes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sam-mendes> is returning to his subsidised 
theatre roots to direct a much anticipated new play by Jez Butterworth at
London’s Royal Court theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/24/the-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder>
.

The theatre announced on Monday that Mendes would make his Royal Court debut 
directing The Ferryman, a play set in rural Derry in 1981 during the height of 
the Troubles.

Vicky Featherstone, the theatre’s artistic director, said she was “beyond 
thrilled” that the play would open at the Royal Court, describing it as “a 
mighty family epic with generations of one family crammed into its dynamic 
world”.


It continues a successful association between Butterworth and the theatre 
which has includedJerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jul/16/jerusalem-review>, which won its 
lead actor, Mark Rylance, an Olivier and a Tony and was one of the hottest 
tickets in both the West End and Broadway.


After that came The River in 2012, which starred Dominic West at the Royal 
Court and Hugh Jackman in its New York transfer.

The decision by Mendes to direct is as eye-catching as the news of a new 
Butterworth play.

Mendes began his theatre career at the Chichester Festival theatre before 
founding the Donmar Warehouse in London where he spent a decade in charge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fsam-mendes-returns-to-london-stage-with-jez-butterworth-play%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81237c5aae565ed19f7aa29cb9362fe88f7cc3e7%2F0_80_3728_2237%2F3728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Mendes%20returns%20to%20London%20stage%20with%20Jez%20Butterworth%20play&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fsam-mendes-returns-to-london-stage-with-jez-butterworth-play%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Mendes%20returns%20to%20London%20stage%20with%20Jez%20Butterworth%20play&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fsam-mendes-returns-to-london-stage-with-jez-butterworth-play%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81237c5aae565ed19f7aa29cb9362fe88f7cc3e7%2F0_80_3728_2237%2F3728.jpg>
 Jez Butterworth’s Jerusalem and The River both debuted at the Royal Court. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
A stellar movie career followed culminating in the spectacular success of 
Skyfall and then Spectre. He announced this year that he would not direct a 
third Bond movie.

Mendes enlisted Butterworth to help improve both the Bond scripts, a job 
uncredited in Skyfall.

The new Butterworth play is a co-production with West End and Broadway theatre 
producer Sonia Friedman and a West End transfer seems almost inevitable.


The Ferryman will run at the Royal Court in April and May. Few details have 
been revealed but it is set in rural Derry, 1981, and follows the Carney 
farming family as they prepare for the harvest.

“A day of hard work on the land and a traditional night of feasting and 
celebrations lie ahead. But this year they will be interrupted by a visitor.”

It is set in the same year as the republican hunger strikes which led to the 
deaths of 10 prisoners including the IRA leader in the Maze prison, Bobby Sands.

Other new plays announced in the Royal Court’s 2017 season include Simon 
McBurney directing The Kid Stays in the Picture, based on the life of film 
producer Robert Evans, who went from being one of the most powerful men in 
Hollywood, producing films such as The Godfather and Chinatown, to disgrace 
when, in 1980, he pleaded guilty to cocaine trafficking.


The Bond theme continues as series producers Barbara Broccoli and Michael 
Wilson are among the co-producers for the Evans play.

In the Court’s smaller space, the Jerwood Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Upstairs, there will be new plays 
by Simon Stephens, Gary Owen and the lower case-preferring debbie tucker green, 
with a play called a profoundly affectionate, passionate devotion to someone 
(-noun).

Other plays in the main space will include a revival of Jim Cartwright’s 
seminal Road, to be directed by John Tiffany following his success directing 
the Harry Potter plays; a work called B by the Chilean playwright Guillermo 
Calderón; and Anatomy of a Suicide by Alice Birch and directed by Katie 
Mitchell.

Featherstone said: “I am humbled and thrilled to be announcing such a varied 
and exciting mixture of work from playwrights and theatre-makers at the top of 
their game, pushing the limits of their potential to challenge, surprise and 
provoke us.

“This is the Royal Court at its best – a place for attracting some of the 
great playwrights and theatre-makers of our times to experiment and take risks 
to give us, the audience, the most extraordinary experiences possible.”
 