
Billy Kinnane, Limerick

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend | Michael Butler and 
Barry Glendenning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/16/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for>
“Sam was a breath of fresh air. He was brilliant and we won the league. He was 
just becoming interested in sports psychology when he joined us and he was so 
innovative. It was a learning curve for him and a big learning curve for us. He 
certainly didn’t do it for the money; he earned a pittance, I think under £200 
a week as player-manager. But he was here to gain experience and he learnt a 
lot. The club couldn’t afford a hotel so I put him up at my house. We had some 
fun and he liked a few pints after the game but, when it came to preparation, 
he was very, very professional – much more professional than any manager I’d 
ever come across. He was also a very good man-manager with the players; he knew 
which ones needed an arm around them, which needed a kick up the arse and which 
he needed to drag out of the local nightclub, the Brazen Head. Sam just seemed 
to get everything right – he was fabulous for Limerick and I’m sure he’ll be 
the same forSunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland>. I’m 
hoping to get a call to come over and watch them in the next few weeks.”

Kinnane was Allardyce’s assistant at Limerick from 1991-92

Andy Morrison, Blackpool
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5027573f386debb3714cbbf2c3d723b5a4dcf6d6%2F0_45_1162_1744%2F1162.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5027573f386debb3714cbbf2c3d723b5a4dcf6d6%2F0_45_1162_1744%2F1162.jpg>
 Andy Morrison, Blackpool’s captain under Sam Allardyce, says: ‘He finds a way 
to win with the players he’s got.’
 Photograph: Neal Simpson/Empics Sport 
“He’s very precise in everything he does. His preparation is very thorough and 
that’s his strength for me. He works with the players he’s got to get the best 
out of them. And if Sam had been given better players to work with I believe he 
would have won leagues. He’s that good. The problem he’s had is the ignorance 
of others for me – people who don’t know the man. Just ask any player who’s 
ever played for him, whether it’sJay-Jay Okocha, players of that calibre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/feb/29/newsstory.carlingcup0304>, 
and they’ll say what a good manager he is. He’s had success everywhere he’s 
been, whether it’s trying to get a team that are struggling into a better 
position or a mid-table team into a top six as at Bolton. Go and ask the 
Venky’s [theBlackburn Rovers owners who sacked Allardyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/dec/13/sam-allardyce-sacked-blackburn-rovers-manager>
 in December 2010] how they feel since he left. I’m sure it doesn’t bother him, 
I’m sure he just gets on with the job in hand. He finds a way to win with the 
players he’s got and that’s what Sam’s always done.”

Morrison was Allardyce’s captain at Blackpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackpool> from 1994-96

Ian Hendon, Notts County 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2165e0d6d23ab19db09ea0ba7bfdd0bcfe93e177%2F0_58_2700_1621%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2165e0d6d23ab19db09ea0ba7bfdd0bcfe93e177%2F0_58_2700_1621%2F2700.jpg>
 Ian Hendon, third from left as Notts County celebrate winning the third 
division title, says of Sam Allardyce: ‘His organisation was an eye-opener.’ 
Photograph: Tony Marshall/Empics Sport 
“I’ve played under some great managers like Terry Venables and Peter Shreeves 
who knew everything there was to know but if I was going to emulate any of my 
managers it was always going to beSam Allardyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sam-allardyce>. He tells you it how it is 
and you know exactly where you stand as a player. If I ever need any advice he 
is always on the end of the phone. I had a brilliant year playing for him at 
Notts County. You can’t fail to learn from Sam – his organisation was an 
eye-opener. Sam brings organisation and defensive stability. He is renowned for 
his preparation and I’m sure he’ll continue in that vein at Sunderland. It’s 
worked at every other Premier League club he’s been at. Sam will have done his 
due diligence on the Sunderland players – he’ll know all about them, he’ll know 
exactly what he’s walking into.”

Hendon played under Allardyce at Notts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty> from 1997-99. He was later a 
coach under him at West Ham

Kevin Davies, Bolton Wanderers

“He’ll galvanise them at Sunderland. He’ll organise them, he’ll get them 
together as one, rather than as individuals; he’ll bring a togetherness within. 
He’ll try and instil a bit of confidence – I think that’s one of his best 
assets. Obviously he’ll assess his group and see what the strengths and 
weaknesses are, devise a plan of trying to win some games, to get the 
confidence up, and just try and build it up from there. I think that’s one of 
his strengths: he’ll try and tie everyone in – players, staff, get the fans 
back on board, just try and create a togetherness, really, an atmosphere where 
they enjoy their training, work hard and try and get the rewards on the back of 
that. He’s a brilliant judge of character – what kinds of players they are: do 
they need a rocket or a bit of a cuddle. He knows how to get the younger ones 
on board. There’s not many players who worked under him who didn’t enjoy doing 
soit. and I think he’s that kind of personality: you want to play for him. You 
know if you give him your best he’ll look after you and treat everyone equally.
Is he a good fit for Sunderland? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/10/sam-allardyce-challenge-sunderland-newcastle-united>
Yeah, he likes a challenge.”

Davies played at Bolton under Allardyce from 2003-08



Michael Bridges, Bolton Wanderers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feccf54a96ab903bd9f79c4b2fa9e4c43bc6385d1%2F145_0_1867_1120%2F1867.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feccf54a96ab903bd9f79c4b2fa9e4c43bc6385d1%2F145_0_1867_1120%2F1867.jpg>
 Michael Bridges was signed by Sam Allardyce for Bolton. ‘Every week we would 
have yoga classes and it was the first time I had been given supplements,’ he 
says. Photograph: John Sibley/Action Images 
“I first met Big Sam when he signed me for Bolton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/boltonwanderers> in 2004. I could not 
believe how in-depth his team analysis video sessions were and the way he 
dissected the opposition’s playing style. He also made it clear that we as 
players could not hide from the Prozone stats we used at Bolton. Having played 
at Leeds you would have thought I’d seen this before and it should of been the 
norm but it wasn’t – this was all new to me and I loved how detailed it was. 
Every week we would have yoga classes and it was the first time I had been 
given supplements to take with my food, which helped recovery and joint ache. 
We even had a psychologist who would sit down with us whenever we wanted to get 
advice or set ourselves targets. Sam was a hard but fair manager. What I 
admired most was the way he orchestrated training sessions and made sure the 
team and players knew their roles and responsibilities with and without the 
ball and he worked on it religiously.

“Set plays are a massive part of football and Sam knew this by stats and facts 
he had shown the team, so again we worked on them day-in, day-out – it was no 
surprise Bolton became the set-play masters. Call it long ball, call it a bad 
style of play but I call it methodical and very, very effective. You don’t win 
games with luck you win games with hard work on the training ground and Sam 
will do this.”

Bridges was with Allardyce at Bolton in 2004 

John Williams, Blackburn Rovers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45e2e0a37deacaca43799a665f53c0dcd635f838%2F0_40_3232_1939%2F3232.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45e2e0a37deacaca43799a665f53c0dcd635f838%2F0_40_3232_1939%2F3232.jpg>
 Blackburn’s chairman John Williams welcomes Sam Allardyce to Blackburn in 
1998. Photograph: Alex Morton/Action Images 
“I can see some parallels in the situation now at Sunderland to when he came 
to Blackburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/dec/17/sam-allardyce-blackburn-rovers>
. We were a little later in the season but he did a sterling job for us, got 
the team better organised, and he succeeded in making sure we weren’t 
relegated. I guess the Sunderland fans will be delighted if that is what he 
will achieve there. He certainly delivered for us in terms of making sure we 
stayed in the league. It’s always a difficult time when you change a manager – 
there’s a threat and there’s also an opportunity to galvanise the playing squad 
and we went on and got some good results. I think he is a very good manager, I 
think his track record speaks for itself. He’s very much in my eyes associated 
with Bolton, where he had a very good tenure, and he’s been through a few clubs 
since and has always had a good success rate. I don’t know his exact win 
percentage but I think he’s a great choice for them.”

Williams was Allardyce’s chairman from 2008-10

Steve Harper, Newcastle United
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faec554f2b9b6f06cd228671a548104bcac9de0ac%2F0_202_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faec554f2b9b6f06cd228671a548104bcac9de0ac%2F0_202_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Steve Harper says of Sam Allardyce: ‘He will expose the players to all areas 
of the game – sports science, sports psychology, etc – to get the best out of 
them.’ Photograph: Phil Cole/Getty Images 
“Sam will make big changes at Sunderland in every area of the club. He 
certainly did that at Newcastle. He will expose the players to all areas of the 
game – sports science, sports psychology, etc – to get the best out of them. 
He’ll teach them it’s not just what happens on the pitch that matters but what 
happens off it too. He’ll organise them – they’ll be well drilled. They’ll 
become a threat from set pieces and what he will do is give them a platform to 
get results. And then, by having given them that platform, he will give them 
the opportunity to go out and play from there. I think Sunderland have made a 
cracking appointment.”

Steve Harper played under Allardyce at Newcastle from 2007-08

Jack Collison, West Ham United
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54d6a310e5668f20af516858960697f7f66dd171%2F9_179_1413_848%2F1413.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54d6a310e5668f20af516858960697f7f66dd171%2F9_179_1413_848%2F1413.jpg>
 Jack Collison, here getting a good-luck handshake from Sam Allardyce, says: 
‘When Sam was under pressure from supporters, he never let it show to the 
players.’ Photograph: Page Images/Rex Shutterstock 
“When Sam was under pressure from supporters, he never let it show to the 
players. He never looked like he had a heavy weight on his shoulders when he 
came into training. In fact it was the opposite. It is frustrating at times if 
you get booed off at home after a draw. But the manager’s objective when he 
took over was to get us back into the Premier League at the first time of 
asking. That was his target and he had his own ideas about how we were going to 
get there. He was a big character and the boys instantly bought into it. We 
wanted success. There’s nothing better than winning a game of football on a 
Saturday afternoon and everyone enjoyed winning together. Although his methods 
frustrated certain people at times, they worked. He completed his objectives. 
He was great around the training ground as well. He enjoyed the banter but when 
it got closer to the game, you knew he was serious. You knew when you had to 
switch on and make sure you were ready. But when there were times to relax, 
like a mid-season break or a team event, he was always the first to let his 
hair down and enjoy being in the environment with the team.”

Collison played at West Ham under Allardyce from 2011-14

Interviews by Louise Taylor, Jamie Jackson and Jacob Steinberg
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f466b66cac051c423f72fee68d9cb26ab2d654d%2F265_0_1155_1732%2F1155.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Allardyce%3A%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20his%20life%20as%20a%20manager%20before%20Sunderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsam-allardyce-sunderland-manager%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f466b66cac051c423f72fee68d9cb26ab2d654d%2F265_0_1155_1732%2F1155.jpg>
 Kevin Davies is consoled by Sam Allardyce after Bolton’s defeat in the 2004 
League Cup final. ‘He’s a brilliant judge of character,’ Davies says. 
Photograph: David Davies/PA Archive/Press Association Ima  