
Sam Allardyce said that it had been an either/or choice in the summer of 2013. 
Either he brought Andy Carroll toWest Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> on a permanent transfer 
from Liverpool or he signed Wilfried Bony from Vitesse Arnhem. He chose the 
former and Swansea City took Bony.

As Allardyce prepares to welcome Bony and Swansea to Upton Park on Sunday, for 
a meeting of the teamsfifth and seventh in the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague/table> at the start of the 
weekend, a jury might still debate the wisdom of the decision.

No striker has scored more goals in England’s top division than Bony in this 
calendar year while his return of 31 from 64 appearances for Swansea in all 
competitions has come to make his £12m fee look like value. Carroll, by 
contrast, has barely played for West Ham since his permanent move because of 
injury and, when he has, he has managed just two goals in 20 matches.

West Ham had made an inquiry to Vitesse about Bony but the price was not right 
for them.Allardyce instead paid £15m to Liverpool for Carroll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/18/andy-carroll-medical-west-ham>
, who had impressed while on loan at Upton Park in 2012-13, when he scored 
seven goals in 24 games. Allardyce continues to feel that Carroll will end up 
proving to be the better buy when he can enjoy consistent fitness, although he 
pretty much has to say that.

Yet Allardyce’s willingness to raise a subject that could invite derogatory 
comments spoke volumes about his confidence and, by extension, that of everyone 
at his club. It is not difficult to imagine the reaction among West Ham fans at 
almost any point last season to the revelation that Allardyce had preferred 
Carroll to Bony, but the climate is different now.

Allardyce and the players are enjoying themselves, and so are the supporters, 
which is not a line that could have been written during the previous campaign. 
West Ham have won six and drawn two of their last 10 fixtures and, inthe 
victories over Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/20/west-ham-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 andManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/25/west-ham-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
, the performances represented lofty benchmarks.

After the home win over Newcastle United last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/29/west-ham-united-newcastle-united-premier-league-match-report>
 andthe midweek victory at West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/dec/02/west-bromwich-albion-west-ham-premier-league-match-report>
, against Swansea Allardyce could give his players the target of completing a 
hat-trick in the space of nine days and talk with excitement about what that 
kind of sequence could do for a club’s season.

Carroll is back and building up towards peak fitness, after his late cameo as 
a substitute inthe draw against Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/08/west-ham-united-aston-villa-premier-league-match-report>
 before the November international break and three successive starts since then 
– which represents his first football of the campaign – but what has fired 
Allardyce is the range of his options, particularly up front.

With Carroll, Diafra Sakho, Enner Valencia, Mauro Zárate and Carlton Cole, 
Allardyce says that the choices are “better than we’ve ever had” and there is 
no dependence of any one of them. The load has been shared and the threat has 
come from all over the field. James Tomkins, a centre-half, scored the winner 
at West Brom while Aaron Cresswell, a left-back, got the only goal against 
Newcastle. The club’s last nine goals have been scored by different players.

Allardyce feels that the Christmas period will provide the acid test of West 
Ham’s credentials – they go to Chelsea on Boxing Day and entertain Arsenal two 
days after that – but, in the meantime, he wants to generate further momentum.

“The next 14 games will have to be as good as the first 14 because anything 
less won’t keep us in our position,” Allardyce said. “We might even have to get 
better. Let’s not slack off and get complacent. Let’s continue what we have 
done up until now.”

Allardyce is wary of Bony and he has told his players to cut the supply lines 
to him. He talked of the Ivorian’s aerial threat and skill, plus how hard it 
was to knock him off the ball. “He seems to be able to roll defenders and hit 
the ball in the same movement,” he added.

Allardyce was not permitted the luxury of hindsight and he suggested that his 
choice between Carroll and Bony was based on the former’s proven Premier League 
pedigree.

“There is always a risk with any player that comes from abroad,” Allardyce 
said. “The risk is always greater. We signed Andy. It was one or the other. We 
couldn’t do both. We didn’t have enough money in the budget that year. Of 
course, it’s paid off handsomely for Swansea. Bony has been an outstanding 
success.”
 