
Arsenal’s destiny in Group A has a distance to run from here, but even in the 
glow of a second half rally on a horribly still, clingy night in Paris this 
still felt like a veryArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> 
kind of night. Arsène Wenger’s team played with heart and grew into a game they 
looked to be losing from the opening 42 seconds. They left the Parc des Princes 
with a point well earned, creditable parity, a comeback draw, and with a fine 
performance by Alex Iwobi in particular, who seems to like playing away from 
home against the giants of Europe.

And yet this was still a missed opportunity for Arsenal in the Champions 
League. This was Arsenal in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>. This was Arsenal. 
Arsenal with heart and spirit. But make no mistake, PSG were here for the 
taking, a team clunking through a few gears of their own, lacking snap in their 
combinations and without the aristocratic edge of the best Zlatan‑era teams.

Arsenal behind after 42 seconds but Alexis Sánchez rescues point at PSG
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/psg-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
PSG could have scored four here. Edinson Cavani could have scored four if his 
finishing had been the same quality as his imperious foraging. But they look 
like a team in progress. At times it was tempting to conclude they might 
struggle to respond to the very specific demands of Unai Emery, who insists on 
working at high pressure all the time, but who must now manage a team for whom 
the pattern is two, maybe four high-pressure matches in March and a handsome 
stroll the rest of the year.

For all that, Arsenal were there but not quite there. Over 90 minutes they 
matchedParis Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain>
. Alexis Sánchez’s late equaliser was well earned. And still it is a familiar 
Arsenal refrain: what a team this could be! The team glimpsed through the bars, 
the team lurking behind the cranky habits and self-imposed limits that make 
late-Wenger Arsenal so fascinatingly themselves. Even Olivier Giroud, who did 
not get on to the pitch until midway through the second half, and who helped to 
create the platform for Sánchez’s equaliser, was sent off at the end for two 
inglorious yellow cards and will miss the home game against Basel, another 
needless little obstacle.

Wenger had picked a surprising team here. Iwobi’s first start of the season 
was a progressive move given his performance inArsenal’s last away Champions 
League match at Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/mar/16/barcelona-v-arsenal-champions-league-last-16-live>
. In goal David Ospina played his first game since April, a chance to erase the 
memory ofthat ball-dropping gaffe against Olympiakos a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-live>
. He played well here, too, making saves and rushing out off his line willingly.

The noise from the home fans comes in peculiar bursts in this ugly concrete 
brute of a stadium, skirling around the steeply banked sides then disappearing 
into an anxious lull just as quickly. The first real burst came after 42 
seconds as PSG took the lead. Serge Aurier, who seems a lot happier now, 
bullocked away down the right, finding space too easily to cross. Cavani just 
had to stand near the penalty spot, unmarked, and flick his header into the 
corner.

As Arsenal scrabbled for parity, the surging runs of Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain 
and Sánchez foundering on PSG’s muscular blue wall, Wenger strode around the 
edge of his rectangle, hands on hips, head bowed, puzzled, shocked that such a 
thing could have happened. New combinations all over the pitch, ungrooved 
starting players, a centre-half signed late in the summer, a 20-year-old 
patrolling left midfield against the man of the match in the final of this 
competition not so long ago. And somehow they concede a soft goal from the 
kick-off.

As ever, Arsenal rallied promisingly. It is another paradox. For a team whose 
spirit is questioned so regularly, Arsenal do play often with real heart. Mesut 
Özil fought to find space between Adrien Rabiot and Grzegorz Krychowiak’s deep 
defensive block. The speed of Arsenal’s flanks troubled PSG’s more ponderous 
banks of four and three. Özil, Oxlade‑Chamberlain and Héctor Bellerín all made 
ground on the right and crossed towards a non-existent, striker-shaped hole, a 
hole filled not just with a Giroud-shaped absence, but with the ghosts of every 
not-quite, every rumour, every linked-with and rumoured-to-be, and failed bid.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fsame-old-arsenal-but-arsene-wengers-team-in-transition-earn-a-useful-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30b96c2486593c37d34fc5194961f8c25e046fc5%2F422_0_3715_2864%2F3715.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Same%20old%20Arsenal%2C%20but%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%E2%80%99s%20team%20in%20transition%20earn%20a%20useful%20point%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fsame-old-arsenal-but-arsene-wengers-team-in-transition-earn-a-useful-point%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Same%20old%20Arsenal%2C%20but%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%E2%80%99s%20team%20in%20transition%20earn%20a%20useful%20point%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Fsame-old-arsenal-but-arsene-wengers-team-in-transition-earn-a-useful-point%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30b96c2486593c37d34fc5194961f8c25e046fc5%2F422_0_3715_2864%2F3715.jpg>
 Alexis Sánchez celebrates after his equaliser in Paris. Photograph: Catherine 
Ivill - AMA/Getty Images 
And for a long time this looked like being a night defined by baffling 
choices. Where was Granit Xhaka, the bought-in muscle for just these occasions? 
How could a midfield pairing of Francis Coquelin and the brilliant but dinky 
Santi Cazorla hope to fend on its own against the great stomping power of 
Rabiot and Blaise Matuidi?

And yet Arsenal did rally, the skill and passing smarts of Cazorla, Özil’s 
gathering influence, and above all the appalling finishing of Cavani dragging 
them back into this game. A point here is an excellent result. Perhaps it might 
even signal a shift in their group stage destiny.

The real issue for Arsenal in the Champions League has been an existential 
one. Progress here. A late rally there. But the stasis by the end. Somehow 
after almost 20 years, after a process of paring away and honing down, this is 
still a team in transition. It could have been more, but a point in Paris is a 
fine result for now.
 