
The MK Dons player Samir Carruthers has been has been fined two weeks’ wages 
by his club and suspended from Saturday’s match against Brighton after his 
conduct at the Cheltenham Festival,when Carruthers urinated into a pint glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/15/mk-dons-samir-carruthers-urinate-cheltenham-festival>
. Northampton Town’s James Collins has also been fined two weeks’ wages despite 
both players apologising for their actions.

The pair, both previously on the books of Aston Villa, were among a group of 
players present in a hospitality marquee at the racing festival on Tuesday and 
Carruthers was pictured relieving himself into a glass. Collins, a striker on 
loan atNorthampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> from 
Shrewsbury Town, then poured the contents of the glass over a balcony.

When golf, football and the world of TV met up in the parade ring at Cheltenham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/16/cheltenham-festival-lee-westwood-alan-shearer>
Gloucestershire police are not taking any action but described the incident as 
“a disgusting and thoughtless act” while the racecourse said the players’ 
behaviour “was unacceptable in general, let alone at theCheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenham> Festival” and cancelled the 
group’s hospitality booking, made by Unique Sports Management (USM), for 
Wednesday.

Carruthers, a Republic of Ireland Under‑21 midfielder, spoke on Wednesday with 
theMK Dons <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons> chairman, Pete 
Winkelman, and manager, Karl Robinson.

“They’re obviously very let down and I’m being disciplined for it,” said 
Carruthers, whose fine will be donated to charity. “They had faith in me not to 
do something like that so I feel like I’ve let them down massively. But it’s 
not just them, I’ve let down the whole team, my team-mates, everyone. And I’m 
really sorry to Cheltenham as well because they let me in and stuff and I 
obviously embarrassed everyone.

“I just want to say I’m sorry to everyone, my family, the club, chairman, the 
gaffer. I’ve not been raised up to do something like that and I’ve let everyone 
down. I’ve let the community down and I’ve let Milton Keynes down and I have to 
take the criticism that comes with it. It’s not something that should be 
laughed about. It’s not an example I should be giving to kids either.

“I’m meant to be a role model and I have to live by my actions now and I 
really am hurt by what I’ve done. It was a silly mistake and I just have to 
take everything that comes with it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fsamir-carruthers-apology-urinate-pint-glass-cheltenham-festival-mk-dons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e24a1a2c9c70eab66f7fc2516ab547781475300%2F154_171_1643_986%2F1643.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Samir%20Carruthers%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20let%20everyone%20down%3A%20the%20team%2C%20my%20team-mates%2C%20everyone%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fsamir-carruthers-apology-urinate-pint-glass-cheltenham-festival-mk-dons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Samir%20Carruthers%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20let%20everyone%20down%3A%20the%20team%2C%20my%20team-mates%2C%20everyone%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fsamir-carruthers-apology-urinate-pint-glass-cheltenham-festival-mk-dons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e24a1a2c9c70eab66f7fc2516ab547781475300%2F154_171_1643_986%2F1643.jpg>
 Carruthers in action for MK Dons. Photograph: TGSPhoto/REX/Shutterstock 
Collins was pictured tipping the contents of the glass over a balcony while 
Carruthers smiled and Bristol City’s Luke Ayling had his arm around the MK Dons 
midfielder. City said they could take action against Ayling, while Northampton 
discussed the issue with Collins’ parent club, Shrewsbury, and decided to fine 
the player and warn him about his future conduct.

Cheltenham cancel booking over photos of MK Dons player urinating in glass
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/15/mk-dons-samir-carruthers-urinate-cheltenham-festival>
Collins said: “I have completely let myself, my family, the fans and the two 
clubs that I represent down, and I am sorry to everyone involved. My actions 
are not excusable and whilst the pictures are rather misleading in that there 
were not people below this balcony and it was only a grassed area, there is 
still no defence to what happened.

“As a footballer I understand and appreciate that we are role models and this 
has only emphasised the negative stereotype of the modern footballer, and for 
that I am truly sorry and disappointed in myself. It is now something that I 
will work hard to change. I do feel this is totally out of character and 
something that has embarrassed me and my family and I fully accept the club’s 
punishment. I will now focus on what I know I am extremely lucky to do for a 
career and that is to play football.”

USM, which did not respond to a request for comment, is run by the football 
agent Will Salthouse. A spokeswoman forCheltenham Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cheltenhamfestival> said: “We felt that we 
should take the necessary action and prevent [USM] from taking the booking that 
they had with us for today. Incidents like this are almost unheard of. We had 
nearly 68,000 people here and that was a party of 20 to 30 people, and probably 
only two or three that were behaving inappropriately.”
 