
Stadium: Stadio Luigi Ferraris, 1911, capacity 35,356

Also known as the Marassi after the local neighbourhood, the Stadio Luigi 
Ferraris is one of the oldest grounds in Italy. Built in 1911, the stadium was 
originally property ofGenoa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa> and 
was the stage of their early titles won during Serie A’s primitive years.

The stadium is a daunting place. With the crowd close to the pitch, it gives 
the players the feeling they are enveloped in a wall of noise and fire. One of 
the best examples of the atmosphere in the ground is evident during thederby 
della lanterna in which Sampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> take on Genoa. Arguably one of 
the most passionate derbies in Italy, it transforms the stadium into a cauldron.

Marcello Lippi has said the game is “the most special in Italy”. In these 
matchesGenoa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa> hold the Curva Nord 
with their ultra groups such as theFossa dei Griffoni, while Sampdoria take the 
Curva Sud with their fangroups, which include the Ultras Tito Tito Cucchiaroni.

The stadium had been updated for the 1990 World Cup and you may remember it 
from the second-round penalty shoot-out between theRepublic of Ireland and 
Romania <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eISJX5FomgI>. It still is one of the 
best stadiums in Serie A.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421931087177%2F3a987d3e-d228-4de9-848f-f30b24ed1a85-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sampdoria%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sampdoria%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421931087177%2F3a987d3e-d228-4de9-848f-f30b24ed1a85-2060x1373.jpeg>
 The Stadio Luigi Ferraris. Photograph: Enrico Calderoni/AFLO/Nippon News/Corbis
The Ultras

Key Ultra Groups: Ultras Tito Cucchiaroni, Fedelissimi 1961

Other Ultra Groups: Rude Boys, Fieri Fossato, San Fruttuoso 1987, Valsecca 
Group 1991, Palati Fini,Irish Clan, Struppa 86, Hells Angels, I Gunners, I 
Bulldog, Ultras Girls,Herberts, Cani Sciolti, Riviera Blucerchiata, Sgreuzzi, 
Belli e Gonfi, Struppa 86

From an English perspective, the Stadio Luigi Ferarris is one of Italy’s more 
aesthetically pleasing stadiums. Located in the port city of Genoa, its 
rectangular shape and the proximity of the crowd to the pitch make for a 
claustrophobic and intense atmosphere. The stadium also plays host one of 
Italy’s under-appreciated rivalries. The Genoa-Sampdoria rivalry is known as the
derby della lanterna named after the port’s iconic old lighthouse 
<http://static.panoramio.com/photos/large/64012760.jpg>. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421925762193%2F6f6fea2b-9eed-42e3-8edc-9dd5dbe7d37a-2060x1328.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sampdoria%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sampdoria%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421925762193%2F6f6fea2b-9eed-42e3-8edc-9dd5dbe7d37a-2060x1328.jpeg>
 Genoa fans support their team against Sampdoria in the Stadio Luigi Ferraris 
in February 2014. Photograph: Tullio M. Puglia/Getty Images 
The fixture captures the imagination thanks to the efforts of those standing 
on the steps of theGradinate, with both ends of the stadium engulfed in a riot 
of noise and colour. The heart of Sampdoria’s support beats in theGradinata Sud 
and the ultras help make theMarassi one of the most eye-catching venues in 
Calcio.

The Blucerchiati cannot boast as distinguished a tradition as their 
neighbours, Genoa. Formed in 1946, following the merger of two sports clubs, 
Sampierdarenese and Andrea Doria, they have had to endure haughty putdowns from 
their older city cousins. However, despite being born some 53 years later than 
theRossoblu, Sampdoria have carved out an identity and rich history. Their name 
and colours (blue-white and red-black) pay tribute to the clubs from which they 
emerged and they have enjoyed spells of veritable success.


At their zenith, Sampdoria toppled the mighty Milan, beating Silvio 
Berlusconi’s giants to theSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> title in 1991. The 
following year, theDoriani threatened to conquer Europe, but Barcelona and a 
swing of Ronald Koeman’s right foot shattered their dreams in the European Cup 
final. The game was played at the old Wembley, a stadium Pelé once called “the 
cathedral of football”. That day in 1992, theSampdoriani ensured Pelé’s 
observation was true, bellowing chorus after chorus while decorating their end 
of the pitch in a sea of blue, white, red and black.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbyjcAjwAjOg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbyjcAjwAjOg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbyjcAjwAjOg&media=>
Sampdoria’s fangroup Ultras Tito Cucchiaroni are one of the most venerable in 
Italy. Formed in 1969, they were trailblazers in the ultra movement. In fact, 
the group claim to be the first to differentiate as “ultras”. The evidence for 
this claim is in the writing on the walls. “Uniti Legneremo Tutti I Rossoblu AS
angue” (“United, we will beat the red and blues (Genoa) till they bleed”).

This graffiti is still visible in parts of Genoa and, according to the Ultras 
Tito Cucchiaroni,it could be seen in the city’s Piazza della Vittoria and 
Scalinata Montaldolong before Torino and Milan supporters claimed to be the 
first ultras in Italy. Squabbling over who came first can seem like nitpicking 
but history and tradition matter in football and it’s no different for the 
ultras.

There is also a story behind the group’s name. Ernesto “Tito” Cucchiaroni was 
an important player for Sampdoria in the 1960s. He endeared himself to the 
supporters immediately after scoring two goals in his firstDerby della Lanterna 
and this admiration was cemented when he helped the club to a fourth-placed 
finish in the 1960-61 season. Despite his small size, Tito hadgrinta (grit) 
and, when he finished his career at the club, the ultras decided to adopt his 
name to honour his effort and commitment.

The Ultras Tito Cucchiaroni have shared the Gradinata Sud with a number of 
other groups, most notably theFedelissimi 1961. Although they were born eight 
years earlier, theFedelissimi originated as a simple fan club. Barring a 
faction of left-wing, anti-racist campaigning ultras known as Rude Boys, 
Sampdoria’s fanatics are generally known to be apolitical. This absence of 
politics undoubtedly contributed to the harmonious existence of the two groups 
who were united by their passion, both physically and metaphorically, in the 
lower tier of theGradinata. This was until Sampdoria’s travails in the late 
1990s, which saw the departure of golden boy Roberto Mancini in 1997 and, two 
years later, the club’s relegation to Serie B.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421929421640%2F5012d13f-b11c-4263-b42d-55924018a0d3-1020x971.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sampdoria%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sampdoria%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421929421640%2F5012d13f-b11c-4263-b42d-55924018a0d3-1020x971.jpeg>
 Robert Mancini playing for Sampdoria in 1993. Photograph: Stewart 
Kendall/Sportsphoto 
The Blucerchiati’s malaise split opinion. The president at the time, Enrico 
Mantovani, suffered the opprobrium of theFedelissimi, who felt that his 
mismanagement had brought about the club’s struggles. On the other hand, the
Ultras Tito Cucchiaroni sided with Mantovani and instead railed against Mancini 
for the manner in which he left. After 15 years of service, the Samp icon had 
allowed his contract to expire and joined Lazio on a free transfer, leaving the 
club short of money to replace him. The spat resulted in separation: 
accompanied by a group calledSan Fruttuoso 1987, Tito Cucchiaroni moved to the 
upper tier of theGradinata, leaving Fedelissimi and the other groups to occupy 
the lower tier.

Having written about Italy’s ultras a lot, the homogenous nature of the 
movement can at times lend itself to repetition but scratch beneath the surface 
and there are always differences and peculiarities to be uncovered. Sampdoria 
were said to be the first club to have a group of female ultras, while women 
were prominent withinTito Cucchiaroni’s hierarchy.

Doria’s Ultras are also among the few supporters in Italy who do not use 
banners during their match-day displays. This is largely in protest against 
specific legislation within theDecreto Antiviolenza, a decree aimed at tackling 
football hooliganism. This legislation has seen drums and megaphones banned in 
stadiums, while the use of flags and banners is strictly regulated. Supporters 
must seek police permission for the paraphernalia they intend to bring into the 
stadium seven days in advance. According to many fans across Italy, this 
legislation is systematically destroying the phenomenon of organised support 
and limits their freedom of expression.

When it comes to violence and politics, it appears that the Sampdoriani take a 
philosophical viewpoint, as revealed by this quote from a fanzine:

“Above all, it’s wrong to go to the stadium with the intention of causing 
havoc. As much as possible, we try to behave. However, it’s almost impossible 
not to react when opposition fans pass the Gradinata and start launching 
objects at people: it’s wrong, this is true, but we try to limit our 
retaliation… Luckily we have managed to expel the delinquents and political 
troublemakers from our ranks.”

In football we are often mesmerised by the talent on the field, whether it be 
a sleight of foot, a moment of individual genius or the elegance of the perfect 
team goal. There is no doubt that football supporters in Italy can unleash the 
ugly and grotesque. But, it’s also worth appreciating the raw beauty and 
innovative spirit of Italian football fanaticism. In 1982, during theDerby 
della Lanterna,the Sampdoriani lived up to their self-acclaimed pioneering 
title, unveiling a gigantic flag displaying the the club colours, swallowing 
the entirety of theGradinata. Its sheer scale was impressive. The flag remains 
the magnum opus of theBlucerchiati’s support and one of the biggest ever seen 
in Italy.

The level of organisation and effort behind such displays should not be 
underestimated. Today, under the tenure of eccentric owner Massimo Ferrero and 
the guidance of coach Sinisa Mihajilovic, the club have threatened to rekindle 
the distant glories of the early 1990s. Regardless of the club’s success, 
however, Sampdoria’s ultras continue to charm those who admire an alternative 
form of footballing art, one born in the terraces.

Classic Player: Attilio Lombardo
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421930155493%2Ff98a82e3-f4b7-4fed-9a5f-7d9e5f8b526f-2060x1424.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sampdoria%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sampdoria%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421930155493%2Ff98a82e3-f4b7-4fed-9a5f-7d9e5f8b526f-2060x1424.jpeg>
 Attilio Lombardo playing for Sampdoria against Barcelona in the 1992 European 
Cup final at Wembley. Photograph: Ted Blackbrow/Daily Mail /REX 
Throughout the late 1980s and the entirety of the 1990s, a bald-headed winger 
terrorised defences across Europe. Attilio Lombardo had a memorable look and a 
memorable talent and, while he had spells at Juventus, Lazio and Crystal 
Palace, he is most fondly remembered for his time at Sampdoria.

Lombardo’s appearance and physique saw him gain two distinct nicknames: 
“Popeye”, because of his bald head and muscular physique, and “the ostrich”, 
because of his ability to run at electrifying pace for 90 minutes. Whatever you 
called him, the little Italian was always easily noticed as he darted up and 
down the wing with his socks down, using his speed to destroy opponents.

He was not the most technical player at Sampdoria but he was a vital part of 
the team. He would produce lightening-quick counterattacks that would often 
take the disciplined Serie A defences by surprise. His passing was superb and 
he could also finish with some spectacular results.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvuV3mq6yJAo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvuV3mq6yJAo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvuV3mq6yJAo&media=>
His ability to get behind defenders caused them major problems. His bursts of 
speed often let him over-take the full-back and then cut inside and bear down 
on goal. His ability to finish from acute angles was the icing on the cake and 
time and time again he would slot the ball home as everyone else was awaiting 
the cross.

He was also capable of shooting from range and this penchant for the 
spectacular won him many admirers. He was not prolific but his ability to score 
with his head (he is only 5ft 9in) gave him a varied repertoire. Between 1989 
and 1995, Lombardo scored 34 times in 201 appearances. He scored another four 
goals in 34 appearances on his return in 2001-02.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421930426860%2F7e767f41-8698-4feb-a0c6-e8500883dc67-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sampdoria%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sampdoria%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fsampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421930426860%2F7e767f41-8698-4feb-a0c6-e8500883dc67-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Lombardo and Mancini playing for Sampdoria against Anderlecht in the European 
Cup Winners’ Cup final in Gothenburg. Sampdoria won the match 2-0. Photograph: 
Ben Radford/Getty Images 
Popeye was also not short of honours and, in a team that featured Gianluca 
Vialli, Roberto Mancini, Pietro Vierchowod, Gianluca Pagliuca and Ruud Gullit, 
under playing under manager Vujadin Boskov, Sampdoria developed into a house 
hold name.

Lombardo can look back on his time at Sampdoria and be proud to hold a Serie A 
winners medal from 1990/91, A SuperCoppa Italiana’s medal in 1991, Coppa Italia 
medals in 1989 and 1994 as well as a UEFA Cup winners Cup medal from 1990. The 
little Italian was on the side that was also beaten at Wembley by Barcelona in 
the 1992 European Cup Final.

Lombardo has won major honors and Juventus and at Lazio but it is at Sampdoria 
where his played some of his best football. The classic blue, red and white 
strip was adorned by many a great player in that era but none worked so hard 
for it than the bald winger.

When calcio ruled the world, the full-backs of Serie A were being pulled from 
pillar to post by Attilio Lombardo; he was a truly great player in an 
incredible team.

• This blog first appeared on Richard Hall’s The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://thegentlemanultra.tumblr.com/>
• Follow Richard Hall <https://twitter.com/Gentleman_Ultra> and Luca 
Hodges-Ramon <https://twitter.com/LH_Ramon25> on Twitter
• Follow Guardian Football on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>
 