
When Leeds and Arsenal touched down in Spain they walked through trays of 
disinfectant because foot and mouth is one British export the Spanish can do 
without. But, as they line up against Deportivo La Coruna and Valencia tonight, 
watching with particular interest will be another, more popular, British 
export: Vinny Samways.

In England everyone knows about Steve McManaman but rather less is said about 
the Union Deportiva deLas Palmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/laspalmas> midfielder, despite his 
enormous, if quieter, success since arriving in 1996.

The Las Palmas man has a warning for his compatriots. "The Leeds game's not 
over yet," he says. "Deportivo have a very attacking system and create lots of 
chances." Samways speaks from experience. Like Leeds, Las Palmas beat Deportivo 
at home recently but were thumped 4-0 when they travelled to La Coruna - part 
of Depor's 25-match unbeaten run at home.

Samways has also been on the receiving end in Valencia, losing 5-1 at the 
Mestalla. But he still thinks Arsenal are well placed. "They're very strong 
away from home," he says of the Gunners' defence.

Samways' chances of facing his fellow countrymen next year are slim; Las 
Palmas are 14th. But he is happy enough. "After coming up last year our aim was 
just to stay in the first division. If we achieve that, we'll have done well." 
In Gran Canaria the former Tottenham and Everton midfielder is a superstar. His 
name adorns countless shirts at the Estadio Insular and he has his own chant: 
"Beenee, Beenee, Beenee, el mejor [Vinny, Vinny, Vinny, you're the best]."

Samways' attitude and his willingness to integrate have made him a favourite 
at the club. He is the linchpin of Las Palmas' midfield, occupying the position 
the Spaniards call el pivote - in charge of winning the ball and controlling 
the game. His manager, Sergio Kresic, rates him as the team's most important 
player, and made him captain for the trip to the Nou Camp.

The man once derided as Skinny Sideways has undergone a drastic image 
transformation in Spain. Sent off on his debut, he has gained a reputation as a 
hard man. The Englishman, people at the club proudly reveal, is even 
competitive in training.

It is a reputation that has been exaggerated. Reports have suggested he has 
been sent off 12 times in Spain. "It's nowhere near that many," Samways 
insists. "They've virtually doubled it.

"I haven't changed my game at all," he adds. "It's the football over here. If 
you make a mistake in England the refs warn you but here they give you a yellow 
card straight away. Then you're walking a tightrope.

"I had problems communicating at first and that got me into a bit of trouble. 
I had to talk in English and they probably thought I was insulting them when I 
wasn't. But I think I've overcome that.

"Linguistically I can get by, although my Spanish isn't as good as it should 
be. I get my five-year-old son to translate things for me," he says laughing.

"With the language problems and so on, my first year was difficult but 
everyone has been brilliant. I've got a lot to thank them for. I'm so glad I 
came."

Things have turned out so well for the 32-year old that he is considering 
staying on the island when he retires.

But for all his success in Las Palmas, there is something in Samways that has 
remained stubbornly English.

A lifelong Spurs fan, he watches football on English satellite television, 
owns a bar in the English resort of Puerto Rico and enjoys a round of golf with 
English friends. "Not many of my team-mates play," he concedes. "I suppose golf 
is a peculiarly British thing."

"I do lead quite an English lifestyle but I have integrated it with Spanish 
things," he continues, warming to his theme, "for example, I really, really 
like paella but I'm no expert on Spanish food. If we're in a restaurant I let 
Spanish friends order - they know what they're doing. And no, I haven't eaten 
bulls' testicles."

Perhaps it is no surprise then that Samways wants to see an English European 
champion. He rates the chances, too. "If Manchester United get through, I'd 
fancy them to win it," he says. "Madrid and United are probably the best sides 
in Europe but in the semi I'd sway towards United because I'm English."

"I do have an affinity for Spanish teams, though, and I was really pleased for 
Steve McManaman last year but I would prefer an English side to win it - even 
if it's Arsenal."

Â• You've read the piece, now have your say. Send your comments, as sharp or as 
stupid as you like, tofootball.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:football.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>
 