
Sandy Easdale has joined the football club board at Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>, which is separate from the PLC 
board at the focus of a power struggle.

Two weeks ago the Greenock-based businessman claimed to hold the largest 
shareholding at Rangers, through his family holdings and other supporting 
investors, after securing a deal to buy the shares of former chief executive 
Charles Green. His brother, James, is on the PLC board. Sandy Easdale had 
recently been proposed as a PLC director as part of a compromise agreement 
between the board and an opposing group of shareholders fronted by the Clyde 
Blowers chairman, Jim McColl. However, the deal broke down.

Easdale's appointment, which was announced on the Companies House website, is 
to the board of the Rangers Football Club Limited, the company previously known 
as Sevco Scotland. He is therefore not subject to re-election at Rangers' 
annual general meeting, which the club have promised to hold before the end of 
October.

Sandy Easdale was sentenced to 27 months in prison for VAT fraud in 1997 but 
now runs a successful group of businesses with his brother, including McGill's 
Buses. According to the list of appointments and departures on the Companies 
House website, the football board now consists of both Easdale brothers plus 
the chief executive, Craig Mather, and the finance director, Brian Stockbridge.

The board of Rangers International Football Club PLC, which owns 100% of the 
football club and is the company listed on the London Stock Exchange, contains 
five men â€“ Mather, James Easdale, Stockbridge, Bryan Smart and Ian Hart. The 
group of shareholders who were seeking change had wanted the removal of Mather, 
Stockbridge and Smart at a general meeting but they withdrew their requisition 
during the week. That group claimed on Friday that a compromise deal had been 
blocked by the club's broker and nominated adviser, Strand Hanson. On Friday 
night, Mather issued a lengthy statement calling for former director Paul 
Murray to withdraw his challenge while stating that McColl, who was not seeking 
a directorship himself, would have been a valuable addition to the board.

On the pitch, Lee McCulloch scored his second successive hat-trick as Rangers 
beat Arbroath 5-1 at Ibrox. The visitors opened the scoring through Alan Cook 
before conceding five goals in the last 30 minutes. Bilel Mohsni scored on his 
debut and Andy Little netted in addition to McCulloch's hat-trick. 
 