
Stadium: Mapei Stadium - Città del Tricolore, 1995, capacity 21,584
 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mapei_Stadium_%E2%80%93_Citt%C3%A0_del_Tricolore#cite_note-1>

The Mapei Stadium is a multi-purpose venue in Reggio-Emilia. It was christened 
“Stadio Città Del Tricolore” but was renamed in March 2012 due to sponsorship 
purposes. Sassuolo’s owner at the time, Giorgio Squinzi, decided to purchase 
the stadium in 2013, making them, along with Juventus, the onlySerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> clubs to own their home 
grounds. The stadium is also home to Reggiana, who rent the space. Zebre, a 
local rugby union side, are also tenants. The ground is the largest sporting 
facility in the region, which is a huge achievement for a club of Sassuolo’s 
size.

When the Neroverdi (Black and greens) were promoted back to the top flight in 
the 2013-14 season as the champions of Serie B they promptly upgraded the 
facilities. These were small but essential changes, such as new scoreboards, 
fresh turf for the pitch and the seating. The stadium is similar in structure 
to theStadio Luigi Ferraris in Genoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2014/apr/10/genoa-serie-a-alternative-club-guide>
. It has an English feel to it, in that the four stands are close to the pitch. 
There is not an athletics track around the pitch and the atmosphere can be 
felt, especially when Sassuolo play the bigger clubs. TheNeroverdi were the 
first club to own their stadium and facilities, with Juventus the second.

Sampdoria: Serie A alternative club guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2015/jan/22/sampdoria-serie-a-club-guide-lombardo>
The club are somewhat revolutionary. They sell various levels of tickets and 
have 32 executive boxes, which is far from standard for an Italian club, 
especially at this level. The match-day experience on the Peninsula needs to 
improve while keeping a place for the ultras and this is somethingSassuolo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sassuolo> do well, despite having a 
ground that is not based in their home town.

Their Bundesliga-style model allows everyone to customise their own match-day 
experience. Fans keep coming back, with attendances at Sassuolo more consistent 
than at other clubs in Italy. The success of the team on the pitch, the 
atmosphere around the ground and the financial model they are employing is 
truly exemplary and should be noted throughout Italian football.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425297070964%2F0f806626-0b50-4066-94d8-95cc043c469d-2060x1180.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sassuolo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sassuolo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425297070964%2F0f806626-0b50-4066-94d8-95cc043c469d-2060x1180.jpeg>
 The Mapei Stadium. Photograph: Claudio Villa/Getty Images 
The ultras


Ultra groups: Clan Curva Nord Sassuolo, Sasol, Ultras Saxolum 1988, Alkatraz, 
Gruppo 1922, Head Out, Eagles, Gli Antenati

Unlike many of the teams and regions documented in this series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-gentleman-ultra>, Sassuolo and 
Emilia-Romagna <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emilia-Romagna> are unknown 
quantities. Sassuolo lies southwest of its more distinguished, super-car 
manufacturing neighbour, Modena. It’s not a destination that sits high on the 
priority list of the average tourist. That is unless you happen to belong to 
the coterie ofcalcio aficionados. Then you may feel a trip to this remote 
industrial town is worth its weight in gold, or more pertinently, ceramics. For 
while Sassuolo is renowned for being at the nexus of Italy’s tile industry, the 
town has been slapped firmly on the footballing map thanks to the seemingly 
inexorable rise of US Sassuolo Calcio.

Sassuolo have one of the lowest followings in Serie A. Speaking to Silvia and 
Giulio, two season ticket holders who have followed Sassuolo home and away for 
the last two years, they were quick to acknowledge the club’s modest history: 
“Sassuolo don’t have a prestigious footballing tradition. It was only after 
Giorgio Squinzi bought the club and Sassuolo began to climb up the leagues that 
the people became passionate.”

Roma: Serie A alternative club guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/dec/11/roma-serie-a-alternative-club-guide>
Their story is similar to that of Chievo’s, a footballing parvenu whose 
extraordinary rise to prominence has left supporters incredulous. TheSassolesi 
are minnows in the landscape of Italy’s ultras. They don’t have strength in 
numbers. Nor are they renowned for their braggart choreographies or tumultuous 
atmospheres. But whether it is home or away, in Modena or Reggio Calabria, a 
small contingent is always present to support theNeroverdi.


Their paucity in numbers is unsurprising. Sassuolo is the smallest town to 
boast a team in Serie A, with a population of around 41,000. The club have 
spent much of their history toiling in the doldrums of the amateur leagues, a 
slab of brick plastered firmly at the base of thecalcio pyramid. The more 
established teams in the region (Bologna, Modena and Reggiana) have 
traditionally attracted the support of the town’s football fans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425297143315%2F8a42c624-b95a-4954-b431-647d7f4a2772-2060x905.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sassuolo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sassuolo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425297143315%2F8a42c624-b95a-4954-b431-647d7f4a2772-2060x905.jpeg>
 Sassuolo fans. Photograph: Giuseppe Bellini/Getty Images 
However, with the club enjoying a period of footballing transcendence, their 
organised support has – to a much smaller extent – enjoyed its own renaissance. 
The story of the club’s ultras can be told through the looking glass of the 
club’s rise. Unbeknown to many, during Sassuolo’s fledgling years, an English 
club calledLancaster Rovers FC <https://twitter.com/lrrfc> left an indelible 
mark on their identity. During their tour of Italy in 1921, Lancaster were 
unable to fulfil a fixture commitment and, as a means of apology, donated their 
black and green kit to the Italians. The strip was adopted and the colours 
promptly embraced, earning Sassuolo their nickname:I Neroverdi.

After years of anonymity, in 1974 Sassuolo’s fortunes began to turn after they 
merged with the cities other football club, Giofil San Giorgio. Ten years later 
the Neroverdi earned a much awaited promotion to Serie C2. It was the first 
time the town had a team competing in a professional league. This success on 
the field inspired movement off it. The ‘Ultras Saxolum 1988’ established 
themselves as a clique of fanatics whose Campanilismo (local pride and 
identity) was their raison d’etre.

Their name reveals all. The town’s title, Sassuolo, is thought to have derived 
from the word ‘Saxolum’, the etymology of which is said to stem from the Latin 
words ‘Saxum’ (large stone) and ‘Solum’ (soil or location). It is thought that 
Sassuolo was once a military fortification housing a legion during Roman epoch 
and thus the denomination celebrates the town’s ancient origins. It’s worth 
speculating whether this association with ancient Rome may also be in keeping 
with their alleged sympathy towards the far-right. Symbols from the Roman 
Empire are often embraced by the neo-fascist Ultras of AS Roma and the 
correlate between right-wing political ideology and ancient Rome has been 
discussed earlier in this series.

For the majority of the late 1980’s and 1990’s the Neroverdi oscillated 
between Serie C2 and Serie D. Despite a period of relative stagnation on the 
field, their Ultra movement continued to evolve. New groups appeared, most 
notably Gioventù and Alkatraz. In 2002, Giorgio Squinzi – owner of the 
multinational MAPEI company – sponsored the club and a year later he acquired 
ownership. This proved to be the harbinger of a new era and Sassuolo’s 
subsequent success has beggared belief.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425297459323%2Ff27d8c34-3b23-48d9-9442-24cdcf127dac-2060x1266.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sassuolo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sassuolo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425297459323%2Ff27d8c34-3b23-48d9-9442-24cdcf127dac-2060x1266.jpeg>
 Sassuolo fans during their Serie A match against Genoa in May 2014. 
Photograph: Giuseppe Bellini/Getty Images 
However, while Squinzi set about developing a concrete club structure which 
was the precursor for Sassuolo’s climb up the professional ladder, support for 
the team became desultory. In 2003, the emergence of ‘Head Out’ helped 
reinvigorate the atmosphere at the Stadio Enzo Ricci. The stadiums tiny 
capacity meant there were no curve and thus the Ultras positioned themselves in 
the tribuna (the side stand). Despite rarely filling 4,000 seats, their 
homebecame something of a fortress and during their promotions to Serie C1 in 
2006 and Serie B in 2008, the Neroverdi lost just three home games in each 
season.

Success didn’t come without its problems, both for the club and their 
supporters. They were forced to relocate to Modena’s Stadio Alberto Braglia due 
to the size of the Ricci. The Ricci was used for training while the supporters 
faced the prospect of a 12 mile trip to watch home games. Having struggled to 
fill a venue of 4,000, the Sassolesi barely filled a corner of Modena’s 
20,000-seat arena. Every home game was a reminder of Sassuolo’s size but also 
one that emphasised just how far the club had come.

Under the tenure of coach Eusebio di Francesco, the Emilians scaled the 
mountain top in 2013, winning the Serie B title. 15,157 watched the Neroverdi 
secure their historic promotion to Serie A with a 1-0 over Livorno, Simone 
Missiroli’s last gasp strike sparking scenes of jubilation as the Sassolesi 
flooded the pitch to celebrate with their heroes.

That said, their new venture in Serie A did not alleviate their stadium woes. 
Sassuolo’s home changed once again, this time to the Stadio Citta del 
Tricolore, the home of Lega Pro side Reggiana. In December, 2013, Squinzi 
bought the stadium and renamed it after his company – Stadium Mapei. It was a 
deal that angered the Ultras of Sassuolo’s Curva Nord.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425297193262%2F001dbedb-3139-420f-89b0-bbce8573490d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sassuolo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sassuolo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425297193262%2F001dbedb-3139-420f-89b0-bbce8573490d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sassuolo fans. Photograph: Giuseppe Bellini/Getty Images 
“How many times have we reaffirmed our sense of belonging and love for our 
city, and how important it is not to constantly feel like guests; but 
unfortunately economic interests have prevailed over the passion and attachment 
to our colours… One more time, we do not belong in this stadium.”

Later that month, for the first 15 minutes of Sassuolo’s game against Chievo, 
500 Reggiana supporters sat with the Sassolesi in the Curva Nord expressing 
their indignation. “Per Squinzi: Un Affare Perfetto, Per Sassuolo: Nessun 
Rispetto” ‘For Squinzi: a perfect deal, for

Sassuolo: no respect’ one banner proclaimed while another read ‘Never at 
home’. The supporters chagrin has yet to be ameliorated however the team’s 
performances on the pitch have provided a welcome distraction.

Sassuolo are now thriving in Serie A. Unsurprisingly the clubs achievements 
have seen the Ultras ranks swell. A group named Clan Curva Nord, formerly 
Saxolum proclaim to be Sassuolo’s only ‘real’ ultras. They are joined by two 
supporter groups known as Sasol and gli Antenati. They ensure the Mapei Stadium 
is not without atmosphere and spectacle, indulging in the customary flag waving 
and relentless chanting.

That said the movement remains small and their following away from home 
modest, especially given that the Clan Curva Nord refuse to accept the 
controversial Tessera del Tifoso (supports ID card), thus making them unable to 
attend away games. According to Silvia and Giulio, around 100 supporters 
usually follow the team on the road.

With success comes envy. Sassuolo’s following is often taunted regarding their 
allegiance to other clubs, especially before the Neroverdi reached Serie A. 
These disparaging attitudes are exemplified in the following statement made by 
a Parma supporter.“They are Juventus fans who used to support Modena during the 
two years the latter competed in Serie A. They returned to Juve and now they 
support Sassuolo. That is apart from when they play against Juve and then they 
revert back to being Juventini.” Ultras or not, Sassuolo’s supporters can 
remind the naysayers that at this point in time they sit highest placed of all 
the clubs in Emilia Romagna. In a city where the fires traditionally burn in 
kilns, Sassuolo have ignited a footballing passion. The Neroverdi are 
re-shuffling Italian football’s hierarchy but as Silvia affirmed, the 
supporters will never forget the clubs humble beginnings.

“Being a supporter or player of Sassuolo is different to that of other clubs 
in Italy. Sassuolo is pride, simply, Sassuolo is our colours. The result is not 
important, we want players who fight for our shirt and who give their hearts. 
Here, in contrast to the rest of Italy, we enjoy a friendly and personal 
relationship with our players.”

With thanks to season ticket holders, Silvia Mezzadri and Giulio Mucci, for 
their knowledge and expertise. In the two years they have been following 
Sassuolo home and away they have missed just one match! Grazie e in bocca al 
lupo per il campionato.

Classic player: Francesco Magnanelli
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425297229971%2Fa0b878cd-a759-4193-b755-3166b85d1122-2060x1479.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sassuolo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sassuolo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425297229971%2Fa0b878cd-a759-4193-b755-3166b85d1122-2060x1479.jpeg>
 Francesco Magnanelli. Photograph: Giuseppe Bellini/Getty Images 
 Francesco Magnanelli may not be a household name in Italy and he may not sell 
newspapers but he is loved by Sassuolo fans. Their short history does not give 
them many star names and it does not leave them speaking over late-night 
glasses of wine about that great player in 1934, who was part of Vittorio 
Pozzo’s World Cup-winning squad. Sassuolo have no Paolo Maldini; they have no 
Giuseppe Meazza; they have no Dino Zoff; and they have never had a Diego 
Maradona.

Maganelli is their captain, however, and he has played 308 times for the club, 
scoring five goals. He is a hard-working midfielder who embodies what Sassuolo 
are as a team: he is talented, purposeful and certainly not pretentious. There 
are better players but his endeavour and humility make him likeable. Aged only 
30, he still has some years to go before he retires, especially as he doesn’t 
rely on pace. After being with the club since 2005, it is unlikely we will see 
him anywhere else in the future.

Magnanelli grew up in Gubbio, where he started his career aged 16. He played 
14 games for them in Serie C2 in the 2001-02 season and look promising. The 
scouts swarmed in and he was watched by Torino and Chievo. He signed for Chievo 
in 2002 for €50,000 and spent a season there failing to make the first team. A 
move to Fiorentina in the 2003-04 season saw him once again fail to make the 
grade – he did not play a single game. In 2004 he moved to Sangiovannese in 
Serie C1, where he played seven games before the end of the season.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425297321538%2Fec41cb63-e0d0-4e4d-9194-c57123d8790c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sassuolo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sassuolo%3A%20Serie%20A%20alternative%20club%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Fsassuolo-serie-a-alternative-club-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425297321538%2Fec41cb63-e0d0-4e4d-9194-c57123d8790c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Francesco Magnanelli celebrates as Sassuolo beat Genoa. Photograph: Giuseppe 
Bellini/Getty Images 
Scouts from Sassuolo watched him during these seven matches and picked him up, 
promising him that he would start in their then-Serie C2 outfit. It was a long 
way from where he had started but Magnanelli wanted to play football so took up 
the challenge. He made 26 league appearances in his first season in Serie C2, 
where he impressed with his mixture of passes, through-balls, interceptions, 
tough tackles and blocks. His will to win was exceptional, even if he lost his 
head and his discipline once in a while.

In first first season, Sassuolo won promotion to Serie C1, where he played 
another 26 games and scored his first goal. He was now the focal point of the 
team. The club were soon in Serie B and he was now establishing himself as an 
anchoring midfielder who was able to mix with a much better calibre of player. 
Under the guidance of Andrea Mandorlini, Stefano Poli and then Daniele Arrigoni 
he improved even more, even managing to score in Serie B in the derby against 
Modena. Now he was becoming a legend and he extended his contract when Fulvio 
Pea came in as coach.

On 18 May 2013 he and his team, now managed by Eusebio Di Francesco 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eusebio_Di_Francesco>, won promotion to Serie A 
as champions of Serie B. At the ripe old age of 28, he played his first Serie A 
match against Torino, the team that once wanted him. They may have lost 2-0 on 
the day, but Captain Maganelli is now leading his team against the great and 
the good of Serie A andthey are holding their own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball/table>. He may not be 
Javier Zanetti or Raimundo Orsi, but to Sassuolo he is more than that. He isn’t 
on a list of greats, he isthe great, and for that, they will be eternally 
grateful.

• This blog first appeared on Richard Hall’s The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://thegentlemanultra.tumblr.com/>
• Follow Richard Hall <https://twitter.com/Gentleman_Ultra> and Luca 
Hodges-Ramon <https://twitter.com/LH_Ramon25> on Twitter
• Follow Guardian Football on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>
 