
A large section of the Aral Sea has completely dried up for the first time in 
modern history,according to Nasa 
<http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/WorldOfChange/aral_sea.php>.

Images from the US space agency’s Terra satellite released last week show that 
the eastern basin of the Central Asian inland sea – which stretched across 
Kazakhstan andUzbekistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uzbekistan> and was 
once the fourth largest in the world – was totally parched in August. Images 
taken in 2000 show an extensive body of water covering the same area.


“This is the first time the eastern basin has completely dried in modern 
times,” Philip Micklin, a geographer emeritus from Western Michigan University 
told Nasa. “And it is likely the first time it has completely dried in 600 
years, since Medieval desiccation associated with diversion of Amu Darya to the 
Caspian Sea.”


In the 1950s, two of the region’s major rivers – the Amu Darya and and the Syr 
Darya – were diverted by the Soviet government to provide irrigation for cotton 
production in Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, starving the Aral. It has been 
diminishing ever since, with thesea level dropping 16 metres 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2008/06/24/idUSL23248577> between 1960 and 
1996, according to the World Bank. Water levels are believed to be down to less 
than 10 per cent of what they were five decades ago.


A lack of rain and snow on the Pamir Mountains has contributed to the 
particularly low water levels this summer, said Micklin.

 A ship graveyard near Muynak, at an area of the dried up Aral Sea in 
Uzbekistan. Photograph: Alexander Zemlianichenko/AP 
The Nasa satellite began taking pictures of the Aral Sea in 2000. Back then, 
it had already separated into the northern portion inKazakhstan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kazakhstan> and the southern portion in 
Uzbekistan. The southern area of the Aral also split into western and eastern 
areas.


Efforts have been made to try and improve conditions in the north Aral sea, 
which were hailed asa partial success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/aug/01/endangeredhabitats.conservation>
. But water from the Amu Darya and south Aral is still used to maintain 
Uzbekistan’s crucial cotton industry. Though water levels do fluctuate, few 
believe they could ever return to those seen in the 1960s .


More than 60 million people live around the Aral Sea basin 
<http://na.unep.net/geas/getUNEPPageWithArticleIDScript.php?article_id=108>. 
The lack of water has devastated the region’s fishing industry, leaving ship 
graveyards as well aslarge areas of salted sand 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/worlds-4th-largest-lake-nearly-dried-up/>, which 
is easily kicked up by winds and contributes tohealth problems 
<http://www.jcu.edu.au/jrtph/vol/v01whish.pdf>. 
 