
As Hamlet's uncle might have said of crosswords, had they been published in 
the Denmark of his day: 'When cock-ups come, they come not single spies, but in 
battalions.' August turned out to be a bad month in the cock-up department. 
First up(Quick No. 12,862 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/quick/12862>, 1 
August) was a clue for SCOOTER which read: 'Large black duck (7)'. The kindest 
rebuke came from Kathy H.

The 'Grauniad' needs a new tutor
Or maybe a better computer.
No. 6 down
Left me with a frown,
'cos SCOOTER for SCOTER won't suit her.

The offending clue was subsequently changed in the online archive to: 'To 
score (anag) (7)'

Then came Paul's Saturday prize puzzle No 25,394 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/prize/25394> for 6 August, where the 
obviously required solutions to 22 across (SPINACH) and 20 down (EROICA) could 
not both be made to fit into the grid as they had different vowels at their 
third-letter intersection. So you were left with a choice between an unlikely 
vegetable, SPONACH, or an as-yet-unperformed symphony by Beethoven, the ERIOCA. 
Prize entries were accepted if they included one or other of the correct 
solutions. The online archive has been corrected so that the symphony in E flat 
is preserved with its proper spelling, with the clue for SPINACH replaced by 
one for STOMACH.

But all this was trumped when, in making up the page that was to carry the 
Saturday prize puzzle for 20 August, the wrong puzzle was imported from the 
database and, instead ofNo. 25,406 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/prize/25406> by Brummie, the previous 
day'sNo. 25,405 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/cryptic/25405> by 
Araucaria was reprinted in the paper, while the correct puzzle was published on 
the website. Since the solution to the Araucaria puzzle was easily available on 
the website for a week before the deadline for submission, the decision was 
made that the winners' names for the 20 August prize would only be drawn from 
those for the Brummie puzzle.

I pray for the sake of us all that September will be less of a mensis 
horribilis.
_____

Many of you have noticed and reacted positively to Alan Connor's new in-house 
crossword blog <http://www.guardian.co.uk/crosswords/crossword-blog> but, for 
those who have not yet found it, the place to look is on the right-hand side of 
the crossword home page. Alan will be regularly blogging twice a week. He and 
his blog space welcome your contributions, comments, likes, dislikes, questions 
and prejudices: preferably related to the world of crosswords but not in any 
way just to those of the Guardian and Observer. Meanwhile the other channels of 
communicating with the papers and with each other remain untouched: the 
crossword editors of each paper and the comment facility attached to individual 
puzzles. And, please, with any question or complaint that is remotely 
technical, go directly to theUser helpdesk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk>. It 
is not that I am uninterested in your plight in these regards, but the chances 
of my being able to give you helpful advice are so close to zero as to make no 
difference.
_____ 

We never met but over almost 15 years of editing her crossword puzzles, often 
discussing how much Australian English was legitimate in a Guardian puzzle, 
Shirl O'Brien became a friend. Her crossword teeth were cut on solving puzzles 
set for the Guardian and the Times and then syndicated in Australian 
newspapers. But she became frustrated at being limited to imported material and 
in 1985, at the age of 50, she persuaded the Brisbane Courier-Mail to run as a 
pilot some of her own puzzles, which deliberately included Australian content. 
They were an instant success and she continued to set regularly for the paper 
as Southern Cross until 2009, by which time she had become the doyenne of the 
Australian setting world. Her final puzzle for the Courier-Mail included the 
clue: 'Constellation setting for the last time (8,5)'. My predecessor, John 
Perkin, took her on as a setter in 1987 and they jointly decided on Auster, the 
south wind, as her appropriate Guardian nom de plume. She continued to send in 
puzzles with elegant and economical clues until last year, by which time her 
health was failing her. Her Catholic faith was a vital part of her life and she 
is survived by Jack, to whom she was married for 61 years, and by their seven 
children.
_____ 

The August Genius puzzle (No 98 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/crossword/java/new/0,,-27232,00.html> by Crucible) 
brought in 378 correct entries by the deadline, 40 of them on the first day. 
Tony of London W5 (01:42) and Ian of London N14 (01:49) were a familiar first 
pair to submit, followed by two from Australia: Jeremy from Canberra (02:49) 
and Peter from Queensland (02:50). The next, having had the better part of a 
good night's sleep, was Alan in York at 07:39.

Congratulations to Simon Margetts from Bristol, who is August's winner.

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@guardian.co.uk <mailto:userhelp@guardian.co.uk> . 
If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk> . For Observer crosswords 
pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk <mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk>
 