
Lyle Taylor’s two goals earned Partick Thistle an important 2-0 victory over 
Motherwell at Firhill. Defeat for the Jags would have left them only a point 
ahead of second-bottom Motherwell in theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>. However, two 
second-half goals from Taylor allowed Partick to widen the gap between them and 
the Lanarkshire side to seven points.

Dundee United finally returned to winning ways in the league thanks to Chris 
Erskine’s decisive 70th-minute strike at Tannadice, which endedHamilton’s 
top-six hopes.

Jackie McNamara’s team had endured a run of 10 league games without a victory 
going into this match, but they ended that sequence when Erskine’s well-taken 
goal gave them a 1-0 win. The result leaves Hamilton winless in 13 games since 
Alex Neil left in early January to take over at Norwich, to be replaced by the 
player‑manager Martin Canning.

St Johnstone beat Dundee 1-0 at McDiarmid Park to secure a fourth consecutive 
top-six finish. Brian Graham’s quality first-half finish gaveSt Johnstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stjohnstone> a narrow victory but the 
visitors will feel hard done by after they had a good share of the overall play 
and David Clarkson hit a post with a powerful volley. Despite the defeat, 
Dundee are almost certain to join the home side in the top six after the split, 
which is formalised once Celtic have visited Dens Park on 22 April.

After Hamilton’s defeat at Dundee United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited>, only Kilmarnock can now 
stop Dundee by winning their final two matches, hoping Paul Hartley’s team are 
defeated by Celtic, and securing an eight-goal, positive goal‑difference swing.

In the Scottish Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-championship>, the league’s 
bottom two sides,Livingston and Alloa, both collected wins. Alloa beat Dumbarton
 3-0 with goals from Iain Flannigan, Kevin Cawley and Greig Spence, and 
basement side Livingston won 2-1 atCowdenbeath, with both goals scored by 
Jordan White.

Hibs and Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>, both on 58 
points, play on Sunday and both sides will be competing for a place in the 
play-offs.

Hibs and the Scottish Championship titleholders, Hearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts>, contest the Edinburgh derby at 
Easter Road, while Stuart McCall’s Rangers will be looking to bounce back from 
their 3-0 defeat away to Queen of the South in midweek when they face Raith 
Rovers at Ibrox.
 