
Inverness battled back to draw 1-1 with Hamilton. The in-form Ali Crawford gave
Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton> a 16th-minute 
advantage with a clever free-kick curled in at the goalkeeper’s near post.

Caley Thistle were denied a penalty when Dan Seaborne appeared to handle the 
ball on the line, but Larnell Cole restored parity early in the second period 
with a powerful half-volley that went in off the crossbar. The result was 
enough to see Caley, who began the day bottom of the table, leapfrog Partick 
Thistle.

Third-placed Aberdeen drew 0-0 with St Johnstone at Pittodrie. The visitors 
could have nicked the three points but for Aberdeen’s goalkeeper Joe Lewis 
turning David Wotherspoon’s free-kick onto the post. Steven MacLean and Blair 
Alston also threatened theAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aberdeen> goal in the second half. The 
Dons are now four points behind Rangers, who are second.

Dundee drew 0-0 against Ross County with striker Liam Boyce having a goal 
disallowed for County before Craig Wighton went close with a long-distance shot 
for Dundee. County’s Christopher Routis and Dundee’s Marcus Haber then missed 
good chances. But the best opportunity arrived with 11 minutes remaining, when 
Alex Schalk’s header from substitute Jonathan Frank’s cross was turned round 
the post by Scott Bain.

Ross MacLean, Lionel Ainsworth and Scott McDonald missed gilt-edged chances for
Motherwell as their game against Kilmarnock also finished goalless.

In the Championship, Hibs remain top after beating Dumbarton 2-0 with goals 
from Paul Hanlon and Brian Graham, andDundee United extended their unbeaten run 
to 12 games with a 1-0 win againstAyr United at Somerset Park. Tope Obadayi 
scored the only goal of the game from a swift counter-attack.
 