
Liam Boyce scored a superb hat-trick as Ross County twice came from behind to 
thump the visitorsDundee 5-2 at Victoria Park in one of only three Scottish 
Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> games 
to beat the weather on Saturday.

Kane Hemmings had put Dundee <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundee> in 
front after five minutes and netted his second shortly after the break, with 
Boyce having brought County level with his first goal of the day just before 
the half-hour mark.

County had strong claims for a penalty turned down after 39 minutes when Craig 
Curran was fouled by Thomas Konrad. The referee gave a free-kick on the edge of 
the area and booked the Dundee defender in the process. Martin Woods then 
curled the free-kick just wide of Scott Bain’s left-hand post

The home side were soon on level terms again through Michael Gardyne and 
Jackson Irvine gave his side the lead for the first time in the match just 
three minutes after coming off the substitutes’ bench. Two more goals from 
Boyce in the 69th and 85th minutes completed his treble and sealed an emphatic 
victory for the hosts.

Kilmarnock were boosted in their battle to avoid relegation as they held on 
for a 1-0 win atHamilton. Tope Obadeyi grabbed the only goal of the game for 
the visitors in the 69th minute after being set up by Josh Magennis.

The games at Tannadice between Dundee United and Motherwell and at Firhill 
betweenPartick Thistle and St Johnstone were both postponed.

In the Championship Falkirk made the most of their chance to close the gap on 
the leading duo Rangers and Hibernian – who meet at Ibrox on Monday – by 
defeatingDumbarton 1-0 courtesy of Blair Alston’s long-range strike on 36 
minutes, while at the bottomLivingston moved above St Mirren, who are now in 
the relegation play-off place after a 4-1 defeat, with two goals from Liam 
Buchanan. 
 