
The new Rangers manager, Mark Warburton, will hope to put the Ibrox club on a 
path to promotion when his side open theirScottish Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-championship> campaign at home 
to relegated St Mirren on 8 August.

The former Brentford manager has been hired by the chairman Dave King to pick 
up the pieces after last year’s campaign ended in humiliation.

Despite having the second biggest budget in Scotland, Gers could only finish 
third in the second tier and were then swatted aside by a rampant Motherwell in 
the play-off final.

But Warburton and his assistant, former Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> captain David Weir, have already 
started work rebuilding a squad hit by the loss of 11 players this summer, with 
Wigan defender Rob Kiernan expected to sign next week.

A trip to Ibrox is probably not the start new St Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stmirren> manager Ian Murray would have 
wanted just two months after taking over.

St Mirren finished bottom of the top flight last year after Gary Teale failed 
to unpick the damage done by Tommy Craig’s brief stint in charge. Like 
Warburton, he has a major task ahead of him as he looks to mount a promotion 
bid.

As things stand, though, Hibernian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hibernian> will feel most confident of 
giving Rangers a challenge for the Championship title after beating them to 
second place last year.

Alan Stubbs’ Hibs kick off their season away to Dumbarton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dumbarton> and hope they can build some 
vital momentum before their first trip to Ibrox, which takes place just three 
weeks into the season on 22 August.

In the other opening-day matches, Morton host Falkirk, Queen of the South 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/queenofthesouth> welcome Alloa to 
Dumfries and Raith take on Livingston at Stark’s Park.

Meanwhile, King – who has promised to spend “whatever it takes” to guide 
Rangers back to the Scottish Premiership – will hope they have promotion 
wrapped up long before they travel to St Mirren Park on the final day of the 
Championship season, which is 30 April.
 