
Rory Loy’s second-half equaliser prevented Hearts closing the gap on Celtic, 
theScottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> leaders, to four 
points asDundee sealed a 1-1 draw at a sold-out Tynecastle.

Hearts <https://www.theguardian.com/football/hearts> took a 24th-minute lead 
when Arnaud Djoum headed his third goal in six appearances for the club after 
moving up front alongside Osman Sow in the absence of the suspended Juanma 
Delgado.

The home side looked comfortably on course for their fifth consecutive league 
victory and clean sheet, but Loy beat the offside trap in the 67th minute 
before finishing expertly for his seventh goal of the campaign.

Ross County got back to winning ways with a comfortable 3-0 home victory over 
Motherwell. Craig Curran gave County the advantage in the first half with a 
clinical finish after good work by Martin Woods. The hosts then dominated the 
second half and after Tony Dingwall doubled the lead in the 69th minute, Liam 
Boyce added a third goal in stoppage time with a penalty.

Murray Davidson scored the winner as St Johnstone continued their good form by 
beatingDundee United 2-1 at Tannadice. Tommy Wright’s team had to come back 
from a goal behind after Billy McKay had headed the hosts into the lead. In a 
hard-fought match, goals late in the first half from Chris Kane and Davidson 
earned victory for the visitors. Striker Steven MacLean struck a second-half 
penalty over the bar for Saints but it did not prove costly as they held on 
against Mixu Paatelainen’s men.

Partick Thistle beat Inverness 2-1 at Firhill and moved further away from the 
bottom of the table. The Highlanders enjoyed the better start to the game when 
Miles Storey fired them into the lead after six minutes. Kris Doolan restored 
parity for Thistle before Ryan Stevenson came off the bench to score the winner 
at the death.

Goals have been hard to come by for the Jags and the victory was only their 
second win of the season at Firhill.

Rangers suffered more frustration on the road as the Championship leaders were 
held to a 1-1 draw atLivingston.

Jason Holt gave Rangers the lead with his fifth goal of the season but they 
were denied the win by a team 26 points behind them when Myles Hippolyte lashed 
home the equaliser just after half-time. Jason Cummings scored his 14th goal of 
the season to giveHibs victory at Alloa and move them level on points with 
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers>, who have a game in hand.
 