
Celtic’s march to the Scottish Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership> title continued 
apace with a 3-0 win atHamilton despite playing most of the second half with 10 
men.

Brendan Rodgers had said he had never witnessed a good game on an artificial 
surface, one of which awaited his side at the SuperSeal Stadium on a wet, windy 
and generally miserable day in Lanarkshire. But Rodgers was happy to see the 
returning striker Leigh Griffiths open the scoring four minutes from the break 
with his 13th goal of the season.

The Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> midfielder Callum 
McGregor was sent off in the 47th minute for picking up a second booking, for a 
foul on Scott McMann, before Stuart Armstrong drove in a glorious second from 
distance and Moussa Dembélé, on for Griffiths at the start of the second half, 
fired in a third.

Scott Sinclair fires Celtic 14 points clear with winner against Partick Thistle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/celtic-partick-thistle-scottish-premiership-match-report>
The champions extended their domestic unbeaten run to 22 games and remain 14 
points clear ofRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> at the 
top with a game in hand over their city rivals.

Rangers strengthened their grip on second spot with a narrow 1-0 win over 
Inverness at Ibrox. A 13th-minute own goal from the Inverness defender Brad 
McKay provided some festive cheer on a day when Mark Warburton’s team were 
largely off-key.

The win restored Rangers’ lead over third-place Aberdeen to seven points, 
although they have played a game more. Richie Foran’s team, however, now sit 
bottom after their ninth defeat of the season.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fscottish-premiership-roundup-rangers-inverness-hamilton-celtic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33956ba97179e3bcf5738ed201dd06ee1e926bda%2F0_47_3456_2075%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scottish%20roundup%3A%20Celtic%20maintain%20lead%20with%20victory%20at%20Hamilton%20as%20Rangers%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fscottish-premiership-roundup-rangers-inverness-hamilton-celtic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scottish%20roundup%3A%20Celtic%20maintain%20lead%20with%20victory%20at%20Hamilton%20as%20Rangers%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fscottish-premiership-roundup-rangers-inverness-hamilton-celtic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33956ba97179e3bcf5738ed201dd06ee1e926bda%2F0_47_3456_2075%2F3456.jpg>
 Rangers score their winner through Brad McKay’s own goal. Photograph: Jane 
Barlow/PA 
During a flat first half the hosts lacked the same spark that had driven them 
to three straight victories over Aberdeen, Hearts andHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hamilton>. Rangers were given a scare 12 
minutes in when Greg Tansey’s cross was redirected goalwards by Losana 
Doumbouya but they were grateful his effort lacked the pace to beat the alert 
Wes Foderingham. Yet despite their lack of energy, Rangers took the lead 60 
seconds later.

Martyn Waghorn drove to the byline before firing a cross into the penalty 
area, which seemed to be aimed at no one in particular. But it caused problems 
as McKay found himself unable to get out of its path and watched in horror as 
the ball fired off his thigh before bouncing into the net.

Rangers, though, continued to live dangerously. Andy Halliday had Foderingham 
to thank when he played the ball straight to Larnell Cole in shooting 
territory, although the home side’s midfielder did better when he unleashed a 
fierce shot from 25 yards, which required a fine save by Owain Fon-Williams to 
prevent it finding the top corner.

Foderingham had to rescue his side again on 35 minutes when Tansey was gifted 
time and space on the edge of the hosts’ box, springing to his right to turn 
the ball behind for a corner.

But he did not look so assured in the last piece of action before the break 
when he spilled Lee Hodson’s headed backpass. The ball fell to Liam Polworth 
with the goal gaping but he let the chance slip as he fired into the 
side-netting.

Garner had the chance to justify his new cult-hero status after 67 minutes 
when Kenny Miller’s deflected shot broke to him six yards out but he nudged his 
header wide.
 