
The federal treasurer, Scott Morrison, has defended negative gearing on the 
basis it keeps rents down and attempted to paper over disagreements with theNew 
South Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> 
premier, Mike Baird, over the issue.


Morrison rejected Baird’s and state planning minister Rob Stokes’ calls for 
negative gearing to be reconsidered but claimed Baird had backed the federal 
government’s position on rent.

Morrison also defended changes made on Saturday that allow foreign buyers of 
off-the-plan apartments to sell them on to other foreign buyers when settlement 
falls through, rather than require them to be sold to Australians.

Mike Baird breaks with federal Liberals over negative gearing changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/mike-baird-breaks-with-federal-liberals-over-negative-gearing-changes>
Morrison said the “anomaly” needed to be corrected to protect the financial 
viability of some developments.

Stokes criticised negative gearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/25/negative-gearing-nsw-minister-savages-federal-coalition-policy>
 by warning it does nothing to improve supply but does help some people reduce 
their taxable income at the expense of other Australians.Baird backed his 
planning minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/mike-baird-breaks-with-federal-liberals-over-negative-gearing-changes>
 in a speech at the National Press Club and added that GST should also be 
reconsidered.

Morrison said housing affordability didn’t just affect people saving for a 
home in Sydney and Melbourne, but also the 30% of people who rented.

“I am not about to do something that will jack up their rents which was the 
result of negative gearing changes last time,” he told a press conference in 
Canberra.

Morrison said the risk of overheating in the investment market had been dealt 
with by Australian Prudential Regulation Authority measures.

But balanced against that was the need to avoid “a negative housing shock” 
through the tax system, he said. “I think that is quite a reckless and 
dangerous idea.”

Morrison noted that Baird had said the commonwealth was right to raise 
concerns about the impacts on rents of abolishing negative gearing.

Morrison said the meeting of treasurers on Friday would consider the $11bn 
spent by federal and state governments on housing policies, which he said was 
“not well spent” by either level of government.

The treasurer was asked why he was allowing foreign investors who purchased 
apartments to onsell them to other foreign investors, not just Australians, 
when settlement fell through.

He said the “modest calibration” to the regulation was needed to address the 
fact the previous requirement to sell to an Australian was threatening the 
“financial viability of various ventures”.

Housing inequality is a failure to govern, and the market is not the answer | 
John Falzon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/29/housing-inequality-is-a-failure-to-govern-and-the-market-is-not-the-answer>
“It was an anomaly, an unintended consequence and it was important to provide 
surety around those projects so we didn’t allow a situation to develop that 
could jeopardise important business ventures.”

Asked if that amounted to saying the difference an Australian or a foreigner 
would pay for an onsold apartment could imperil developments, Morrison said 
only that the regulation change “ensured some stability in some fragile areas 
of that market”.

Negative gearing was one of the most contentious issues in the federal 
election campaign.

In the months before the election, at least six different pieces of economic 
modelling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/22/scott-morrison-is-losing-his-negative-gearing-modelling-war>
touched on negative gearing changes, none of them with the same conclusion.

Labor has sought to target the government for refusing to reconsider negative 
gearing after the intervention of Stokes and Baird.
 