
Change was in order at Liverpool this summer and six new players plus the 
pursuit of Christian Benteke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/06/football-transfer-rumours-liverpool-christian-benteke>
 demonstrates that the owner, Fenway Sports Group, was inclined to agree. The 
additional overhaul of the coaching staff is intended to lead Liverpool in “a 
new technical direction”, according to Brendan Rodgers, although it signals not 
so much a revolution as continued backing for the manager’s judgment at Anfield.

Liverpool appoint Sean O’Driscoll as their assistant manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/06/liverpool-appoint-sean-odriscoll-assistant-manager>
Sean O’Driscoll was confirmed as Liverpool’s assistant manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/06/liverpool-appoint-sean-odriscoll-assistant-manager>
 on Monday having finalised his departure from the Football Association. The 
58-year-old spent the past nine months as the head coach of England’s Under-19 
team and replaces Colin Pascoe, sacked last monthfollowing FSG’s review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/05/mike-marsh-liverpool-first-team-coach>
 into last season’s domestic and European disappointments. He and Rodgers are 
joined by the highly regarded Pepijn Lijnders, promoted from Liverpool 
under-16s to the newly created position of first team development coach. A new 
first-team coach, possibly one with connections to the club, is also being 
sought to replace Mike Marsh, who was released on the expiry of his contract 
last month.

The appointment of O’Driscoll and elevation of Lijnders banishes one of many 
uncertainties that surrounds Liverpool. Rather than being left isolated or 
undermined by the departures of Pascoe and Marsh, two close allies he described 
as “absolutely critical” to 2014’s title challenge, Rodgers received the full 
support of his employer to instigate the restructuring. He could not have 
accepted anything less before a critical season in hisLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> reign.

O’Driscoll, the former Bournemouth, Doncaster Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/doncaster>, Crawley Town, Nottingham 
Forest and Bristol City manager, has attended several of Rodgers’ coaching 
sessions at Melwood in recent seasons. He was the first manager Rodgers faced 
at Vicarage Road after he left Chelsea’s coaching team to take charge of 
Watford in November 2008. The two have remained in regular contact since that 
1-1 draw with O’Driscoll’s admired Doncaster team.

“I have made these appointments because I want to take us in a new technical 
direction, in terms of coaching,”Rodgers said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/06/liverpool-appoint-sean-odriscoll-assistant-manager>
. “I believe the entire first-team set-up will benefit and I am extremely 
positive and excited about what we can achieve, as a group, going forward.”

He described O’Driscoll as “one of the best coaches I have ever come across” 
in a wide-ranging critique of English coachingmethods in October 2013 
<http://www.express.co.uk/sport/football/437773/Liverpool-manager-Brendan-Rodgers-slams-coaches-for-stifling-young-talent>
. On Monday he added: “My admiration for Sean, as a professional, is well 
documented. He is someone with a clear vision and philosophy and has proved he 
has the ability to transfer that knowledge, through his coaching, to the 
players. I am looking forward to working with him and also learning from his 
experiences and gaining valuable knowledge from his expertise.”

O’Driscoll’s emergence as the favoured candidate raised many an eyebrow given 
his lack of experience at Premier League level, something Pascoe and Marsh 
possessed in abundance by comparison, plus the rival names linked with the 
post. There was a clamour for change at the top following the dismal end to 
last season and while it has arrived in personnel, the coaching philosophy in 
place appears more unified than ever.

The 32-year-old Lijnders arrived at Liverpool’s academy only last year but 
made a major impression on players and fellow coaches. The Dutchman was in his 
early 20s when lured from PSV Eindhoven by Porto, where he progressed from 
coaching the club’s under-sixes to the first team. The career path of a coach 
who excels at one-to-one tuition is following a similar upward trajectory on 
Merseyside. With Rodgers and O’Driscoll he shares a common belief in a 
high-pressing, fluid attacking game, in the constant development of an 
individual’s technique and faith in young talent.

“I couldn’t think of a better attacking manager to assist,” said Lijnders on 
his promotion. “Everybody knows how I feel about representing this amazing 
club. The owners have a clear and strong philosophy which is based on 
developing top young players into elite – I want to thank them for giving me 
this opportunity.”

Gareth Roberts, the former Wales international, played for O’Driscoll at 
Doncaster and is intrigued by his former manager’s switch from the FA. He said: 
“It will be fascinating to see how he works with top-flight players in the 
Premier League, both in terms of improving the Liverpool lads and in finding 
the weaknesses of the opposition.

“He’s a No2 this time and has always been a manager in the past but he and 
Brendan Rodgers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brendan-rodgers> seem to 
share a similar philosophy about the way the game should be played.”

The former Anfield favourite Sami Hyypia was keen to replace Pascoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/08/sami-hyppia-coaching-role-liverpool>
 while Rafael Benítez’s former assistant Pako Ayestarán was also linked. Both 
were overlooked for the assistant manager’s post but Rodgers hopes to appoint a 
former Liverpool old boy as first-team coach. According to Roberts, they will 
work alongside a meticulous operator in O’Driscoll.

“He was the best manager I played for, and I played under quite a few,” said 
the 37-year-old former Liverpool trainee, who made over 150 appearances for 
Doncaster during O’Driscoll’s tenure and also played for Tranmere Rovers, Derby 
County, Bury, Notts County and Chester before joining Stockport County this 
summer.

“There is no doubt he made me a better player. He’s different class on the 
training ground. He makes you think at every stage of a training session. 
Everything he does is designed to make you think, to improve you as a player 
and to improve you as a person. The sessions are always plotted through the 
week with a focus on the match at the weekend. He tailors what you do to focus 
on the weak points of the opposition on a Saturday.

“He is very good at seeing things from the side of the pitch, tweaking players 
or tweaking the way players are doing things. He’s very good at changing or 
adjusting tactical systems. It’s something he practices with the players on the 
training ground. Players respond to him. He is very quietly spoken and when he 
raises his voice you listen. He’s very calm. He wants to get his point over. If 
someone is not getting what he is after, he will work with them until they see 
it.”

Roberts added that “everything has to be done for a reason” with O’Driscoll, a 
coach he claims “is always doing things to make you think”.

The former Wales left-back explained: “He would split the group of players 
into two teams and call one person from each side over to tell the rules of the 
game about to be played. Then he would tell them they have 30 seconds to tell 
the rest of the team the rules before the match started. It was all about 
developing communication skills among the players, making them better at 
passing information on to each other on the pitch. He’s a top guy and he 
deserves this chance.”
 