
Sebastian Vettel and Daniil Kvyat were involved in an uncomfortable exchange 
after the Chinese Grand Prix, with Vettel accusing the Red Bull driver of 
causinghis early collision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/apr/17/f1-chinese-grand-prix-live?page=with:block-571331ade4b0ef2dcefa88e1#liveblog-navigation>
 with his Ferrari team-mate Kimi Raikkonen.

An action-packed race in which several cars manoeuvred through the field after 
early incidents, led to the unusual situation of two drivers involved in a 
collision both making the podium.

The drama began on the 270-degree opening corner, with Vettel, who started 
fourth on the grid, moving sharply to his left and colliding with Raikkonen, 
who had also started on the second row, forcing the Finnish driver off the 
track.

F1: Nico Rosberg wins dramatic Chinese Grand Prix to extend championship lead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/17/chinese-grand-prix-f1-nico-rosberg>
The collision also affected Lewis Hamilton – he was clipped by Felipe Nasr as 
the Sauber driver swerved to avoid Raikkonen, who had fought his way back into 
the race.

On the team radio Vettel was quick to blame Kvyat, accelerating on the inside 
from the third row, for the collision, claiming that the Russian came up behind 
him “like a madman” and branding the attacking move “suicidal”.

At the chequered flag, with Vettel recovering to take second place – 
overtaking Kvyat on lap 36 – the German showed contrition over the team radio 
and offered an apology to the fifth-placed Raikkonen during the cool-down lap.

In the pre-podium room, the four-times drivers’ champion took a different 
stance, placing responsibility squarely on Kvyat in a heated exchange. After a 
brief conversation in German withthe race winner, Nico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/17/chinese-grand-prix-f1-nico-rosberg>
, Vettel turned on Kvyat, saying in English: “If I don’t go left [at the 
start], you crash into us and we all three go out – you are like a torpedo.”

Kvyat’s response – “I was racing … I didn’t crash” – seemed to antagonise 
Vettel further. He replied: “You didn’t; you were lucky this time.”

The Red Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> driver pointed out 
that, with both drivers on the podium, little long-term harm was done. The race 
stewards did not take any action over the incident and the pair appeared to 
bury the hatchet by clinking their champagne bottles on the podium but 
continued to discuss the incident as Rosberg celebrated his victory.

Vettel did not apportion blame to Kvyat in his post-race comments, saying only 
that he was “disappointed that I made contact in lap one”. The Germain said: 
“Lucky that the car was still intact.”

Speaking on the podium, Kvyat said: “You see the gap, you go for it on the 
inside. It was a risky move … but you have to take risks and I am on the 
podium.”

It was not the only time during the race that Kvyat had an altercation with 
another driver. The Red Bull man was frustrated by Jolyon Palmer not moving 
aside as he tried to lap, apparently gesturing to the Renault driver and 
exclaiming over the team radio: “Why won’t he get out of my fucking way?”

In a dramatic, seesaw race in which Lewis Hamilton finished seventh after 
starting at the back of the grid, and comebacks from Daniel Ricciardo as well 
as Vettel and Raikkonen, Rosberg was relatively untroubled at the front of the 
field, winning by a distance to seal his sixth consecutive grand prix victory.
 