
Sebastian Vettel <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel> has 
escaped punishment for his expletive-laden outburst at the Mexican Grand Prix’s 
race director, Charlie Whiting, on Sunday.

Vettel swore repeatedly at Whiting and Max Verstappen over the team radio as 
the four-time champion dramatically lost his cool when he clashed with the 
Dutch driver in the closing stages of the race.

Daniel Ricciardo elevated to podium as airwaves turn blue at Mexican GP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/31/daniel-ricciardo-hits-out-at-sebastian-vettel-after-explosive-conclusion>
Following a letter of apology to the FIA president, Jean Todt, and Whiting, 
however, the sport’s governing body confirmed on Tuesday night that the German 
will face no further action.

The FIA said in its statement: “At the recent Mexican Grand Prix, the Ferrari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> driver Sebastian Vettel made 
comments over team radio using repeated foul language directed at both the FIA 
Formula 1 race director Charlie Whiting and a fellow competitor which were 
retransmitted during the live broadcast of the event.

“Immediately following this incident, Sebastian Vettel spontaneously sought 
out Charlie Whiting to express his regrets for his behaviour in person. He 
then, again on his own initiative, sent letters to each of the FIA president 
Jean Todt and Charlie Whiting, in which he apologised profusely for his 
actions. He also indicated that he would likewise be contacting Max Verstappen 
and vowed that such an incident would never occur again.

Five things we know with two races remaining in F1 title race
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/31/f1-sebastian-vettel-lewis-hamilton-nico-hulkenberg-mexican-grand-prix>
“In the light of this sincere apology and strong commitment, the FIA president 
has decided, on an exceptional basis, not to take disciplinary action against 
Mr Vettel by bringing this matter before the FIA international tribunal.”

Vettel’s outbursts, which were transmitted during the race on Sunday, 
overshadowed Lewis Hamilton’s victory in Mexico. The Ferrari driver has been 
told that he will face disciplinary action for a repeat offence. “The FIA will 
always condemn the use of offensive language in motor sport – especially when 
directed at officials and/or fellow participants – and expects all participants 
in its championships to be respectful and mindful of the example they set for 
the public and the younger generation in particular,” the statement said.

“The FIA takes this opportunity to advise that, in the event of any future 
incident similar to the one that occurred in Mexico, disciplinary action will 
be taken by bringing such incident before the FIA international tribunal to be 
judged.”
 