
Sebastian Vettel <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel> believes 
Ferrari will be “even stronger” this season as they bid to wrestle the Formula 
One championship away from Lewis Hamilton’s Mercedes team.

Vettel, who was speaking at the launch of the Ferrari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> SF16-H alongside team-mate Kimi 
Raikkonen and team principal Maurizio Arrivabene, won three races in his debut 
season with the Italian team last year.

But Vettel hopes this year’s Ferrari – which sports a retro feel with large 
flashes of white on its livery – will be able to take the challenge to 
Hamilton, whom he finished 103 points adrift of last season, and Mercedes.

Williams unveil 2016 F1 car and hope cornering problems are solved
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/19/williams-unveil-2016-f1-car> 
“We had a fantastic year last year – obviously my first season with the team – 
and we all want more,” said Vettel, the four-times world champion.

“Last year, we finished second overall in the constructors’ championship so 
there is only one more step which is a difficult one to take but hopefully this 
car will help us achieve it. We have improved in many areas.

“When I joined the team there were a lot of people changing their positions 
and it was a difficult time to have expectations. But now we have had a much 
better winter to prepare and therefore we will be a strong team – as we have 
seen already last year – but even stronger this year.”

Hamilton’s Mercedes team have dominated the sport for the past two seasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/07/lewis-hamilton-f1-nico-rosberg-formula-one-mercedes-ferrari>
, winning 32 of the last 38 races. And Ferrari, who took great strides forward 
last term, are expected to be their closest challengers once more in 2016.

James Allison, the British designer who joined Ferrari from Lotus midway 
through the 2013 season, has been instrumental to the team’s revival. “We know 
Mercedes were very strong last year and very strong the year before, but we 
also know that we have extremely talented people here at Maranello and we have 
put nearly 1,000 man hours of work into this car,” he said.

“We have done our absolute best to try to make this car a step up, a bold step 
forward, to give it the competitiveness it needs to be a proper winning car. I 
hope we have done enough but we will only know for sure once we have started 
racing it. The love, care, effort and skill that has gone into this car is 
beyond question.

Arrivabene said: “We would like to fight until the end for the championship. I 
know that is not going to be easy, because our competitors are not sleeping, 
but we are committed to do our best.”

Ferrari will get the chance to unleash their car at the first pre-season test 
which gets under way in Barcelona on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/18/testing-f1-ferarri-red-bull-mercedes-lewis-hamilton-barcelona-haas>
. The campaign begins in Melbourne on 20 March.
 