
Sebastian Vettel <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sebastian-vettel> has 
denied he has fallen out with Maurizio Arrivabene after the Ferrari principal 
said the driver must earn his place after next season and also cast doubt over 
the German’s future with the team.

“Sebastian has a contract,” Arrivabene said as the team prepared for Sunday’s 
Japanese Grand Prix. “We work together this year and next year. Then during 
next year we’ll see. Each of us has goals. So it is only right that anyone, no 
matter who it is, earns their place and their salary.”

F1: Nico Rosberg pips Lewis Hamilton to Japanese Grand Prix pole
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/f1-rosberg-pips-hamilton-japanese-grand-prix-pole>
Vettel, demoted to seventh for the race after serving a three-place grid 
penalty forhis collision with Nico Rosberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/02/f1-malaysian-grand-prix-live>
 last Sunday, has one year to run on his current deal. He is one of the best 
paid drivers in the F1 paddock, with a salary of about £30m, but his form has 
been disappointing this year.

Since Baku on 19 June the four times world champion had scored 57 points while 
his team-mate, Kimi Raikkonen, who many felt was fortunate to be given a fresh 
contract with the biggest team in the sport, has managed 79. Vettel has scored 
one podium place in that time.

Arrivabene said: “Sebastian just needs to focus on the car. He is a person who 
gives so much and this means he is interested in a bit of everything, so 
sometimes you have to re-focus him, remind him to be focused on the main job.”

After qualifying, Vettel said: “I haven’t heard what he said but generally I 
enjoy a very straightforward and honest relationship with him.”

“If there is something I don’t like, I tell him and equally the other way 
round. I know there is nothing between us, nothing we need to sort out. Both of 
our focus is on trying to achieve the same thing, we’re trying to win races, 
get stronger, especially in the future and that is where the main focus goes.”

Vettel, who won four straight Formula 1 titles with Red Bull between 2010-13, 
added: “As much as the team wants to perform, I want to perform. It’s been an 
up-and-down year. The results we have were not always fair and rewarding, given 
the pace we showed on different weekends but sometimes it’s like this.

“The main focus now is not looking at that too much, to try and make progress 
to the end of this year.”

The 29-year-old is entitled to feel a little aggrieved by Arrivabene’s 
comments. If he has driven too aggressively this season it is usually because 
he has to make up for the deficiencies of his car. Ferrarihave fallen behind 
Red Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/ferrari-james-allison-formula-one>
 in the battle to be the best of the rest after Mercedes.

Lewis Hamilton walks out of Japanese GP press briefing over Snapchat furore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/lewis-hamilton-walks-out-japan-gp-press-conference>
There have been technical problems, but also strategic ones. Vettel would 
probably have wonin Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/20/formula-one-grand-prix-season-opener-in-melbourne-live>
 andMontreal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/lewis-hamilton-wins-f1-canadian-grand-prix-close-gap-nico-rosberg>
 but for bad calls made by his team, who have appeared short of leadership and 
direction since parting with their much respected technical director, James 
Allison, in July.

If Vettel had a bit more cheek – and he has enough – he could say that it is 
Arrivabene who has to earn his place.Ferrari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ferrari> were expected to kick on this year 
after winning three races in 2015. Once again the team appears to have stalled 
and lack coherent planning.

Also, Ferrari – and this is nothing new with the team – seem gripped by a 
fundamentally conservative attitude as they attempt to compete with the more 
original minds at Mercedes and Red Bull. Although their engine has been sound 
there have been aero and chassis problems and now they are failing to get the 
most out of their best driver.

Vettel was not the only frustrated driver in Japan. Daniel Ricciardo, who 
replaced him as the top driver at Red Bull, qualified a disappointing sixth on 
the grid. “To be honest, I did what I could,” he said. “We had a few issues in 
qualifying and it’s a bit frustrating to see how close it is. I was just a 
little bit slower in the straights. It may have been there from last weekend.”
 