
Taxpayers will pick up the bill should the cost of storing radioactive waste 
produced by Britain’s newest nuclear power station soar, according to 
confidential documents which the government has battled to keep secret for more 
than a year.

The papers confirm the steps the government took to reassure French energy 
firm EDF and Chinese investors behind the £24bnHinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c> plant that the amount 
they would have to pay for the storage would be capped.

The Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy – in its previous 
incarnation as the Department forEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and Climate Change – resisted 
repeated requests under the Freedom of Information Act for the release of the 
documents which were submitted to the European commission.

“The government has attempted to keep the costs to the taxpayer of Hinkley 
under wraps from the start,” said Dr Doug Parr, Greenpeace chief scientist. 
“It’s hardly surprising as it doesn’t look good for the government’s claim that 
they are trying to keep costs down for hardworking families.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-plant-gets-green-light-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hinkley%20Point%20C%20nuclear%20power%20plant%20gets%20green%20light%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-plant-gets-green-light-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hinkley%20Point%20C%20nuclear%20power%20plant%20gets%20green%20light%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-plant-gets-green-light-video&media=>
Hinkley Point C nuclear power plant gets green light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-plant-gets-green-light-video>
But, earlier this month, on the very last day before government officials had 
to submit their defence against an appeal for disclosure of the information, 
the department released a “NuclearWaste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/waste> Transfer Pricing Methodology 
Notification Paper”. Marked “commercial in confidence”, it states that 
“unlimited exposure to risks relating to the costs of disposing of their waste 
in a GDF [geological disposal facility], could not be accepted by the operator 
as they would prevent the operator from securing the finance necessary to 
undertake the project”.

Instead the document explains that there will be a “cap on the liability of 
the operator of the nuclear power station which would apply in a worst-case 
scenario”. It adds: “The UK government accepts that, in setting a cap, the 
residual risk, of the very worst-case scenarios where actual cost might exceed 
the cap, is being borne by the government.”

Separate documents confirm that the cap also applies should the cost of 
decommissioning the reactor at the end of its life balloon.

Hinkley Point C developers face £7.2bn cleanup bill at end of nuclear plant's 
life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/30/hinkley-point-c-developers-face-72bn-cleanup-bill-at-end-of-nuclear-plants-life>
The level of the cap is unclear. But Dr David Lowry, a senior research fellow 
at the Institute for Resource and Security Studies in Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
who made the FoI request, said it was clear that the risk of footing the bill 
for a significant cost overrun had been transferred from Hinkley’s operator to 
the taxpayer.

“This shows that the government cares more about the economic future of a 
foreign power generator than British taxpayers,” Lowry said.

In return for the cap, the document reveals that Hinkley’s operator will pay 
the government a risk fee which “is expected to be relatively low, reflecting 
the high level of confidence that the cap will not be breached”.

But Lowry pointed out that the nuclear industry had form when it came to 
sizable cost over-runs. He warned that an accident that could force the closure 
of the reactor, either because of problems with it or at another plant, as 
happened in Japan, would leave the taxpayer having to pay billions of pounds 
for the clear-up years after it ceased generating revenues.

A government spokesman said: “All operators of new nuclear power stations in 
the UK are legally obliged to meet the full costs of decommissioning and their 
full share of waste management and disposal costs. They will also pay the UK 
government to dispose of the waste produced at the end of a plant’s life.”
 