
Self-driving cars <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/self-driving-cars> 
will be the most significant development in motoring since Americans swapped 
horses for cars, the chief executive of Ford has said.

Speaking at the Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas, the world’s 
biggest technology event, Mark Fields said that focus groups had traditionally 
equated Ford’s Mustang with freedom. “But is sitting in traffic in LA really 
freedom?” Fields asked. “The part that’s true freedom is going to be changing. 
In Beijing, getting around in an autonomous vehicle that’s your cocoon can be 
freedom. Driving with a steering wheel is as antiquated as wanting to ride a 
horse.”

Car manufacturers have dominated this year’s show, with Toyota, Volkswagen, 
General Motors and Fiat Chrysler all bringing futuristic cars more notable for 
their software than for their silhouettes. These cars aim to drive themselves, 
are filled with touch screens and are permanently connected to the internet..

Fields announced an initiative with Amazon to integrate its voice-activated 
Alexa and Echo assistants into Ford’s cars, which would enable drivers to 
connect to their home systems and ask the car to open the garage door, start 
the engine or turn on the light above the front door.

He also set an ambitious target of having an autonomous vehicle on the road by 
the end of 2016, but did not announce a widely expected deal with Google to 
share software and vehicle expertise.

Dragos Maciuca, a former Apple executive who now runs Ford’s Silicon Valley 
branch, said the most difficult issue was that Detroit had a seven-year cycle 
for a new car, while Silicon Valley products operated on a one-year cycle. 
“It’s an inflection point for the car,” he said. “I don’t think it’s panic, but 
we’re certainly accelerating.”

Technology companies including Apple, Uber and Google are all developing 
significant teams that believe they can beat Detroit in the race to a fully 
robotic car.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fself-driving-cars-hog-the-road-at-ces%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdd5cb556f7f96fb5efb9068881b78781c24c30b%2F0_117_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Self-driving%20cars%20hog%20the%20road%20at%20CES&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fself-driving-cars-hog-the-road-at-ces%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Self-driving%20cars%20hog%20the%20road%20at%20CES&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fself-driving-cars-hog-the-road-at-ces%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdd5cb556f7f96fb5efb9068881b78781c24c30b%2F0_117_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Mark Fields speaks at CES. Photograph: Ethan Miller/Getty Images 
“Our assumption is Apple is going to do a car, and it’ll have a great 
interface,” Fields said. “But you can’t reboot a vehicle as you’re going down 
the highway at 70 miles an hour.”

Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> is convinced that technology 
companies are underestimating the expertise involved in car production. Ford’s 
chief technical officer, Raj Nair, said: “To talk about Google without sounding 
too offensive, understanding the technical complexity of a car, the number of 
lines of code is not what is in your smartphone.”

Carmakers sold more units in the US than ever before in 2015, with the car 
industry now worth $2.3tn (£1.57tn). But the transportation industry was $5.4tn 
“and we’re getting zero of that”, Fields said, referring to mass transit, taxis 
and ridesharing.


Dr Gill Pratt, chief executive of the recently opened Toyota Research 
Institute, with offices in Silicon Valley and near the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, sounded a note of caution.

“We are a long way from the finish line of fully autonomous cars,” he said. 
“Most of it is easy, but a little bit is very hard.” It was simple to program a 
car to cruise down a highway or stop at a red light. But, he asked, how should 
it react if debris falls off the back of a truck?

Pratt, who formerly worked for the research arm of the US Defense Department, 
said he expected that it would be more than four years before consumers began 
to have fully autonomous vehicles. Many experts believe full adoption of 
autonomous vehicles will not happen until 2030.

Despite the floor space given to cars, the show still had 220,000 sq metres to 
spare for every other imaginable technology product including smartwatches, 
smart toilets, smart washers, smart windows, and even a smart nappy-changing 
station.

Hatch Baby is being pitched as a virtual nanny that weighs and measures a 
child each time its nappy is changed. Parents also enter data about stool 
colour and information on when they resumed intimacy with their spouse.

There was huge interest in drones, with more than 100 new models on display. 
The Chinese-made Ehang 184, which looked more like a miniature helicopter, 
claimed to be the first to be able to carry a person, while Intel demonstrated 
how its Yuneec Typhoon drone could recognise and steer around moving objects, 
such as falling trees. Another Chinese drone, the DJI Phantom, featured a 
built-in high-quality 4K camera able to use Wi-Fi to stream video footage up to 
three-quarters of a mile away.

During one of the CES <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ces> debates, 
America’s top privacy regulator, the chair of the Federal Trade Commission, 
Edith Ramirez, said that consumers needed to be cautious about handing over 
more of their data to companies as they committed more of their lives to the 
internet. “Consumers are going to be slow to take up these products if there 
are issues with privacy and security,” Ramirez said.

Asked about the risk of hackers taking over internet-connected vehicles, a 
Toyota executive said consumers should be more worried about “balding tyres”.

Top releases at CES 2016

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fself-driving-cars-hog-the-road-at-ces%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ff3a10b2703a370ef29a09df479439e69e6b572%2F0_14_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Self-driving%20cars%20hog%20the%20road%20at%20CES&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fself-driving-cars-hog-the-road-at-ces%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Self-driving%20cars%20hog%20the%20road%20at%20CES&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fself-driving-cars-hog-the-road-at-ces%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ff3a10b2703a370ef29a09df479439e69e6b572%2F0_14_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
 The Ehang 184 autonomous aerial vehicle. Photograph: John Locher/AP 
1 Passenger drone

The Ehang 184 is the first drone that can carry a human. The battery-powered 
flying machine can carry one person up to 100kg (15st 7lbs) at a height of up 
to 3,500 metres (11,480 ft) for 23 minutes at speeds of up to 63mph. That means 
it can fly you up to 24 miles autonomously.

2 Ninebot Segway

Part personal transporter, part robot companion, the Ninebot Segway can follow 
you around and recognise voice commands. Ride it into work, press a button and 
you have a robotic butler to do your bidding.

3 Sensorwake

The aromatic alarm clock diffuses scents into the air to wake you from your 
slumber – from the aromas of coffee, mint or fresh grass to the smell of money 
– but will begin beeping if you don’t wake up within two minutes.

 4 Sphero Force Band

If having your own mini replica of the fan-favourite BB-8 droid from Star Wars 
wasn’t enough, now you can control it using the force. Or, more precisely, hand 
gestures, using the new Force Band wrist strap.

5 LG flexible display

Conceived as the technology that will replace paper, LG’s latest roll-up 
flexible screen can display images, text and video.

6 OMbra smart bra

Wearable technology has come to underwear thanks to the OMbra, which tracks 
heart rate, respiratory rate, distance travelled and calories burned, and can 
measure states of fatigue while you’re training.

7 Oculus Rift

Facebook’s virtual reality headset the Oculus Rift has been in development for 
more than three years – and is finally ready to buy for £500. It comes with two 
controllers and two free games, but you’ll need a powerful PC to run it.

8 Casio Android Wear watch

An Android Wear smartwatch built to military standards. Shockproof and 
waterproof down to 50 metres, the Outdoor Smart Watch can guide you with a 
built-in compass and will last up to a month per charge in time-only mode or up 
to a day with all bells and whistles going.

9 Sony and Technics turntables

Both Technics and Sony released new vinyl turntables at CES this year, 
offering to play and record your original or new records in glorious hi-res 
audio. Once the tracks are recorded with vinyl warmth, they can be trimmed and 
edited using an app.
 