
Serbia has deported a group of Russians suspected of involvement in a coup 
plot in neighbouringMontenegro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/montenegro>, 
the Guardian has learned, in the latest twist in a murky sequence of events 
that apparently threatened the lives of two European prime ministers.


The plotters were allegedly going to dress in police uniforms to storm the 
Montenegrin parliament in Podgorica, shoot the prime minister, Milo Ðjukanović, 
and install a pro-Moscow party.


The Russian fingerprints on the October plot have heightened intrigue about 
Moscow’s ambitions in a part ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> hitherto thought to be 
gravitating towards the EU’s orbit.

A group of 20 Serbians and Montenegrins, some of whom had fought with 
Moscow-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine, were arrested in Podgorica, the 
Montenegrin capital. InSerbia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/serbia>, 
meanwhile, several Russian nationals suspected of coordinating the plot were 
caught with €120,000 and special forces uniforms.

According to the Belgrade daily, Danas, the Russians also had encryption 
equipment and were able to keep track of Đjukanović’s whereabouts.

Diplomatic sources told the Guardian the Belgrade government quietly deported 
the Russians after the intervention of the head of the Russian security 
council, Nikolai Patrushev, who flew to Belgrade on 26 October in an apparent 
effort to contain the scandal. The country’s interior minister, Nebojša 
Stefanović denied the government carried out any deportations connected to the 
plot.

A source close to the Belgrade government said Patrushev, a former FSB 
(federal security service) chief, apologised for what he characterised as a 
rogue operation that did not have the Kremlin’s sanction. In Moscow, a Security 
Council official told Tass that Patrushev “didn’t apologise to anyone, because 
there is nothing to apologise for”.

The Serbian government was further rattled three days after Patrushev’s visit 
when a cache of arms was found near the home of the prime minister, Aleksandar 
Vučić. The weapons were discovered at a junction where Vučić’s car would 
normally slow down on his way to the house.

Stefanović said there were “strong suspicions” that an organised crime gang 
had been hired to kill Vučić for €10m, but he would not specify who was behind 
the alleged plot, saying further investigation would show whether people 
“outside the region” were involved.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fserbia-deports-russians-suspected-of-plotting-montenegro-coup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f0a5b922575e43dbb3daee070271d4016797213%2F0_177_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Serbia%20deports%20Russians%20suspected%20of%20plotting%20Montenegro%20coup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fserbia-deports-russians-suspected-of-plotting-montenegro-coup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Serbia%20deports%20Russians%20suspected%20of%20plotting%20Montenegro%20coup&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fserbia-deports-russians-suspected-of-plotting-montenegro-coup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f0a5b922575e43dbb3daee070271d4016797213%2F0_177_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Aleksandar Vučić addresses the media in Belgrade, in October. Photograph: 
Andrej Cukic/EPA 
“You know the people who don’t like a strong Vučić or a strong government of 
Serbia and who could contribute some money, €10m or so, to see this kind of 
thing done,” Stefanović told the Guardian.

“We know that the people who were potentially hired to do this kind of thing 
were from the region, but not from Serbia, and that there were crime groups 
that are operating in the region that were involved. But these were just the 
trigger persons,” the minister added.

“We believe that criminal gangs are just being used to do the job, but the 
motives are not linked to the gangs. The assassination of the prime minister is 
not something that even they would do lightly, we believe they are being used.”

Since the discovery of the weapons, Vučić has announced plans 
<http://www.balkaninsight.com/en/article/serbian-pm-vows-to-shake-up-secret-service-11-08-2016>
 to shake up the intelligence service, saying the security situation was “even 
more serious than we expected”.

“There will be changes in the secret service,” he told the public broadcaster, 
RTS. “I believed in the skills of people who didn’t show that they have these 
capacities, but I’ll take responsibility for this.”

It is unclear whether there is a connection between the alleged assassination 
plots against Vučić and Đjukanović. But the intrigue of the past month comes 
against a backdrop of fierce east-west competition.

Đjukanović has been instrumental in pulling his country to the verge of Nato 
membership – an accession protocol was signed in May – which has dashed Russian 
hopes of securing a naval foothold on the Adriatic. According tothe Montenegrin 
press 
<http://www.slobodnaevropa.org/a/officials-squash-talk-of-russian-military-base-in-montenegro/26839898.html>
, Moscow lobbied hard in recent years for transit and maintenance facilities at 
the ports of Bar and Kotor.
Balkans map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/balkans_map/giv-15726Raa09wcKF60v>
The importance of such facilities was demonstrated late last month when the 
Russian carrier, the Admiral Kuznetsov and its battle group wasdenied refuelling
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/russia-cancels-spanish-fuel-stop-for-syria-bound-warships>
 in European ports along their way to support the Russian military effort in 
Syria.

In Serbia, Vučić has been seeking a delicate balance between Nato and Russia, 
and the country’s armed forces have conducted military exercises with both, 
although farmore frequently 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-serbia-nato-idUSKCN0ZJ06S> in recent years 
with Nato. Vučić has also refused to grant diplomatic status to Russian 
officials staffing a Serbian-Russian humanitarian centre established in the 
city of Niš in 2012, infuriating Moscow.

Montenegrin prosecutor says Russian nationalists behind alleged coup plot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/06/montenegro-prosecutor-milivoje-katnic-russian-nationalists-behind-alleged-coup-plot>
Western officials suspect 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/03f70a64ec5b48bbb1c2f56bdea9255e/inside-russian-spy-base-balkans>
 the centre of being a Trojan horse, which could expanded as a hub for 
intelligence and paramilitary operations in the region. Diplomatic status, they 
point out, would have allowed equipment to be brought in without oversight by 
Serbian customs.

 Some analysts have suggested the operation could have been mounted as a 
“semi-freelance” one, giving enough distance from Moscow to be plausibly 
deniable if was uncovered.

“Both sides have an interest in playing this as a freelance, vigilante-type 
thing, it allows them both to save face. Whether that’s actually true is 
unclear. There’s simply not enough evidence either to support or disprove it,” 
said Vladimir Frolov, a Moscow-based analyst.

“Judging from the amount of logistical and financial support they got, it 
looks likely they acted with at least a tacit understanding that this was 
sanctioned.”

A few days after the would-be coup, a former intelligence officer, Leonid 
Reshetnikov, who ran a hawkish research institute in Moscow, was relieved of 
his duties by Putin. The Russian Institute for Strategic Studies has a branch 
office in Belgrade, and Reshetnikov had given strong backing to the anti-Nato 
opposition party in Montenegro.

A security analyst from the region, who did not want to be named, said his 
understanding from intelligence sources was that the incidents in the Balkans 
were probably linked to Russian attempts to gain influence and leverage in the 
Balkans in the run-up to an anticipated Hillary Clinton US presidency, which 
was expected to take a harder line on Russian activity in the region.

In Moscow, the Russian foreign ministry took a dim view of this Guardian 
report on the Balkan events.

Maria Zakharova, spokeswoman for the Russian foreign ministry wrote on 
Facebook: “The publication in the Guardian with a link to ‘sources’ saying that 
Patrushev apologised for ‘Russian nationalists’ who had planned to kill the 
prime minister of Montenegro is a classic provocation aimed at spreading 
knowingly false information.”

“I declare you “liars of the day”. You can sew your own hat.”

 