
A furious Sergio Pérez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sergio-perez> dumped 
one of his personal sponsors after they published a tweet mocking Mexicans in 
the wake of Donald Trump’s US presidential election victory.

Trump has promised to build a wall along the border between the US and Mexico, 
andafter his electoral triumph over Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-us-president-nightmare>
, Hawkers sent out a tweet encouraging Mexicans to buy its sunglasses. 
“Mexicans, put on these glasses so they can’t see your crying eyes tomorrow 
when building the wall,” Hawkers tweeted on Wednesday.

The ill-advised message was swiftly removed and in subsequent tweets Hawkers 
stressed that the comment was meant in jest. But Pérez did not see the funny 
side and instantly moved to cut ties with the sponsor. The 26-year-old also 
claimed that the company would have to halt production of 20,000 limited 
edition sunglasses bearing his name.

Jolyon Palmer secures second F1 season after being retained by Renault
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/09/jolyon-palmer-renault-f1-second-season>
“When I read the comment I didn’t find it funny at all,” Pérez said. “I have 
decided to split with the brand because I am not in favour at all of the 
comment.

“They are very sorry and I am very sorry, too. I know the owners and they have 
done incredibly well and the relationship was going to be very successful. But 
my country and people come first and I want to support them and won’t let 
anyone make fun of my country.”

Pérez, a former team-mate of Jenson Button at McLaren, is now in his third 
year at Force India and has competed in more than 100 grands prix. The Mexican 
driver is financially backed by Carlos Slim, one of the world’s wealthiest men.

Damon Hill: ‘I thought butter wouldn’t melt in Nico Rosberg’s mouth’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/09/damon-hill-nico-rosberg-f1> 
Pérez, who had just entered into a relationship with the sunglasses company, 
said: “I feel sorry because it is a great brand and they have done really well 
but I am not willing to stay there because basically the brand must be in 
charge of the social manager.

“It is a shame that the brand pays for it. It is a mistake by one person and I 
am sure he regrets it now but that is how things are in life sometimes.”
 