
Louis van Gaal has signed Sergio Romero on a three-year deal with an option of 
a further 12 months, the Argentina goalkeeper arriving atManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> on a free transfer 
from Sampdoria.

Romero is expected to be the No2 goalkeeper with Víctor Valdés, who has fallen 
out with the manager Louis Van Gaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/15/manchester-united-sell-victor-valdes-refusal-reserves>
, set to leave the club.

Van Gaal previously worked with Romero at AZ Alkmaar and he was part of the 
Dutchman’s Eredivisie title-winning side in the 2008-9 season. He played for 
Argentina in the nation’s run in the 2014 World Cup final,defeating Holland in 
the semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/09/argentina-holland-world-cup-semi-final-match-report>
, when the Dutch were coached by Van Gaal.

Louis van Gaal: Manchester United lack creativity to rival top clubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/26/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-creativity-aguero-hazzard-messi>
Romero, 28, has 62 caps and may be a challenger for the No1 jersey should 
David de Gea leave for Real Madrid. Indeed, Van Gaal claims he was forced into 
signing Romero because of the uncertainty surrounding De Gea, who may still 
leave this summer.

“I think that in our circumstances, with the threat that David de Gea is going 
to Real Madrid, we have to prepare our season and I think Sergio Romero can 
fulfil that because you have to handle very quickly when it may happen with 
David de Gea,” the United manager said.

“I am absolutely delighted to join Manchester United,” said Romero. “To play 
for the biggest club in the world is a dream come true. Louis van Gaal is a 
fantastic manager and I cannot wait to get started on this new and exciting 
challenge in my career.”

Van Gaal added: “Sergio is a very talented goalkeeper. He was a young keeper 
during my time atAZ Alkmaar <https://www.theguardian.com/football/azalkmaar> 
and I am delighted he is joining Manchester United. Sergio had a fantastic 
World Cup last summer in Brazil, although, that is something I have put to the 
back of my mind. He will be a great addition to the team and I am looking 
forward to working with him once again.”

Romero is United’s fifth signing this summer. He follows Memphis Depay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/12/memphis-depay-completes-manchester-united-transfer>
,Morgan Schneiderlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/12/morgan-schneiderlin-manchester-united-southampton>
,Bastian Schweinsteiger  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/13/bastian-schweinsteiger-manchester-united-bayern-munich>
andMatteo Darmian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jul/20/manchester-united-matteo-darmian-view-from-italy>
.
 