
Champions Juventus returned to the top of Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> with a 4-0 home rout of 
Cagliari on Wednesday, while former leaders Napoli dropped to second after 
being held to a goalless draw atGenoa. First-half efforts from Daniele Rugani, 
Gonzalo Higuaín and Dani Alves and a late own goal from Luca Ceppitelli helped 
Juve ease to their fourth win of the season and up to 12 points, one ahead of 
Napoli on 11.

Internazionale beat Empoli 2-0 away after a first-half double from Mauro 
Icardi to go fifth on 10 points, whileRoma jumped to third, also on 10, after 
thrashingCrotone 4-0.

Mauro Icardi appeases Inter fans as Derby d’Italia win follows Europa shock | 
Paolo Bandini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/19/mauro-icardi-inter-juventus-seriea>
Juve were criticised after their loss to Inter on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/18/serie-a-roundup-internazionale-juventus-comeback>
 and boss Massimiliano Allegri made six changes to his team, with record 
signing Higuaín restored to the starting lineup. However, it was defender 
Rugani who opened the scoring with a poacher’s finish, reacting first to tap 
past Marco Storari after the keeper saved from Higuaín’s volley.

Higuaín did get on the scoresheet in the 34th minute when he fired home the 
rebound after Storari had blocked Miralem Pjanic’s effort. Dani Alves added a 
third six minutes later with his first for Juve, lashing the ball into the 
bottom corner from the edge of the box after being picked out by a Pjanic 
corner.

“I’m happy to return to the top of the table and we played well,” Allegri 
said. “The boys took the right approach, although maybe when we were 2-0 up we 
should’ve controlled the tempo instead of pushing forward looking for a third 
goal too unreservedly.”

Juve replaced goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon at half time due to injury, but 
added to their tally in the 83rd minute when Ceppitelli deflected the ball past 
Storari. “It was a good response to the rather excessive criticism of our 
performance against Inter on Sunday,” Allegri concluded.

Napoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli>, Serie A’s top scorers 
heading into Wednesday, were held at Genoa despite enjoying the lion’s share of 
possession and were left ruing two penalty appeals that were turned down.

Marek Hamsik struck the woodwork as Maurizio Sarri’s side were forced to 
settle for a point, with a foul on Arkadiusz Milik in the box and Lucas 
Ocampos’s handball going unpunished. “We commanded the match for 85 minutes,” 
Sarri said. “It does disappoint me that I am the one who always has to talk 
about it, but we should’ve had two penalties.”

Inter took the lead against Empoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/empoli> after 10 minutes when Icardi met 
Antonio Candreva’s chipped cross with a diving header.

They doubled their advantage seven minutes later when Icardi was picked out by 
Mario and slotted calmly past Lukasz Skorupski for his sixth goal of the 
season. “I want to see [this attitude] not just against a great side like Juve, 
but also other teams,” said the Inter coach, Frank de Boer. “We’ve proved that 
we’re in good shape.”

At the Stadio Olimpico, Roma eased past promoted Crotone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crotone> in a 4-0 triumph that hinted 
that Luciano Spalletti’s side could be title contenders again. Stephan El 
Shaarawy struck in the 26th minute after a sustained period of pressure from 
the home side, while Mohamed Salah added a second with a thunderous left-footed 
finish from close range 11 minutes later. Edin Dzeko bagged two in the second 
half, the first after a remarkable assist from Francesco Totti, while Wojciech 
Szczesny saved Raffaele Palladino’s penalty.
 