
Milan wasted a chance to take the Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> lead with an uninspired 
2-0 loss atLazio on Wednesday, while Diego Milito scored four goals in 
Internazionale's 4-4 draw with Palermo in the snow at San Siro.

With the Italian league-leaders Juventus' match with Parma on Tuesday 
postponed owing to snow,Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> 
needed only a point to go level at the top of the table.

It looked like they might get that single point with a draw until the Brazil 
playmaker Hernanes struck forLazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> 
in the 76th minute. Lazio's 34-year-old captain, Tommaso Rocchi, added another 
goal in the 85th to seal the Roman club's first league win over Milan in 14 
years.

Juventus still lead with 44 points, followed by Milan (43), Udinese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/udinese> (41), Lazio (39) and Inter (36).

"We played an ugly match, but it's still a long season and this doesn't make 
it an open road for Juve," the Milan manager, Massimiliano Allegri, said. "I'm 
sure this loss will do us well. In the last matches, even when we won we didn't 
always play great. I repeat, this will help."

Udinese beat Lecce 2-1 with goals from the newly signed Michele Pazienza and 
Antonio Di Natale.

In Milan, Milito accounted for all four of Inter's goals – including a penalty 
– although Fabrizio Miccoli scored a hat-trick forPalermo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> and equalised in the 85th 
minute. It snowed from start to finish and, while the lines were painted pink, 
they were still difficult to see as the snow settled on the central section of 
the pitch.

"I'm a bit upset because Palermo scored four goals with five shots on goal, 
but anyhow this match was a real advertisement for football because the two 
squads never gave up," the Inter manager, Claudio Ranieri, said.

Three other matches slated for Wednesday were also postponed owing to snow: 
Bologna-Fiorentina, Siena-Catania and Atalanta-Genoa.

Elsewhere, Cagliari beat Roma 4-2 with two goals from the Brazilian forward 
Thiago Ribeiro and one each from Mauricio Pinilla and Victor Ibarbo; and all
Napoli could manage in a 0-0 draw at Cesena was a shot that hit the post from 
Edinson Cavani.

Earlier, several officials spoke out about the inability to deal with snow at 
stadiums. "The facilities are not in shape," the Juventus general director, 
Giuseppe Marotta, said. "I hope next season they evaluate the schedule with 
more attention."

The Serie A president, Maurizio Beretta, responded by saying Italy needs a new 
law to provide more funding to build new, safer stadiums with modern 
technology, while the players association president, Damiano Tommasi, said the 
league needs to move more games to warmer periods.
 