
Maxi López scored on his Sampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> return to give the team a 1-0 
victory at bitter rivals Genoa in thederby della lanterna.

López is in his second loan spell at Sampdoria and he took less than 24 
minutes to mark his debut with a goal. The Argentinian played a one-two with 
Eder before lifting the ball over theGenoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa> goalkeeper, Mattia Perin.

"It's a new fantastic debut," López said. "I couldn't ask for more. This is a 
reward for the hard work of the squad and a present for the fans. I'm happy 
with the goal, I've returned home. I have to thank the club for the faith 
they've shown in me, I needed consistency and to be back at the top level."

The fixture was moved to Monday after Genoa and Sampdoria fans threatened to 
boycott the match in protest at the original Sunday midday kick-off. The 
boycott was called last week by the hardcore ultra fans of both clubs.

Genoa twice had the ball in the back of the net but Luca Antonelli's effort 
four minutes from half-time and Moussa Konaté's 65th-minute strike were both 
ruled out for offside. Sampdoria moved into 13th place in the table, two points 
behind Genoa.

The match was originally scheduled to take place on Sunday night but was 
postponed for security reasons, with the region's biggest market taking place 
at the same time near the stadium.

Serie A strugglers Bologna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> have 
suspended four staff after they apparently forgot to collect new signing Ibson 
from the airport.

Albano Guaraldi, the club's president, was reportedly furious after the 
Brazilian arrived on Sunday, only to find there was no one to greet him. Former 
Porto and Spartak Moscow midfielder Ibson, 30, has joined Bologna from 
Brazilian club Corinthians.
 