
As some of you may already have noticed, I have been on Super Bowl duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/02/malcolm-smith-super-bowl-mvp-seattle-manning-denver>
 for the Guardian this week. Frustratingly, that coincided not only with the 
Derby d'Italia, but also plenty more interest around the end of the transfer 
window. As with the last few years on this weekend, I've put together a few 
talking points instead of the usual blog. Apologies for the reduced service, 
but rest assured that we will be back to full coverage next week.

Talking points

• Juventus thumped Internazionale 3-1, just as they were always likely to do. 
It was hard to imagine any other outcome given the recent disparity in each 
team's performances – with the Bianconeri unbeaten in the league since October, 
and the Nerazzurri yet to win a game in any competition this year. Indeed, 
given that Inter had managed one goal so far in 2014, it was almost a surprise 
just to see them score. And yet, it remains true that Walter Mazzarri's side 
are one of only three teams to take points offJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> so far this season, drawing 
with them at home in September. For all their frailties – from Andrea 
Ranocchia's repeated mental absences at the back right through to the enduring 
reliance on a declining Diego Milito up front – it is still hard to grasp quite 
how they have fallen so far. This team, after all, had only lost a single 
league game before mid-December. The arrival of Hernanes may help, and 
addresses a need in creative terms, but it is hard to shake the sense that the 
problems here run deeper.

• The gap between first and second has widened, at least temporarily, to nine 
points, after Roma's game against Parma was abandoned due to a torrential 
downpour at the Stadio Olimpico. The game may not get made up for some time 
now, either, since the venue is already heavily booked up with additional Coppa 
Italia games, as well as Lazio's Europa League fixtures and Italy's Six Nations 
home games. For now it has been provisionally scheduled for 12 March, but if
Lazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> were to make it through to 
the last 16 of the Europa League, it could get bumped back into April.

• Easily the most shocking result of the weekend arrived at the Stadio Atleti 
Azzurri d'Italia, whereAtalanta demolished Napoli 3-0. Rafael Benítez engaged 
in some heavy squad rotation, presumably with one eye on Wednesday's Coppa 
Italia semi-final first leg away to Roma, leaving out the likes of Gonzalo 
Higuaín and Marek Hamsik, but their absence cannot explain the shambolic nature 
of all three goals Napoli conceded, from Pepe Reina letting Germán Denis's tame 
effort squirm under his body for the opener to Gokhan Inler hooking the ball 
awkwardly back into the same striker's path for the second. It would be 
tempting to just dismiss the game as one freakishly bad day at the office, but 
while that is undoubtedly the case,Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> have not won any of their last 
three league games. They, too, are slipping.

• The coolest image of the weekend, for me, was that of Denis celebrating with 
his son <https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini/status/430400096904019968>, a youth 
team player and ball-boy, after scoring his first goal. The striker was being 
an embarrassing dad before the game,ruffling his son's hair 
<http://www.sportmediaset.mediaset.it/calcio/atalanta/2014/fotogallery/1003235/denis-un-figlio-raccattapalle-come-portafortuna.shtml>
 as he walked out on to the pitch, but must have seemed a whole lot cooler 
after connecting ball with net against such high-profile opponents.

• If the season ended today (which, you will be shocked to learn, it doesn't), 
thenVerona would claim Italy's last Europa League spot. The "little, big club", 
as Gazzetta dello Sport referred to them this Monday, climbed above Inter into 
fifth place by virtue of a 2-1 win away to Sassuolo. Their first goal was a 
gift, Thomas Manfredini sliding the ball into his own net as he tried to cut 
out a cross at the near post, but the second, a chip from Luca Toni,was a peach 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x1awmct_all-goals-sassuolo-1-2-verona-02-02-2014-highlights_sport>
. It was also his 10th goal of the campaign.

• Clarence Seedorf's perfect start in the league with Milan was ended by a 1-1 
draw against Torino, but Adriano Galliani did not seem too disappointed with 
his new manager's start. "With Seedorf, Milan have changed their mentality and 
formation," he said. "Now the players are applying themselves much more."

• The sale of Hernanes might not have had any immediate impact on Lazio's form 
– the Biancocelesti winning 2-0 away to Chievo this weekend – but it has 
certainly not gone down well with the club's fans. The owner Claudio Lotito's 
phone number was circulated on message boards and social media this week, and 
he has since been inundated with abusive phone calls attacking him over his 
transfer policy. He even received one such call while in the middle of an 
interview with reporters outside the league's offices in Milan. "Yesterday 
evening I received about 60 calls from pseudo-fans, in which they either asked 
me to leave Lazio or threatened me with death," said Lotito. "I am living under 
protection, you have to understand that writing stupid things is an incitement 
to violence."

Results

Atalanta <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> 3-0 Napoli, Bologna 
0-2 Udinese, Cagliari 1-0 Fiorentina, Catania 3-3 Livorno, Chievo 0-2 Lazio, 
Genoa 0-1 Sampdoria, Juventus 3-1 Inter, Milan 1-1 Torino, Sassuolo 1-2 Verona, 
(Roma v Parma was postponed).

Latest Serie A standings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball/table>.
 