
Fiorentina claimed a 4-1 victory over Frosinone at the Stadio Artemio Franchi 
to move top of Serie A. The match was settled by half-time, by whenFiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> had scored all their goals.

Ante Rebic opened the scoring after 24 minutes and five minutes later Gonzalo 
Rodríguez netted the second. Kouma Babacar stepped up to take a 31st-minute 
penalty as the visitors crumbled before Mario Suárez made it four.

Frosinone <https://www.theguardian.com/football/frosinone> pulled one back 
through Alessandro Frara in the 87th minute.

Napoli missed a chance to join La Viola and Internazionale at the top after 
being held to a goalless draw at Genoa, which left them fourth, whileSassuolo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sassuolo> failed to build on their 
midweek win over Juventus as they drew 0-0 at Udinese.

In the late game Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> ended 
Lazio’s perfect run at home this season with a 3-1 win at the Stadio Olimpico.

The Rossoneri took a 25th-minute lead through the midfielder Andrea Bertolacci 
before Philippe Mexès made it 2-0 early in the second half with a header almost 
immediately after coming on as a substitute.

Carlos Bacca struck his team’s third in the 79th minute before Lazio pulled 
one back when the substitute Ricardo Kishna scored with six minutes remaining.

Struggling Bologna struck three times in the second half to beat Atalanta 3-0 
and give their new coach, Roberto Donadoni, a winning start.

Donadoni, the former Italy and Milan winger, this week replaced Delio Rossi, 
with Bologna having lost eight of their first 10Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> games.

Emanuele Giaccherini’s 15-yard shot put them ahead in the 52nd minute before 
Mattia Destro doubled the hosts’ lead six minutes later and the substitute 
Franco Brienza made it 3-0 five minutes from time as Bologna climbed to 18th 
place.

Hellas Verona were left still searching for their first league win this season 
as they drew 0-0 at Carpi. The result at the Braglia stadium left both teams on 
six points, level at the bottom of the standings.
 