
Hi everybody. We’ve decided to hold my main Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> blog until Tuesday this 
week, so it could focus on that tantalising top-of-the-table clash between 
Napoli and Inter. But we would not want to deny everybody the usual spot to chat
calcio on a Monday, so here, in advance, are a few quick hits from the weekend.

• A fourth consecutive win for Juventus, and suddenly the notion – posited 
quite widely after their slow start – that they were ever out of the title race 
starts to look a little silly. TheBianconeri still have ground to make up, and 
I certainly would not name them as my favourites for the Scudetto at this 
stage, but I do have them in my top three. An attack that once seemed 
disjointed is beginning to gel, with four different forwards – Mario Mandzukic, 
Paulo Dybala, Álvaro Morata and Simone Zaza – all chipping in either a goal or 
an assist in Sunday’s 3-0 win over Palermo. At the other end, Juventusheld the 
Sicilians without a shot on target 
<https://twitter.com/OptaPaolo/status/671086517616574464>, the third time this 
season they have achieved such a feat.

• Roma, by contrast, are looking ever more vulnerable after losing 2-0 at home 
to Atalanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/29/roma-rudi-garcia-slump-atalanta-defeat>
. It would be easy to write a narrative which says this team had the stuffing 
knocked out of it during the midweek rout by Barcelona, but there were more 
tangible reasons for this defeat. TheGiallorossi’s defence has been atrocious 
all season (and Rudi García’s decision to drop Wojciech Szczesny and Antonio 
Rüdiger failed to deliver a quick fix) while their prolific attack has relied 
heavily on the pace of Mohamed Salah and Gervinho. Deprived by injury of both 
forwards, there was always a risk that the goals would start to dry up. 
Nevertheless, García remains convinced that: “The sky behind these clouds is 
still blue.”

• There were no clouds over Atalanta’s changing room celebrations at 
full-time, mind. Only an electronic board 
<https://twitter.com/Atalanta_BC/status/670998786504851457> that someone seems 
to have pinched from the fourth official.


• Sinisa Mihajlovic got one over his former employers – or more accurately, 
got four over them – asMilan smashed Sampdoria at San Siro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/28/milan-sampdoria-serie-a-match-report>
. This was one of those matches where it was hard to tell whether theRossoneri 
were truly playing brilliantly or simply being made to look better by 
desperately disappointing opponents. M’Baye Niang was moved inside to 
centre-forward, though, and had a fine game – grabbing a pair of goals. 
Deployed more often on the wing in the past, it would be interesting to see him 
granted a run of matches in this role.

M’Baye Niang hits double as Milan thrash Sampdoria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/28/milan-sampdoria-serie-a-match-report>
• Not the most action-packed game between Torino and Bologna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bologna> but it was encouraging to see 
Andrea Belotti finally get off the mark for theGranata in what was his 11th 
appearance for the club. A €7.5m summer signing from Palermo, the 21-year-old 
had quietly posted a strong goals-to-minutes ratio for the Sicilians, as well 
as scoring regularly at youth level for Italy, and remains a player to keep an 
eye on.


• A 3-2 victory over Verona vaulted Frosinone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/frosinone> up to 17th and means that they 
have now taken 13 points out of a possible 15 in their last five home games. 
There is a very long way to go yet, but their form at the Stadio Matusa is 
giving them a puncher’s chance in the relegation scrap.


• Empoli’s masseur has an unusual technique 
<http://video.gazzetta.it/empoli-morra-schiaffoni-tonelli-mchedlidze-massaggiatore/a9d2e4dc-91c6-11e5-8427-87478eab8d51?refresh_ce-cp>
 for getting Lorenzo Tonelli ready for a game. After the defender scored the 
only goal in his team’s win over Lazio on Sunday, it might be time for other 
teams to experiment with this more widely.


Results: Chievo 2-0 Udinese, Empoli 1-0 Lazio, Frosinone 3-2 Verona, Genoa 1-2 
Carpi, Milan 4-1Sampdoria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria>, 
Palermo 0-3 Juventus, Roma 0-2 Atalanta, Torino 2-0 Bologna

 