
Juventus moved nine points clear at the top of Serie A by defeating Palermo 
4-0 at home and Francesco Totti scored a dramatic late equaliser as Roma drew 
3-3 atAtalanta <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta>.

With second-placed Napoli losing 2-0 at Internazionale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/16/internazionale-napoli-serie-a-match-report>
 on Saturday, Juventus tightened their grip at the top and took a major step 
towards a record fifth consecutive Italian title following goals from Sami 
Khedira, Paul Pogba, Juan Cuadrado and Simone Padoin.

Napoli’s Serie A title hopes fade after defeat at Internazionale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/16/internazionale-napoli-serie-a-match-report>
Juve moved up to 79 points, with five games to play, Napoli have 70 and Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> are third on 65.

Khedira controlled Pogba’s lofted ball with his chest before flicking it past 
Stefano Sorrentino in thePalermo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> 
goal in the 10th minute. Pogba added a second in the 70th minute, finishing at 
the back post after the visitors failed to deal with a Juve corner, before 
Cuadrado’s superb individual effort and Padoin’s late finish underlined the 
home side’s dominance.

Davide Ballardini returned to the Palermo hotseat on Tuesday, their eighth 
managerial change of the season, but was unable to prompt a change in fortunes 
for the relegation-threatened side, who dropped to 19th place on 28 points.

Totti’s future at Roma remains unresolved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/22/francesco-totti-roma-luciano-spalletti-seriea>
 following a testing season and a strained relationship with the coach, Luciano 
Spalletti, but the 39-year-old demonstrated his enduring class with an 
85th-minute equaliser in a thrilling six-goal draw at Atalanta.

Roma went 2-0 up inside the first half an hour, with goals from Lucas Digne 
and Radja Nainggolan, before Marco D’Alessandro halved the deficit in the 33rd 
minute.

The Roma old boy Marco Borriello came back to haunt his former club with his 
first goal for Atalanta as his excellent header evaded Wojciech Szczesny, and 
he fired the home side ahead when he converted Alejandro Gómez’s cross in the 
50th minute.

Totti had the final say as he hammered home Alessandro Florenzi’s cut-back for 
the 301st goal of his glittering career.

Spalletti was sent to the stands in the dying minutes of the draw, which left 
his side four points clear of fourth-placed Inter in the race for the final 
Champions League qualifying place.

“We often lose our heads,” Spalletti told Mediaset Premium. “Totti’s goal 
doesn’t change anything for me. If he wants to be a player, he’ll be a player. 
The team still won nine games without him.”

Elsewhere, Fiorentina consolidated their grip on fifth spot with a 3-1 over 
Sassuolo.
 