
An eighth draw in nine Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> matches resulted in Roma 
losing further ground in the title race but their goalless stalemate at Chievo 
will be remembered for the horrific injury suffered by Federico Mattiello.

The Giallorossi were unable to break down the opposition and therefore sit 
eight points behind the leaders,Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, who host Sassuolo on Monday 
evening.

It was difficult for both sides to focus from 20 minutes onwards, however, 
after the players witnessed the youngChievo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo> midfielder Mattiello suffer what 
appeared to be a lower-leg break.

The point lifted the hosts six clear of the relegation zone but they have 
failed to score in three games.

Later, Mauro Icardi denied Napoli the victory that would have moved them to 
within two points of Roma as his cheeky penalty earnedInternazionale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale> a 2-2 draw.

There were no goals in a frantic first half at the Stadio San Paolo but they 
began to flow after half-time as Marek Hamsik and Gonzalo Higuaín gaveNapoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> a two-goal lead.

Rodrigo Palacio halved the deficit with 20 minutes remaining and a rash late 
challenge from Henrique resulted in the Napoli defender being dismissed, 
allowing Icardi to force the draw with a “Panenka” spot-kick.

Rafael Benítez’s men are four points shy of Roma, while Inter join Torino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/torino> in a share of eighth place.

Earlier, Empoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/empoli> held high-fliers 
Genoa to a 1-1 draw that extended their unbeaten run to six games. M’Baye Niang 
gave Genoa a 27th-minute lead but the substitute Federico Barba levelled in the 
66th minute for an Azzurri side who showed great fight in front of their home 
fans at the Carlo Castellani.

Udinese <https://www.theguardian.com/football/udinese> hit back from an early 
deficit to beat Torino 3-2 and clinch their first home victory since 26 October.

Fabio Quagliarella put Torino in front in the 15th minute but Udinese hit back 
with a goal from Antonio Di Natale and a Cristian Molinaro own goal to take a 
2-1 lead after 25 minutes. The visitors were unlucky not to equalise in the 
41st minute when Quagliarella’s right-foot volley cannoned off the post.

Molla Wagué extended Udinese’s lead early in the second half before the Torino 
substitute Marco Benassi reduced the arrears in the 69th minute.

Palermo were held to a goalless draw at relegation-threatened Cesena, while 
debt-ridden Parma secured a point from a match ending with the same scoreline 
against Atalanta.
 