
Domenico Berardi scored four goals as Sassuolo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sassuolo> stunned Milan 4-3 on Sunday 
evening. Goals from Robinho and Mario Balotelli had given Milan a 2-0 lead 
after 13 minutes before Berardi stole the show at the Città del Tricolore 
stadium.

The 19-year-old, who is on loan from Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, scored a hat-trick before the 
break and added his fourth two minutes into the second half.

Riccardo Montolivo gave Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> a 
lifeline four minutes from time but Sassuolo held on for their biggest win yet 
in their maiden campaign in Italy's top flight.

The defeat was Milan's seventh of the campaign and dropped them to 11th place, 
30 points behind theSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> leaders, Juventus, at the 
halfway stage.

Juve came from behind at Cagliari to claim their 11th consecutive league 
triumph. Mauricio Pinilla putCagliari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari> ahead in the 21st minute before 
Fernando Llorente equalised on the half-hour.

Claudio Marchisio gave Juve their first lead in the 73rd minute before the 
Spanish international Llorente scored his second three minutes later. Stephan 
Lichtsteiner notched the Turin club's fourth goal in the 80th minute for a 4-1 
victory. Juve are eight points clear ofRoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> at the top of the standings.

Roma, coming off their first defeat in Serie A – a 3-0 defeat at Juve – romped 
to a 4-0 triumph overGenoa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa>.

Goals from Alessandro Florenzi, Francesco Totti and Maicon handed Roma a 3-0 
half-time lead. Mehdi Benatia wrapped up all three points for the Romans in the 
52nd minute. Genoa finished the game with 10 men after Francesco Matuzalem was 
shown a red card on the hour.

Dries Mertens was again on target as Napoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> won 3-0 at Hellas Verona.

The Belgian winger, who struck twice against Sampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> last weekend, put Napoli on 
their way in the 27th minute and the game was put beyond Hellas's reach with 
Lorenzo Insigne and Blerim Dzemaili scoring midway through the second half.

Fiorentina lost ground on Napoli and the last Champions League qualifying spot 
as they were held to a goalless draw at Torino. The absence of the injured 
Giuseppe Rossi hurtFiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina>
, who failed to threaten the home side. Rossi, Serie A's top scorer with 14 
goals, is out of action with a right knee injury. The outcome dropped the Viola 
five points behind Napoli.

Atalanta <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> claimed all three 
points for the first time in two months with a 2-1 triumph over Catania. The 
outcome lifted the Bergamaschi to 12th and kept the bottom side Catania winless 
on the road this season.
 