
Edinson Cavani's hat-trick carried Napoli to a 3-0 win over Lazio and the 
Uruguayan striker to 99Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> goals in his career. 
There could have a 100th too, but after completing his treble Cavani missed a 
penalty.

He scored after 18 minutes with a deflected effort to make the breakthrough 
and after 30 minutes putNapoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> 
firmly in charge, completing the scoring on 63 minutes with a solo effort.

Looking to complete his century of goals, Cavani rapped a penalty over the 
Lazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> bar.

The victory moved Napoli level with Juventus at the top of the table, with 
both sides having 13 points from five games and identical goals scored and 
goals conceded records.

Milan eased the pressure on their manager, Massimiliano Allegri, as Stephan El 
Shaarawy scored twice in a 2-0 home win overCagliari.

El Shaarawy's 15th-minute opener was the Rossoneri's first goal at San Siro 
this season and his classy second strike eight minutes from the end sealed a 
first victory in front of the home faithful.Cagliari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cagliari> had Daniele Conti sent off 
after 66 minutes.

Internazionale were comfortable 2-0 winners at Chievo, Alvaro Pereira putting 
them ahead after 43 minutes and Antonio Cassano, who replaced Wesley Sneijder 
midway through the first half, adding the second in the 74th minute.

Elsewhere, Roma were held 1-1 at home by Sampdoria, who equalised after going 
down to 10 men.

Francesco Totti opened the scoring after 34 minutes and Roma's hand looked to 
have been strengthened when Enzo Maresca was dismissed for a second yellow card 
a minute into the second half.

But Sampdoria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> defied 
expectations by pulling level after 62 minutes when Gianni Munari capitalised 
on an error from the goalkeeper Maarten Stekelenburg.
 