
Internazionale were forced to fight back from 2-0 down to rescue a point 
againstLazio at San Siro on Sunday night.

The Internazionale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale> 
manager, Roberto Mancini, glowered from the touchline after watching the 
Brazilian Felipe Anderson score his first brace in Serie A – the Lazio 
midfielder’s second goal arrived at the end of a wonderful run – but the hosts 
refused to give up.

Mateo Kovacic halved the deficit with a stunning volley in the 66th minute to 
give Inter confidence. Then the striker Rodrigo Palacio scored his first goal 
of the season to spare his side from defeat with 10 minutes remaining.

The point was enough to lift Lazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio>
 into third place heading into the winter break, while Inter remain in 11th.

Earlier on Sunday Sampdoria missed the chance to move into the final Champions 
League spot after they drew 2-2 at home to 10-manUdinese.

The Genoa club would have leapfrogged Napoli with victory at the Stadio Luigi 
Ferraris but, despite Pedro Obiang’s left-foot drive givingSampdoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sampdoria> a 15th-minute lead, goals from 
Alex Geijo in the 31st minute and Danilo three minutes later gave Udinese the 
upper hand.

Sampdoria hit back with the forward Manolo Gabbiadini equalising on the hour 
mark. However, despite the dismissal of Thomas Heurtaux, for a second bookable 
offence, the hosts had to settle for a point.

Atalanta fought back from two goals down to earn a 3-3 draw against Palermo in 
Bergamo.

Luca Rigoni put Palermo ahead in the sixth minute and Franco Vázquez doubled 
the advantage 10 minutes later.

Germán Denis earned and converted a penalty to reduce the arrears in the 40th 
minute before Vázquez scored his second of the day to give Palermo a 3-1 lead 
at half-time.

However, second-half goals from Maximiliano Moralez and Denis earned the home 
side a deserved point.

Kamil Glik scored twice in the second half as Torino came from behind to beat 
Genoa 2-1 for their first league victory in nearly two months.

Iago Falque gave Genoa the lead three minutes before half-time but Glik 
equalised seven minutes after the restart. The Polish defender then headed home 
the winner in the 63rd minute to condemn Genoa to their first away defeat this 
season.

In a battle between two Tuscan teams in Florence Empoli held Fiorentina to a 
1-1 draw to extend their unbeaten run to five games.

The Peruvian midfielder Juan Manuel Vargas scored his first goal of the season 
to putFiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> ahead in the 
44th minute but Lorenzo Tonelli equalised shortly before the hour mark.

Elsewhere Alberto Paloschi scored the only goal of the game to hand Chievo a 
1-0 win atVerona in the city derby. The Italian striker headed home Ervin 
Zukanovic’s cross nine minutes from time asChievo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo> won for the fourth time this 
season.
 