
“Players end up fearing they’ll never win away again,” Jorge Sampaoli said and 
you could see why.Sevilla <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> hadn’t 
won on the road since 2015 – you know, back when there was hope. Worse, they 
hadn’t won away for a year and four months: 511 days had passed since a 3-2 
victory at Málaga on the final weekend of 2014-15. An entire season had been 
and gone but they hadn’t been and won. They’d defeated lesser clubs Logronés 
and Mirandés in the Cup and Athletic in Europe, true, but travelling just 
wasn’t their thing. Not here and not there: 21 league games, three trips abroad 
in the Champions League, three more in the Europa League, and no victories.

They had been from Manchester to Mönchengladbach and Molde; more to the point 
they’d gone to Málaga, Las Palmas and Valencia, both sides of the city; to 
Eibar twice and Villarreal twice; to San Sebastián, A Coruña, and across to the 
other side of Seville; to Madrid, north and south, Vigo, and Vallecas; Getafe 
and Gijón, Bilbao twice and Barcelona, but it was no good. So they tried going 
somewhere they’d never been before: New Mexico, USA. That, at least, was what 
president José Castro said – Albuquerque, Butarque, same difference – prompting 
CD Leganésto advertise Saturday’s match 
<https://twitter.com/CDLeganes/status/786581407715827712> with the stars and 
stripes and a foam finger declaring, in English: “come on cucumbers!”

Valencia hand Cesare Prandelli winning La Liga start at Sporting Gijon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/valencia-hand-cesare-prandelli-winning-la-liga-start-at-sporting-gijon>
Leganés promised a show better than the Super Bowl and Butarque – 
B-U-T-A-R-Q-U-E, as the poster put it – was full for the fourth time in four 
games. Down in the corner, a thousand fans had come from Seville and they were 
enjoying it for once, singing the Marseillaise in the afternoon sunshine. It 
was a bit after 2.15pm and apart from Sergio Escudero – poleaxed on the pitch, 
his long run ending in a meeting with Martin Mantovani a split-second after he 
released the key pass – the visiting players were celebrating. Franco ‘The 
Mute’ Vázquez had nodded in the opener after 25 minutes and now Samir Nasri 
made it 2-0, with half an hour left. On to their anthem Sevilla’s supporters 
went. “And that’s why I came here to see you today,” it runs.

To see them win, at last. Sevilla would have been home and dry if it wasn’t 
for the fact that they weren’t home at all. And then it happened. All that time 
and in two minutes it was gone: first David Timor then Alex Szymanowski scored: 
67’, 69’, 2-0, 2-2. Butarque went bananas, Sevilla supporters silent. Up in the 
directors’ box,Monchi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/17/sevilla-monchi-liverpool-europa-league-final>
 lit up a cigarette and puffed away nervously. The fear was natural, no wonder 
they felt it: two-up at a ground that hadn’t seen its team win a first division 
game in its entire history and theystill couldn’t do it. They were never going 
to win away.

“It’s an inherited condition and an uncomfortable one,” Sampaoli said 
afterwards, making Sevilla’s run sound like a nasty dose of piles. “Players 
always end up fearing that they’ll never win away again, but instead of going 
under, they rebelled and looked for the goal.” With five minutes left, they 
found it. The former Getafe striker Pablo Sarabia came in from the right and 
made up his mind. “I knew I had to try it,” he said. It was on his wrong foot 
but it was the right decision, a gorgeous shot curling into the far corner. On 
the touchline, Sampaoli went wild, or perhaps justis wild. “Hyperactive,” he 
calls himself. And at the final whistle, he clenched his fists, pumped big, 
tattooed biceps and ran off down the tunnel. Sevilla had only gone and bloody 
done it.

With some justification, Sampaoli had tried to shift the focus from the whole 
run to the more recent one: after all, just three of the 21 had been since he 
took over, and they had only lost one of those – away at Athletic – while 
drawing at Eibar and Villarreal. It hadn’t been that bad – and even last season 
with that dreadful run they’d managed to finish seventh and win the Europa 
League – but it had hung there. “We pulled a thorn from our side,” said 
Vázquez. “This was very important; there had been some anxiety,” Sarabia 
admitted. “Now we can forget it, treat it as just an anecdote.” As for 
Escudero, he insisted: “What really matters is being up there.”

Sevilla are up there, alright. The monkey off their back, things look rather 
different now: seven games into the season they are unbeaten. Five wins and a 
draw in the league, a draw in Turin and a win over Lyon in Europe. When they 
left Leganés, heading for Atocha station and the fast train home, they were top 
of the table. It didn’t last – Atlético put seven past Granada and Madrid put 
six past Betis – but they do still sit third, just one point behind the top 
two, a point ahead of Barcelona. Eight games into a season, they have only been 
better off twice – in 2006 and 2014. No manager has ever had a better start 
than Sampaoli.

But if Escudero says that’s what really matters, his manager doesn’t entirely 
agree and he is not alone. If it was not as bad as it seems, it might not be as 
good either. In the iron walkway that leads out of Butarque, Sarabia was 
talking to his mum, a member of staff piled up the pizzas on the Sevilla bus, 
and the Mute gave an interview. A few metres away, a Sevilla director was 
puffing out his cheeks. “Congratulations,” people said. “Yeah, but,” he 
replied. In the press room, Sampaoli replied in much the same way. The manager, 
who insists that he would rather his team defended an idea than defended a 
result, was refusing to slip into hypocrisy, even if it is something a little 
more comfortable.

“They overcame us at times,” he admitted. “They were better.”

Even when they led 2-0, Sevilla had not convinced: Leganés had seemed more 
likely to score when Sevilla made it 1-0, and more likely to equalise when they 
made it two. By the end, they’d taken 19 shots to Sevilla’s five, but lost 3-2. 
“Sevilla chose a bad day to stop smoking,” wrote Juan Jiménez in AS. “They 
played like always and won like never,” ran one headline in the local paper 
Estadio Deportivo. For some, the problem is that they do not play much at all, 
and nor is it just this weekend. The start to the season has not been the most 
difficult and tougher tests await: the next two teams to come to the Sánchez 
Pizjuán are Atlético and Barcelona. Sevilla’s season started with that 
incredible 6-4 win over Espanyol, but they were beaten 3-1 in Bilbao and their 
other victories were 2-1 wins against Alavés and Las Palmas – both secured with 
last-minute equalisers.

“Luck? You have to look for your luck,” Vicente Iborra insisted. And he is 
right; there’s something not quite right about Sevilla yet but there’s 
something about them. A huge amount of talent, for a start. And an intent. They 
have been fortunate but there are some glimpses of what they are trying to do 
and what they’re about: only Barcelona have had more of the ball, against 
Alavés they won it with two lovely backheels, and while it is true that Las 
Palmas dominated the first half against them, cutting Sevilla to bits, but 
while the equaliser came late (89’) and the winner later (94’), they did not 
come in isolation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsevilla-get-the-monkey-off-their-back-at-last-but-still-seek-to-find-their-groove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72f443777ec9a3c4ac4b5fcbd120ea8c2a11ecee%2F0_0_3191_2034%2F3191.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sevilla%20get%20the%20monkey%20off%20their%20back%20at%20last%20but%20still%20seek%20to%20find%20their%20groove%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsevilla-get-the-monkey-off-their-back-at-last-but-still-seek-to-find-their-groove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sevilla%20get%20the%20monkey%20off%20their%20back%20at%20last%20but%20still%20seek%20to%20find%20their%20groove%20%7C%20Sid%20Lowe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsevilla-get-the-monkey-off-their-back-at-last-but-still-seek-to-find-their-groove%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72f443777ec9a3c4ac4b5fcbd120ea8c2a11ecee%2F0_0_3191_2034%2F3191.jpg>
 Sevilla’s players celebrate the opening goal. Photograph: Mariscal/EPA 
Things are not quite happening as Sampaoli wanted so far, which is natural 
enough. It is, after all, only eight weeks into the season and he rightly 
describes it as a “process”. “To repeat the philosophy is to consolidate it,” 
he says, but that is not so easy. There are eleven new players in the squad 
(five of them Argentinians) and surprisingly little has been seen of Correa or 
Ganso, the latter a player whose touch and subtlety Sampaoli embraces, while 
Matías Kranevitter has played a little under half the minutes. On Saturday, 
Iborra, a central midfielder who has spent time at centre-forward, played at 
centre-back. The ball is not coming out as they would like. They don’t yet have 
an obvious candidate as the central midfielder who leads them in controlling 
the game; there’s no Éver Banega or Ivan Rakitic.

Or perhaps they do. Because there is Nasri, chosen ahead of Jack Wilshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/wilfried-bony-signs-stoke-manchester-city-loan>
 and nurtured by his manager and assistant coach Juanma Lillo. At Leganés, he 
was at turns Sevilla’s deepest player and their most advanced, on the right, 
the left and the middle, taking responsibility for getting them going, and not 
for the first time. “The team breathes when he has the ball,” Sampaoli said. 
“He has so much quality that he is able to relieve us when we’re being 
pressured by our opponent.” Sampaoli called it a “process”, one that takes 
time, but there’s only one way to buy time – by winning. On Saturday, at last, 
Sevilla did. Just when they thought they might never do so again.

Talking points

• Gooool! Gol, gol, gol, gol, gol, gol, gol. And so on ,and on and on. Not one 
of the current top six scoffed fewer than three goals this weekend: Atlético 7, 
Real Madrid 6, Sevilla 3,Barcelona 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/barcelona-deportivo-la-coruna-la-liga-match-report>
, Villarreal 5, Athletic 3.

• A pity, then, that Las Palmas had to go and ruin it all with a 0-0 draw 
against Espanyol. Not that it wastheir fault, really. Quique Sánchez Flores 
seems to have decided that goalless is the way to go.

• It was a weekend of belting good goals too, but the best turned out to be 
pretty much the least relevant: Isaac Cuencareleased his inner Matt le Tissier 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4aqwCLFjnCE> to give Granada the lead at the 
Calderón but by the end of the night,Yannick Carrasco was standing there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/atletico-madrid-granada-la-liga-match-report>
 under the stand beaming, with the match ball in his hands signed by all his 
team-mates. “We told him to shoot more,” Simeone said, helpfully. A little 
further along, a member of the Granada coaching staff was shrugging: “When they 
get the steamroller out, there’s not a lot you can do.” They could have done a 
little more than they did – which, after a semi-decent first half, was not very 
much at all – but he had a point. Atlético are not just the best team 
defensively in La Liga – although they’re that too, having let in just three 
goals – they are the best team, full stop.

• Maybe sacking your manager isn’t a problem after all; maybe the problem is 
waiting until the season actually starts to do it. Celta scored four against 
Barcelona last time round; this weekend, they conceded five against Villarreal 
– the team that got rid of their manager, Marcelino García Toral, before the 
campaign had even begun. Villarreal are unbeaten in their eight games, level 
with Barcelona and just two points off the top. They were superb too, Roberto 
Soriano scoring twice to start it all off – including a neat curled lob. 
Afterwards, the coaches couldn’t agree, just not the way round that managers 
normally don’t agree: “They played well [at times]; we were tremendously 
effective,” Fran Escribá said; “they could have scored more past us; they 
controlled the game,” Toto Berizzo said.

• “That was bordering on the ridiculous,” Gus Poyet said. Bordering on? Fans 
chanted for him to go asBetis were taken apart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/real-betis-real-madrid-la-liga-match-report>
 by a very impressive Real Madrid side who also scored pretty much the perfect 
counter-attack from just about the worst corner imaginable. Oh, and for whom 
Isco starred, scoring twice. “I’m in intensive care, but I’m not dead yet,” 
Poyet insisted.

• The Basque derby ended with Gero Rulli’s last ditch chance, three yards out, 
being pulled back for offside. That’s Rulli, the Real Sociedad goalkeeper. It 
was that kind of game. He had saved his team over and over but couldn’t save 
them in the end, the match finishing 3-2. Zurutuza gave la Real the lead; Iker 
Muniain curled in a beauty, Aritz Aduriz beautifully clipped Athletic into the 
lead, and then Inaki Williams made it 3-1. He’s Spain’s fastest player, you 
know. Although a gorgeous goal from Iñigo Martínez – like a perfect 
cross-and-header routine but with everyone kind of facing the wrong way, turned 
side on instead – gave la Real a chance, Athletic held on for their first derby 
win in four-and-a-half years.

• Next weekend: Valencia-Barcelona, Sevilla-Atlético, Madrid-Athletic and the 
Galician derby. Woof.

Results: Las Palmas 0-0 Espanyol, Leganés 2–3 Sevilla, Barcelona 4–0 
Deportivo, Atlético 7–0 Granada, Betis 1-6 Madrid, Alavés 1–1 Málaga, Athletic 
3–2 Real Sociedad, Villarreal 5–0 Celta.Monday night: Eibar 2-3 Osasuna.

 