
“I call this luxury on a Brexit budget,” says Amber Jeavons 
<http://www.amber-interiors.com/> of her south London flat. The interior 
designer’s home is where she loves to play around and try out new ideas but, 
she says, “I can’t just go out and buy a whole new look.” And neither would she 
want to. “A home needs to feel evolved, not bought off the peg,” she adds.

Instead, Jeavons’s style has come about from adapting and reinventing pieces 
she already owns. Wooden furniture has been painted or stripped back, a 
favourite standing lamp is repaired with industrial hose clips and her kitchen 
is a masterclass in where to spend and where to save. “The result is dark, 
theatrical splendour – but without breaking the bank,” she says with a flourish.

This is dark, theatrical splendour – but without breaking the bank

In a previous life, this one-bedroom flat was “all white – the floors, the 
walls, everything”. But that was then and this is 2016, when dabbling in paint 
shades with names such as Down Pipe, Ink and Urbane Grey has become de rigueur. 
However, Jeavons’s take on dark walls is anything but pedestrian. Yes, her 
rooms are wrapped in gradations of grey, but the paint shades are ones she 
mixes herself from pigments. “I add to taste, like a cook seasoning her food, 
rather than following a strict formula,” she explains. And her other decorative 
touches – layers of feathers, fur, cloudy gilt and mirror glass – are 
inexpensive ways to create an air of louche luxury.

Jeavons’s first career was as a dancer, so she knows all about the power of a 
fabulous backdrop. “I do like a look that will stop people in their tracks,” 
she says. At work, her moodboards are as likely to include ghostly images of 
ballet dancers and plant fronds as fabric swatches and flooring samples. “As I 
come up with ideas, I work rapidly, instinctively, intensely,” she explains.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Famber-jeavons-flat-stylish-chic-theatrical-and-on-a-tight-budget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8292a072a0aaa2b0aa3c1fc63b7e40aa367f7d81%2F0_936_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shades%20of%20grey%3A%20a%20chic%20south%20London%20flat%20-%20on%20a%20tight%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Famber-jeavons-flat-stylish-chic-theatrical-and-on-a-tight-budget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shades%20of%20grey%3A%20a%20chic%20south%20London%20flat%20-%20on%20a%20tight%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Famber-jeavons-flat-stylish-chic-theatrical-and-on-a-tight-budget%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8292a072a0aaa2b0aa3c1fc63b7e40aa367f7d81%2F0_936_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
 Black to white to wood: Jeavons’s 1930s dining table. Photograph: James 
Balston for the Observer 
When it came to reinventing her own flat, Jeavons balanced budget restrictions 
with her taste for the dramatic. Her 1930s dining table, a hand-me-down from 
her mother, was originally lacquered black. It got the all-white treatment in 
Jeavons’s pale phase, but she has now sanded it back to its original wood. “It 
contrasts with its surroundings and adds richness,” she says. An oriental 
console table, the wardrobe and woodwork, such as window frames and skirtings, 
have all been given the dark paint treatment, while floorboards are in a 
charcoal shade with hints of purple. Jeavons says: “I bucked the trend by doing 
everything matt rather than eggshell, which I feel has more depth.”

I do like a look that will stop people in their tracks
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Famber-jeavons-flat-stylish-chic-theatrical-and-on-a-tight-budget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a167f7216db6a387c11324869ff3b9a62f4124%2F0_327_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shades%20of%20grey%3A%20a%20chic%20south%20London%20flat%20-%20on%20a%20tight%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Famber-jeavons-flat-stylish-chic-theatrical-and-on-a-tight-budget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shades%20of%20grey%3A%20a%20chic%20south%20London%20flat%20-%20on%20a%20tight%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Famber-jeavons-flat-stylish-chic-theatrical-and-on-a-tight-budget%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a167f7216db6a387c11324869ff3b9a62f4124%2F0_327_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Open door: the hospitable kitchen combines cheap and pricey items. Photograph: 
James Balston for the Observer 
The chimney breast was painted in a Zoffany <https://www.zoffany.com/>’s Ink 
flat emulsion. Wallpapers err towards high-end, but are used sparingly, in 
alcoves, on a single wall or as a backing for shelving. The intricate patterns 
of Oreste by Zoffany and Paisley Patani byThibaut 
<http://www.thibautdesign.com/> swirl across the walls of the living room and 
bedroom respectively. In the kitchen, the geometric angles of Cole & Son’s 
Curio add zing and distract from its skinny galley shape.

The kitchen is where Jeavons splurged on some things and saved on others. The 
cabinets are high-street buys that she customised with a two-tone paint 
treatment. “This meant I had more to spend on good-looking appliances and a 
bamboo worktop. It’s worth putting money into surfaces you use every day – 
also, bamboo is a sustainable source.”

Jeavons’s accessories include animal skins, but she gets them direct from her 
local butcher,M Moen & Sons <http://moen.co.uk/>. “I only use ones that are 
by-products of the meat trade – the Inuit have the right idea,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Famber-jeavons-flat-stylish-chic-theatrical-and-on-a-tight-budget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6d6332af2fc899ee92df4e6ff3353c803ce7f69%2F0_2079_3744_2246%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shades%20of%20grey%3A%20a%20chic%20south%20London%20flat%20-%20on%20a%20tight%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Famber-jeavons-flat-stylish-chic-theatrical-and-on-a-tight-budget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shades%20of%20grey%3A%20a%20chic%20south%20London%20flat%20-%20on%20a%20tight%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Famber-jeavons-flat-stylish-chic-theatrical-and-on-a-tight-budget%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6d6332af2fc899ee92df4e6ff3353c803ce7f69%2F0_2079_3744_2246%2F3744.jpg>
 Glints of gold: in the bathroom. Photograph: James Balston for the Observer 
Glints of gold come from an old mirror bought for a song from a Devon maker 
and mellowed, fine-weave wicker baskets, and old finds from the shopLombok 
<http://www.lombok.co.uk/>.

“My budget here for this place was a grain of rice compared to what some other 
designers get to work with,” says Jeavons. “Could I do more if I had more 
funds? Absolutely.”

AJ Interior Styling is at amber-interiors.com <http://www.amber-interiors.com/>
 