
Stratford-upon-Avon is a town preserved not in amber but by language. The 
words of its most famous son have made this Warwickshire town a sacred spot 
ever since the great actor David Garrick stageda Shakespeare jubilee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/24/shakespeare-odes-review-david-garrick-thomas-arne-holy-trinity-church-stratford-upon-avon-ex-cathedra>
 at Stratford in 1769. That date is significant. It’s in the very early days of 
the industrial revolution, when Britain had barely been modernised and many 
medieval as well as Tudor buildings were still in use. A world we have lost 
could still be found.

Shakespeare Trilogy review – Donmar's phenomenal all-female triumph
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/23/shakespeare-trilogy-five-star-review-donmar-kings-cross-harriet-walter>
The Shakespeare cult took off in the 18th century, just in time to ensure that 
a possible connection with the playwright would help Stratford protect many of 
its venerable buildings and make it one of Britain’s best-preserved 
pre-industrial towns. This is a unique place where, instead of yet another 
aristocratic stately home, you can visit a 16th-century glovemaker’s house, 
complete with the loft where the apprentices lived and a section let out as a 
tough-looking pub. Oh yes, andthe room 
<https://www.shakespeare.org.uk/visit/shakespeares-birthplace/> where 
Shakespeare was probably born.

A new discovery at Stratford adds to its historic richness, and adds to 
Britain’s cultural debt to the name of Shakespeare. Restorers have nearly 
finished work onrare medieval wall paintings 
<https://stratfordobserver.co.uk/news/hidden-medieval-paintings-uncovered-at-stratfords-guild-chapel/>
 in the Guild Chapel in Stratford – vivid scenes that had been invisible for 
centuries. We apparently owe their survival not to William Shakespeare but his 
father John, who as town bailiff in 1563 got the job of obliterating these 
religious paintings that Protestants condemned as idolatrous pomp. Instead of 
erasing them, John Shakespeare had them carefully covered with limewash – and 
now they can be revealed again after 450 years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fshakespeare-father-stratford-murals-guild-chapel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbe81b84388f33c19460e268c93e3879a8d51af8%2F31_45_4008_3108%2F4008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shakespeare's%20Stratford%20reminds%20us%20of%20a%20forgotten%2C%20morbid%20England%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fshakespeare-father-stratford-murals-guild-chapel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shakespeare%27s%20Stratford%20reminds%20us%20of%20a%20forgotten%2C%20morbid%20England%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fshakespeare-father-stratford-murals-guild-chapel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbe81b84388f33c19460e268c93e3879a8d51af8%2F31_45_4008_3108%2F4008.jpg>
 Detail from the restored Allegory of Death. Photograph: PhilYeomans/BNPS 
Apparently, Shakespeare’s dad wasn’t quite the illiterate boor portrayed by 
Harry Enfield in Ben Elton’s sitcomUpstart Crow 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03vbjt1>. But Stratford’s latest miracle of 
conservation makes you wonder – what about all the lost art in Britain that 
doesn’t have the Shakespeare name to help get a lottery grant to restore it, 
and a tourist industry to enhance the glamour of the local past?

It is possible to exaggerate the greatness of British art before the 
Reformation. Let’s not turn faded murals into Brexit boasts. The paintings in 
Stratford’s Guild Chapel are not “some of the finest in Europe”, asone report 
patriotically claims 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3964086/Stunning-medieval-murals-painted-Shakespeare-s-father-orders-Henry-VIII-revealed-time-450-years.html>
. Please. There is no evidence that medieval Britain ever produced any 
paintings to equalGiotto’s masterpieces 
<http://rebeccabricker.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/giotto-scrovegni-parete-est.jpg>
 in the Scrovegni chapel in Padua, Lorenzetti’sAllegory of Good and Bad 
Government 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Allegory_of_Good_and_Bad_Government#/media/File%3AAmbrogio_Lorenzetti_-_Effects_of_Good_Government_in_the_city_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg>
 in the Communal Palace of Siena, or Simone Martini’sAnnunciation 
<http://www.travelingintuscany.com/art/simonemartini/annunciations.htm>.

It’s reasonable to assume that the very best artists available were hired to 
decorate London’s Palace of Westminster, yetpaintings that survive 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walter_of_Durham#/media/File%3APanel_Painted_Chamber_Westminster.jpg>
 from this royal medieval English building are cheerily crude rather than 
aesthetically refined. That goes double for the freshly restored paintings in 
Stratford. With a cartoon skull and a monkey-like devil, these paintings are 
not so much great art as a wondrous window on the imaginative lives of people 
who lived half a millennium ago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fshakespeare-father-stratford-murals-guild-chapel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c6d6e58eaae785b50f027ef9543f785df9a271b%2F0_0_5142_3396%2F5142.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shakespeare's%20Stratford%20reminds%20us%20of%20a%20forgotten%2C%20morbid%20England%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fshakespeare-father-stratford-murals-guild-chapel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shakespeare%27s%20Stratford%20reminds%20us%20of%20a%20forgotten%2C%20morbid%20England%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fshakespeare-father-stratford-murals-guild-chapel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c6d6e58eaae785b50f027ef9543f785df9a271b%2F0_0_5142_3396%2F5142.jpg>
 Bard day’s work... a scene in Stratford-upon-Avon during commemorations of the 
400 years since Shakespeare’s death. Photograph: Leon Neal/AFP/Getty Images 
This is what makes Stratford special. Literary scholars love to point out how 
little we know about Shakespeare the man, how hard it is to link his works to 
the sparse biographical documents that survive. Yet paradoxically, in trying to 
preserve something of him in the town where he was born and died, Shakespeare 
fans from Garrick onwards have saved something else – a small part of the 
fabric of everyday life in medieval and Tudor Britain.

The paintings restored in the Guild Chapel reveal the powerful dream-world 
that was visible to ordinary townspeople 500 years ago. Devils and death loomed 
up on painted walls. Whether they were painted simply, as in Stratford, or done 
with the genius of aBosch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/11/hieronymus-bosch-review-a-heavenly-host-of-delights-on-the-road-to-hell>
, these were collective fantasies of spectacular power.

The project that has saved Stratford’s murals deserves to be imitated wherever 
there are traces of medieval art still surviving in Britain. It does not matter 
if these images are fine art. They are something more important: a reminder of 
what it is to be human in a world shadowed by death and the devil.

 