
Chris Wilder is to take over as manager of Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> following the sacking of 
Nigel Adkins.

The Blades confirmed they had sacked Adkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/12/nigel-adkins-sack-sheffield-united>
 11 months into his three-year deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/02/sheffield-united-nigel-adkins-manager>
 after he could only guide them to 11th in League One, eight points adrift of 
the play-off places.

In their statement they had stressed they hoped “to make an appointment very 
shortly” and Wilder, a former Sheffield United defender, was given permission 
to speak to them, with theNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> chairman Kelvin Thomas 
saying he would “expect the deal to be completed in the next 24 hours”.

The 48-year-old was a target for managerless Bolton after leading the Cobblers 
to the League Two title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/northampton-town-promoted-league-one-bristol-rovers>
 and he had been in discussions with Charlton only to see that potential move 
break down on Monday.

Adkins arrived at Bramall Lane last June having achieved three promotions out 
of the third tier yet, with the Blades now facing a sixth successive season at 
that level, the board decided to move on.

The club tweeted: “Blades confirm appointment of Chris Wilder as new manager.”

An early statement on the club’s website read 
<http://www.sufc.co.uk/news/article/sheffield-united-nigel-adkins-3109392.aspx>
: “Nigel is a gentleman and, as proved by his record, a very good manager, but 
the overriding aim is promotion from League One and the club feels that this is 
the correct time to make a change.

“We will now begin the process of bringing in a new manager. We hope to make 
an appointment very shortly, with promotion from this division once again the 
priority. This is a decision made jointly between the co-owners and is the 
result of discussions between board members and colleagues.

“We sincerely wish Nigel and his backroom staff, Andy Crosby and Dean Wilkins, 
all the best for the future.”

Adkins added: “I am proud and honoured to have been the manager of Sheffield 
United but saddened to leave after just one season.

“I am naturally very disappointed not to be able to continue the good work 
going on behind the scenes, which I am confident will be of benefit to the club 
going forward. I wish the club and the supporters the best of luck for the 
future.”
 