
Sheffield Wednesday <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday> 
have not been blessed with great success in the last 16 years. They have 
bounced between the Championship and League One since their relegation from the 
Premier League in 2000, with their defeat of Hartlepool in the League One 
play-off final in 2005 one of the few highlights of a distinctly fallow period.

That victory in their only play-off final to date was sandwiched between two 
failures for Sheffield United – after United were hammered 3-0 by Wolves in the 
2003 League One final and before their defeat to Burnley in 2009Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> final. The way Wednesday 
scored four goals in their first play-offs final – one in each half of normal 
time and extra time – mocks United’s record of having played in four finals 
without managing to score a single goal. That is almost 400 minutes of 
scoreless football in contrast to free-scoring Wednesday – and United have also 
fallen at the semi-final stage four times.

United fans must have looked on in horror at the assurance with which 
Wednesday took to the whole affair. Where was the struggle; where was the 
torment? This was not how it was meant to be; it was supposed to be about 
anguish and disappointment rather than joy and fulfilment. Even Paul Sturrock’s 
triple substitution againstHartlepool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hartlepool> on the day, the ultimate 
managerial gamble, worked like a dream, with two of the subs scoring – a sure 
sign that all is right in the world.

As rivals, the Sheffield clubs are generally evenly matched, with one team 
holding ascendancy for a while before the other comes back to challenge, and so 
forth. United hold a small lead in Steel City derbies, which go back 125 years, 
with 45 wins in all competitions against 42 for Wednesday, but there is only 
one clear victor when it comes to the play-offs. Here, Wednesday fan and 
football writer Laura Jones talks us through her experience of the 2005 final:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhwQOgbPP4hE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhwQOgbPP4hE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhwQOgbPP4hE&media=>
 Sheffield Wednesday 4-2 Hartlepool. 
My friend Phil narrowly avoided a freak “football descending to Earth” 
accident on the day of the play-off final. From within the densely packed crowd 
outside the Millennium Stadium someone booted a Mitre football so hard and high 
in the air that, if it had hit him on the way back down, we’d have been taking 
him to hospital that afternoon and not to the match. It missed by a couple of 
centimetres and served as a fitting metaphor for the emotional turmoil 
Sheffield Wednesday put us through that day.

Wembley was being rebuilt so we travelled to Cardiff for the match. We’d never 
been in a play-off final before so didn’t know what to expect. Sheffield 
Wednesday fans have a lot of affection for the 2005 promotion team. Not just 
because they gave us a much needed sense of joy after five years of relegation, 
financial problems and some of the worst managers we’ve ever seen at 
Hillsborough, but because they felt complete, more than just a collection of 
individuals.

They weren’t the greatest players in the world and only a few, such as Chris 
Brunt and Glenn Whelan, would go on to play top-level football but Lee Bullen, 
Lee Peacock, Jon-Paul McGovern and Steve MacLean, names that might not mean 
much to other supporters, bring a smile to the face of any Wednesday fan. They 
were a team. They were our team.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fsheffield-wednesday-play-offs-hartlepool-2005%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7e189d3d2c7d12b25013e061d8bd0b48e122b86%2F0_77_1312_1660%2F1312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheffield%20Wednesday%20in%20the%20play-offs%3A%20a%20fan's%20view%20of%20their%20triumph%20in%202005&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fsheffield-wednesday-play-offs-hartlepool-2005%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheffield%20Wednesday%20in%20the%20play-offs%3A%20a%20fan%27s%20view%20of%20their%20triumph%20in%202005&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fsheffield-wednesday-play-offs-hartlepool-2005%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7e189d3d2c7d12b25013e061d8bd0b48e122b86%2F0_77_1312_1660%2F1312.jpg>
 Sheffield Wednesday fans. Photograph: Sean Dempsey/PA 
Outside the Millennium Stadium there wasn’t a square inch that wasn’t covered 
in blue and white. Tightly packed together it was difficult to tell which fans 
were which. However, most of them were complaining about the city centre pubs 
only serving cans of Carling and having the nerve to charge £3 a pop for them. 
Inside the ground there were over 40,000 Owls fans, some of who had taken 
advantage of the tickets Hartlepool had returned. We were encroaching into 
their end of the stadium.

Wednesday dominated the first half but couldn’t get the ball in the net. We 
left it until the stroke of half time when JP McGovern smacked it in off the 
under side of the crossbar. The relief among sent us sky-high over the break 
but Hartlepool scored within the first few minutes of the restart. Grumbles of 
“typical Wednesday” came from all around us. From then on Hartlepool had the 
better of the game. The atmosphere completely changed in the 70th minute, when 
they brought Jon Daly on and within a minute he’d put them in the lead. I 
remember saying over and over to my boyfriend, “I can’t go home feeling like 
this!” We couldn’t go back to where we had been.

Wednesday’s manager Paul Sturrock made a triple substitution in the 77th 
minute. In the depths of despair there was a shining light. Our leading 
goalscorer, Steve MacLean, who had been out for three months with a stress 
fracture in his foot, hadn’t been expected to make the bench that day but he 
was coming on. His mere presence on the pitch received one of the loudest 
ovations of the day. Within minutes, Hartlepool’s Chris Westwood gifted us the 
chance to get back in the game. With the tamest of tackles and pushes on 
Talbot, he gave away a penalty and earned himself a red card.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fsheffield-wednesday-play-offs-hartlepool-2005%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75655a780e0de7a31b9ff86a73922267f2285ee1%2F0_0_1487_1213%2F1487.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheffield%20Wednesday%20in%20the%20play-offs%3A%20a%20fan's%20view%20of%20their%20triumph%20in%202005&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fsheffield-wednesday-play-offs-hartlepool-2005%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheffield%20Wednesday%20in%20the%20play-offs%3A%20a%20fan%27s%20view%20of%20their%20triumph%20in%202005&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-agony-and-the-ecstasy%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Fsheffield-wednesday-play-offs-hartlepool-2005%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75655a780e0de7a31b9ff86a73922267f2285ee1%2F0_0_1487_1213%2F1487.jpg>
 Lee Peacock breaks open the bubbly. Photograph: Sean Dempsey/PA 
Up stepped substitute MacLean, who duly slotted the ball home to equalise. A 
young lad who was standing on his seat next to us, jumped up like the other 
40,000 Wednesday fans, but age and wisdom hadn’t developed yet. The seat 
flipped up and when he came back down it was halfway to closing. He ended up in 
the row in front of us.

Sheffield Wednesday and Hull aim to make the most of unexpected chances
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/sheffield-wednesday-hull-championship-play-off-premier-league>
Isn’t it funny how you can swing between pessimism and optimism within 
seconds? Going into extra time we felt we would win it. When Whelan stayed on 
his feet to score from distance it was all over. Drew Talbot, rounding the 
keeper and scoring our fourth, was just inevitable. I hadn’t felt that kind of 
high since we beat Sheffield United in the FA Cup semi-final at Wembley in 
1993. My heart felt like it would burst. I was a loose woman with my hugging 
that day.

On the way back we stopped off at the services for something to eat. The 
locusts had already reached Burger King by the time we got there. I asked for a 
Whopper and, when it was handed to me, the flame-grilled burger was served 
between two slices of thin-cut white Hovis. The day had been so emotional that 
I almost cried eating this pathetic excuse for a burger. I’d been so high that 
I had to come crashing back down to Earth like that Mitre football booted into 
the air. So close to impending doom but surviving it.

• This article is from The Agony and the Ecstasy 
<http://www.ockleybooks.co.uk/shop/the-agony-the-ecstasy>
• Buy Richard’s book on the play-offs 
<http://www.ockleybooks.co.uk/shop/the-agony-the-ecstasy> and follow him  
<https://twitter.com/FLPlayOffs>on Twitter <https://twitter.com/FLPlayOffs>
 