
The name of Olympic champion Jessica Ennis-Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jessica-ennis> is to be removed from a stand 
at Sheffield United’s ground just months after she joined protests against the 
club’s plans to re-sign the convicted rapist Ched Evans.

The League One club announced it was renaming the stand after a sponsorship 
deal with local estate agent Redbrik.

Last November Ennis-Hill said she wanted her name to be removed if the club 
re-signed Evans after his release from prison. The footballer was released 
after serving half of his five-year sentence for the rape of a 19-year-old 
woman in 2012. His victim received abusive threats via Twitter as a result of 
the row over whether he should be allowed to return to football.

But the national outcry over plans to give him a second chance forced the club 
to reconsider. Evans, who scored 35 goals for United in one season, has since 
failed to restart his career.

Sheffield United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> made 
no mention of the row in its decision to rename its Bramall Lane stand, which 
is used to seat away supporters, but it said it wanted to continue its 
association with Olympic heptathlon champion.

The club’s managing director, Mal Brannigan, said: “The introduction of 
Redbrik as the new Bramall Lane stand naming rights partner sees the name of 
the city’s most famous Olympian replaced, three years after the club honoured 
Jess Ennis-Hill’s achievement at London 2012.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fsheffield-united-jessica-ennis-hill-stand-estate-agent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdec7b3dcfff2f49621784ad240379b1633b14488%2F223_0_3269_1962%2F3269.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheffield%20United%20to%20drop%20Jessica%20Ennis-Hill%E2%80%99s%20name%20from%20Bramall%20Lane%20stand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fsheffield-united-jessica-ennis-hill-stand-estate-agent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheffield%20United%20to%20drop%20Jessica%20Ennis-Hill%E2%80%99s%20name%20from%20Bramall%20Lane%20stand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fsheffield-united-jessica-ennis-hill-stand-estate-agent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdec7b3dcfff2f49621784ad240379b1633b14488%2F223_0_3269_1962%2F3269.jpg>
 The Jessica Ennis Stand at Bramall Lane. Photograph: Anna Gowthorpe/PA 
“We have started discussions with Jess and her team as to how she continues to 
be recognised by the club going forward befitting of her achievements and our 
hopes for her in Rio 2016.”

The 29-year-old’s local club renamed the Bramall Lane end of the ground the 
Jessica Ennis-Hill stand in honour of her Olympic heptathlon gold.

She said: “It was a real honour to have had the Bramall Lane stand named after 
me in 2012 in recognition of my Olympic achievements. However, I completely 
understand the need for Sheffield United to recognise the valuable 
contributions of its sponsors and want to wish the club and the team all the 
best for the forthcoming season.”

The club refused to comment on how much the new three-year deal was worth.

Redbrik has two offices in Sheffield and another in nearby Chesterfield where 
it was founded in 2013. The firm says its ethos is based“honesty, unrivalled 
customer service and innovative marketing” <http://redbrik.co.uk/143566/>.


 