
Sheffield United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> have 
sacked their manager Nigel Adkins after just one season at Bramall Lane.

He is expected to be replaced by the Northampton manager Chris Wilder, who led 
his side to theLeague Two title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/northampton-town-promoted-league-one-bristol-rovers>
 and has been given permission by the club to talk to the Blades.

Northampton tweeted: “We can confirm that club has received an official 
approach from Sheffield United for services of manager Chris Wilder. Due to 
release clauses in existing contracts, the club have regrettably given 
permission for talks.”

The Northampton chairman Kelvin Thomas said he would “expect the deal to be 
completed in the next 24 hours”.

Wilder and his assistant Alan Knill had discussions with Charlton earlier this 
week before deciding against a move to The Valley.

The 51-year-old Adkins signed a three-year contract in June 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/02/sheffield-united-nigel-adkins-manager>
 but could only guide the Blades to 11th in the final League One standings, 
eight points adrift of the play-off places.

With the team facing a sixth successive season in the third tier, United 
announced that the former Southampton and Reading manager Adkins would not be 
kept on in South Yorkshire.

Following his sacking Adkins tweeted: “I’ve met many good people in the 11 
months I’ve lived in Sheffield. I wish you well. It saddens me to say goodbye.”

A statement on the club website read 
<http://www.sufc.co.uk/news/article/sheffield-united-nigel-adkins-3109392.aspx>
: “A decision has been made by the board of Sheffield United for Nigel to 
depart immediately.

“Nigel is a gentleman and, as proved by his record, a very good manager, but 
the overriding aim is promotion fromLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> and the club feels 
that this is the correct time to make a change.

“We will now begin the process of bringing in a new manager. We hope to make 
an appointment very shortly, with promotion from this division once again the 
priority. This is a decision made jointly between the co-owners and is the 
result of discussions between board members and colleagues.

“We sincerely wish Nigel and his backroom staff, Andy Crosby and Dean Wilkins, 
all the best for the future.”

Adkins had three promotions out of the third tier on his record when he 
arrived and expressed his disappointment that he was departing just one year 
into his deal.

“I am proud and honoured to have been the manager of Sheffield United but 
saddened to leave after just one season,” he said.

“I am naturally very disappointed not to be able to continue the good work 
going on behind the scenes, which I am confident will be of benefit to the club 
going forward. I wish the club and the supporters the best of luck for the 
future.”
 