
In the queue for the ladies at the Savoy theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/06/funny-girl-review-sheridan-smith-menier-chocolate-factory-savoy>
, several older women are wistfully talking of Barbra and how irreplaceable she 
is. I have to admit I haven’t seen theiconic Streisand film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/dec/02/fanny-barbra-and-sheridan-funny-girl-on-stage-and-screen-in-pictures>
 but in the stage version of Funny Girl, which is back in the West End for the 
first time in 50 years, I thought Sheridan Smith was phenomenal as the 
entertainer Fanny Brice.


Funny Girl review – a joyous Sheridan Smith keeps rain off parade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/03/funny-girl-review-sheridan-smith-menier-chocolate-factory>
I’ve never seen a musical performance so committed to comedy. Smith is 
determined to get a laugh out of every line, and she does. It’s never cynical – 
just a pure joy at making people laugh as much as possible. She has a constant 
connection with the audience and a vintage sense of timing, a dash ofLucille 
Ball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/14/sarah-kendall-lucille-ball-comedy>
 with a slosh of Les Dawson. In Brice’s Cornet Man routine, Smith is 
all-singing, all-dancing and at every opportunity giving a knowing wink to the 
audience – even her backing dancers struggled to suppress giggles alongside 
Smith’s level of cheekiness.


In the musical, Brice’s big break comes fairly quickly. (She even says: “This 
is too easy, where are my tortured years?!”) In real life, Brice worked at 
theatres in New York for years before her success. That doesn’t make for a neat 
narrative, of course: people want to believe someone just finds you, sitting in 
a doorway, waiting to become incredibly successful. When you try and explain 
you spent seven years doing theatre in education, working at WH Smith and 
gigging to five people in theatres that held 40, people tend to zone out. It’s 
just not a compelling story – so I can see why they skipped over Brice playing 
the part of an alligator in her early career, although I would have enjoyed 
seeing that.


In the musical, Brice’s vaudeville world comes across as if Spearmint Rhino 
was populated by debutantes; beautiful chorus girls sing sweetly about 
marriage, gliding around the stage. Casting an entire female ensemble about a 
foot taller than Smith is a delightful touch for her physical comedy. She 
constantly barges into them, scattering them like skittles. Brice doesn’t fit 
the mould of a vaudeville beauty; her mother and aunts sing to her, “If a girl 
isn’t pretty, like a Miss Atlantic City” … then, basically, give up. But she 
proves the age-old rule that, if you’re trying to make ’em laugh, it doesn’t 
matter what your face looks like: funny is so powerful that it destroys the 
beauty barrier.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fsheridan-smith-funny-girl-musical-comedy-savoy-theatre-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf6a7300dff9ee153f59f5298f0088dee6c8bc47%2F0_248_4625_2776%2F4625.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheridan%20Smith's%20Funny%20Girl%20is%20a%20masterclass%20in%20musical%20comedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fsheridan-smith-funny-girl-musical-comedy-savoy-theatre-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheridan%20Smith%27s%20Funny%20Girl%20is%20a%20masterclass%20in%20musical%20comedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fsheridan-smith-funny-girl-musical-comedy-savoy-theatre-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf6a7300dff9ee153f59f5298f0088dee6c8bc47%2F0_248_4625_2776%2F4625.jpg>
 ‘If a girl isn’t pretty, like a Miss Atlantic City’ … Sheridan Smith, far 
right, and company in Funny Girl. Photograph: Marc Brenner 
Fanny falls in love, gets more successful, has a baby and goes back to work – 
so far, a regular modern funny gal. But her new husband is not as clean as his 
shirts: he embezzles money and gets arrested, leaving Fanny with baby (and a 
sellout show, so not all bad). As he gets deeper into debt, she tries to help 
him. The reactions to her help seemed strange to me – it’s implied that it is 
this help which turns him into a swindler. He actually sings, “Stop choking me, 
Fanny!” (With all that lovely money your natural talent and hard work have 
given me …) Even her mother tells her she took away his pride by giving him all 
that cash. I guess I felt sad that, even though it’s set in the past, we didn’t 
stand up and shout: “No, you bastard, stop taking her money and being a 
criminal!” Or at least sing it.


But we wept and clapped and felt sorry for her as she tragically reprised 
Don’t Rain on My Parade. It is hard being a Funny Girl, yet Fanny Brice 
succeeded at a time when everything was against her – at one point she was the 
best-paid star on Broadway. But a woman will be punished for having a more 
successful career than her husband. He’ll turn to crime, and she’ll have 
nothing left but her talent and that don’t keep ya warm at night. Which, I’m 
aware, makes a much better end song than “I stopped loving that man because I 
realised I needed to respect myself”, but that may well be the finale of the 
Beyoncé musical in 2116.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fsheridan-smith-funny-girl-musical-comedy-savoy-theatre-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F365a7b8ed4f2f424410765d281752156db063d00%2F0_174_4388_2634%2F4388.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheridan%20Smith's%20Funny%20Girl%20is%20a%20masterclass%20in%20musical%20comedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fsheridan-smith-funny-girl-musical-comedy-savoy-theatre-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheridan%20Smith%27s%20Funny%20Girl%20is%20a%20masterclass%20in%20musical%20comedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fsheridan-smith-funny-girl-musical-comedy-savoy-theatre-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F365a7b8ed4f2f424410765d281752156db063d00%2F0_174_4388_2634%2F4388.jpg>
 Making ’em laugh … Sheridan Smith as Fanny Brice. Photograph: Marc Brenner 
 Whatever happens in life, however tragic, if you can get on stage and make 
them laugh then you regain your power, your control. In a life as unstable and 
insecure as a performer’s (especially when you have selfishly turned your 
husband into a felon), she reminded me of how much work and belief it takes to 
carry on being funny. Brice carried on singing and smiling. It’s a cliche but 
that’s because there’s a truth to it. You get on stage, you make ’em laugh, and 
for that moment, they forget their troubles and so do you.

 * Funny Girl is at the Savoy <http://www.savoytheatre.org/funny-girl/>, 
London, until 8 October 2016. Buy tickets attheguardianboxoffice.com 
<http://www.theguardianboxoffice.com/tickets/funny-girl>.
 