
Mat Sadler is running his eyes over profiles of the England players he 
appeared alongside at the European Under-17 Championship in 2002, shaking his 
head as he reflects on the idea that one talented teenager has gone on to 
captain his country and win 100 caps while so many others have disappeared into 
football’s black hole.

Louis van Gaal: Shrewsbury may not be afraid of Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/21/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-shrewsbury-fa-cup>
Only five of the 18 members of an England squad who finished third in that 
tournament in Denmark are still playing professional football, with several 
slipping into the non-league scene, such as the former Nottingham Forest 
midfielder Ross Gardner, who now turns out for West Auckland Town and works for 
British Gas, while others have walked away from the game altogether.

“Madness,” Sadler says, smiling as the memories come flooding back. “Those 
were the days. We all thought we were going to be big hitters then, I tell you. 
We really did. There are some good players there. I see a few of these lads now 
at times, playing against them or maybe in a giantkilling cup game.”

The Shrewsbury Town defender should have been reunited with the most famous of 
them all in the FA Cup tie againstManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> on Monday night but 
Wayne Rooney’s knee injury means Sadler will be denied the chance to cross 
paths with someone he last saw in May 2002, when the 16-year-old from Croxteth 
was named player of the tournament in Denmark after scoring five goals, 
including a hat-trick in a 4-1 win over Spain.

Rooney had yet to make his Everton debut but the week before the tournament 
started he was on the bench against Southampton. “I think Everton weren’t going 
to let him come on the tournament because they wanted him to be involved in the 
first team,” Sadler says. “I remember thinking: ‘Come on, that can’t be the 
case’, because at that age I wasn’t even thinking about first-team football. 
But obviously he did really well in the tournament and flourished from there.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fshrewsbury-mat-sadler-manchester-united-fa-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff564c8f4be03578b8d99338d034007e68a3fd180%2F0_59_2049_1229%2F2049.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shrewsbury%E2%80%99s%20Mat%20Sadler%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20all%20thought%20we%20were%20going%20to%20be%20big%20hitters%20back%20then%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fshrewsbury-mat-sadler-manchester-united-fa-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shrewsbury%E2%80%99s%20Mat%20Sadler%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20all%20thought%20we%20were%20going%20to%20be%20big%20hitters%20back%20then%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fshrewsbury-mat-sadler-manchester-united-fa-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff564c8f4be03578b8d99338d034007e68a3fd180%2F0_59_2049_1229%2F2049.jpg>
 Mat Sadler in action for England Under-17s against Denmark in 2002. 
Photograph: Friedemann Vogel/Bongarts/Getty Images 
Many years later, when Rooney was on the verge of winning his 100th cap, an 
intriguing story emerged about the team’s farewell dinner in Denmark. Dick 
Bate, who was in charge of the England Under-17s at the time, revealed how
Rooney had requested permission to read out a poem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/06/wayne-rooney-poetic-side-england-youth>
he had written about playing for his country, which was titled “When Saturday 
Comes”. Sadler, with a bit of prompting, can recall the moment, yet it was the 
pianist from Merseyside, not the poet, who made the biggest impression on him.

For Wayne to be at the top for as long as he has, he deserves serious 
recognition

“The poem is now ringing a few bells. I have a blurred image of the event and 
I can picture the two of them up there,” Sadler says, remembering how James 
Biggins, the former Nottingham Forest player, had got up to read alongside 
Rooney. “But my outstanding memory of that night is of David Raven, who was 
with Liverpool at the time, captivating us all with his piano skills. He was 
unbelievable, he played in front of all the lads and all their parents and we 
all had a good sing-song.”

Raven, who is now with Inverness Caledonian Thistle in the Scottish 
Premiership, Wayne Routledge of Swansea City and Oldham Athletic’s Lee Croft 
are the other three players from that England squad still playing 
professionally. With so many of their former team-mates it feels like a classic 
case of what might have been.

“What hasn’t happened at that time, when you’re 16 and 17, is setbacks, and 
it’s overcoming those,” Sadler says. “Because at that point you’ve been the 
best in your group the whole time, everyone has loved you, then all of a sudden 
you’re not in the team. Not to mention you’re growing up, girlfriends, going 
out, drinking, getting attention – all of these things have to be factored in.

“So for Wayne to be at the top for as long as he has, he deserves serious 
recognition. He gets barracked at times but that documentary Gary Lineker did 
highlighted just how well he has done. He’s still expected to do it now and 
still will do it now. He’ll lead the line for England at the Euros, he’ll be 
the captain, and if things don’t go well he’ll be the first one to get 
hammered, the first one who should come out the team. Yet he’s done so much for 
English football.”

Sadler’s story started at Birmingham City, where the left-back made his 
Premier League debut at the age of 17 and was extremely well-regarded, so much 
so that when the Football Association’s technical department organised a 
“Player Audit” in 2003, his name was one of25 considered as “certainties” for 
full England honours 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/football/teams/england/2310510/Platt-diagnosis-of-Englands-ills-a-real-cause-for-alarm.html>
.

Fascinated by a list he was never aware of until now, Sadler scans through the 
names of which only seven – Jermaine Jenas, Michael Carrick, Aaron Lennon, Glen 
Johnson, Michael Dawson, David Bentley and James Milner – vindicated the FA’s 
judgment. “There are a few that did get there but more that didn’t. It’s nice 
company to keep, though,” Sadler says, smiling. “I might frame that.”

Not long after breaking through at Birmingham, Sadler suffered a major setback 
when he was sidelined with a foot and ankle problem that required five 
operations. In April 2006 he made his first Premier League appearance in more 
than three years, against José Mourinho’s title-winning Chelsea side, and 
although he was a regular in the Birmingham team who regained their place in 
the top flight the following season, he was sold to Watford for £750,000 in 
January 2008. After moving to Walsall, Crawley Town and Rotherham United, he 
joinedShrewsbury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> last summer.

Looking back, in particular to those early days, Sadler wonders whether he had 
that “inner self-belief” that someone such as Rooney possesses. “I was really 
trying to find myself as a human being at the age of 15, 16, 17,” he says. 
“Everyone seemed better than you were at that time, maybe that was just me, and 
maybe that’s why I haven’t gone on.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fshrewsbury-mat-sadler-manchester-united-fa-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf5aac0e143fbaacd70c2da9c3e039c0408c7218%2F0_0_3812_2287%2F3812.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shrewsbury%E2%80%99s%20Mat%20Sadler%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20all%20thought%20we%20were%20going%20to%20be%20big%20hitters%20back%20then%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fshrewsbury-mat-sadler-manchester-united-fa-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shrewsbury%E2%80%99s%20Mat%20Sadler%3A%20%E2%80%98We%20all%20thought%20we%20were%20going%20to%20be%20big%20hitters%20back%20then%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fshrewsbury-mat-sadler-manchester-united-fa-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf5aac0e143fbaacd70c2da9c3e039c0408c7218%2F0_0_3812_2287%2F3812.jpg>
 Mat Sadler in action for Shrewsbury against Crewe at New Meadow in September. 
Photograph: Catherine Ivill - AMA/Getty Images 
Sadler, who turns 31 on Friday, comes across as such a likeable, down-to-earth 
character and is entitled to be proud of a career that will provide a few 
stories to dine out on, notably the day when he was asked to mark David Beckham 
at Old Trafford. Aged 17 and with only one Premier League appearance behind 
him, Sadler thought he was hearing things when Steve Bruce, Birmingham’s 
manager, read out the starting XI at the team hotel.

“I really wasn’t sure if the gaffer said my name or not. I had to check with 
one of my mates when I got on to the team coach. I said: ‘Is that me?’” Sadler 
says, laughing at the memory. “But it was a great experience that day, 
something I look forward to telling my kids about.”

A glance at the United lineup provides a reminder of how much things have 
changed at Old Trafford. Beckham, Roy Keane, Juan Sebastián Verón and Paul 
Scholes made up United’s midfield, with Ryan Giggs coming off the bench. “There 
was a fear factor behind that team, for sure,” Sadler says. “But there are 
still some cracking names on that team sheet now – World Cup winners, a £36m 
left-sided centre-forward in Martial.”

As for life at Shrewsbury, Sadler thinks United may be pleasantly surprised by 
the New Meadow stadium, which holds just under 10,000, and Rooney’s former 
team-mate hopes that could work in the League One club’s favour. “You go to 
some lower league grounds and it’s horrible in terms of the facilities, but it 
won’t be like that at our place,” he says. “That will hopefully be the 
advantage we can take, it won’t be ugly in that sense, the pitch isn’t bad, and 
maybe that relaxed nature will play into our hands.”
 