
Shrewsbury booked their place in the fifth round of the FA Cup for the first 
time in 25 years with a stunning last-gasp 3-2 victory overSheffield Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldwednesday>.

The Owls led 2-1 going into the last five minutes before Shrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> roared back with Shaun 
Whalley’s equaliser followed by a Jack Grimmer winner deep into stoppage time.

Saido Berahino bags brace but Posh secure replay with late equaliser
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/30/west-brom-peterborough-fa-cup-match-report>
Wednesday had twice taken a one-goal advantage through Lewis McGugan’s brace 
either side of Jean-Louis Akpa Akpro pulling one back for the Shrews, who 
stunned their visitors in the closing minutes to complete a memorable win.

Wednesday started brightly and McGugan drove over from 25 yards before he 
fired the visitors in front in the 19th minute. Awarded a free-kick 25 yards 
out on the left, McGugan’s strike found its way to the bottom corner of the net.

Wednesday might have doubled their lead just before the interval but Lucas 
João headed an inviting cross from Modou Sougou over the bar.

Shrewsbury, third-round conquerors of Cardiff, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/10/cardiff-city-shrewsbury-town-fa-cup-match-report>
 enjoyed plenty of possession but chances were hard to come by, although Junior 
Brown saw a shot deflected off target.

Shrewsbury equalised in the 56th minute when Akpa Akpro headed in a cross from 
Andy Mangan.

Wednesday regained the lead in the 76th minute thanks to McGugan smashing in a 
20-yard drive which took a deflection on its way in.

But Shrewsbury never gave up and levelled matters at 2-2 four minutes from 
time. Akpa Akpro was tripped by Vincent Sasso and, although his penalty was 
well saved by Lewis Price, the substitute Whalley was on hand to turn in the 
rebound.

Shrewsbury then grabbed a dramatic late winner in the 97th minute when Scott 
Vernon’s cross was headed home by Grimmer, on loan from Fulham, to send Micky 
Mellon’s League One strugglers into the last 16 for the first time since the 
1990-91 season when they defeated Wimbledon in the fourth round before going 
out to Arsenal.
 