
Silverstone, the regular home of the British Grand Prix, is to get £9.1m of 
lottery money to help create a Formula 1 heritage centre, theHeritage Lottery 
Fund <http://www.hlf.org.uk/Pages/Home.aspx> has announced.

The scheme at the Northamptonshire track is one of six major projects to be 
given first round support worth a total of £68m.

While applications from the V&A and the Southbank Centre were rejected, there 
was success forAberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/aberdeen> art gallery, 
Auckland Castle in County Durham, Redruth's old brewery in Cornwall, HMS 
Caroline in Belfast and Alexandra Palace in north London.

The full money will only be given once more detailed applications are made and 
are accepted and the HLF has agreed development funding for all six to do that.

Jenny Abramsky, the HLF's chair, said the six projects succeeded because they 
reflected a "real desire to tell the stories of important aspects of the UK's 
heritage".

She added: "In an extraordinarily competitive funding environment, these six 
proposals stood out because of their strong focus on regeneration and 
importance to their local communities."

The money for Silverstone represents nearly half the estimated £20m that the 
project is likely to cost. The plans include creating exhibition space, a 
200-seat cinema which will give people the feeling of being behind the wheel at
Silverstone <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/silverstone> and a new building 
for the archive of the British Racing Drivers' Club, to which the public will 
have public access.

Sally Reynolds, Silverstone's leisure development director, said the plans 
involved telling the whole story of the area back to Saxon times and would 
include its role as an airbase for Wellington bombers during the second world 
war.

"It is a very exciting project. The UK and certainly the area around 
Silverstone plays a unique role in world motorsport, it is responsible for 
effectively exporting motorsport to the world."

The scheme is backed my many motorsport luminaries including Sir Jackie 
Stewart, who won the British grand prix there in 1969 and 1971.

He welcomed what is a first step in ensuring "the heritage of the site and 
that of British motorsport can reach a far wider audience than before and 
cements its importance for future generations".

The £10m initially agreed for Auckland Castle, in Bishop Auckland, is part of 
project which is also putting on public display a remarkable collection of 
paintings by the 17th-century Spanish artist Francisco de Zurbarán.

The paintings were saved from an uncertain future when local philanthropist 
Jonathan Ruffer paid £15m to C of E church commissioners, preventing their 
sale. The plans now include full restoration of the building.

The remaining schemes are:

• £10m for Aberdeen art gallery to redevelop three buildings, adding a new 
rooftop gallery, to better display its collection;

• £16.8m to restore and re-open the BBC studios and Victorian Theatre at 
Alexandra Palace 
<http://www.alexandrapalace.com/about-us/regeneration/latest-news/>, with the 
aim of mounting displays and exhibitions around popular entertainment from 
Victorian times to today;

• £9.8m for Kresen Kernow, a new Cornish archive centre in Redruth;

• £12.2m to turn the warship HMS Caroline – the last survivor of the Battle of 
Jutland – into a visitor attraction in Belfast.

There were some significant bids rejected, not least two big capital schemes 
in London. TheV&A's application for £8m, to help in its scheme to create a new 
underground extension with new space for temporary exhibitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/jul/11/vanda-underground-extension-plan-permission>
, was turned down.

Also rejected was the Southbank Centre's bid for £10.2m towards its £100m 
redevelopment plans for the Hayward Gallery, Purcell Room and Queen Elizabeth 
Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/mar/06/southbank-centre-redevelopment>
.

The others to lose out were: Nottingham Castle; the RAF Museum in Hendon, 
north London; Canterbury Cathedral; and Bath Abbey.

A spokeswoman for the HLF said: "It was a massively oversubscribed round of 
funding and only the best get through. The main reason why these projects were 
rejected is that there just isn't enough money."
 