
Giancarlo Inzaghi saw it all coming. He was watching on television as Roma 
romped to a 4-1 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/03/roma-lazio-napoli-udinese-serie-a>
 in theDerby della Capitale. As Diego Perotti stroked home the final goal from 
the edge of the box, Inzaghi turned to his eldest son, Pippo, and told him his 
brother had just become the manager of Lazio.

So it proved. Simone Inzaghi’s elevation from youth team coach was confirmed 
by theBiancocelesti a few hours later, in the same statement that announced 
Stefano Pioli’s firing as manager 
<http://www.sslazio.it/it/news/ultime-news/32055-comunicato-3-04-2016>. Pippo 
was among the first to congratulate him, with a text message that read: “Have 
courage brother, this is your moment.”

Juventus close in on title after Paul Pogba seals comeback win over Milan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/milan-juventus-serie-a-match-report>
Simone has spent almost his entire career in the shadow of his sibling. The 
younger Inzaghi was no slouch as a player. He won a Scudetto and the Uefa Super 
Cup withLazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> as well as lifting 
the Coppa Italia twice (he was part of the squad when theBiancocelesti won it 
again in 2008-2009 but played only once in the tournament and missed the final).

And yet, to many outside of Lazio, he has always been “Pippo’s little 
brother”. Hardly surprising, really. The elder Inzaghi was one of the most 
famous footballers on the planet – winning everything fromSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball> (three times) to the 
Champions League (twice) and the World Cup.

Happily, the two brothers have always been more interested in supporting one 
another than competing. When Pippo was a boy, neighbourhood kids used to come 
to the family’s house asking him to play for their teams – because they knew he 
would always score. According to his mother, Marina, the answer was always the 
same: “Only if Simone can play, too.”

No such nepotism was required to secure the manager’s job at Lazio. Simone has 
earned this opportunity on merit after six productive years as a coach in the 
club’s academy system. Over the past two seasons, he guided Lazio’s under-20 
side to a pair of domestic cup triumphs and came within a lost penalty shootout 
of taking the league title last June.

“My objective was always to become manager of Lazio,” he said after taking 
charge of the senior side. “I’m proud and I cannot wait to start. I am the 
manager today but I want to be manager for the future as well.”

For now, the job was his only on a temporary basis. With seven games left to 
go in a dismal season, Lazio were looking for someone to steady the ship. A 
side who finished third last season andtook Juventus to extra time in the Coppa 
Italia final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/20/juventus-lazio-coppa-italia-final-report>
 had fallen to eighth. Even to qualify for the Europa League would require them 
to make up seven points on sixth-placed Milan.

The squad Inzaghi inherited had been ravaged by injury and suspensions. The 
greatest blow came at the beginning of this campaign, when Stefan de Vrij had 
to have knee surgery from which he is yet to return. Lately, though, the rest 
of the defence have also been falling to pieces. Dusan Basta, Stefan Radu, 
Abdoulay Konko, Wesley Hoedt and Edson Braafheid would all be unavailable for 
Inzaghi’s first game at the helm.

More damaging still was the atmosphere around the club. Ultras had boycotted 
the derby but hundreds descended on Lazio’s Formello training centre after it 
was lost. They had hoped to give the players a piece of their mind but instead 
wound up clashing with police. Rocks were thrown and arrests made.

A day later, Inzaghi led Lazio’s squad on a punitive retreat to Norcia, some 
100 miles away in the Umbrian hills. He celebrated his 40th birthday on Tuesday 
by taking charge of his first training session.

If the idea had been partly to escape the fans’ ire, then it failed. By 
Wednesday a group had shown up with banners demanding the departures of the 
club owner, Claudio Lotito, and the sporting director Igli Tare. The following 
afternoon an even larger contingent arrived. Inzaghi broke off his team’s 
training session to lead the players over.

The Ultras’ list of grievances was familiar. They wanted to see more effort, 
more commitment even if it came in a defeat. In short, they wanted the team to 
approach every match with the same burning desire Inzaghi showed when he was a 
player. Antonio Candreva, speaking on behalf of the squad, agreed Lazio “have 
had a ridiculous season”.

The fixture list, at least, had been kind to Inzaghi. His first match would be 
against a Palermo side who had sunk to 18th. The mood among the Sicilian club’s 
supporters was every bit as mutinous as that of their counterparts in Rome. 
Protests have been continuing against Palermo’s owner, Maurizio Zamparini,whose 
erratic behaviour and endless managerial changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/14/palermo-zamparini-managerial-meddling-serie-a>
 have driven fans to distraction.

Tempers flared before kick-off, with fists and fireworks thrown as close to a 
hundred peoplebrawled in one of Palermo’s biggest thoroughfares, Viale della 
Libertà 
<http://www.repubblica.it/sport/calcio/serie-a/lazio/2016/04/10/news/palermo-lazio-137348385/>
. Ultras from both teams were reported to have been involved.

When the match started, Lazio leapt to an immediate lead. Miroslav Klose is 
only two years Inzaghi’s junior and they share the distinction of having each 
scored four goals in a single match for Lazio (actually, Klose got five). The 
German looked as if he might be in the mood to repeat the trick as he struck 
twice in the opening 15 minutes on Sunday.

Palermo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/palermo> Ultras responded by 
throwing fireworks on to the pitch. The referee, Andrea Gervasoni, was obliged 
to pause the match for several minutes and although play resumed, the situation 
would recur in the second half. This time, a firework landed beside Candreva as 
he attacked down the left channel. Both he and the tracking defender had to 
abandon their pursuit of the ball and sprint away in order to avoid the 
explosion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Flazio-simone-inzaghi-serie-a-palermo-pippo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e2a5af0edbba7c7b2c8cb307a16935294f67607%2F18_194_3007_1804%2F3007.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simone%20Inzaghi%20steps%20out%20of%20Pippo%E2%80%99s%20shadow%20with%20bright%20start%20to%20Lazio%20role%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Flazio-simone-inzaghi-serie-a-palermo-pippo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simone%20Inzaghi%20steps%20out%20of%20Pippo%E2%80%99s%20shadow%20with%20bright%20start%20to%20Lazio%20role%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Flazio-simone-inzaghi-serie-a-palermo-pippo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e2a5af0edbba7c7b2c8cb307a16935294f67607%2F18_194_3007_1804%2F3007.jpg>
 The referee talks to officials from Palermo and Lazio after flares were thrown 
on to the pitch by Palermo fans. Photograph: Franco Lannino/EPA 
For a moment it seemed the match might be abandoned, Gervasoni conferring with 
officials from both teams as a section of the crowd lobbed further missiles on 
to the field. Order was restored and Felipe Anderson, on as a second-half 
substitute, made it 3-0 to Lazio before the end.

From a footballing perspective, this had been an encouraging start to 
Inzaghi’s tenure. With Milan and Sassuolo losing, Lazio were able to close 
immediately to within four points of a Europa League spot.

There was nothing new about the Biancocelesti’s 4-3-3 formation but they 
played with a compactness and intensity not seen much lately. Their 68% share 
of possession was the highest they have had all season and Palermo managed only 
a single touch in the Lazio penalty area throughout the first half.

“This team has great qualities, we can beat anybody in a one-off match,” 
Inzaghi said. And then came the inevitable questions about his brother. Pippo 
has not had a permanent position in football since he wassacked as the Milan 
manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/16/milan-sack-filippo-inzaghi> 
at the end of last season but one journalist nevertheless demanded to know 
which of the two brothers was the better coach.

“We each have our own path to walk,” Simone said. “I hope one day we will get 
to face off against each other as Serie A managers, just like we did as 
players.”

That was all that needed to be said. Pippo’s little brother has far more 
pressing matters to consider as he sets about trying to achieve big things at 
Lazio.

Talking points

• Juventus cleared one of the biggest hurdles left on their path to the 
Scudetto bybeating Milan 2-1 at San Siro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/09/milan-juventus-serie-a-match-report>
. In one sense, the result was not at all surprising – theRossoneri have been 
dreadful lately and had lost all of their last six matches against the Old 
Lady. But on this occasion, Milan played well. It was only a series of stunning 
saves (and I do mean stunning 
<https://twitter.com/btsportfootball/status/718892926802075648>) from Gigi 
Buffon that kept them from scoring more than once, and possibly getting 
something from the game. This was not the first time that Buffon has made 
crucial interventions in recent weeks. Gazzetta dello Sport note that his save 
percentage (79.49%) is the highest of any goalkeeper in Europe’s top leagues 
this season, and he has made as many saves (22) in Juventus’s last six games as 
he did in the previous 15.

• I might also note that Buffon’s most extraordinary saves in that match were 
from Mario Balotelli. It was a classically frustrating performance from Mario, 
silent and stationary for long stretches but then so nearly decisive in others.

• Hats off to Milan’s fans for a beautiful farewell to Cesare Maldini in their 
pre-game choreography. “Bye Cesare!”, “Forever red and black” and “Gone but 
still here” readthe messages writ large across the stands of San Siro 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AyH_Af8k3gY>.

• The most surprising result of the weekend arrived at the Stadio Carlo 
Castellani, where Empoli won their first Tuscan derby against Fiorentina since 
1997. The Viola have been out-of-sorts for a while, and reports that Paulo 
Sousa had met with representatives from Zenit St Petersburg last week cannot 
have sent a great message to his players, but this was still a colossal shock. 
Empoli had not won any game since 10 January. The team president, Fabrizio 
Corsi, was understandably ebullient at full-time. “Beating Fiorentina grants us 
a great joy because we are the ugly ducklings,” he said. “Maybe we’ll beat them 
again in another 20 years’ time.”

• Although winless in six games, Fiorentina remain eight points clear of 
seventh-placed Sassuolo with six games left to play, and are therefore unlikely 
to lose their Europa League spot. They can probably kiss goodbye to any slender 
hopes of the Champions League, however, as they are now seven points behind 
Roma – who have a game in hand to play against Bologna on Monday night.

• Inter are slightly to the Giallorossi after a 1-0 win away to Frosinone. The 
real story here was Mauro Icardi: who scored the game’s only goal and now has 
exactly 50 in 100 games for Inter. That is fewer than it took Diego Milito or 
Sandro Mazzola (each 110) to achieve the same tally with theNerazzuri.

• Not a lot of change at the bottom of the table, with Carpi, Frosinone and 
Palermo all losing – although Sampdoria did take another big stride away from 
trouble with their 2-0 win over Udinese.

Results: Chievo 1-0 Carpi, Empoli 2-0 Fiorentina, Frosinone 0-1 Inter, Milan 
1-2 Juventus, Napoli 3-0 Verona, Palermo 0-3 Lazio, Sampdoria 2-0 Udinese, 
Sassuolo 0-1 Genoa, Torino 2-1 Atalanta
 