
It’s been no week for the faint-hearted (and we’re not talking about world 
politics… although, inevitably, we are). Two new productions of operas notable 
for their evocation of deadly tyranny made their London audiences gasp and 
wince – but also sent them away reflecting on the dark evolution of societies 
that allow hatred of “the other” to gain the upper hand.

“The times are so strange that it’s impossible to tell if you’ll survive 
them,” wrote Karl Amadeus Hartmann of his native Germany in the 1930s. His way 
of coping with National Socialism was not to flee but to stay, witness the 
regime at work and resist by composing subversive testimonies for performance 
after the inevitable collapse. And so his 1936 operaSimplicius Simplicissimus 
<http://www.independentopera.com/productions/simplicius-simplicissimus> was not 
heard until 1948. He revised it in 1957, the version that finally made its way 
on to the British stage for the first time last week.

The gore flowed freely, to the point where the audience took refuge in nervous 
laughter,

Hartmann took the thirty years’ war as his parallel, adapting Grimmelshausen’s 
1668 novel of the same name. Between 1618 and 1648, Germany’s population 
dropped from 12 million to 4 million as competing armies swept across the land, 
killing, looting and spreading plague. Simplicius, a simpleton boy shepherd, is 
caught up in this carnage but survives and transcends it, raised to the status 
of a holy fool, the only one allowed to speak truth to power and predict its 
demise.

Polly Graham’s intensely physical production for Independent Opera 
<http://www.independentopera.com/> cleverly moves between 17th- and 
20th-century Germany, underscoring that, whatever the era, war will always 
brutalise its protagonists. That brutality, vividly choreographed by Michael 
Spenceley, was chiefly portrayed by a team of eight young male singers, 
required to play, variously, swaggering troops, poor peasants, Hitler youth and 
placid sheep. Their beefy heft as they charged around Nate Gibson’s set gave 
the production much of its drive, following the example of baritone William 
Dazeley as the deeply menacing and universal Soldier who, when not killing and 
raping, taunts and ridicules poor Simplicius.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F189961899&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F189961899>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F189961899&media=>
Independent Opera’s trailer for Simplicius Simplicissimus. 
<https://vimeo.com/189961899> 
Soprano Stephanie Corley 
<http://www.hazardchase.co.uk/artists/stephanie-corley/> portrayed the simple 
shepherd with touching sensitivity, and was particularly affecting when laying 
the gentle Hermit (Adrian Thompson) in his grave, a brief respite from the 
whirling terror. When it returned, the troops had captured a lone woman (Chiara 
Vinci), abusing and humiliating her in front of the venal, repulsive Governor 
(Mark Le Brocq). Vinci represented all women caught up in war in her 
impressively balletic performance, her agony ending only when Simplicius 
intervened to foretell the downfall of such tyranny.

David Pountney’s new translation is suitably crude and direct; and Timothy 
Redmond conducted the Britten Sinfonia with admirable commitment to Hartmann’s 
bracing score, which while short of sinuous vocal lines has an attractive 
modernist palette all its own, despite the nods to Stravinsky, Borodin and Bach.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fsimplicius-simplicissimus-opera-oreste-review-wiltons-music-hall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F520aeab7e0dd730d6df9f6a70a6aa504dd214789%2F0_0_3307_2205%2F3307.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simplicius%20Simplicissimus%3B%20Oreste%20review%20%E2%80%93%20there%20will%20be%20blood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fsimplicius-simplicissimus-opera-oreste-review-wiltons-music-hall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simplicius%20Simplicissimus%3B%20Oreste%20review%20%E2%80%93%20there%20will%20be%20blood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fsimplicius-simplicissimus-opera-oreste-review-wiltons-music-hall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F520aeab7e0dd730d6df9f6a70a6aa504dd214789%2F0_0_3307_2205%2F3307.jpg>
 Stephanie Corley, centre, and ensemble in Simplicius Simplicissimus. 
Photograph: Max Lacome 
“I’m much more interested in the run-down and the squalid than the beautiful 
and glamorous,” says new firebrand opera director Gerard Jones. “I think 
glamour is a false path for telling stories.” Certainly, no one would apply 
“beautiful” or “glamorous” to the look of his dystopian imagining of Handel’s
Oreste <http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/oreste-by-richard-gerard-jones>, this 
year’s Jette Parker Young Artists offering from the Royal Opera, but its 
unsparing portrayal of a violent, amoral society in freefall marks him out as a 
director with a powerful sense of the relevant and a determination never to 
sugar the pill.

Handel hastily assembled his pasticcio opera from previous compositions in 
order to showcase a starry cast at Covent Garden in 1734, and it makes an 
intriguing vehicle for today’s new talent. They didn’t disappoint.

Taken from Euripedes, the opera tells of Oreste, who, deranged by his 
matricide, consults the Oracle and seeks respite on the shores of Tauris. The 
Oracle turns out to be a lousy travel agent: King Toante, the island’s despotic 
ruler, has decreed all strangers be put to death. Unbeknown to Oreste, his 
sister Ifigenia is chief executioner, killing hapless refugees with a hammer. 
She is assisted by the psychotic Filotete, who captures Oreste’s wife, Ermione, 
and his friend Pilade, who have arrived on the island to look for Oreste.

Every character in Jones’s production is deeply damaged, and none is allowed 
the heroism the music suggests. The gore flowed freely in the bleak, 
graffiti-daubed set, to the point where the audience took refuge in nervous 
laughter, perhaps finding the place that Jones seeks in his schlock-horror 
realisation – “where not funny meets funny”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fsimplicius-simplicissimus-opera-oreste-review-wiltons-music-hall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8716f4cbb835b59d744fb184d4a510164cf38c22%2F0_168_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simplicius%20Simplicissimus%3B%20Oreste%20review%20%E2%80%93%20there%20will%20be%20blood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fsimplicius-simplicissimus-opera-oreste-review-wiltons-music-hall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simplicius%20Simplicissimus%3B%20Oreste%20review%20%E2%80%93%20there%20will%20be%20blood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fsimplicius-simplicissimus-opera-oreste-review-wiltons-music-hall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8716f4cbb835b59d744fb184d4a510164cf38c22%2F0_168_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 The show-stopping Vlada Borovko as Ermione in Oreste at Wilton’s Music Hall. 
Photograph: Clive Barda 
Whether that’s ever a good place to be is a moot point, but his twist at the 
close, subverting the conventional expression of undying devotion, was a clever 
surprise. And no one would disagree that, musically, this was a hit. Angela 
Simkin as Oreste was indisposed when I attended, her place taken by established 
countertenorRussell Harcourt. <http://www.russellharcourt.net/about.html> He’s 
an impressive Handelian, with a thrilling top register and assured technique. 
BaritoneSimon Shibambu <http://www.simonshibambu.com/> (King Toante) does a 
nice line in menace and sings with cool authority, if a little rushed at times. 
The tenorThomas Atkins <http://www.hazardchase.co.uk/artists/thomas-atkins/> 
(Pilade) impressed with his fluent dispatch of some high-octane arias, andVlada 
Borovko <http://vladaborovko.com/> (Ermione) brought the house down with her 
furious demisemiquavers.Jennifer Davis 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/people/jennifer-davis> (Ifigenia) possesses a voice of 
rare beauty, lamenting her appalling situation with real warmth and tenderness, 
and baritoneGyula Nagy <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/gyula-nagy> (Filotete) 
sings and acts with such extraordinary intensity that he demands attention.

The conductor James Hendry <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/james-hendry>, at 
just 24, is definitely a name to watch. He drove the valiant Southbank Sinfonia 
with consummate ease, ensuring that whatever mayhem was happening on stage the 
music maintained a thrilling focus.

Star ratings (out of 5)
Simplicius Simplicissimus ★★★★
Oreste ★★★
 