
Arnold Wesker, who has died aged 83, shot to fame as one of the wave of 
British playwrights spearheaded byJohn Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/24/john-osborne-a-natural-dissenter-who-changed-the-face-of-british-theatre>
 andJohn Arden <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/30/john-arden>. His 
three most renowned works made up what became known as The Wesker Trilogy.

Chicken Soup With Barley <http://www.arnoldwesker.com/plays.asp?workID=48> 
(1958) tells the story of the Kahn family, antifascist East End Jews fighting 
Oswald Mosley’s Blackshirts in 1936.Roots 
<http://www.arnoldwesker.com/plays.asp?workID=49> (1959), set in a Norfolk 
family, celebrates the gradual move towards independence of Beatie Bryant, an 
early feminist prototype. Both opened at the Belgrade theatre in Coventry and 
the Royal Court in London. The trilogy was completed at the latter when the 
first two were presented alongsideI’m Talking About Jerusalem 
<http://www.arnoldwesker.com/plays.asp?workID=50> (1960), in which Ada Kahn, 
the daughter of the Chicken Soup family, engages in a back-to-the-land 
experiment in Norfolk.

The trilogy plays were steeped in the socialism of Wesker’s childhood, hymning 
mass education and attacking fascism. They also reflected his experience of 
London and life outside it: Beatie was inspired by Doreen Bicker, a chambermaid 
at The Bell Hotel, Norwich, where Wesker was working as a kitchen porter. He 
gave her the nickname of Dusty, because of her “gold-dust” hair, and an Arts 
Council bursary of £500 covered the cost of their marriage in 1958.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fsir-arnold-wesker-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1932f2015d9f9deb5dc1cab69501619b0d5cc7f8%2F27_681_4763_2858%2F4763.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Arnold%20Wesker%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fsir-arnold-wesker-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Arnold%20Wesker%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fsir-arnold-wesker-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1932f2015d9f9deb5dc1cab69501619b0d5cc7f8%2F27_681_4763_2858%2F4763.jpg>
 I’m Talking About Jerusalem by Arnold Wesker, 1960, with, left to right, 
Cherry Morris as Cissie, Jessie Robbins as Esther, Mark Eden as Dave and Ruth 
Meyers as Ada.
 Photograph: ANL/Rex/Shutterstock 
Wesker became known for his social optimism: he was the nearest Britain had to 
aClifford Odets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/mar/19/theatre-clifford-odets-rocket-moon>
. Later, he was to move towards lyricism, with monologues in smaller venues, 
and then further into the personal.

Critics lauded Wesker’s epics and, although the plays were seen to be 
occasionally didactic, they were praised as realistic celebrations of 
working-class life. They presented areas of Britain that had never been seen on 
the stage.

The Kitchen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/may/21/arnold-wesker-food-for-thought> 
(1959) is a reflection of Wesker’s time spent working as a pastry chef in the 
Paris restaurant Le Rallye. It points to the dehumanising effect of highly 
pressurised, underpaid labour, and in her 1967 Paris production Ariane 
Mnouchkine presented it as an attack on capitalism. Chips with Everything 
(1962) attacks the class system, ending provocatively with the national anthem 
before a seated audience conditioned to stand for God Save the Queen.

Wesker’s texts were revolutionary for their time. He was the young, 
working-class Jewish writer, lionised by a middle-class theatre in a state of 
flux. He rejected the label of “angry young man”, saying of this period that he 
was “a happy young man”. There was money, there was recognition, there were 
audiences hungry for his work but, as he was soon to admit, he would become an 
angry old man.

British playwright Arnold Wesker dies, aged 83
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/12/arnold-wesker-british-playwright-dies-aged-83>
To his generation belonged Bernard Kops 
<http://www.thejc.com/arts/arts-interviews/59829/interview-bernard-kops> and 
Harold Pinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/dec/27/harold-pinter-obituary-playwright-politics>
. All three came from Jewish immigrant families. But whereas Pinter found 
recognition within the theatre establishment, Wesker felt himself to be outside 
it.

Born in Stepney, he grew up in Fashion Street, Spitalfields, in a 
working-class family. His mother, Leah (nee Perlmutter), a passionate 
communist, was born in Transylvania. His Ukrainian father, Joe, was a tailor’s 
machinist. Wesker was devoted to his mother and had great sympathy for his 
father, a little Chaplin of a man with a strong tenor voice, who detested 
tailoring. As a teenager, Wesker wrestled and boxed with his father. His 
Yiddish-speaking parents influenced his development as a self-taught writer, 
and inspired the Kahn family in the trilogy.

Wesker always had trouble with authority, and this caused problems in his 
career. His mother taught him that humility was not a trait to be encouraged. 
“Somebody says something you think is silly, you don’t sit back,” he said in 
1994. “You say something. It is not very wise, especially in the theatre.” He 
inherited Leah’s fierce personality: it fuelled his life-force and his anger 
with the theatre establishment.

He was educated at the Jewish infants school in Commercial Street and at Upton 
House school in Hackney. In 1948, he started what was to be a long line of 
jobs. He was apprentice to a furniture maker, a carpenter’s mate and a bookshop 
assistant before undertaking his national service in the RAF (1950-52). During 
this period he started an unpublished novel, The Reed That Bent, which was used 
as the basis for Chips With Everything. Over the next six years, Wesker was a 
plumber’s mate, a seed-sorter and a farm labourer. Through working at Le 
Rallye, he saved up to study at the London School of Film Technique (now the 
London Film School).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA-QfMmF8d0E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA-QfMmF8d0E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA-QfMmF8d0E&media=>
 A scene from the 1961 film of Arnold Wesker’s The Kitchen 
In 1959, Wesker was named the most promising playwright of the year by the 
Evening Standard. A single-act version at the Royal Court that year of The 
Kitchen was followed in 1961 by a full two-act production anda film version by 
James Hill <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A-QfMmF8d0E>, with James Bolam 
making his movie debut. In 1966, The Kitchen became a hit off-Broadway, 
starring Rip Torn. It was the first play that Wesker wrote, in 1957: eventual 
performances in 50 centres around the world included a musical version in Japan 
in 2000.

Alan Bates and Diane Cilento had roles in Wesker’s West End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/westend> success The Four Seasons (1965), 
and Their Very Own and Golden City (1966) starred Ian McKellen.

However, in the next decade Wesker suffered several professional catastrophes. 
The Journalists (1972), set on a Sunday newspaper, an epic, with 30 characters, 
was offered to the Royal Shakespeare Company and David Jones was to direct. It 
went into rehearsal, but, amazingly, the actors refused to perform it.

Peter Gill on Arnold Wesker: ‘John Dexter brought these new plays to life’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/apr/29/peter-gill-arnold-wesker-obituary-letter>
Wesker was furious. He wrote widely in the press attacking Trevor Nunn, the 
RSC’s artistic director at the time, and filed a suit claiming £25,000 damages. 
The foreign rights for the play were dependent on a London production. Wesker 
was losing earnings at home and abroad because of the aborted production. The 
case dragged on until 1980, when Wesker was awarded damages of £4,250, winning 
the battle but not the war. In 1981 Wesker was still writing lengthy articles 
about his disappointment, detailing every moment of the play’s life and death.

Wesker said he was told that the actors were unhappy because there were no 
starring roles in The Journalists. Seemingly they objected to the cast being 
composed of many small parts. His analysis was quite different: he believed the 
actors’ rejection was because they hated the creation of four intelligent Tory 
cabinet ministers as characters in the play, at a time when Thatcherism was at 
its height. Wesker opined that the company was in thrall to the Workers’ 
Revolutionary party. In his articles, he took on the theatre establishment, 
blaming it for siding with the actors and not the playwright.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fsir-arnold-wesker-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F076740b981d6c989b4b593949338eeadc0f831e7%2F0_296_3058_1835%2F3058.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Arnold%20Wesker%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fsir-arnold-wesker-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Arnold%20Wesker%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fsir-arnold-wesker-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F076740b981d6c989b4b593949338eeadc0f831e7%2F0_296_3058_1835%2F3058.jpg>
 Their Very Own and Golden City by Arnold Wesker, 1966, with, left to right, 
Sebastian Shaw, Ian McKellen and Ann Firbank. Photograph: Topham Picturepoint 
In 1976, Wesker’s The Merchant had its world premiere in Stockholm. It was a 
controversial work, in which Wesker’s Shylock bids for his pound of flesh, not 
as a revenge act against Christian society, but as a joke with his philosemitic 
friend Antonio, against antisemitic Christendom. The play marks a radical 
challenge to Shakespeare’s infamous Jewish fantasy figure of Shylock.

Zero Mostel was to lead the Broadway production, but he died suddenly during 
the Philadelphia try-out in 1977, and the Broadway show never happened. Apart 
from a production at Birmingham Rep, the play, later renamed Shylock, has never 
been staged in Britain. As a result, Wesker wrote Dark Suspicions, a pamphlet 
alleging subconscious antisemitism in the British theatre establishment.

He was exiled to the margins of the London fringe, where he turned away from 
his epic style to create a cycle of one-woman scripts, including Annie Wobbler, 
which transferred to the Fortune theatre in the West End in 1984. In 1990 he 
wrote Letter to a Daughter for the Norwegian jazz singer Susanne Fuhr.

There must have been some pleasure when the Royal Court’s director Stephen 
Daldry directed The Kitchen in 1994 and theNational Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre> revived Chips With 
Everything in 1997. The establishment showed an attempt at partial 
reconciliation, but, if the young Wesker would have been pleased at these 
revivals, the mature Wesker was enraged at the exclusion of his later works. 
Even as the Court was restaging The Kitchen, he told the Independent: “They 
should have picked something else.” As he got older, he spoke more about being 
marginalised.

In 1996 he wrote Blood Libel, a Norwich Playhouse commission. This play, 
together with The Merchant, explored a Christian society infected by 
antisemitism. Blood Libel is about William of Norwich, a 12-year-old whose 
murder in 1144 was attributed to the Jews. This rumour resonated throughout 
medieval Europe. As Wesker sought to underline with this drama, the medieval 
Christian fantasy of the Jew as child-murderer was an element that contributed 
in part to the Holocaust. In his review of The Merchant, Michael Billington 
wrote, “Wesker’s point comes across clearly: that anti-Jewish prejudice is 
ingrained in English life.” Both plays examine the past and also seem to 
suggest that little has changed.

Despite his early success, by 1997 his new work was still on the margins: When 
God Wanted a Son had its premiere at Hampstead’s tiny New End theatre. This 
play hinted at what was happening in his own life. As a result of Wesker’s 
affairs, Dusty and Wesker were estranged and Wesker went to live in Wales.

Throughout his career, Wesker continued to have international success. He 
delighted in directing his own texts, believing that plays belonged to 
writer-directors and not to autocratic artistic directors. But, an outcast in 
his own country, it was a bitter life for the playwright who once was the Royal 
Court’s golden boy.

There were other disappointments, such as the failure in the 1960s of his arts 
organisation Centre 42, planned to have a home in the Roundhouse, in north 
London. This arts initiative was intended to commit the trade unions to 
culture. Wesker, as founder-director, had “the aim of finding a popular 
audience for the arts, not an audience for popular art, as was its frequently 
mistaken description”. Funding difficulties were overwhelming and the idea was 
shelved.

Although he never joined any political party, and admitted to never having 
read Marx or Lenin, Wesker was clearly of the left. As he wrote in his 
autobiography, As Much As I Dare (1994), the Jewish youth movement Habonim was 
his only political involvement apart from a few teenage months in the Young 
Communist League. He joined the antiwar group Committee of 100 and, after a 
demonstration, was imprisoned with Bertrand Russell.

Wesker was a European self-made intellectual who refused to flatter the 
theatre elite. Had he learned diplomacy, his career might have suffered less. 
However, had he sought to please he would never have written texts that were so 
challenging to the dominant English historical narrative. His distinctive 
achievement lay in reminding audiences that Jews are an essential part of 
British history and in presenting a vibrant working-class dynamic that was 
radical for its time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzJS0tiqr52k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzJS0tiqr52k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzJS0tiqr52k&media=>
 Jessica Raine discussing the role of Beatie in Arnold Wesker’s Roots, in the 
revival by the Donmar Warehouse, 2013 
He was welcomed back in his later years, and in 2006 was knighted. In 2011, 
the NationalTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> revived The 
Kitchen and The Royal Court restaged Chicken Soup With Barley. Wesker reacted 
with pleasure and fury. He was happy to return to the top table, but angry that 
his later work was neglected by a new generation of directors.

Speaking on a BBC Radio 4 interview before the National Theatre premiere he 
refused to show gratitude, saying: “I don’t feel I’m known. I’m frozen in the 
trilogy of the 1960s.” Wesker was chagrined that his later dramas (he wrote 
more than 40 plays) were not staged by the Court or the National.

In 2013, the Donmar Warehouse, London, produced Roots, with Jessica Raine as 
Beatie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zJS0tiqr52k>. At the end of the play, 
Beatie finds her ability to voice her individual opinions after being educated 
by her urban boyfriend Ronnie, a version of the playwright.

In his autobiography, Wesker comes across as an emotional, impulsive man with 
high nervous energy and an elevated libido. Yet, despite the marriage fracture, 
Dusty remained Arnold’s wife, and his carer in his final years. He had three 
children with her: Lindsay (named after the director Lindsay Anderson, who 
championed Wesker’s work), Tanya and Daniel. He also had a daughter, Elsa, with 
a Swedish journalist, Disa Håstad. Towards the end of his life, he lived 
peacefully with Dusty at their home in Hove, East Sussex.

Tanya died in 2012. Wesker is survived by Dusty and his three other children.

• Arnold Wesker, playwright, born 24 May 1932; died 12 April 2016

 * This article was amended on 14 April 2016. It originally said that Arnold 
Wesker, Bernard Kops and Harold Pinter were all the children of Jewish 
immigrants. However, Pinter’s parents were born in Britain, his grandparents 
having been Jewish immigrants. The sentence now says that all three came from 
Jewish immigrant families.  