
Sir Antony Jay, who has died aged 86, was one of the two authors behind the 
influential 1980s BBC government satireYes Minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/jun/18/yes-minister-your-next-box-set>
 and its successor Yes, Prime Minister. It was a broadcasting triumph that not 
only intrigued and attracted the civil service caste and politicians from
Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/08/margaret-thatcher-political-phenomenon-dies>
 downwards, but has echoed around the world – with sales to 84 countries – and 
reverberated in spin-off books and a successful West End adaptation of Yes, 
Prime Minister.

The idea of a hapless politician, constantly thwarted, outwitted and 
occasionally saved by wilier, more devious, civil servants struck a resonant 
chord among viewers in democracies from Europe to Australia and the US, and 
taught viewers valuable, if cynical, lessons about the shortcomings of 
governments. While it did not make Jay’s fortune – he and his co-authorJonathan 
Lynn <https://www.faber.co.uk/tutors/jonathan-lynn/> were paid £1,200 an 
episode between them – it did establish him as an occasional media commentator 
of trenchant rightwing views on Westminster and Whitehall politics forever 
afterwards.

The series had its genesis in Jay’s much earlier experience as a young TV 
producer on the groundbreaking BBC nightly news programme Tonight in the late 
50s and early 60s. The live broadcasts were among the first to interview 
politicians robustly and to report the news occasionally irreverently. What it 
taught Jay was the conceit and vulnerability of ministers when viewed at close 
quarters. “You saw a lot of politicians were just puppets,” he told the Irish 
Times in 2013. “I realised these compromises, driven by conflicts between 
ministers and permanent secretaries, had huge comic potential.”

Nevertheless it took nearly 20 years for the programme to get off the ground, 
the 38 episodes of the two series between 1979 and 1988 coinciding with the 
Thatcher government. Its success was not only down to the crunchingly 
authentic-seeming verbal jousts between the main characters but to the casting 
ofPaul Eddington 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-paul-eddington-1580768.html> 
as Jim Hacker, the harassed and permanently alarmed minister at the fictional 
Ministry for Administrative Affairs, andNigel Hawthorne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/dec/26/guardianobituaries.filmnews> as 
his feline permanent secretary Sir Humphrey Appleby, refereed by Derek Fowlds 
as the private secretary Bernard Woolley. Eddington, seeing where the laughs 
were, had originally wanted to play Sir Humphrey, but was persuaded of the 
comic potential of the minister. Nonetheless, he then watched Hawthorne win 
four Baftas without winning any himself as the series progressed.

The writers themselves were not even invited to the Bafta ceremonies at which 
the programmes eventually won a total of seven awards. Their partnership was 
successful despite their different political allegiances: Jay, the rightwing 
free marketer, and Lynn, the left-leaning actor, researched and wrote 
everything together.

The scripts were closely based on detailed research and conversations with 
former political advisers and ministers, including Marcia Williams and Bernard 
Donoughue, who had been members of Harold Wilson’s staff at 10 Downing Street, 
and the scenarios were sometimes derived from real incidents.The distinction 
between a ministry’s policy and its minister’s policy 
<http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1057%2F9781137552952_8> came from a Civil 
Service College lecture byBarbara Castle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/may/04/guardianobituaries.obituaries> 
that Jay attended in 1972.

The undatedness of the plot lines arose because the original scripts were 
written well in advance of transmission – some actually during the era of the 
Callaghan government in the late 70s – so they could not take their topicality 
from current events later. “We often had to write months ahead of transmission 
… it means you can’t put in little topical jokes that will be funny tomorrow 
but meaningless months later,” Jay said. “Our jokes were about permanent things 
rather than temporary things and they stayed relevant.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEkpS-yBj7gY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEkpS-yBj7gY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEkpS-yBj7gY&media=>
 Yes Minister: Why Britain joined the European Union 
Thatcher became a fan, identifying so closely with the series that she even 
insisted on writing asketch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cwaX_DgHZkM> for 
the characters in 1984 before a National Viewers’ and Listeners’ Association 
award ceremony. Lynn, Hawthorne and Eddington were reluctant participants, not 
least because the prime minister’s sense of humour was notoriously 
non-existent, but also because they did not wish to be associated with a 
partisan event, since the whole point was that Hacker’s politics were never 
identified. Jay, however, was happy to indulge the prime minister: “I was a 
great supporter of Margaret Thatcher: she was very nice about it. It gave us 
lots of publicity,” he said.

Jay and Lynn had met at a company called Video Arts <http://www.videoarts.com/>
 that Jay had formed withJohn Cleese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/john-cleese> in 1972, after he had left 
the BBC. It was set up to make training documentaries about business 
management. The humorous approach, tackling issues such as how not to interview 
candidates and how not to sell things – described by Lynn as the comedy of 
cock-up – was wildly successful, and Lynn, who had been in the Cambridge 
Footlights with Cleese, was recommended to Jay when Cleese left to writeFawlty 
Towers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/18/the-10-best-fawlty-towers-moments-40th-anniversary>
. The company, which started with £4,000, was eventually sold for £44m in 1989.

By then Yes, Prime Minister – the sequel series in which Hacker fortuitously 
reaches Downing Street – had come to an end in the UK, and Lynn was leaving for 
Hollywood to become a film director. The two teamed up again more than 20 years 
later to write a stage play based on the same characters, though with new 
actors, since Eddington and Hawthorne had both died, and Fowlds was too old to 
return as Bernard.The stage Yes, Prime Minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/may/20/yes-prime-minister-review> came 
to the West End in 2010 and also toured the US. The afterlife continued in a 
spin-off television series featuring the same characters,broadcast by the Gold 
satellite channel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/nov/27/tv-review-yes-prime-minister>
.

Born in London, Antony was the son of Ernest Jay, a character actor who 
appeared in a number of British films in the 30s and 40s, and his wife, 
Catherine Hay, also an actor. He was educated on a scholarship atSt Paul’s 
<http://www.stpaulsschool.org.uk/> school, west London, and studied classics 
and comparative philology atMagdalene College, Cambridge 
<http://www.magd.cam.ac.uk/>. He claimed to have spent his time at university 
playing bridge and cricket and writing for university magazines before 
knuckling down to study and being awarded a first-class degree.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG0ZZJXw4MTA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG0ZZJXw4MTA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG0ZZJXw4MTA&media=>
 Yes, Prime Minister: Sir Humphrey Appleby on the use of leading questions 
After national service as a second lieutenant in the Royal Signals 
<http://www.army.mod.uk/signals/signals.aspx>, in 1955 he joined the BBC and 
was in at the start of the Tonight programme as a producer. Broadcast live, 
with limited technical resources, the show centred on its unflappable presenter
Cliff Michelmore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/17/cliff-michelmore-obituary>
, who could be relied upon to cope with films breaking down and guests held up 
in traffic. But it was also a training ground not only for onscreen journalists 
but also for producers and directors such as Jay,Alasdair Milne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/09/alasdair-milne> and Michael 
Peacock. Jay became the programme’s editor (1962-63), and left BBC TV as head 
of talks features (1963-64) to become a freelance writer and producer.

Following the sale of Video Arts and the success of the Yes Minister series, 
Jay retired to Somerset, from where he produced a stream of works on management 
techniques, spin-off books including Jim Hacker’s diaries and How to Beat Sir 
Humphrey: Every Citizen’s Guide to Fighting Officialdom (1997) and even a 
handbook, Not in Our Back Yard: How to Run a Protest Campaign and Save the 
Neighbourhood (2005), about organising community resistance to planning 
proposals for the likes of wind farms and road schemes.

There was also a regular stream of articles, many attacking his old employers 
at the BBC, for receptive papers such as the Daily Mail and Telegraph. He 
insisted that the corporation was institutionally leftwing, and in 2011 he 
called for it to be reduced to Radio 4 and BBC1: “What more do we need? The 
case for a drastic slimming-down gets stronger every day.”

Jay was knighted in 1988, at about the time Yes, Prime Minister ended, though 
apparently for his much earlier work as a producer of theQueen’s Christmas 
broadcasts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/25/royal-christmas-broadcast-queens-speech-elizabeth-10-facts>
. His final collaboration with Lynn came in the Guardian earlier this month,
with Sir Humphrey welcoming a new Brexit minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/07/yes-minister-brexit-eu-jonathan-lynn-sir-humphrey>
.

In 1957 he married Jill Watkins. She survives him, along with their children, 
Mike, Roni, Kate and David.

• Antony Rupert Jay, writer and producer, born 20 April 1930; died 21 August 
2016

• This article was amended on 24 August 2016 in response to a letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/24/jonathan-lynn-antony-jay-obituary-letter>
 by Jonathan Lynn
 