
Although the playwright Sir Peter Shaffer, who has died aged 90, wrote one of 
the best farces of postwar British theatre in Black Comedy (1965), he was best 
known for his hugely popular philosophical dramasThe Royal Hunt of the Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/aug/27/theatre> (1964), Equus (1973) 
and, in particular, Amadeus (1979). The last of these, which charted the 
destructive jealousy of the 18th-century court composer Salieri for his rival 
Mozart was a highly sought after ticket at the National Theatre and on 
Broadway, and was turned into one of the most successful films of the 1980s, 
which won eight Academy Awards including best picture.

The critical response to Amadeus, which ran the gamut from the rapturous to 
the dismissive, was typical of wider attitudes to Shaffer, who some saw as a 
writer of extravagant theatricality and others as one whose showmanship 
disguised an intellectual hole at the heart of his work.Peter Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/peter-hall>, who directed Amadeus, called it 
“one of the most remarkable plays I have ever read”. The equally respected 
directorMichael Blakemore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/06/michael-blakemore-stage-blood-faber-book-extract>
 described it as “the longest record sleeve” in history.

Son of Jack, an estate agent, and his wife, Reka (nee Fredman), Shaffer was 
born in Liverpool, with an identical twin brotherAnthony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/nov/08/guardianobituaries.nigelfountain>
, who was also to become a playwright, achieving success with the thriller 
Sleuth. Shaffer once observed that all acts of creation are acts of 
autobiography and Shaffer’s “twinness” was reflected in the duality in his 
plays, which frequently featured two contrasting but equal main characters.

It was the struggles between Mozart and Salieri in Amadeus, Atahualpa the Inca 
god and Pizarro the conquering Spanish atheist in The Royal Hunt of the Sun and 
the passionless psychoanalyst Martin Dysart and his patient, who has committed 
acts of extraordinary violence and passion, in Equus, that provided the 
dramatic meat and dynamic in Shaffer’s plays. Even the odd couple relationship 
of Lettice Douffet and Lotte Schoen in the 1987 comedy Lettice and Lovage was a 
variation on Shaffer’s preferred conflict between the untamed or ecstatic and 
hard-headed reason.

Although he had a strong musical bent that he put to good use in his 
subsequent plays, there was little in Shaffer’s prosperous, middle-class Jewish 
upbringing to suggest a theatrical career. He was academically successful at St 
Paul’s school, which he and his brother attended after the family moved to 
London in the mid-30s, and he then won a scholarship to Trinity College, 
Cambridge, where, with Anthony, he edited the college magazine, Granta. Before 
university he complied with national service requirements by working as a Bevin 
boy in Chislet coal mine, in Kent, an experience he loathed.

After leaving university in 1950 with a degree in history, finding a 
satisfying occupation proved difficult. In 1951 he moved to New York, a city he 
fell immediately in love with and which was to become his permanent home after 
he achieved success in the theatre. He subsequently observed that if London was 
a watercolour, New York was an oil painting. But during that initial period in
New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> he did a series of dull 
jobs including stints in the Doubleday bookshop and the 42nd Street library, 
while trying his hands at thriller writing, including two novels co-authored 
with his twin. In 1954 he returned to Britain and a job with the music 
publishers Boosey and Hawkes. A year later his first TV play, The Salt Land, 
about Israel, was broadcast on ITV.

Shaffer threw up the job and decided to devote himself full time to writing, 
eked out by a little literary criticism. Later he was to have a short stint as 
music critic on Time and Tide magazine. He had another play on TV and a radio 
play broadcast, but at last found his theatrical voice with Five Finger 
Exercise in 1958, a drama that, like the later Amadeus, reflected his passion 
for music. He was always a great lover of theatre, but was later to say that it 
took him a long time to accept that writing plays was a serious occupation.

Directed by John Gielgud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/may/22/news.obituaries> at the Comedy 
theatre, the play concerned an upper middle class English family whose 
comfortable existence is disrupted by the arrival of Walter, a young German 
tutor. His presence throws up all sorts of seething emotions beneath the calm 
exterior of their lives. Clever and well-constructed, Five Finger Exercise owed 
much more to Pinero than it did to the new drama ofPinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/dec/27/harold-pinter-obituary-playwright-politics>
, whose play The Birthday Party was premiered in the same year.

Shaffer was never an experimenter, although he was always a brilliant 
craftsman who knew when to borrow to his advantage, most notably the Brechtian 
devices that he used to tremendous effect in The Royal Hunt of the Sun about 
the conquest of Peru by the Spanish. The play existed in draft form before Five 
Finger Exercise, but did not see the light of day until 1964 when it opened at 
Chichester before moving in triumph to the National Theatre. Many were dazzled 
by the combination of Shaffer’s metaphysics,Michael Annals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/dec/06/theatre2>’ design and John Dexter
 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/03/27/obituaries/john-dexter-64-english-director-of-both-theater-and-opera-dies.html>
’s staging.

The script included the seemingly impossible stage direction “They cross the 
Andes,” and when Shaffer offered to change it, Dexter swiftly replied: “If you 
are thinking of removing that, I am not doing the play.” As Shaffer was later 
to acknowledge, it was Dexter, who also directed Equus, who “helped me to 
discover the grammar of a bolder kind of theatre”, without which plays such as 
The Royal Hunt of the Sun, Equus and Amadeus stood in danger of coming across 
as classy tosh.

The success of The Royal Hunt of the Sun led Laurence Olivier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/11/laurence-olivier-25-years-anniversary-death>
 to commission a new play from Shaffer. The result was Black Comedy, a return 
to the comic form that Shaffer had employed with only limited success in the 
1962 double bill The Private Ear and The Public Eye.

Inspired by a Peking Opera sketch where two men fighting a duel in the dark 
are shown in full light, Black Comedy has a London sculptor attempting to 
entertain his fiance’s father and other guests during a power blackout while 
also attempting to conceal that his furniture has all been borrowed from his 
antique-dealing neighbour. At its premiere one member of the audience actually 
fell out of his seat and onto the floor he was laughing so much.

Black Comedy is a classic farce that has passed the test of time, as a 1998 
West End revival proved. In many ways this small but exquisitely formed comedy 
has a deeper meaning – that in darkness are deeper truths revealed – than some 
of Shaffer’s more highfalutin serious dramas.

The 1970 failure The Battle of Shrivings suggested that Shaffer had lost his 
magic touch, but it was the strange story he heard from a friend of a teenage 
boy who had been sent to an institution after blinding horses that inspired the 
1973 play Equus that was to become a huge worldwide hit. It also fitted a now 
familiar pattern for Shaffer’s plays, in which the main dramatic argument was 
between two emotional opposites – the dry psychiatrist whose idea of passion is 
a jaunt to Greece and the damaged boy who has made a deity of the horse. It was 
clear where Shaffer’s sympathies lay. As he once remarked: “Passion, even 
unholy passion, has something enviable about it.”

The sheer theatrical power of Equus made it easy to gloss over some of its 
intellectual deficiencies. As Michael Billington wrote when reviewing the first 
London production: “Only in the street outside, doubts about the argument 
begin.” But both the London and Broadway productions were hits with Shaffer 
drily suggesting: “If it was a success in Britain it was because it was about 
horses, and if it was a success in America it was because it was about 
psychiatrists.”

Amadeus was Shaffer’s last mega-hit, although he continued to have plays 
staged, including the Old Testament drama Yonadab at the National Theatre in 
1985 and Gift of the Gorgon at the RSC in 1992. The 1987 comedy Lettice and 
Lovage had some success in both the West End and on Broadway, largely due to 
the efforts of the actor Maggie Smith, for whom the role of Lettice was 
written. To celebrate Shaffer’s 80th birthday, the National in 2006 staged a 
revival ofThe Royal Hunt of the Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/apr/13/theatre> directed by Trevor Nunn 
and with Alun Armstrong and Paterson Joseph in the central roles; and among 
later revivals of his work was a popular 2007 production ofEquus at the Gielgud 
starring Daniel Radcliffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/feb/28/theatre1> that brought new 
audiences to Shaffer’s work; and a2014 production of Amadeus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/18/amadeus-rupert-everett-salieri-mozart-chichester-festival-theatre-review>
 with Rupert Everett as Salieri that marked the reopening of the Chichester 
festival theatre.

Shaffer was devoted to theatre and unlike most playwrights of his generation 
did little screenwriting, with the notable exception of his involvement on 
Peter Brook’s 1963 film of Lord of the Flies. His own plays tended to be too 
highly wrought and theatrical to transfer well to the cinema, although that did 
not stop producers and directors trying. Shaffer himself wrote the screenplay 
for Amadeus and won himself an Oscar to go with the mantelpiece full of Tonys 
and other theatre awards he won during a long career.

He was appointed CBE in 1997 and knighted in 2001.

Anthony died in 2001. Shaffer is survived by their younger brother, Brian, by 
two nephews, Brian’s sons Milo and Mark, and by two nieces, Anthony’s daughters 
Cressida and Claudia.

• Peter Levin Shaffer, playwright, born 15 May 1926; died 6 June 2016

• This article was amended on 8 June 2016 to add information about Peter 
Shaffer’s family. Shaffer’s twin brother, Anthony, died in 2001. He is survived 
by their younger brother, Brian, and Brian’s sons, Mark and Milo; and by 
Anthony’s daughters, Claudia and Cressida.
 