
“I call it redeeming the money,” said Sister Elizabeth Riebschlaeger, munching 
a turkey sandwich in a bar with a stuffed steer’s head mounted on a wall next 
to a life-sized poster of John Wayne.

About six years ago, when fracking got feverish in the Eagle Ford Shale, a 
company offered to lease the mineral rights to some land bought by her 
grandfather in the 1920s.

Sister Elizabeth did some research about the consequences of fracking – 
extracting natural gas by pumping water, sand and chemicals at high pressure 
into wells deep underground – and did not like what she learned. But her 
attorney told her that the company would find a way to get the rights with or 
without her consent.

Denton, Texas, banned fracking last year – then the frackers fought back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/22/denton-texas-banned-fracking->
She decided: “What I’ll do is I’ll take the money and use it for something 
that will promote responsible development.”

The nun would donate her oil and gas windfall to fund watchdog activities, 
holding the oil and gas industry to account and warning of the dark effects of 
get-rich-quick, lightly regulated capitalism.

The 80-year-old roams the region, educating, advocating and sniffing out 
malpractice, often in a white Honda Civic with more than 250,000 miles on the 
clock, a windscreen that keeps getting cracked by road debris kicked up by 
trucks, and bumper stickers that say “Don’t Mess With Texas” and “No Disposal 
Pits”.

As a result of her vow of poverty, the proceeds from Sister Elizabeth’s 
mineral rights go to her Catholic congregation, the Sisters of Charity of the 
Incarnate Word of San Antonio, which funds her tours.

Sister Elizabeth is backing a long-running, longshot campaign to stop a 
fracking waste pit from being built next year in fields just outside the city 
limits of Nordheim, only half a mile from the main drag and a school with about 
170 pupils. It’s an eye-catching battle in the Eagle Ford, which runs for some 
400 miles through southTexas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> from 
the border with Mexico through to counties north-west of Houston.

“With the onset of the fracking we had hectic, frantic activity. Everybody was 
rushing to get those wells drilled,” Sister Elizabeth said. “Air quality and 
safety deteriorated a great deal. Lots of people were killed on the roads.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftexas-gas-fracking-nun-funding-campaign-oil-company-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1789bdc0781d7bf46c14ae22f6bf532183138e4%2F0_245_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sister%20on%20a%20mission%3A%20the%20Texas%20nun%20using%20oil%20company%20money%20to%20fight%20fracking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftexas-gas-fracking-nun-funding-campaign-oil-company-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sister%20on%20a%20mission%3A%20the%20Texas%20nun%20using%20oil%20company%20money%20to%20fight%20fracking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftexas-gas-fracking-nun-funding-campaign-oil-company-money%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1789bdc0781d7bf46c14ae22f6bf532183138e4%2F0_245_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 A boarded-up building in downtown Nordheim. Photograph: Tom Dart for the 
Guardian 
The first well of the Eagle Ford Shale boom was drilled in 2008. That year, 26 
drilling permits were issued. In 2014, the height of the frenzy, the figure 
soared to 5,613. Amid the industry’s continuing downturn, 642 permits were 
issued from January to Augustthis year 
<http://www.rrc.state.tx.us/media/8675/eaglefordproduction_drillingpermits_issued.pdf>
.

A landscape of cattle ranches became blotched with well pads. As vehicles 
barreled along once-quiet country roads, fatal traffic accidents in the region
increased 
<http://www.mysanantonio.com/news/energy/article/Eagle-Ford-fatal-crashes-up-40-percent-4359356.php>
 by 40% between 2011 and 2012.

“One man’s American dream quickly becomes another man’s American nightmare,” 
Sister Elizabeth said. “All you have to do is drive around and you will see the 
damage being done to the environment. And I point those things out and tell 
people that it can be reported.”

The rapacious pace of the fracking surge and the stress the process puts on 
the environment is hard for some to digest, even in a pragmatic and 
conservative state that owes much of its prosperity and population growth to 
oil.

“We didn’t even water our lawns in droughts. Now we see it going out by the 
truckload so people can waste it by putting it down a hole,” said Lyn Janssen, 
whose bucolic ranch is a short drive along the same country lane as the planned 
dump.
fracking explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=4d42b98e-1b9d-4f95-b256-e12acfd39f21>
While other places nearby have grown and smartened up by exploiting the boom’s 
economic benefits, Nordheim has stayed sleepy. Folks whose families have been 
here for generations and want a quiet rural retirement like it that way. Which 
may help explain why, unlike its neighbours, little Nordheim, population 307, 
fought back.

At the least there will be a substantial increase in industrial traffic. At 
worst, locals fear that the pit and landfill cells will stink and release toxic 
chemicals into the air and the ground. At 143 acres, the facility will be 
roughly half the size of the town.
Federal rules allow a maximum leakage rate of 100 gallons per acre per day 
from disposal cells and 1,000 gallons per acre per day from pits. Then there 
are concerns about the potential for leaks and spills. An underground gas 
pipeline runs through the site. Itruptured 
<https://www.victoriaadvocate.com/news/2014/dec/31/cleanup-continues-on-pipeline-leak-3-weeks-later/>
 in 2014 only a stone’s throw away and contaminated soil.

“Within five years, if it’s put in, this town will die,” predicted Larry 
Baucum, seated behind the counter at Nordheim Mercantile, a bric-a-brac bazaar 
in town. In the window, next to a sign stating the opening hours – three days a 
week – there is a poster with a skull and crossbones and the slogan “Don’t Dump 
on Nordheim”.

He believes that businesses and residents would flee. “It’s not that we’re 
against the pits – I’m an old oilfield hand,” the 69-year-old said. “But we’re 
against the location. It does not have to be right next to our city limits.”

A posse of Nordheim residents banded together and formed a group called 
Concerned About Pollution (CAP). Armed with technical knowledge and a stubborn 
streak, they wrote letters, showed up at hearings in Austin and managed to 
stall the granting of a permit for three years.

Their battle ultimately underlined the limited powers of the state’s oil and 
gas regulator, the anachronistically named Texas Railroad Commission, which has 
often drawnaccusations 
<http://www.mystatesman.com/news/news/state-regional-govt-politics/at-texas-oil-and-gas-regulator-close-ties-to-indus/nqsPB/>
 that it enjoys an overly warm relationship with the industry it oversees.

When the permit was confirmed in May, the developer, Petro Waste Environmental,
said in a statement 
<http://www.oilandgas360.com/petro-waste-environmental-obtains-nordheim-landfill-permit/>
 that “high standards of safety and compliance are Petro Waste’s top priority. 
These core company values played a vital role in the design and engineering 
process for this facility.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftexas-gas-fracking-nun-funding-campaign-oil-company-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96a151856f49b15ca217c200f5cf949a19fcdd1b%2F0_377_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sister%20on%20a%20mission%3A%20the%20Texas%20nun%20using%20oil%20company%20money%20to%20fight%20fracking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftexas-gas-fracking-nun-funding-campaign-oil-company-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sister%20on%20a%20mission%3A%20the%20Texas%20nun%20using%20oil%20company%20money%20to%20fight%20fracking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ftexas-gas-fracking-nun-funding-campaign-oil-company-money%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96a151856f49b15ca217c200f5cf949a19fcdd1b%2F0_377_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Paul Baumann in front of the planned waste site near Nordheim. Photograph: Tom 
Dart for the Guardian 
CAP did not admit defeat: it filed an ongoing lawsuit in Austin to challenge 
the decision. But victory appears unlikely.

CAP’s president, Paul Baumann, was born in Nordheim and owns a rental property 
next to the site. His brother and nephew live close to the entrance. The 
72-year-old returned after a career working at a DuPont chemical plant near 
Houston.

“Thought I was gonna be away from chemicals and breathe my clean air down 
here,” he said ruefully before guiding his pickup truck down a bumpy path next 
to the future dump along a hayfield dense with dancing butterflies.

“It’s a terrible site,” Sister Elizabeth said. But her indefatigable crusade 
against “capitalism without moral or ethical values” in the Eagle Ford Shale 
goes on.
 