
Businesses wanting to improve their low carbon credentials rely on highly 
creative people to come up with new ideas. But for those innovators wanting to 
share their ideas, it can be hard to get projects off the ground. It takes time 
and money to refine products and business plans – things startups often don’t 
have. So what help is there for innovators wanting to give up their day jobs 
and focus on their inventions?

One option is Cleantech Innovate <http://www.cleantechinnovate.com/>, a 
biannual event in London and Glasgow where low carbon innovators pitch for 
£20,000 and get to meet potential investors. Here are some of the exciting 
innovations that caught the eye at the most recent event this month.

The lighting of the future is here, and it's designed to make you spend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/feb/12/lighting-future-sale-customers-shop-energy>


1. Steamed up


Originally designed for boats, steam infusion 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UzQDuT4DluQ> cooks huge quantities of food 
very quickly and evenly, keeping food nutritious and tasty. It works on liquid 
foods like sauces and soups by blasting them with steam travelling at three 
times the speed of sound, heating food from 20C to 80C in only a second, and 
can cook 1000kg of food in just 10 minutes.

Designed by British engineering company OAL Group <http://www.oalgroup.com>, 
steam infusion has been successfully making ready meals, ketchup, béchamel 
sauce and minestrone soup. It has been used to feed refugees in northern Iraq 
and to make a new maize-based nutritional drink in Zambia.

2. Insulating robots 


Also poised to improve our homes is q-bot, a London startup that has invented 
a robot <http://www.q-bot.co/> that squeezes under floorboards and sprays 
insulation into areas that no human can reach.

Putting in floor insulation can be very disruptive and takes at least a week. 
But with this remote-controlled gadget, a whole house can be done in a day. 
Inventor Mathew Holloway explains: “in many UK homes around one quarter of heat 
loss is through the floor. If there’s a draught coming up you can’t keep your 
home warm. q-bot makes it much easier to insulate under the floorboards, which 
means more people are more likely to have it done.”

It’s great for draughty older buildings – like the 4.6m UK homes built before 
1919. London’s Camden Council has used q-bot to insulate council housing 
without having to move tenants out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsix-clean-tech-innovations-you-need-to-know-about%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F20%2F1424452799310%2F4d45434d-d278-4c59-bd4a-bffe33453a3b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20clean%20tech%20innovations%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsix-clean-tech-innovations-you-need-to-know-about%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20clean%20tech%20innovations%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsix-clean-tech-innovations-you-need-to-know-about%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F20%2F1424452799310%2F4d45434d-d278-4c59-bd4a-bffe33453a3b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 q-bot’s robot can squeeze into tight spots. Photograph: Q-bot. 
3. Harnessing the power of waves


Sea Wave Energy <http://seawaveenergy.info/> turns the power of waves into 
electricity. The company’s latest innovation, designed by Adamos Zakheos, is 
the WaveLine Magnet – interconnected platforms that stick to the surface of the 
sea. As waves pass through the platforms, power converts to electricity.

Spokesman Christopher Biggs explains: “Right now wave energy is in its infancy 
compared to other renewables, but the UK has one of the best wave resources in 
the world. There is enough wave energy out there to meet 22% of the UK’s 
electricity needs.”

The next version, with 60 platforms, will be tested at FaBTest, a special 
wave-testing centre in Falmouth, Cornwall. “It is a low-tech way of producing 
energy without using fossil fuels ... One of our full-sized arrays will be 
capable of delivering 30,000 megawatt hours of electricity a year. It can also 
help prevent erosion by stopping waves lashing against the coast.”

4. Compressed air meets salt caverns


Storelectric uses compressed air <http://storelectric.com/index.html> to store 
energy from renewable sources in underground salt caverns. Founder Mark Howitt 
describes it as “the holy grail of energy supply. It’s the world’s biggest 
battery and it uses only air, water, salt and off-the-shelf equipment.”

This design means renewable energy can be kept ready for when it’s needed. 
Salt caverns are already used to store natural gas, but Storelectric is the 
first company to successfully put air through a compressor and store it at a 
pressure about 30 times higher than tyre pressure.

Meet the robot giving hospitalised children superpowers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/feb/06/robots-for-good-hospitalised-children-superpowers>
5. Breathing easy


A new startup set to improve our homes is Adaptavate. Founders Thomas Robinson 
and Alberto Fernandez Minguela have developed a plasterboard replacement made 
from agricultural waste. Unlike plasterboard, which is classified as hazardous 
waste, Breathaboard is compostable, so any on-site waste will add nutrients, 
not pollution, to the soil.

Robinson adds: “It’s breathable, preventing condensation and mould in the 
home, reducing diseases caused by damp housing like asthma. The breathability 
reduces the need for mechanical ventilation – cutting energy use.”

Who will fund tomorrow’s big scientific breakthroughs?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/feb/05/plan-b-resource-scarcity-google-bp-exxon>
6. A good egg


People can only save energy if they know how much they are using, and several 
Cleantech finalists presented products to help with that. TheGreenEgg Smart 
Home Hub <http://www.greenegg.ie/utilities.html> displays energy consumption on 
a TV screen, making it easy for people to see.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsix-clean-tech-innovations-you-need-to-know-about%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F23%2F1424713473931%2Fe4ae3bd9-dca1-4932-9b47-2635ceb64e2f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20clean%20tech%20innovations%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsix-clean-tech-innovations-you-need-to-know-about%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20clean%20tech%20innovations%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fsix-clean-tech-innovations-you-need-to-know-about%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F23%2F1424713473931%2Fe4ae3bd9-dca1-4932-9b47-2635ceb64e2f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 GreenEgg Smart Home Hub Photograph: GreenEgg Smart Home Hub 
Designed for family homes, the GreenEgg Smart Home Hub has a traffic light 
system that shows red when energy use is high. CEO Rob Merriman explains: “we 
noticed that many people struggle to engage with their energy use, which can 
lead to higher bills than expected. There are already devices on smartphones, 
but only the bill payer sees the information. With GreenEgg you access it with 
your remote control so it’s on the TV. The whole family can engage with it – 
especially kids and older people.”

The technology and innovation hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/series/technology-and-innovation>
 is funded by BT. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled “brought to you by”. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.


Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB 
member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.


 