
Sky Sport Italia has suspended its relationship with the former West Ham and 
Lazio strikerPaolo Di Canio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/paolo-di-canio> after he presented a show 
revealing his “dux” tattoo. The 48-year-old has been working as a pundit on the 
television station in Italy and appeared in a short-sleeved shirt showing his 
tattoo which represents the former Fascist leader Benito Mussolini. After a 
raft of complaints from viewers, threatening to withdraw subscriptions, the 
channel decided to take action.

Jacques Raynaud, executive vice president of sports channels and advertising 
sales at Sky Italia said: “We made a mistake. We apologise to all those we have 
offended the sensibilities. After talking at length with Di Canio, despite his 
professionalism and football expertise, together we decided to suspend his 
collaboration.”

Di Canio has attracted controversy ever since 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2005/dec/13/newsstory.sport12> when he 
twice gave straight-arm salute to fans of Lazio and told the Italian news 
agency Ansa: “I am a fascist, not a racist.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsky-sport-italia-suspends-paolo-di-canio-after-showing-dux-tattoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F737390aeb2e5cb2e1ffd409ad4a07467b7407f0d%2F0_151_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sky%20Sport%20Italia%20suspends%20Paolo%20Di%20Canio%20after%20showing%20%E2%80%98dux%E2%80%99%20tattoo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsky-sport-italia-suspends-paolo-di-canio-after-showing-dux-tattoo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sky%20Sport%20Italia%20suspends%20Paolo%20Di%20Canio%20after%20showing%20%E2%80%98dux%E2%80%99%20tattoo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsky-sport-italia-suspends-paolo-di-canio-after-showing-dux-tattoo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F737390aeb2e5cb2e1ffd409ad4a07467b7407f0d%2F0_151_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Paolo Di Canio salutes towards Lazio fans in 2005 Photograph: Paolo 
Cocco/AFP/Getty Images 
In 2013, David Miliband resigned from the board of Sunderland in protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/01/david-miliband-resign-sunderland-di-canio>
 when Di Canio became their manager and prior to that the GMB trade union also 
cited his political views when it withdrew its sponsorship of Swindon Town 
after he was appointed their manager in 2011.

In his autobiography, he wrote of the Italian dictator Mussolini: “His actions 
were often vile. But all this was motivated by a higher purpose. He was 
basically a very principled individual.”
 