
I have been wondering for a while whether to start compiling a list of words 
and phrases that began life with a technical meaning in one sphere or another 
(chemistry, medicine, mathematics, the law, cricket, linguistics, sailing or 
whatever) but which along the way have taken on quite a different meaning that 
has gained general acceptance. They are words and phrases that always produce 
explosions of indignant rage from the experts, when used in crosswords in the 
vulgar (ie non-technical) sense. When, in myAugust blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/aug/06/1>, I used 
the phrase "accelerated exponentially" I was roundly abused by correspondents 
from here to New Zealand and back for demonstrating such a woeful lack of basic 
mathematical understanding. I admit that it not a particularly elegant phrase 
but I have support for the view that, for non-mathematicians, it now also means 
accelerating faster and faster.

So I am indebted to dor35, a regular commentator on our website, for warning 
me in advance of the barrage 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27900234> that will 
descend, if I let through the phrase 'quantum jump', used in its non-scientific 
sense. Of course, as every schoolchild knows, in physics a quantum jump is 
something pretty small, being the abrupt transition of an electron, atom or 
molecule from one quantum state to another, either absorbing or emitting in the 
process a quantum (and that a quantum is a quantity of energy). However, I am 
prepared to go to the stake to uphold the belief that a quantum jump also means 
the same as a quantum leap and that both can mean a sudden, very large increase 
or advance of any kind in any field.

C.P. Snow, the scientist and novelist, in his 1959 Rede Lecture at Cambridge 
University, which he entitled The Two Cultures, argued that the whole of 
western civilisation was split between the sciences and the humanities and that 
this was a major obstacle to progress. Clearly "exponential acceleration" and 
"quantum leaps" mean different things to different people in different 
contexts, so providing sport for those of a pedantic disposition. But I am 
blowed if I can see why this should matter in the least, or affect what goes on 
in crosswords.

A similar problem with indignant complaints arises when solvers rely on pocket 
dictionaries for the definition of a word. "I must protest," wrote Sad Person 
from Reading last month, "that one of the clues in today's quick crossword [No 
13,562 for 26 October, 9 across 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/quick/13562>] was quite wrong â€¦ the 
clue was 'Held in high regard' and the answer REPUTED. My dictionary states 
that 'reputed' is 'what is generally thought or supposed'. Somebody could be 
reputed to be held in high regard but the word doesn't mean 'to be held in high 
regard'. Sorry to sound so pedantic but I enjoy having a go at the crossword 
and mistakes like that can put a 'sad person' like me off the scent!"

The first meaning of REPUTE in most dictionaries (and the only one in the 
smaller ones) is, certainly, "general opinion or impression", but Chambers 
gives also "widespread or high estimation; fame" and the Oxford Dictionary of 
English also gives "the state of being highly regarded; fame". Under REPUTED, 
Chambers gives "of repute" (as in "a gentleman of repute") and the ODE gives 
"widely known and well-thought of" (as in "cooked by reputed chefs"). I think 
that the second (and even third) meanings of plain words are fair game in 
Guardian Quicks.

It is confusing, I know, because all the online Guardian and Observer 
crossword puzzlesappear together online <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords>
. But I am in fact only responsible for the Guardian puzzles (Quick, Cryptic, 
Saturday prize, Quiptic and Genius) and know nothing about the online versions 
of the puzzles published each Sunday in the Observer (Speedy, Everyman and 
Azed). The Observer has its own crossword editor. So sending emails to 
crossword.editor@theguardian.com regarding a problem with or question about, 
say, the Observer Everyman puzzle is unlikely to be effective. The Observer 
person in charge of crosswords is Edie Reilly and her email is 
crossword.editor@observer.co.uk. I do forward to Edie emails addressed to me by 
mistake, but tend not to see them on a Sunday as that is the one day of the 
week when I get out of bed in the morning buoyed up by the assumption that 
there can be no rude messages or complaints from solvers about Guardian puzzles 
for me to deal with until the morrow.
_______

The October Genius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2013/nov/04/genius-crossword-annotated-solution-124>
 (No 124 by Picaroon) attracted 206 entries, 19 of them on the first day. First 
in was Tony (of demon.co.uk) at 1:36 and first from abroad was Maurice in 
France at 12:06. Congratulations to Tom Irving from Hertfordshire, who is the 
winner of our September Genius puzzle (No 123).
_______

We hope you enjoy our crossword service. If you have any technical problems 
with it, please emailuserhelp@theguardian.com <mailto:userhelp@theguardian.com>
. If you have any comments or queries about the crosswords, please email
crossword.editor@theguardian.com <mailto:crossword.editor@theguardian.com>. For 
Observer crosswords pleasecrossword.editor@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:crossword.editor@observer.co.uk> .
 