
Smart technology that could shave £90 off household energy bills and curb 
carbon emissions is being stymied by government policy, a leading thinktank has 
said.

In a wide-ranging report, Policy Exchange <https://policyexchange.org.uk/> 
also claimed that current energy policy offered too many incentives to build 
polluting diesel generator farms at the expense of cleaner technology. The 
thinktank pointed to an estimate by the government’s National Infrastructure 
Commission that a smarter, more flexible power grid – which would allow 
businesses to store power and shift usage to less busy times of day – could
reduce energy costs by £8bn 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/a-smart-power-revolution-could-save-consumers-8-billion-a-year-adonis>
 by 2030.

“Making the power system smarter will mean it can provide cheaper and cleaner 
electricity,” said the report’s author, Richard Howard. “The current set of 
policies is encouraging a growth in dirty diesel generators – exacerbating air 
pollution in UK cities and towns. The government needs to level the playing 
field to encourage the use of cleaner technologies such as demand response and 
storage.”

Demand response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/demand-response-europe-policy>
 involves large energy users, such as factories, using power at times when 
there is less strain on theNational Grid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationalgrid>.

This reduces the need for the Grid to ask fossil fuel energy firms to turn up 
the power at times when therisk of blackouts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/14/winter-electricity-blackouts-risk-recedes-says-national-grid>
 is increasing. Firms that provide demand response technology to large 
companies are unable to bid for Grid contracts lasting more than one year in the
annual capacity market auction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/31/governments-plan-secure-power-generation-capacity-market-unfit-purpose-ippr-report>
, because they do not fit the current criteria. But large coal power stations 
andeven diesel farms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/17/diesel-farms-set-win-lucrative-contracts-back-up-national-grid>
, a heavily polluting source of power, are able to bid for contracts lasting up 
to 15 years.

Policy Exchange also advocated lower carbon taxes on battery storage, where 
surplus electricity is saved and released at a later date when it is needed.

It called for greater penalties for emissions released by diesel generators, 
which currently receive payments to be on standby to keep the lights on, as 
well as separate subsidies.

And the thinktank said rules set by the energy regulator, Ofgem, should be 
changed to encourage local power networks to use battery storage, rather than 
building new power lines. It said these measures, among others, could hand 
households a boost by cutting up to £90 from energy bills by 2030, while also 
making renewable technology more viable.

Technologies such as solar and wind power do not produce energy when the sun 
does not shine and the wind does not blow. But greater use of battery storage 
would allow renewable power firms to store their electricity to be released 
when conditions aren’t right for them to produce. Experts say this would reduce 
the need to build large fossil-fuel-burning power plants, which are still 
needed to provide a more reliable source of power.

Dr Jonathan Marshall, energy analyst at the Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and Climate Intelligence Unit 
thinktank, said: “This report is the latest in a long series of calls for the 
government to enable flexible technology to compete on equal footing with 
existing power stations. This will reduce the number of power stations that 
need to be built only to operate for a few hours per year, and increase the 
opportunity for UK businesses to take control of their energy bills, using 
electricity when it is at its cheapest and opening new streams of income, as 
well as helping Britain meet its climate change targets at the lowest possible 
cost.”

While industrial energy usage offers the biggest scope for reducing 
electricity demand, Policy Exchange also pointed to the potential benefits from 
fitting homes withsmart meters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/01/smart-meter-energy-saving-revolution-cut-bills-gas-electricity>
. The government has set a target of 2020 to fit every home in the UK with a 
smart meter, a box installed in the home that can monitor energy usage in real 
time.

Howard said these could help ease the burden on the Grid and cut energy bills 
because suppliers could offer “time-in-use” tariffs that charge customers based 
partly on when they use their energy.

Power suppliers buy some of their electricity at short notice in the wholesale 
markets, where prices change depending on how much demand there is. If 
customers use energy at low-demand times, it limits the amount that suppliers 
need to buy when prices are high.

“Appliances are coming to the market that could be connected to the internet 
to run when energy is cheaper,” said Howard. “It’s all technically possible.”

Ofgem said it would be publishing a call for evidence on smart power networks 
that would look at electricity storage and demand response.

“Progress towards smarter grids is already being made,” the regulator said, 
adding that it was looking into subsidies for diesel generators. “Some diesel 
plants receive additional payments for generating during times of peak demand, 
in addition to the wholesale price of power. We have set out our concerns on 
this as we believe it is distorting the market. We are now considering the 
responses.”
 