
The Burton Taylor Studio 
<https://www.oxfordplayhouse.com/about-us/burton-taylor-studio/>, just behind 
Oxford Playhouse, has never let me down when it comes to kids’ shows. 
Snowflakes, adapted byCerrie Burnell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/may/11/cerrie-burnell-diversity-in-childrens-books-disability>
 of CBeebies renown from her own book and directed by Tina Williams, is no 
exception. Some rather nice songs, enthusiastic and adroit performances from 
its cast of three, and well-judged amounts of audience participation add up to 
a sweet little Christmassy treat for the under-sevens.

On the way in, each child is given a wooden snowflake bauble (they will end up 
decorating the large Christmas tree at the back of the stage). The usual 
floor-cushion seats are scattered around for children (and willing parents) to 
perch on. Burnell’s story is an easy-to-get but rather clever tale of a city 
kid called Mia who moves to her grandmother’s cottage in the countryside and 
feels very much out of place. “Snowflake”, here, suggests the idea that 
everyone is different, but equally perfect.

The story has a fairytale element, and when Mia becomes lost in the woods 
everything gets a little Red Riding Hood. But the jeopardy and peril are very 
minimal, and in any case the kids in the audience appeared to reserve a lot of 
interest for the wooden animal puppets: a dog and three very pecky chickens. My 
kids, aged four and six, did their level best to give them a stroke whenever 
they came near – as well as scooping up handfuls of “snow” whenever the 
opportunity presented itself. Their overall verdict? “Amazing!”

Of the cast members, it’s Antony Antunes who looks after most of the 
puppeteering and scene-shifting, as well as acting as narrator and playing one 
of the village kids; he gets through a lot of heavy lifting, as it were. Kate 
Winder does a nice job as the grandma. And the show looks to have unearthed a 
bit of a star in its lead performer, Nazerene Williams, who plays Mia with just 
the right amount of engaging, childlike charm.

It’s an ideal Christmas show: gentle, meaningful and – above all – snowy. 

•Snowflakes is at the Burton Taylor Studio 
<http://www.oxfordplayhouse.com/whats-on/all-shows/snowflakes/3312>, Oxford 
Playhouse, until 31 December. Box office: 01865 305 305.
 