
I always wonder, when people say a woman has lost her looks, what she did with 
them. Where did she last see her looks? If she were to rummage down the back of 
the sofa, would she find them, a bit crumpled but otherwise nice and youthful? 
It would be like finding your lost keys, only better: you’ll be able to leave 
the house again, and with your looks intact, people won’t point and laugh, or 
run away covering their eyes.

The Duchess of Cambridge is in danger of losing her looks, if you believe the 
front page of the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2958779/Kate-shows-silver-streak-Duchess-Cambridge-s-stylish-inadvertently-reveals-glimpse-grey.html>
 this week. I know: big news. “Oh Kate, are you really showing grey roots at 
33?” it asks in the weary tone of the terminally disappointed. Well, yes, as 
the picture of the back of her head showing an inch of greying hair clearly 
demonstrates. If only all questions were as easy to answer. Sadly, we have come 
to expect this treatment of older women, but it is Kate’s age, highlighted by 
the paper, that makes her transgression so despicable. How could a woman in her 
early 30s show such careless signs of ageing?

Helen Mirren shows women can age beautifully, but we shouldn’t have to | 
Christina Patterson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/29/helen-mirren-women-age-beautifully-tv-bosses>
The beauty industry has widened its net of consumers so that before they’ve 
had a chance to stop using spot cream, young women are encouraged to start 
buying youth-preserving products. Some are having Botox in their teens 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/womens-life/10804277/Girls-have-no-need-for-Botox-treatment.html>
. Fear of ageing leaves young women vulnerable to unscrupulous practices. When 
I was in my mid-twenties, I did a piece for a women’s magazine which involved 
going around plastic surgeons to see who would give meBotox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/22/botox-silences-womens-faces-empathy>
, liposuction and a boob job. All but one agreed to do it.

Making women frightened and ashamed of growing old is nothing new, but by 
age-shaming younger and younger women, you have to wonder what “perfect” age 
we’re all trying to get back to. The creams the huge beauty corporations want 
you to buy are trying to sell you the skin of your twenties. But try to really 
remember that. I had a few wrinkles then, and the last of my teenage spots; I 
had the pallor of too many late nights. And if your twenties are now to be 
spent hating your hideously ageing face anyway, do you have to go back even 
further?

At what age would I have been deemed acceptable by the Daily Mail’s high 
beauty standards? In my twenties, I started noticingcrow’s feet  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2012/jan/16/pass-notes-crows-feet>
and grey hairs. As a teenager, I had cellulite. I’m pretty sure I was born with 
visible veins, what with having pale skin and – shock! – tubes carrying blood 
around my body and stuff. Like most humans, I have never had perfect, smooth, 
Photoshopped skin. Perhaps 10-year-old me might have been considered peachy 
enough. Is this where we are headed – that any female over the age of 10 is 
going to be considered past it?

“We’re living longer, healthier lives than any previous generation but, 
curiously, worrying about ageing younger,”writes Anne Karpf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jan/04/ageing-mixture-gains-losses>, 
writer, sociologist and author of How to Age. “This means that we are going to 
be worried for an awfully long time.” And worrying, as anyone will tell you, is 
incredibly ageing.

I have realised a few things over the past few years that have made me care 
less about looking older. One, just ignore all beauty advertising – I tell 
myself that, like adverts for cars or those collectible plates that you find in 
the back of Sunday colour supplements, these just don’t apply to me. I’m not 
your target market; I do not believe your claims (blusher works better than any 
miracle cream). Two, don’t buy or click on bitchy articles that shame other 
women, it only encourages them – and it rarely makes you feel better about 
yourself.

Lastly, realise that while trying to look attractive to men is an appalling 
reason to care about your appearance, many women will have been conditioned to 
think that way on some level. But – and this is the thing most advertisers 
won’t want you to remember – most men, kind men, don’t care about cellulite, or 
wrinkles or streaks of grey. I doubt most even notice. I didn’t think like this 
a few years ago, back when I hated my newly landed crow’s feet and thought I’d 
be doomed after the age of 30. You get wise with age, a few grey hairs and all.
 