
To say that the new crossword website <https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords> 
when it was launched in mid-February was not universally popular would be 
something of an understatement. I have seldom read such an outpouring of 
vituperative abuse, coupled with more plaintive cries of "give us back our old 
site!" The most touching complaint about not being able to print out puzzles 
properly came from Shirley F: "I'm 79 years old and I can't cross-country ski 
much any more. So these puzzles are important." An Australian regular thought 
that it was unkind of us to have launched the new website on St Valentine's Day 
and that it might have been better to wait until 1 April.

There were a couple of suggestions that I should immediately fall on my sword 
for not having made sure that everything worked properly before it went live. I 
was beginning to empathise with the poor president of Toyota, until I 
remembered that it had all happened to me before back in 2008, when the 
crosswords were still subscription only. Then, an email arrived headed "Gross 
incompetence" with the message: "You, sir, are unfit to run a whelk stall let 
alone a PAID FOR SERVICE. Stand down, please, and let someone with more clout, 
more guts, more pride and more self-respect take over." After that, for some 
reason, I felt a bit better.

The technical team that worked so hard to design a better site for you have, 
in the meanwhile, also worked hard to put right the bits that were clearly not 
working properly. As a result I hope/think that the majority of you are finding 
your way round the new site and finding it more user-friendly. Here are some of 
what I think are real improvements:

• Ever since we started the website, there have been complaints about the 
amount of ink consumed in printing the black squares in the grid, coupled with 
the suggestion that we should have lighter shaded squares as used by other 
broadsheets online. So that is what was provided for the "print" option and, 
now that the initial problem of the grid lines not being legible has been 
solved, the economically-minded and the ecologists alike should be happier. If, 
though, for any reason you still want to print out black squares, the option is 
available to you via the "print PDF" version. If you are using a system or a 
computer that is still causing you difficulties in printing out, please put the 
details of the problem and what you are using tosubshelp@theguardian.com 
<mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com> for advice.

• The colours used have been altered to make the puzzles easier to read for 
those who have colour blindness.

• Date of publication has been added to all new puzzles so that in future, in 
the archive, the context of contemporary references in the clues will be clear 
(eg who was the prime minister involved).

• In the interactive version, if you click on either a specific clue or a 
space in the grid, the clue involved will pop up to the right of the grid so 
that you do not have to scroll up and down from grid to clues and back again.

• The 'clear' and 'check' facility can now be used either for individual 
solutions or for all of them together.

• Solvers can use the 'comment' facility with each puzzle to make a comment or 
to ask a question about that puzzle and others can reply, thus extending the 
social aspect of crosswording for those who prefer the computer route to 
phoning a friend or chatting face to face. They can also join in the general
TalkBoard discussions 
<http://talk.theguardian.com/WebX/Guardian%20Talk/Crosswords/>, accessed from 
the bottom of the home page.

• There is at the top of the home page a place to click for answers to 
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2010/feb/09/crosswords-frequently-asked-questions>
, which are added to as new frequently asked questions emerge. Many people are 
already finding this a useful and quicker route to an answer than sending an 
email tosubshelp <> or to me.

• If you click on an individual setter's name you will get a potted profile 
and be led to comments about her/his previous puzzles.

_____

Two final comments arising out of all of the above. First, a number of people 
have complained that they find the advertisements now on the website intrusive. 
The straight answer to these complaints is that the Guardian and Observer 
puzzles online are provided absolutely free to anyone with a computer; but it 
costs a considerable sum of money to put them there and the papers are in deep 
deficit. What commercial business in this position would not try to recoup some 
revenue by selling advertising? To the complainant who finds the soundtrack 
with some of these ads particularly intrusive, I would suggest that the 
solution is in his own hands – via the on/off/volume switch on his loudspeaker.

Second, for those of you who want to get the puzzles via mobile phones, it is 
hoped soon to be able to offer new crossword applications for a number of 
hand-held devices. If you would like to take part in trials of this new service 
at some point in the near future, please register your interest with
subshelp@theguardian.com <mailto:subshelp@theguardian.com>.

_____

You seem to have found Puck's February Genius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/java/new/0,,-25651,00.html> offering a 
bit harder than previous puzzles, as there were only 271 correct entries by the 
deadline. Perhaps the fact that the indicated letter counts for all the down 
clues did not match the available grid space and that none of these solutions 
was an actual word may have put some people off! (I hope that theannotated 
solution notes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/update/story/0,,2304108,00.html> 
provided with the solution itself make all clear for those who could not break 
Puck's "Blessed" code.) However, Ian of London N14 again made short shrift of 
the problem, getting his correct answer in at 01:12 GMT. The next submission, 
from David at Elancourt in France, was not in for another 8 hours and 45 
minutes and there were 22 correct answers in total by the end of that first day.

My apologies to those caught short by the wrongly announced deadline for 
submissions ofEnigmatist's January puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crossword/java/new/0,,-25514,00.html>. The 
deadline will always be 23:59 GMT on the last Saturday before the first Monday 
of the following month. This was 30 January, the first Monday being 1 February. 
We were then stuck with the consequences of the mistake, as the February Genius 
had to be posted on that first Monday.
 