
Sone Aluko and Tom Cairney settled the west London derby as Fulham sank their 
neighboursBrentford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford> at Griffin 
Park.

Aluko hit his third goal of the season in the first half and Cairney struck in 
injury-time to seal a deserved win for the visitors from along the Thames.

Chris Martin at the double as five-star Fulham knock Huddersfield off course
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/fulham-huddersfield-town-championship-match-report>
The Bees had tasted derby success the previous Friday night when they won 2-0 
at QPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/28/queens-park-rangers-brentford-championship-match-report>
 but missed the chance to make it a double and move into the play-off spots. 
Instead Fulham, with only six wins from 16 games this season, are up to seventh 
and outside the top six only on goal difference.

Aluko was at the heart of every Fulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> attack in a dominant first half 
and got his reward in the 36th minute. The summer signing from Hull had already 
got on the end of Chris Martin’s header back across goal only to see his shot 
deflected wide.

He curled another effort wide when he should have hit the target and then 
crashed a shot against the supporting pole behind Daniel Bentley’s goal.

But when his fourth chance arrived – or rather his fifth – Aluko made no 
mistake.

Lucas Piazon fed Stefan Johansen down the right-hand side of the area and the 
Norwegian pinged a low cross to Aluko, lurking on the edge of the box. The 
forward’s initial shot was parried by Bentley but the ball kindly fell back at 
the feet of Aluko, who slid in to bundle home the rebound.

It was no more than Fulham deserved from a first half during which Brentford 
did not manage a single shot at goal. The visiting keeper, David Button, had 
nothing to do but listen to the jeers from home fans, unhappy at his decision 
to leave Griffin Park for their rivals in the summer.

Fulham could have had more before the break but the impressive Cairney curled 
an early effort over and had another drive saved by Bentley, with Piazon 
blazing the rebound over.

Brentford improved in the second half and finally forced a save out of Button 
on the hour, when Josh Clarke raced through, although his unconvincing shot was 
comfortably dealt with. Moments later Clarke got free again and this time 
brought a fine near-post save from Button, before the midfielder scuffed the 
rebound back across goal.

But Fulham weathered the late storm and then in stoppage time wrapped up the 
points on the counter-attack as Martin fed Cairney to slot in the second.
 