
Micky Mellon chuckles dismissively at the suggestion Manchester United are 
experiencing a few problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/18/midtjylland-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
 and in the same breath gives an insight into what it is like operating inthe 
lower reaches of League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball/table>, where the 
Shrewsbury Town manager sounds like he could be in the market for anything from 
a launderette to a left-winger and some piping hot leek and potato soup.

“I think I have built my fourth team this season. I started the season with 
people asking about my philosophy. I keep redoing it. I lost probably five 
players in the first month. So you have to get others, but you can’t buy them,” 
Mellon says of life at a club pushed into the relegation zone by Saturday’s 
results. “We don’t have a training ground, we come 29 miles to here, we get 
sandwiches from the local butty shop, the soup arrives just about half warm and 
we wash our own training kit. But we still count ourselves very fortunate we 
are in football.”

Mellon is talking at Lilleshall, the national sports and conference centre, in 
Shropshire, where his players have been preparing for Monday’sFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> fifth-round tie at home against 
United – a game that is probably about as appealing to Louis van Gaal right now 
as that lukewarm soup.

Shrewsbury Town v Manchester United: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/19/shrewsbury-town-manchester-united-match-preview>
Brimming with excitement, Mellon sounds like he cannot wait for kick-off. The 
43-year-old Scot, wholed Shrewsbury to promotion from League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/25/tranmere-cheltenham-relegated-conference-shrewsbury-plymouth>
 last season, is an effervescent character, fiercely ambitious and not short of 
ways to motivate his players, with Jamie Vardy’s name chief among them.

It was only four years ago that Vardy, now the Premier League’s leading 
scorer, was turning out for Fleetwood Town in the Conference and Mellon, who 
was in charge of the club at the time, admits he often cites the England 
international’s rags-to-riches story to try to inspire others to make a similar 
journey.

Tranmere and Cheltenham relegated to Conference while Shrewsbury rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/25/tranmere-cheltenham-relegated-conference-shrewsbury-plymouth>
“I am like a big schoolboy when it comes to football,” Mellon says, smiling. 
“I still dream, I have ambition, I have managed againstManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> about 1,000 times in 
my playground career, this time I’m doing it for real. I want my players to 
believe. I hate it when a player loses ambition. What sometimes happens at this 
level is that the ambition goes, then the imagination goes, and you can’t 
improve them.

“I encourage them all the time to be ambitious, believe they can be Jamie 
Vardy. We’ve had Ryan Woods and Connor Goldson here, 18 months ago they were 
just coming out of youth teams, now they’re playing in the Championship [for 
Brentford and Brighton respectively] in front of crowds of 28,000.

“In the week before our last game we showed some footage of strikers at 
Fiorentina and Southampton, their movement and imagination. You see our players 
rising up, getting that excitement: ‘I could have a bit of that’. It inspires 
them. They played in the afternoon and two of the three lads I showed it to 
scored. There were big smiles on faces.”

Mellon, whose playing career took him to Bristol City, West Bromwich Albion, 
Blackpool, Tranmere and Burnley, took over the recently-relegatedShrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> in May 2014, at a time when 
he was studying on the Football Association’s Uefa pro licence course alongside 
Ryan Giggs.

Van Gaal’s No2 has long had a reputation for being a quietly spoken man but 
Mellon saw another side at St George’s Park. “I don’t buy into the idea that 
Ryan’s not forceful enough. I think he’s very steely-minded, very clear about 
how he wants the game played, has a good presence about him. But I don’t 
believe you’ll know if anybody’s going to be a manager until they’re in that 
technical area, they get beat and certain things get thrown at them, how they 
deal with it – that’s when you’ll know.”

Although this is the first time Shrewsbury have reached this stage of the FA 
Cup since a 1-0 defeat against Arsenal in 1991, they hostedChelsea in a League 
Cup tie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/28/shrewsbury-town-chelsea-capital-one-cup-match-report>
 only 16 months ago and won many plaudits on an evening when José Mourinho’s 
side required a late own goal to squeeze into the quarter-finals. Mellon 
remembers initially thinking Mourinho was joking when the he spoke so warmly 
about Shrewsbury afterwards.

“We played with a back three and that wasn’t something a lot of teams were 
doing. He felt that was new for his team. He was really complimentary about how 
brave we were when we got the ball, how determined we were, not kick you off 
the pitch, roughen you up – we wanted to give a better account of ourselves 
than that. He actually said we gave them a tougher game than a lot of their 
opponents that season. I laughed. He replied: ‘No I’m serious. I congratulate 
you on that.’ I said: ‘Thanks, sorry we never knocked you out.’”
 