
Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> have announced 
the signing of the attacking midfielder Sofiane Boufal from Lille for an 
undisclosed fee. The 22-year-old Morocco international has agreed a five-year 
contract.

Football transfer rumours: Chelsea to sign Real Madrid's James Rodríguez?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/29/football-transfer-rumours-chelsea-to-sign-real-madrids-james-rodriguez>
It is understood the fee for Boufal could rise to £21m, a club record. 
Southampton’s previous record signing was Dani Osvaldo, who joined from Roma in 
2013 in a deal that could have beenworth up to £14.6m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/01/southampton-dani-osvaldo-terminate-contract>
.

Boufal said: “I’m very, very happy to sign for Southampton and I am really 
excited to play in St Mary’s stadium in front of the fans. Southampton showed 
big interest in signing me, and I can see that this club is the best place for 
me to continue my progression as a footballer. I hope I can achieve many great 
things with Southampton. It is a very good club, with excellent facilities, and 
I feel it is the perfect environment to continue my development.”

Southampton’s manager, Claude Puel, had been looking to add more firepower to 
his squad after losing last season’s top scorersSadio Mané 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/sadio-mane-signs-liverpool-southampton>
 andGraziano Pellè 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/11/graziano-pelle-leaves-southampton-joins-shandong-luneng>
.

Boufal scored 12 goals in all competitions in his first full season with Lille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lille> as they finished fifth in Ligue 1 
and reached the final of theCoupe de la Ligue.

Premier League: transfer window summer 2016 – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/aug/23/premier-league-transfer-window-summer-2016-interactive>
Southampton’s executive director of football, Les Reed, said: “I’m absolutely 
delighted to welcome Sofiane to Southampton. He has shown his undoubted 
qualities in France over the past few seasons, and we are extremely confident 
he will successfully adapt to life in the Premier League.

“Sofiane is a player we have watched develop closely over the last few years, 
and we’re thrilled to have him join the club ahead of what promises to be a 
very exciting season, with Europa League football on the horizon. His excellent 
campaign with Lille last season meant a number of clubs were pursuing him to 
secure his services, but we’re delighted that Sofiane sees Southampton as the 
best place for him to continue his development.

“Saints fans may have to wait for a few weeks yet to see him demonstrate his 
skills, as Sofiane had a delayed start to his pre-season training and will be 
working very hard with our fitness staff to get up to full match fitness.”
 