
Several windfarm operators in South Australia have already revised their 
settings to allow them to ride through larger network disruptions, following t
he storm in September that caused a statewide blackout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/28/south-australia-braces-for-storm-that-could-be-most-severe-in-50-years>
, according to an update by the Australian Energy Market Operator (Aemo).

New information released by Aemo on Wednesday morning reveals nine of 13 
windfarms in the state “tripped” after freak winds blew over several major 
transmission lines in the state.

The loss of the power lines caused six “voltage disturbances” in the network. 
Generators, including windfarms, have safety settings which automatically 
disconnect from the grid when there are more than a set number of such 
disturbances.

It appeared almost a third of the state’s windfarms had settings that allowed 
them to ride through the six disturbances, as did all the state’s thermal 
generators.

Aemo said it was working with both windfarm operators and turbine 
manufacturers to better understand these “voltage ride-through” settings.

South Australia's blackout explained (and no, renewables aren't to blame)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/29/south-australia-blackout-explained-renewables-not-to-blame>
“Several windfarms have already implemented revised settings, allowing them to 
ride through a higher number of disturbances,” Aemo saidin a statement 
<http://www.aemo.com.au/Media-Centre/Update-to-report-into-SA-state-wide-power-outage>
.

When the nine windfarms disconnected, they removed 445 MW of generation from 
the network, causing a surge of power to be drawn from the Heywood 
interconnector with Victoria. That caused another automatic safety trip, 
shutting down the interconnector. In turn, that caused trips at the state’s 
thermal generators, resulting in the statewide blackout.

The new information was sure to reignite a campaign being launched against 
renewable energy.

Energy expert Dylan McConnell, from the Melbourne Energy Institute, told 
GuardianAustralia <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/australia> it was likely 
windfarms needed more conservative “voltage ride-through” settings than coal or 
gas generators.

But he said the fact that a number of windfarms did ride through the event 
suggested their disconnection from the grid inSouth Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> was not a 
fundamental issue with wind power, but rather an issue with the choice of 
settings.

However, McConnell said the voltage disruptions were very severe, and 
potentially big enough to cause damage to generators that remained connected.

The report noted that voltage levels were usually required to be maintained 
within 10% of a line’s rating. “If voltage levels are not maintained within 
this range, damage can occur to the network or customer-connected equipment, 
and power system protection equipment might not operate correctly,” it said.

But three of the disruptions ahead of the blackout involved voltage dropping 
to 60% below the line’s rating.

McConnell said: “There are obviously questions about whether the preset limit 
(for voltage ride-through) was too conservative. But there is also a question 
of whether it [is] reasonable to think that a generator should ride a voltage 
collapse all the way down.”

McConnell also pointed out that if South Australia had fewer windfarms, this 
particular event was likely to have played out exactly the same way.

The large number of windfarms in the state was a factor in the shutting of the 
Northern coal-fired power generator in Port Augusta. If that generator was 
still running, it would have been cut off from the grid by the downed power 
lines, creating a similar disruption to the tripped windfarms.

“Yes, if there was gas generator or coal generator in Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide>, then yes it might have 
ridden through the fault. But if you’re comparing the current situation to one 
where there was a coal generator in Port Augusta, you would have had a 
significant loss of generation,” he said.

McConnell said although the storm was a freak event, the resulting analysis 
could help network operators, market operators and policymakers create a more 
robust network.

“There’s a question about having a diversity of renewable energy resources,” 
he said.

Aemo was continuing to investigate the event.
 