
Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> are set to 
break their transfer record to sign Sofiane Boufal from Lille after the two 
clubs moved closer to an agreement over the fee for the Morocco forward.

Negotiations for the 22-year-old have continued in the last few days after 
Southampton’s initial bid of around £13m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/24/southampton-sofiane-boufal-lille-talks>
 was rejected in the week, with Lille expected to accept a renewed offer which 
could eventually be worth up to £21.2m (€25m).

Transfer window: exposing the widely held myths about how clubs sign players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-set-pieces-blog/2016/aug/24/transfer-window-market-myths>
The sticking point appears to be over any potential sell-on fee the French 
club could be due in future, although that is not expected to prevent Claude 
Puel’s club from exceeding the £14m they paid to sign Dani Osvaldo from Roma in 
2013. It is understood that Boufal has already told friends he has his heart 
set on moving to the south coast club, with an official announcement possible 
over the weekend.

Puel, who managed Lille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lille> between 
2002 and 2008, refused to discuss the transfer in advance of meeting with 
Sunderland at St Mary’s but he is understood to have pushed for the signing 
after watching Boufal in action last season. However, the player is 
recuperating after injuring a knee in May and is not expected to be match-fit 
again until the middle of next month.

A product of the youth system at Angers, who he left last January to join 
Lille, Boufal won the award for the best African player in Ligue One and is 
comfortable out wide or as a No10. Born in Paris, he opted to represent Morocco 
– for whom he qualifies through his parents – this year and made his debut 
against Cape Verde in March.

His arrival could allow the England international Jay Rodriguez to join West 
Brom on loan. The 27-year-old has also been linked with Burnley, a former club.

The Euro 2016 winner Cédric Soares, meanwhile, has signed a new four-year 
contract with Southampton.

The club have also recruited the goalkeeper Stuart Taylor on a free transfer. 
The 35-year-old will offer cover for Fraser Forster and Alex McCarthy after 
Kelvin Davis’ retirement and Paulo Gazzaniga joining Rayo Vallecano on loan.
 