
If there’s one thing I have learnt in five years of recipe-perfecting for this 
newspaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/aug/10/how-to-make-the-perfect-proposal>
 – apart from the joy of a decent dishwasher – it’s that some people get very, 
very angry about food.Jamie Oliver found this out the hard way last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/jamie-olivers-paella-chorizo-brings-fractured-spain-together-against-him>
, when he managed to unite the entire Spanish nation against his chorizo-spiked 
paella. Now, it’s the Italians turn to jump on the bandwagon, this time over 
crimes against bolognese.

The celebrity chef Antonio Carluccio told an audience at the Cheltenham 
literary festival 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/10/spaghetti-bolognese-is-ruined-by-the-british-top-italian-chef-an/>
 that no such dish as spaghetti bolognese exists in Italy, whereragù alla 
bolognese is served over tagliatelle, and made “without any herbs whatsoever”. 
He’s not the first to find the uniquely British notion of “spag bol” leaves a 
bad taste in the mouth – indeed, the Italian Academy of Cuisinepublished an 
official recipe as long ago as 1982 
<http://www.itchefs-gvci.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=587&Itemid=976>
 to try to prevent such culinary outrages – but if he thinks a couple of 
millimetres of missing pasta are the worst we can do to bolognese, he needs to 
get out more. (But eat first Antonio. Definitely eat first.)

Even Jamie Oliver, who might well attract Carluccio’s ire for his use of 
rosemary and sun-dried tomatoes 
<http://www.jamieoliver.com/recipes/beef-recipes/spaghetti-bolognese/>, looks 
tame compared with the former enfant terrible of British cookery, Marco Pierre 
White,who slips in a “tasty twist” of chocolate and chilli for a bolognese 
<http://www.knorr.co.uk/recipes/detail/8632/1/bolognese-with-marcos-twist> 
that’s “guaranteed to get the family asking what you’ve done differently” – and 
then, no doubt, for a bowl of cereal instead.

Sainsbury’s got knickers in a twist last year by suggesting customers add 
instant coffee granules to bolognese 
<https://www.sainsburys.co.uk/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/gb/groceries/get-ideas/features/twist-your-favourites---spaghetti-bolognese?langId=44&storeId=10151&krypto=14Ja%2BRhfhhog82jcM9F2Tpp9bq8fkx9b67GsIyn1tCwoDwwOKWlslZZCpb%2BQFDaus9hckHMCSMsgReyJgISBH5JVtnFlPq%2B2P43oBB4K7%2Bs0q42TaEG72qJDSHVPEffQ6KxGfkzc7gb0pcLUU45foJ%2BrbjC5n9dpLzQbkXTtHX0%3D&ddkey=https%3Agb%2Fgroceries%2Fget-ideas%2Ffeatures%2Ftwist-your-favourites---spaghetti-bolognese>
, on the basis that it “cuts through the natural sweetness of the tomato-based 
ragu”. Why anyone would want their dinner to taste like 1983 is beyond me, but 
still, that recipe looks sane compared with that of Australian nutrition guru 
Sarah Wilson, which she claims offers “double the healthy comfort – tomato-free 
bolognese and a sweet Thai dish in one”.That’s right, it’s a red curry 
bolognese, served with pasta 
<https://iquitsugar.com/recipe/thai-red-curry-bolognese/>.

But just when I thought it couldn’t get worse, I stumbled upon a totally raw, 
vegan, gluten-free version from chef Stephanie Jeffs 
<http://www.womenshealthmag.co.uk/nutrition/recipes/3045/raw-spaghetti-bolognese/>
: the noodles are made from courgettes and the “Parmesan” from cashews and 
nutritional yeast flakes, an ingredient I suspect to be all the rage in 
Bologna. Meanwhile, instead of beef, there are chia seeds, walnuts and 
portobello mushrooms. In fact, the tablespoon of “Italian herbs” may well be 
one of the few ingredients in there that Carluccio would recognise. Suddenly 
that abominable spaghetti doesn’t seem so bad, eh, Antonio?
 