
Vicente del Bosque has claimed Spain are favourites to win a third successive 
European Championship after seeing his side beatSouth Korea 6-1. Alvaro Morata 
and Nolito each scored twice as the champions from 2008 and 2012 warmed up for 
their defence in style. Manchester City’s David Silva and Cesc Fàbregas of 
Chelsea were also on target in Salzburg.

Euro 2016: the complete guide to every squad and every player in France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/jun/01/euro-2016-the-complete-guide-to-every-squad-and-every-player-in-france>
“We are the favourites [for Euro 2016] because we come into it having won four 
years ago,” Del Bosque said. “There are other national teams, but it’s our 
dream to be champions again. We’re in a good moment. We have had a tough 
season, very intense, but we are ready to go into the Euro in the best 
conditions.

“We are ready to start, to win is another thing. There are good rivals and in 
football everything is really even.”

Spain play Georgia in Getafe on Tuesday before beginning their Euro 2016 Group 
D campaign on 13 June against theCzech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/czechrepublic> in Toulouse.

Russia, England’s opening opposition in Marseilles, lost 2-1 to the Czechs in 
Innsbruck, Austria. Tomas Necid scored a 90th-minute winner as the Czechs came 
from behind. Aleksandr Kokorin’s sixth-minute goal forRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/russia> was cancelled out by Tomas 
Rosicky four minutes into the second half before Necid struck.

Everton’s Romelu Lukaku scored an 89th-minute equaliser which saved Belgium 
the embarrassment of defeat toFinland, who have not qualified for the 
championship.Belgium <https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium>, who are in 
Group E with Italy and are one of the pre-tournament favourites, went behind to 
Kasper Hamalainen’s goal eight minutes into the second half.

Holland, who will not be playing at Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> after failing to qualify, beat 
Poland 2-1 in Gdansk. Newcastle’s Georginio Wijnaldum got the winner for the 
Dutch after Artur Jedrzejczyk had cancelled out Vincent Janssen’s opener. The 
Poles will contest Group C with Northern Ireland, Germany and Ukraine.

Norway, who will not be in France either, beat Iceland 3-2. Iceland, who are 
in Group F with Portugal, went behind in the first minute and ultimately Gylfi 
Sigurdsson’s 81st-minute penalty softened the scoreline for them.

Elsewhere, Estonia beat Andorra 2-0 and Latvia defeated Lithuania 2-1.
 