
With tickets for  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/how-did-hamilton-become-broadway-breakout-hit>
Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/how-did-hamilton-become-broadway-breakout-hit>
sold out months in advance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/how-did-hamilton-become-broadway-breakout-hit>
, theatre lovers everywhere have been trying to find a way to get their fix. 
The latest way to be part of the craze that has been sweeping the nation for 
more than a year is to attend Spamilton – a parody of the popular musical and 
its creator, Lin-Manuel Miranda.

When Miranda saw the show the other night at the Triad on the Upper West Side, 
he “laughed his brains out”. As he should – the show is funny and the cast 
talented, holding their own belting out raps and other songs. Yet those who 
have yet to listen to Hamilton or those who do not find themselves living and 
breathingBroadway <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> might find 
themselves missing out on the joke.

Javier Muñoz: adding sex and steel to Hamilton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/15/hamilton-lin-manuel-miranda-understudy-broadway-interview>
The premise of Forbidden Broadway <http://www.forbiddenbroadway.com/>, a New 
York parody revue created by Gerard Alessandrini, is to rewrite a popular 
musical and turn the spotlight on Broadway itself. This year’s parody, 
Spamilton, follows Miranda – played by Dan Rosales – as he tries to 
revolutionize Broadway.

The humor in the show is not only dependent on one’s knowledge of Hamilton, 
the world-beating musical – but also on the world of theater in general. Do 
namesAudra McDonald <http://audramcdonald.net/>, Daveed Diggs 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/cheats/2016/07/13/daveed-diggs-leaving-hamilton.html?via=desktop&source=copyurl>
 andStephen Sondheim <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sondheim> mean anything 
to you? If not, you might find yourself lost at Spamilton with jokes flying 
past your head left and right.

However, if you know which Broadway diva once stopped a performance of Gypsy 
to yell at an audience member taking a photo 
<http://gawker.com/5135726/patti-lupones-fabulous-mid-show-freak-out>, and 
which Broadway show closed this year after its leading lady announced she was 
expecting 
<http://www.broadway.com/buzz/184796/shuffle-alongs-audra-mcdonald-is-pregnant-six-time-tony-winner-postpones-west-end-debut-in-lady-day/>
, then step right up. Spamilton is the show for you.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fspamilton-hamilton-parody-triad-new-york-lin-manuel-miranda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcc2e90fad8b51917c67ab0c185100c18ac4ba63%2F25_178_937_482%2F937.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spamilton%3A%20Hamilton%20parody%20is%20a%20supplement%2C%20not%20a%20substitute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fspamilton-hamilton-parody-triad-new-york-lin-manuel-miranda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spamilton%3A%20Hamilton%20parody%20is%20a%20supplement%2C%20not%20a%20substitute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fspamilton-hamilton-parody-triad-new-york-lin-manuel-miranda%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcc2e90fad8b51917c67ab0c185100c18ac4ba63%2F25_178_937_482%2F937.jpg>
 Nicholas Edwards, Nora Schell, Chris Anthony Giles, Juwan Crawley and Dan 
Rosales in Spamilton. Photograph: Carol Rosegg/The Triad 
Eliza Orlins, one of the younger members of the audience at the show I 
attended, admitted to having missed some of the jokes. Her friend Winston 
Nguyen, who attended dressed in Hamiltonesque garb, however, was happy to 
explain whatever she missed.

“We both LOVED Spamilton tonight!” she told me after. “We are huge Broadway 
nerds, in fact Winston has seen every single show currently on Broadway. The 
voices were incredible. We thought it was brilliantly written and the jokes 
were impressive. It was an awesome combination of pop culture and high culture 
– $800 seats and YouTube.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fspamilton-hamilton-parody-triad-new-york-lin-manuel-miranda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fd87699a18bfb55453e5642584f52e699f2c373%2F0_0_2917_2448%2F2917.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spamilton%3A%20Hamilton%20parody%20is%20a%20supplement%2C%20not%20a%20substitute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fspamilton-hamilton-parody-triad-new-york-lin-manuel-miranda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spamilton%3A%20Hamilton%20parody%20is%20a%20supplement%2C%20not%20a%20substitute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fspamilton-hamilton-parody-triad-new-york-lin-manuel-miranda%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fd87699a18bfb55453e5642584f52e699f2c373%2F0_0_2917_2448%2F2917.jpg>
 Eliza Orlins and her ‘extremely well-dressed friend’ Winston Nguyen. 
Photograph: Courtesy of Eliza Orlins 
Despite its steep ticket prices – “Can you believe you paid 800 bucks for 
this?” the Spamilton cast asks at one point –Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hamilton> has been able to connect with a 
wider audience thanks to its widely celebrated soundtrack and the rap songs 
that make it more accessible for younger audiences. Yet the room where it 
happens is still often majority white and older – leaving the cast more diverse 
than the audience.

Falling in love with Broadway is easy. Being able to find $50 to $100 tickets 
per show is harder. As a result, the audience at Spamilton reflected that 
Broadway still has a way to go before it is revolutionized.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fspamilton-hamilton-parody-triad-new-york-lin-manuel-miranda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3c95c96a7f7ec36365107e3545bba67ddc6df7d%2F0_0_1523_914%2F1523.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spamilton%3A%20Hamilton%20parody%20is%20a%20supplement%2C%20not%20a%20substitute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fspamilton-hamilton-parody-triad-new-york-lin-manuel-miranda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spamilton%3A%20Hamilton%20parody%20is%20a%20supplement%2C%20not%20a%20substitute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fspamilton-hamilton-parody-triad-new-york-lin-manuel-miranda%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3c95c96a7f7ec36365107e3545bba67ddc6df7d%2F0_0_1523_914%2F1523.jpg>
 Nicholas Edwards in Spamilton at the Triad. Photograph: Carol Rosegg/The Triad 
At no point is this more evident than when one of the cast members takes the 
stage to belt out a spoof of You’ll Be Back, singing that Broadway was full of 
“clawingly gay” shows till the public got mad.

“Straight is back. Gay went out with Glee,” he sings. And then, where Jonathan 
Groff’s King George invited the Hamilton audience to harmonize with him, 
Spamilton’s king invites the room of older white New Yorkers to join him in 
singing: “gay, gay, gay, gay, gay, gay”. It is a sight to see.

 * Spamilton will run at the Triad until 30 October
 