
About this time last year, I was fending off a torrent of abuse from solvers 
berating us for misspelling "ukulele" as "ukelele". Even the guardians of the 
Corrections and Clarifications column were minded to print an apology until I 
mounted the defence that Chambers gives "ukelele" as "a common spelling of 
ukulele" and that the Oxford English Dictionary (no less) even allows "ukalele" 
and "eukaleli" as alternatives.

There was only one complaint this July when Rover's clue "Luke Lee playing 
small guitar in the popular style" invited the solution "ukelele". However, I 
am grateful to a solver, Dudley Turner, for drawing my attention to the fact 
that when Clint Eastwood played an American secret service agent in the 1993 
film In the Line of Fire, the "correct" spelling is vital.

John Malkovich is trying to assassinate the US president and Clint is given a 
bit of paper with "ukulele" written on it and told to ring the phone number 
corresponding to those letters on the dial. He thinks the spelling looks wrong, 
but is told to dial it as spelt. God knows what would might have happened to 
the president if Clint had tried to dial "ukalele".

__________

Back in 2003 I thought I had a safe rule of thumb for this and other similar 
problems: it was that any word or spelling sanctioned by one of the main 
one-volume dictionaries should, in principle, be allowed in a Guardian puzzle. 
The rule seemed to have the advantage of being fair and simple. I should have 
known that such rules are never fair and rarely simple.

The otherwise admirable rule has been undermined by the modern practice among 
dictionary publishers of bringing out new edition after new edition, and of 
regularly sneaking in revised editions as well.

Chambers could once be relied on as a generally secure support in a turning 
world. It is true that using Chambers as one's overriding authority meant that 
you had to let in a number of pretty archaic Scots usages (such as "drucken" 
for "drunken" or "faurd" for "favoured") and the odd bit of Spenserian English 
long forgotten even by the small minority of Guardian cruciverbalists who have 
ever read The Faerie Queene.

But somehow, these words have acquired over time a conventional legitimacy for 
use in crosswords, even if no one uses them any longer in any other context.

__________

My basic Chambers, well thumbed but still entirely serviceable, remains the 
1993 edition. It had already taken in the word subsidiarity, a Roman Catholic 
social doctrine reinvented in 1991 as a political concept to help John Major 
get his party to ratify the Maastricht treaty. The word is clearly now part of 
the English language, even if no one still knows quite what it means in 
practice.

The 1993 edition had also taken in, for example, "crop circles", "fatwa" and 
"grunge", none of which would have caused a raised eyebrow. But then, in 1996, 
came the Chambers 21st Century Dictionary, which was "updated" in 1999. And now 
Chambers is up to its ninth edition. Collins has also been bringing out a new 
edition, it seems, every two or three years. Oxford even started publishing the 
Oxford Dictionary of New Words, which itself has regular new editions.

Each of these new editions appears with a preface containing some variation on 
the theme that this is an important contribution to the development of the 
treasury of the English language. One cannot avoid the feeling that the real 
reason is that it is an important contribution to revenue in an increasingly 
difficult market that is facing hot competition from CDs and the internet.

__________

The problem all this creates for the crossword editor is that to justify a new 
edition dictionary editors need to include new words. So neologisms are now 
appearing in one-volume dictionaries much sooner than used to be the case. I 
think that they are increasingly appearing even before they have really become 
generally accepted usages.

The ninth edition of Chambers, in particular, is causing me problems: "McJob" 
(poorly paid employment in a fast food outlet), "zoodoo" (droppings by captive 
animals), "pottymouth" (use foul language) and "jockney" (an exaggerated 
Glasgow dialect) all appear in this edition.

They are all fine words, and "jockney" in particular deserves to succeed - but 
I am not at all convinced that the average punter yet regards them as fair in a 
crossword.

I discussed this problem last week with John Grant, the former Times crossword 
editor. "Simple", he said. "I made it a rule never to use the latest edition of 
any dictionary, only the one before the latest edition."

Â·  Hugh Stephenson is the Guardian's crossword editor.
 