
“We were devastated,” says Yaron Lifschitz, artistic director of the 
Australian circus ensembleCirca <http://circa.org.au/>. He is talking about the 
company’s Melbourne festival performance ofOpus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/20/opus-circa-barbican-circus-review-lyn-gardner>
, a daring blend of Shostakovich and circus. What could possibly have gone 
wrong for the company who, over the past decade, have redefined the language of 
circus with their critically acclaimed box-office hits? The 2,500-seat venue 
was packed and the audience clapped at almost every trick. But that’s the 
problem. “We consider a clap where we don’t want one a form of failure,” 
explains Lifschitz mournfully.

Since 2004, Lifschitz’s ensemble – now numbering around 20 – have rescued 
circus from the arena of mere spectacle and expanded its possibilities as an 
artform, borrowing from music, poetry, theatre, visual arts and architecture. In
How Like an Angel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jun/29/how-like-an-angel-review>, 
acrobats swooped through the interiors of ancient English cathedrals; inThe 
Return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/28/circa-the-return-five-star-review-physical-struggle-refugees>
, performed in London earlier this year as Europe’s refugee crisis gathered 
pace, Monteverdi’s Baroque opera Il Ritorno d’Ulisse in Patria was the 
jumping-off point for a show in which acrobatics became an expression of 
displacement, endless wandering and grief.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcirca-london-cemetery-depart-lift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb61bf2d7e43550c3a72ad6d593ccb872774fd63%2F0_0_5477_3651%2F5477.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spinning%20by%20the%20graves%3A%20Circa%20stage%20a%20show%20in%20London%20cemetery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcirca-london-cemetery-depart-lift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spinning%20by%20the%20graves%3A%20Circa%20stage%20a%20show%20in%20London%20cemetery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcirca-london-cemetery-depart-lift%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb61bf2d7e43550c3a72ad6d593ccb872774fd63%2F0_0_5477_3651%2F5477.jpg>
 ‘A place where the living and the dead can meet’ … Depart. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Meaning in most of our work is created out of the composition. If a trick gets 
too good it will overwhelm the emotion
Yaron Lifschitz 
Most circus relies upon the wow factor of the perfectly executed, apparently 
impossible physical trick. Lifschitz is more interested in how a trick might be 
framed – what comes before or after it, how tension and texture are created, 
and what meaning and emotion might be conveyed. “Circus has the problem of 
double focus,” he explains. “People are always watching the thing and the 
virtuosity of the thing at the same time. You are always having to adjust the 
pitch, weigh up how much stuff to put in a particular place so as not overwhelm 
the audience with its own admiration and applause.”

Lifschitz argues that great circus is not reliant on the virtuosity of the 
trick for its effectiveness – or indeed the number of tricks you can stuff into 
a single evening. “At the end of the day there is an expressive limit to what 
you can do in any given form. At some point you get to the inherent 
contradiction that what we are actually doing is a bunch of virtuoso skills 
that don’t inherently carry a great deal of meaning inside themselves. The 
meaning in most of our work is created out of the composition and arrangement. 
If the trick gets too good it will overwhelm the structural integrity and the 
emotion. So you have to really balance how many great tricks you do and how you 
frame them so they can speak and have their own emotional weight and find their 
right wave length.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcirca-london-cemetery-depart-lift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c9f9d8525d745f572a5975525bdefd98c685e9c%2F378_474_5099_3059%2F5099.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spinning%20by%20the%20graves%3A%20Circa%20stage%20a%20show%20in%20London%20cemetery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcirca-london-cemetery-depart-lift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spinning%20by%20the%20graves%3A%20Circa%20stage%20a%20show%20in%20London%20cemetery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcirca-london-cemetery-depart-lift%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c9f9d8525d745f572a5975525bdefd98c685e9c%2F378_474_5099_3059%2F5099.jpg>
 Rehearsals for Depart by Circa in Tower Hamlets Cemetery Park. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
That might mean less clapping from the audience, but it can lead to a far 
richer experience. “If anyone claps in this show – other than at the end – it 
will be a disaster,” says Lifschitz of the company’s latest piece, Depart, made 
in collaboration with theNational Centre for Circus Arts 
<https://www.nationalcircus.org.uk/>, whose graduating students form part of 
the ensemble. Depart is being performed inTower Hamlets Cemetery Park 
<http://www.fothcp.org/> at dusk as part of the London international festival 
of theatre (Lift).

Circus can’t help but be an aspirational hymn to the living, an intense form 
of celebrating being alive

“It’s a fabulous environment in which to play,” says Lifschitz, pointing to 
the mass of trees and untamed vines that spread across tottering gravestones, 
and the twisting fairytale paths that lure you into dark places. Wherever you 
walk here, you are walking over history. It is a place where the living and the 
dead can meet together. “The thing that excites me about the site is exploring 
what circus can do with its possibilities and how the artform can embrace them. 
I always enjoy the opportunity to think about what circus can do that it 
doesn’t normally do. As soon as I saw this place, I knew it spoke our language.”

The show takes its inspiration from the Orpheus and Eurydice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jan/16/greekmyths.greekmythsfeatures2> 
myth, and there have been considerable logistical challenges in creating a 
full-scale outdoor circus promenade performance, particularly when the showery 
English summer has turned the cemetery into a muddy, slippery environment, not 
ideal for circus. On the day we meet, Lifschitz is busy rethinking the final 
sequence in case the heavens open. “We can’t do the same intensity of 
acrobatics in the rain or wet and maybe we will just need to taper it down and 
leave the audience with a beautiful quiet close, which is a perfectly good 
dramaturgical option,” he says, “but whether it will be satisfying for those 
expecting acrobatic fireworks is another matter. We would be happy with that, 
but in circus such is the hunger for the trick and instant gratification – the 
fix – it becomes a bit like a drug.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcirca-london-cemetery-depart-lift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd90159caa64c29616b74e31a15d0f978e9dcb79d%2F0_0_5002_3555%2F5002.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spinning%20by%20the%20graves%3A%20Circa%20stage%20a%20show%20in%20London%20cemetery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcirca-london-cemetery-depart-lift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spinning%20by%20the%20graves%3A%20Circa%20stage%20a%20show%20in%20London%20cemetery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcirca-london-cemetery-depart-lift%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd90159caa64c29616b74e31a15d0f978e9dcb79d%2F0_0_5002_3555%2F5002.jpg>
 ‘A fabulous environment in which to play’ … Depart. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
There are other challenges, too. As Lifschitz says: “Circus can’t help but be 
an aspirational hymn to the living, an intense form of celebrating being alive.
Circus <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/circus> bodies are stubbornly 
corporeal. They are clearly there and clearly intensely alive. It is why as an 
audience we like them so much. But it means that you can’t go round pretending 
that they are unhealthy or dead.”

At the dress rehearsal I saw, it’s clear that they do have a ghostly presence. 
Pale young women stand silently like a row of alabaster angels who suddenly 
break into jagged movement; a wistful figure is glimpsed in the distance, 
eternally turning on a Cyr wheel; a pair of acrobats appear to have sprouted 
out of a tree stump; aerialists hang from the trees as if suspended between 
heaven and hell. There is something uncanny about our encounters with them as 
we wander down paths as if in search of ourselves, occasionally catching a 
glimpse of an apparition out of the corner of our eye or hearing distant 
singing. Towards the end dark figures march in a seemingly endless procession, 
like souls emerging from the underworld.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcirca-london-cemetery-depart-lift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc703fdca261516cadeaed0d3ec7879f17903622%2F0_378_5283_3170%2F5283.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spinning%20by%20the%20graves%3A%20Circa%20stage%20a%20show%20in%20London%20cemetery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcirca-london-cemetery-depart-lift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spinning%20by%20the%20graves%3A%20Circa%20stage%20a%20show%20in%20London%20cemetery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcirca-london-cemetery-depart-lift%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc703fdca261516cadeaed0d3ec7879f17903622%2F0_378_5283_3170%2F5283.jpg>
 ‘A fabulous environment in which to play’ … Tower Hamlets Cemetery Park. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Lifschitz has always resisted narrative. “I was really relieved years ago to 
hear thechoreographer William Forsythe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/07/in-the-middle-somewhat-elevated-william-forsythe-dance>
 say he lacked a narrative gene. I think I do too. The world just doesn’t 
reveal itself to me through story.” Depart may be inspired by a myth familiar 
to most people, but Lifschitz is not in the business of storytelling in any 
traditional sense.

“I imagine this piece as a series of reflections in a cut-glass chandelier. 
You see many images of the same thing. Every element, from the video work to 
the choreography to the circus, is all connected to a very small set of images: 
there are themes of turning around or walking towards, of looking for 
something, or losing something and being stuck. Many little clue moments are 
stitched throughout the work. It’s textured in such a way that creates the 
feeling of walking through a series of elusive memories and impressions. It’s 
not tragic, in fact it’s strangely joyous, and I really like the fact that it 
works like a dream and it’s ephemeral, like existence itself.”

He quotes the poet and translator Anne Carson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/dec/30/featuresreviews.guardianreview7>
: “Existence will not stop until it gets to beauty and then there follow all 
the consequences that lead to the end.’” He smiles. “It’s the hunger for the 
beautiful moment that fuels a project like Depart.”

 * Depart is at Tower Hamlets Cemetery Park from 16 to 26 June 
<https://www.liftfestival.com/?post_type=lf_event&p=542> as part of the London 
international festival of theatre (Lift) andSpitalfields Music summer festival 
<https://www.spitalfieldsmusic.org.uk/>  