
Supermarket sales of courgettes are soaring thanks to health-conscious 
consumers embracing new kitchen gadget the spiraliser, which cuts raw 
vegetables into ribbons and curls, making them an easy substitute for pasta or 
noodles.

Sales of courgettes are up by 20% compared with last year, says Marks & 
Spencer, fuelled by shoppers ditching pasta for so-called ‘courgetti’ – long, 
thin slivers of courgette popularised by food writers and bloggersHemsley & 
Hemsley <http://www.hemsleyandhemsley.com/>, who suggest eating them with beef 
ragu 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/beauty/2012/10/17/hemsley-and-hemsley-quick-ragu-and-courgette-spaghetti-recipe>
 orred pesto <http://www.hemsleyandhemsley.com/recipe/courgetti-with-red-pesto/>
.

Inspect a gadget: cutting-edge kitchen aids put to the test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/30/food-gadgets-test-three-course-meal-save-time-trouble>
 The vegetables are also selling well at Sainbury’s. Courgette volumes were up 
by nearly a third year-on-year last week, while Waitrose, last week sold 13% 
more courgettes than the same time last year.

Beetroot, celeriac, squash, cucumber and turnips can easily be given the 
spiraliser treatment to create imaginative dishes without the time-consuming 
cutting of veg into julienne strips. Sweet potato sales are up more than 64% 
over a year, M&S reports, as consumers stock up to create sweet potato 
‘noodles’ and curly fries with their spiralisers.

M&S vegetable buyer Louisa Read said: “We’ve seen a huge increase in sales of 
vegetables as customers are using spiralisers as an easy way to reach their 
five a day. We’ve sold over 37 tonnes of courgettes in the last month alone as 
our customers embrace the trend for courgetti.”


Based on a Japanese invention, the spiraliser is a razor-sharp cutting device 
that creates thin ribbons of vegetable. Food writers and sisters Jasmine and 
Melissa Hemsley, high-profile champions of healthy food and raw vegetables, put 
their name to one machine that turned out to be the foodie Christmas present of 
2014, while Lakeland has reported booming sales of its own machine.




Jasmine Hemsley said: “Courgettes for us are hero vegetables and the perfect 
ingredient because they’re easy to spiralise, don’t require cooking and are 
quicker than getting a bowl of pasta on the table.”

Sales of carrots, another ideal vegetable for spiralising, are also on the 
increase. This April, M&S said it had sold over 12.5 tonnes of carrots, 
including their speciality Abledo and Emperor varieties – a 10% rise on last 
year.

 Waitrose vegetable buyer Patrick Keane said that courgettes were once little 
used beyond ratatouille recipes, but are now just as likely to be turned into 
courgetti.

“This new technique is an easy way to add more vegetables to your diet whilst 
reducing the amount of carbs needed to bulk up a meal. Parents have found they 
are perfect for secretly hiding vegetables in popular children’s meals such as 
spaghetti bolognese,” he said.


Courgettes are very low in fat, sodium and calories with a relative high 
protein level in comparison to other vegetables and also boast digestive 
soothing benefits. But the current enthusiasm for them will not provide a boost 
for British farmers until later in the spring.

UK vegetable grower Stubbins <http://stubbins.com> said courgettes on sale in 
the UK were now imported from Spain, France, Italy and Morocco, with 
British-grown produce – including the home-grown variety – not hitting the 
shops until June.


 