
Security failures exposed at France’s Cup final over the weekend will be 
sorted out before the start ofEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> in three weeks’ time, the 
government said on Monday.

The month-long European Championship tournament opens across France on 10 June 
with a state of emergency still in force following Islamist militant attacks 
last November that killed 130 people in Paris and targeted multiple sites 
across the capital, including the Stade deFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>.

The match on Saturday between arch-rivals Paris Saint-Germain and Olympique 
Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/marseille-psg-french-cup-final-match-report>
 at the Stade de France had been deemed a high-risk event and a first test for 
organisers of security measures required for Euro 2016.

Fans threw firecrackers and flares inside and outside the stadium and banned 
objects were brought into the grounds despite close searching, security 
officials said. There was also serious overcrowding.

“The system cracked a little. There are weak points that are not acceptable,” 
Philippe Galli, prefect for the Seine-Saint-Denis region that is in part 
responsible for security at the stadium,told Le Parisien newspaper 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/sports/football/euro-2016/euro-2016-une-reunion-apres-les-rates-de-la-securite-au-stade-de-france-23-05-2016-5821871.php>
. “We will have to correct what didn’t work.”

Local authorities, the French Football Federation and Europe’s governing body 
Uefa met on Monday to assess the security lapses and what should be done to 
correct them.

Speaking after the meeting, the Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve said a 
series of measures would be finalised in the coming days to resolve the 
problems encountered on Saturday.

“It was decided to rapidly correct the failings to guarantee the flow of 
supporters at entry points to the stadiums, to make security checks by private 
security firms reliable and to make end-of-match exit points for fans safe,” he 
said.

About 2.5 million spectators are expected for 51 matches involving 24 teams in 
games played at 10 stadiums across France. There will also be “fan zones” for 
crowds watching games on big screens in major cities.

The state of emergency still in force following the Islamic State shooting and 
bombing attacks in November grants extra powers to police and security forces.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Ffrance-promises-stade-security-concerns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ed90b81408857756a67a7f14a4b137df2daa24c%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stade%20de%20France%20promises%20to%20resolve%20security%20concerns%20ahead%20of%20Euro%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Ffrance-promises-stade-security-concerns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stade%20de%20France%20promises%20to%20resolve%20security%20concerns%20ahead%20of%20Euro%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Ffrance-promises-stade-security-concerns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ed90b81408857756a67a7f14a4b137df2daa24c%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Riot police use their shields for protection near Marseille supporters in the 
tribunes after the French Cup final. Photograph: Thomas Samson/AFP/Getty Images 
Uefa, the Euro organiser, has drafted in 10,000-15,000 security staff for more 
than 110 sites, including stadiums, team hotels and other tournament sites. 
High-tech equipment will be used to monitor crowds.

One of the main issues on Saturday appeared to be overcrowding caused by a 
second security cordon that was in place to reduce the number of entry points 
into the stadium from 26 before the 13 November attacks to four.

“When the system was under pressure, it collapsed at a certain number of 
points,” Galli said.

Patrick Calvar, head of France’s DGSI internal intelligence agency, told a 
parliamentary committee last week that there was a risk of new attacks by 
militants placing numerous explosive devices in different crowded places to 
create maximum panic.
 