
For months, Julie Richards has been planning for the battles that would come 
the moment that she was no longer needed at the Standing Rock encampments. When 
that day came, the 43-year-old Oglala Lakota woman knew that she needed to take 
the fight back home.

“I have a crew ready to go back to my homeland, to set up a camp like this, 
and move against meth,” she said in November.

Richards’ home is the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota. She 
founded Mothers Against Meth Alliance (Mama) there five years ago, when her own 
daughter got hooked on the drug .

'This is an awakening': Native Americans find new hope after Standing Rock
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/standing-rock-dakota-pipeline-transformation-stories>
On Friday, as she prepared to pack up her tent in the Standing Rock 
encampments – her home for many months – her thoughts turned to an addiction 
crisis whose origins she sees in the gas and oil boom of the American west.

“We’re going to do a Mama awareness tour and recruit more warriors, then we 
are going to set up a Mama headquarters on Pine Ridge,” she said, envisioning 
“a Mama’s safe house for women and children affected by meth.”

A week after the Army Corps of Engineers denied a final permit for the Dakota 
Access pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/dakota-access-pipeline-permit-denied-standing-rock>
 to drill under the Missouri river, the thousands of indigenous “water 
protectors” who travelled to North Dakota to support the Standing Rock Sioux 
are trying to figure out their next steps.

Few believe the pipeline is truly dead. Energy Transfer Partners, the 
pipeline’s company, has gone to court over the permit denial, and the 
president-elect, Donald Trump, isopenly supportive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/26/donald-trump-dakota-access-pipeline-investment-energy-transfer-partners>
 of the Dakota Access pipeline andfossil fuel extraction in general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/scott-pruitt-trump-administration-epa-oil-gas-environment>
.

But with another winter storm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/standing-rock-dakota-access-pipeline-protesters-remain-snow>
 bearing down, and with the tribal chairman of the Standing Rock Sioux asking 
people to leave, many are taking the opportunity to move on. Where one week 
ago, the road to Oceti Sakowin, the main encampment, was packed with cars, 
busses, and trucks bringing supplies and reinforcements, today the traffic is 
heading in the opposite direction.

“There’s time for people to take a breath and rest and get ready,” said Dave 
Archambault, the tribal chairman, in an interview on Friday .

Though Archambault said that he agrees with his critics that the permit denial 
was just one battle within a larger war to defeat the pipeline, he argued that 
the next stage would be fought in the courtroom and in Washington DC, not on 
the banks of the Missouri river.

“There isn’t really a purpose for the camp to be in this location now,” he 
said. “You don’t want to put people’s lives at risk if you don’t have to, and 
we don’t have to.”

For many water protectors, the break is an opportunity to refocus on other 
campaigns around the same issues: indigenous rights and protecting the 
environment.

Standing Rock activists stay in place, fearing pipeline victory was a 'trick'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/dakota-access-pipeline-standing-rock-protest-trump>
Tara Houska, national campaigns director for Honor The Earth, left Standing 
Rock to drive to Minnesota on Friday, where she planned to testify in front of 
state lawmakers about the dangers ofEnbridge’s Line 3 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatchewan/line-3-pipeline-project-caused-concerns-several-saskatchewan-first-nations-1.3873300>
, a proposal to replace and expand an old pipeline that carries tar sands oil 
from Alberta, Canada, to Wisconsin.

Line 3’s proposed route goes through the freshwater lakes and rivers in 
northern Minnesota that contain theAnishinaabe’s hunting and fishing grounds 
<http://www.honorearth.org/sandpiper_line_3_corridor> The pipeline, Houska 
said, “threaten[s] the survival of our most important cultural identifier”.

But Houska was still planning to return to Standing Rock, in part to help 
defend the several hundred protesters who have pending legal cases from various 
mass arrests.

“This fight is not done,” she said. “This is a very temporary hold.”

Others at Standing Rock discussed travel to Hawaii, to help block the 
construction of a newtelescope on Mauna Kea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/26/hawaii-protesters-telescope-construction-bail-blockade>
, which Native Hawaiians say is a desecration. One group planned to travel to 
Wyoming to join a campaign to stop theculling of the Yellowstone buffalo 
<https://psmag.com/the-buffalos-burden-fa0d64b55aa4#.cq6a206ew>. A sign in camp 
tried to recruit people to help stop theSabal Trail pipeline 
<http://www.gainesville.com/news/20161104/protesters-gather-to-try-and-block-sabal-trail-pipeline-project>
 in Florida – it promised warmer weather.

Archambault, too, has considered getting involved in other indigenous 
campaigns. He said he planned to travel to Oak Flats, Arizona within the next 
few months to show support for the San Carlos Apache, who are fighting a
proposed copper mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/21/native-americans-apache-copper-mine-protest-capitol-arizona>
 on land they say is sacred.

After receiving so much support from other tribes, the chairman said, “If 
there’s anything Standing Rock can do to assist in a cause, we’ll be the first 
ones.”

For Richards, while meth is not strictly an environmental battle, it is 
inextricably linked to the fossil fuel economy and the crises facing indigenous 
people.

“It’s practically the same fight,” Richards said of the campaigns against meth 
addiction and crude oil pipelines. “It’s all connected.”

Meth took hold of Pine Ridge, she said, at the same time that the oil boom in 
the Bakken Formation ofNorth Dakota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/north-dakota> kicked off. The influx of 
male workers and money created an opening for gangs and the drug market.

“It all points back to Bakken.” 
 