
Between 2006 and 2014, the Ministry of Defence calculates that 616 British 
soldiers were VSI – very seriously injured – in Afghanistan. At least 160 
service personnel have had amputations while serving in Iraq and Afghanistan 
since the turn of the new century. To many of these men and women,Emma Willis 
MBE <http://www.emmawillis.com/bespokeOnline> is nothing less than a fairy 
godmother.

Willis, a Jermyn Street shirt maker whose clients include Benedict Cumberbatch 
and Barack Obama, first had the idea of making bespoke shirts for wounded 
soldiers in 2008, after hearing a Radio 4 documentary onHeadley Court 
<https://www.thednrc.org.uk/whats-happening-on-now/headley-court-is-preparing-to-move.aspx/?source=PPC&gclid=CLupoaLgr9ACFdQaGwodwOIOyA>
, the military’s medical rehabilitation centre near Epsom, Surrey. “What really 
moved me was their lack of self-pity and their fear of leaving the forces,” 
Willis recalls. “I thought: ‘What can I do?’ Well, I make shirts, so I just saw 
it as going and giving a gift of gratitude, something small.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70e1633c98115c6053b0557ce1de70f9ebb7045e%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Standing%20tall%3A%20the%20Jermyn%20Street%20tailor%20giving%20support%20to%20injured%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Standing%20tall%3A%20the%20Jermyn%20Street%20tailor%20giving%20support%20to%20injured%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70e1633c98115c6053b0557ce1de70f9ebb7045e%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 ‘Their lack of self-pity moved me’: Emma Willis. Photograph: Colin Thomas 
Over the years her remit has expanded in unexpected ways through her charity 
Style for Soldiers <https://www.emmawillis.com/style-for-soldiers>. Now, 
through her connections, she organises everything from hand-carved ebony 
walking canes and £400 vouchers for M&S suits to mentoring and work placements. 
She even offered sessions with a sex therapist, though there were no takers for 
that. She throws parties, and the Christmas bash has become the biggest annual 
reunion of injured servicemen. When one double amputee told Willis he was 
getting married, she arranged for a donor to foot the bill for his honeymoon to 
Mauritius.

If you spoke to my husband, he would say that Style for Soldiers has taken 
over my life
Emma Willis 
“If you spoke to my husband, he would say that Style for Soldiers has taken 
over my life,” smiles Willis. “But it has opened up my world in a lot of ways. 
It’s so rewarding, I know that later on in life I’ll have been so happy to have 
done this. For the soldiers, they have a box that arrives in the post or a gift 
voucher, but for me I get a little thank you most days. Yesterday one chap sent 
a lovely message saying: ‘I got my job because of the shirt. They said I looked 
the part.’ To get one of those a day, that’s quite enough.”

Speaking to the servicemen, it’s clear that Style for Soldiers fills a 
much-needed hole in the system. Because of their injuries, they often have to 
leave the military. They are sent off with an army pension, but often little 
idea of what to do next with their life. “A lot of them joined the forces at 17 
and didn’t have a great education,” says Willis. “Then they have a major 
injury: it might be physical; it might be psychological. They could easily be 
young marrieds, with young babies. How many more challenges can you give to a 
young person who has given so much for their country? It should not be left up 
to fortune to decide what happens to them.”

Although the number of British soldiers being severely injured has decreased 
in recent years, Willis believes that, with the men and women now having to 
adapt to life on civvy street, the need for support has never been greater.

“It’s not an insurmountable number of people,” Willis continues. “We’ve got 
750 soldiers on our database and these are numbers that could be coped with. 
They are all able to be identified and then kept in touch with. I think 
everyone feels the same: the public empathy for it would be 100%.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb065a2658331e3dbc7d6f4dfefea39e310a5b23%2F0_878_4802_6002%2F4802.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Standing%20tall%3A%20the%20Jermyn%20Street%20tailor%20giving%20support%20to%20injured%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Standing%20tall%3A%20the%20Jermyn%20Street%20tailor%20giving%20support%20to%20injured%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb065a2658331e3dbc7d6f4dfefea39e310a5b23%2F0_878_4802_6002%2F4802.jpg>
 ‘10ft tall again’: Craig Winspear and Hayley Willson. Photograph: Levon Biss 
for the Observer 
Craig Winspear and Hayley Willson

Craig Winspear, 34, was a lance corporal in the Royal Pioneer Corps 
<http://www.royalpioneercorps.co.uk/> in Afghanistan. His job was as a 
“searcher” – looking for and destroying IEDs. In December 2011 he stood on one, 
and both his legs and some fingers had to be amputated. His partner Hayley 
Willson, 36, runs a gift shop in Bedfordshire.

Craig Winspear: I always wanted to join the army, but I had a daughter quite 
young, which prevented me going in. But as she got older, I was on hard times 
and it was a job. I was 26 and it put a roof over my head and money in my 
pocket. Being a searcher is not the safest of jobs, but it is one of the 
greatest. You are taking a lot of IEDs off the ground, but also weapon caches, 
so you are saving a lot of lives. The more bombs you get off the ground and the 
more weapons and explosives you take, there’s five, 10, 20 people whose lives 
you’ve just saved. So a good job in that respect, but it’s obviously intense. 
You’re also getting shot at while you’re digging for bombs.

Emma Willis makes you feel smart and then she puts on an event for you to be 
smart at
Craig Winspear 
Hayley Willson: We’d only known each other six months before Craig got 
deployed to Afghanistan, nine months when he was injured. So a new 
relationship, but yeah, we’ve been together ever since.

CW: I remember Emma coming into Headley Court, where I was doing rehab. I was 
going to a wedding and she made me a shirt. I was in a horrible electric 
wheelchair then, so I didn’t really think much of what I looked like or 
anything. You fling your pyjamas on and go anywhere at that point. When you’re 
in your military uniform you feel 10ft tall, you stand proud. Emma Willis gives 
you a shirt that’s made specially for you and it makes you feel like that again 
– you’re proud, you’re 10ft tall again.

HW: When you go through a trauma, you do lose yourself. And he lost 
confidence. When Emma came, I remember Craig telling me there was this lady 
from a tailor’s, and she’d done these shirts. Then they get sent, and they 
arrive in a lovely box and you think: “This isn’t just a lady…”

CW: She sent us gifts: tea for two at the Ritz, things like that. Just 
randomly, you’ll get this package through and you open it, and it’s Emma again. 
It’s not just about making you feel smart – she makes you feel smart and then 
she puts on an event for you to be smart at.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F914aad2685b9120bdbe7d218f7d3c1943b938ae7%2F0_517_4802_6002%2F4802.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Standing%20tall%3A%20the%20Jermyn%20Street%20tailor%20giving%20support%20to%20injured%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Standing%20tall%3A%20the%20Jermyn%20Street%20tailor%20giving%20support%20to%20injured%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F914aad2685b9120bdbe7d218f7d3c1943b938ae7%2F0_517_4802_6002%2F4802.jpg>
 ‘I’m still here’: Andy Reid. Photograph: Levon Biss for the Observer 
Andy Reid

Andy Reid, 40, was a corporal in the 3rd Battalion Yorkshire Regiment 
<http://www.army.mod.uk/infantry/regiments/23987.aspx> when he stood on an IED 
during a routine foot patrol in Afghanistan in 2009. He lost both his legs and 
his right arm. He is now a motivational speaker and next year he will attempt 
to complete theBalfour Beatty Warrior Challenge 
<https://www.facebook.com/BalfourBeattyWarriorChallange/photos/pcb.1607379516230046/1607379476230050/?type=3>
, which will involve cycling 500 miles around the UK and then kayaking 100 
miles in two weeks.

Andy Reid: I remember waking up in Selly Oak Hospital in Birmingham and the 
doctor coming over. He told me what injuries I had and my first thought was: 
“I’m a survivor, not a victim.” Unfortunately I’d previously seen a sergeant on 
a patrol I had been on, and seven friends from my unit all pass away, so I 
thought: “I’m still here!”

My four-year-old son says where’s your arm? Has a bad man got it?
Andy Reid 
I wrote a diary when I was in Afghanistan and, after I was injured, that 
became a book,Standing Tall 
<https://johnblakebooks.com/standing-tall-the-taliban-nearly-killed-me-but-they-couldn-t-take-away-my-fighting-spirit-the-inspirational-story-of-a-true-british-hero.html>
. A lot of guys nowadays suffer with PTSD and I think writing the book was very 
therapeutic; rather than me storing it in my hard drive I was downloading it on 
to paper. I’ve also written a shorter version for William, my little boy. He’s 
only four at the moment, but maybe when he’s about seven or eight, he can read 
that and understand what happened a little bit more.

William knows now, anyway. He’s like: “Oh where’s your arm?” And I’ll say: “I 
had an accident and it fell off.” And he says: “Has a bad man got it?” And I 
say: “No mate, a bad man hasn’t got it.” Some of the questions can be quite 
hard to answer, but the last thing you want is him growing up misunderstanding 
about Muslims or Afghan people, because in general they are very nice people.

I met Emma Willis in 2009 at Headley Court and I just thought: “What an 
amazing gesture from an amazing woman.” For my shirts she puts cufflinks in, 
but because I’ve only one arm she puts Velcro on the cuff, so I can put it on 
and take it off myself. It’s a very small thing, but massive in respect to my 
personal needs. And I’ve got two false legs, so you tend to sweat more. Your 
body disperses heat from the extremities so if your extremities are missing or 
they are wrapped up in silicone, your body can’t get rid of that heat. Having a 
lightweight cotton shirt helps you cool down a lot easier, which is fantastic 
as well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31ffb2084f630e2f7654d5563eb566904dd2dc57%2F296_1434_4126_5157%2F4126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Standing%20tall%3A%20the%20Jermyn%20Street%20tailor%20giving%20support%20to%20injured%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Standing%20tall%3A%20the%20Jermyn%20Street%20tailor%20giving%20support%20to%20injured%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31ffb2084f630e2f7654d5563eb566904dd2dc57%2F296_1434_4126_5157%2F4126.jpg>
 ‘I was lucky to live’: Dave and Stacey Patterson. Photograph: Levon Biss for 
the Observer 
Dave and Stacey Patterson

Dave Patterson, 42, served in Iraq and Afghanistan with the Royal Engineers. 
In July 2009, the vehicle he was travelling in was blown up, leaving him with a 
spine crushed in eight places, fractured thyroid cartilage and frontal-lobe 
brain damage. He and his wife Stacey, 36, have two children.

Dave Patterson: I was lucky to live, because the bomb went off underneath my 
seat. The vehicle I was in was left in the bottom of a hole that was 5m wide 
and 2m deep. I was at the bottom of that. And that was the end of that.

It’s hard to explain what it felt like when I met Emma Willis – like someone 
cared
Dave Patterson 
Stacey Patterson: When I saw him in the hospital in Birmingham, he asked me to 
leave. He didn’t want me there. Then that hit home that it wasn’t David lying 
there. It was somebody else. And that person’s been there ever since. That’s 
hard. He’s not the man I married. The person I loved and who I knew disappeared 
that day. And when he came back he wasn’t the David I fell in love with. So 
I’ve had to learn to love somebody else.

DP: Our son Jack was two at the time.

SP: So Jack also now doesn’t know the David that was. He just knows his dad 
after injury. And I think Jack would have had a completely different experience 
of his dad before the injury. David became more aggressive, quick-tempered; 
when he came home, because he wasn’t in the army he used Jack to command 
almost. He wanted Jack to be regimental in what he did and he was just a child. 
He’s still a child. So that was where we argued, we were butting heads.

DP: I was down on the brain-injury ward at Headley Court when I met Emma 
Willis. It’s hard to explain what it felt like – like someone cared. And 
getting shown that someone was appreciative of what you’ve done. Having someone 
come to show that and say thanks.

SP: When David first got injured he could be self-destructive. Spend it, spend 
it, spend it, don’t pay the bills, spend it, spend it, spend it, don’t pay the 
bills.

DP: Because of the situation I was in with my head and my functional skills, 
the worst thing in the world the army did was give you the money without any 
help. That’s probably the worst thing you could do and they did it. I’m not 
blaming them for it, because it’s just the way it is.

SP: It’s different from the life I had before, but I’m not saying it’s a bad 
life I’ve got now. But it is different. And David’s home, he’s watching the 
kids grow up now, whereas before in the army he didn’t, so that’s good.

DP: Once you’re gone from the army, you’re gone. And I’m sad to say that. I 
never regret anything I did. What I did, I chose to do. So it’s not a regret, I 
thoroughly enjoyed it. But it’s sad, because you’ve got someone else you don’t 
even know, like Emma, who does everything for you.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F439ebef335ca22f067257663b9dedfe46a9b56de%2F252_1330_4336_5420%2F4336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Standing%20tall%3A%20the%20Jermyn%20Street%20tailor%20giving%20support%20to%20injured%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Standing%20tall%3A%20the%20Jermyn%20Street%20tailor%20giving%20support%20to%20injured%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Four-secret-weapon-suits-for-injured-soldiers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F439ebef335ca22f067257663b9dedfe46a9b56de%2F252_1330_4336_5420%2F4336.jpg>
 ‘My injury humbled me a bit’: Bruce Ekman. Photograph: Levon Biss for the 
Observer 
Bruce Ekman

Major Ekman, 36, was in Iraq and Afghanistan, and continues to serve in the 
Royal Logistic Corps <http://www.army.mod.uk/logistic/23443.aspx>. In July 
2011, while he was on patrol in Afghanistan, an IED exploded under his vehicle. 
He was left with extensive damage to his left foot and shin.

Bruce Ekman: When I was injured, they told me they were going to amputate my 
foot. I was sobbing – not because of my foot but because I thought my career 
was over. I knew nothing else. I grew up wanting to be a soldier. I couldn’t 
dream of doing anything else. I’m so fortunate, I thank God that I can continue 
to soldier now.

I grew up wanting to be a soldier. I couldn’t dream of doing anything else. I 
thank God that I can continue
Bruce Ekman 
I think my injury humbled me a bit. You go from being fit, strong, confident, 
loud. One moment you’re there with all of your closest friends and you go from 
that to being injured. The army support network,Help for Heroes 
<http://www.helpforheroes.org.uk/> and Headley Court, are amazing, but once the 
guys leave that, they are home and they’ve got to get jobs. It’s a massive 
confidence hit.

Everything you’ve planned for, your hopes, your dreams, your career is gone. 
Emma Willis understands the vulnerabilities and she recognises the crushing 
blow to self-esteem of young, fit, happy soldiers who have got these injuries. 
Then she does something about it – and she does it personally and directly.

Charles Dickens wrote: “Any man may be in good spirits and good temper when 
he’s well dressed.” When I met Emma I was on crutches, I had my foot all pinned 
up. While she’s sizing a person up, she asks you questions, she finds out about 
you and about your life. I said it was my wife’s birthday coming up, and not 
long after – through one of her connections, who is a fashion editor – she 
posted us out a handbag.

I’ve just written my MBA thesis: “The Butcher, the Baker, the Fancy Shirt 
Maker”. It’s on Emma Willis’s context-focused philanthropy model: she does 
philanthropy but in what she’s good at, which is shirt-making and tailoring, 
and then she uses her connections.

Russell & Bromley has recently donated loads of pairs of shoes to the charity 
for people like myself, because I’m two different sizes after my injury and I 
struggle to get shoes, and then I need to buy two pairs. You couldn’t dream of 
support like that for an injured serviceman. You expect nothing, you ask for 
nothing, and she helps you in so many ways.

emmawillis.com/style-for-soldiers 
<http://www.emmawillis.com/style-for-soldiers>
 