
New South Wales has reportedly relented and agreed to allow the controversial 
Adler shotgun to be reclassified to the toughest of the four categories, 
opening the way for limited importation to resume.

The states will discuss reclassifying the lever-action Adler shotgun at 
Friday’s Coalition of Australian Governments meeting in Canberra.

The Abbott government paused the importation of the Adler 110 shotgun in 2015 
after the Lindt cafe siege.

We’ve reached the fork in the road on gun laws. Which way will we go? | 
Samantha Lee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/21/weve-reached-the-fork-in-the-road-on-gun-laws-which-way-will-we-go>
That ban could not be changed until a consensus can be reached on lifting it 
from the current category A, which allowed recreational shooters to own one, to 
a more restrictive category.

On Sunday the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, said one 
proposal was for the guns to be reclassified as category D, making them 
available to basically only “very few users” such as feral pest controllers, 
generally working for governments.

But “the classification of firearms and regulation of them is a matter for 
states and territories under the national firearms agreement,” he told 
reporters in Sydney.

State police and justice ministers met with the federal justice minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/21/adler-ban-ministers-fail-to-reach-agreement-on-reclassifying-shotgun>
, Michael Keenan, in October to discuss how to deal with the gun, which is 
capable of firing eight shots in eight seconds.

All of the states except NSW called for the weapon to be given a “D” 
classification – the toughest of the four categories.

Michael Keenan criticised for holding 'one-sided' meetings with gun lobby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/25/michael-keenan-criticised-for-holding-one-sided-meetings-with-gun-lobby>
The ABC and News Corp reported on Sunday that NSW had agreed to that 
classification.

The Alannah and Madeline Foundation, established in memory of sisters killed 
in the Port Arthur massacre, cautioned against any watering down of gun laws.

“In particular, there should be no moves to water down the restrictions 
applied to category D firearms,” chief executive Lesley Podesta said in a 
statement on Sunday.

“Now is not the time to be horse-trading away community safety.”

The issue has caused divisions in the government, with Nationals senators 
Bridget McKenzie and John Williams voting last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/nationals-senators-break-with-liberals-and-vote-to-end-adler-shotgun-ban>
 with Liberal Democrat David Leyonhjelm in a bid to overturn the import ban.
 