
St Etienne <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stetienne> have signed Steed 
Malbranque from Sunderland. The Ligue 1 club have agreed a two-year deal for 
the 31-year-old midfielder, who returns to his native France for an undisclosed 
fee.

The Sunderland manager, Steve Bruce, admitted that Malbranque, who began his 
career at St Etienne's fierce rivals Lyon, was on his way from the club. "Of 
course Steed has done remarkably well for the club over the last two or three 
years, but it's maybe time that he moves on and we wish him well," he told the
Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> Echo.

Blackburn Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blackburn> have 
completed the signing of the Scotland striker David Goodwillie from Dundee 
United. Goodwillie, 22, has signed a four-year contract. Blackburn did not 
disclose the transfer fee involved, however Goodwillie is believed to be 
costing Blackburn an initial Â£2m.

He was reportedly wanted by Blackpool and Cardiff before the battle for his 
services came down to a contest between Rangers and Blackburn. Rovers agreed a 
fee with United on Friday, and although Rangers made several efforts to strike 
a deal, they did not match Dundee United's demands. The structure of payments 
was reported to have been a stumbling block for the Scottish champions.

Blackburn said: "Rovers have seen off fierce competition from a host of other 
clubs to make their first signing of the summer."

Rangers are understood to believe their final offer was better than the bid 
from Blackburn and that United chairman Stephen Thompson did not want to do 
business with them. However, Thompson insisted the total package on offer from 
Rangers was not acceptable.

Goodwillie made his Scotland debut against Faroe Islands in November and has 
been included in Craig Levein's squad for the friendly against Denmark next 
Wednesday. He won the PFA Scotland's Young Player of the Year award in May, and 
had two years remaining on his contract with United, having signed a one-year 
extension in March.

The Tannadice club tonight wished Goodwillie well, saying: "Dundee United 
confirm that the transfer of David Goodwillie to Blackburn Rovers for an 
undisclosed fee is now complete. Everyone atDundee United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> thanks David for his 
efforts and wishes him all the best for his future career."
 