
Stephen Dawson’s nightmare began with an early‑morning police raid. He had 
gone to bed a happy man, his professional and personal lives better than ever. 
He was the 28-year-old captain of Barnsley and the father of two young 
daughters with his girlfriend, Stacey. But he was about to be wrenched from 
that cosy existence and catapulted into a bewildering drama in which he was 
miscast as a conspirator in what threatened to be one of the biggest scandals 
in English football history. “It nearly broke me,” Dawson says, three days 
after theNational Crime Agency ended his nine-month ordeal by confirming that 
the case against him has been dropped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/14/fake-sheikh-spot-fixing-players-no-action-cps>
. Now he is the one seeking answers.

“I’ll never forget 2 April 2014,” Dawson says. “They came at 6.30am. Ten 
officers. They searched our house from top to bottom and seized some of our 
belongings – my mobile phones, my laptop, my girlfriend’s phone, documents. 
Then they said I had to go down to the station. We didn’t know what was going 
on.”

Dawson was arrested on suspicion of involvement in a major spot-fixing scam, 
whereby players supposedly took bribes in return for deliberately getting 
booked. He was one of 13 players – all of whom denied any wrongdoing and have 
since been cleared – collared by the NCA following an alleged sting byMazher 
Mahmood <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mazher-mahmood>, the so-called “fake 
sheikh” who had written a front-page article in the Sun on Sunday the previous 
December under the headline“Ex Prem stars in match fix probe” 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/5311767/football-match-fixing-exposed-by-the-sun.html>
. Within hours of receiving information from Mahmood, the NCA swooped on the 
players.

“The police asked me about three matches in which I had been booked that 
season,” says Dawson, who had been booked in seven of the 32 matches he had 
played up to that point. “They asked if I’d got any payment for the cards. It 
may sound weird but I honestly didn’t know whether to laugh or to cry.”

After being held for 20 hours, the Dubliner was released on bail pending 
investigation into three offences: conspiracy to commit acts of bribery, 
conspiracy to cheat and suspicion of entering into an arrangement to launder 
criminal proceeds relating to match-fixing. “I couldn’t believe it,” Dawson 
says. “I know what’s right and wrong. I’ve got three points on my licence from 
eight or nine years ago and that’s the extent of my criminal activity. But I 
was being told my career could be ruined and I could go to prison for a long 
time. And this wasn’t just the police, I was told the NCA was above the police, 
like Britain’s FBI or something.”

He did not know what to do. “I’m not ashamed to say I was nervous and scared. 
I obviously thought I’d better get some legal advice so I rang the Professional 
Footballers’ Association. They basically said: ‘This is too serious, we can’t 
help you.’” The PFA did not respond to the Guardian when asked about this. “I 
was disappointed with that. When even your own union say they can’t do anything 
for you, you really worry. I knew I hadn’t done anything but you always hear 
stories about people being convicted of things they didn’t do so you can’t help 
wondering: ‘What do they think they have on me?’ and: ‘They’re not actually 
going to go through with this, are they?’”

It frustrates him that he still does not know why his name came up in the 
investigations. Six of the arrested players were on the books of Preston North 
End, another three had family ties – Stephen, Akpo and Sam Sodje, the last of 
whom had allegedly been filmed boasting to Mahmood that he took money in return 
for getting a yellow card. The only link Dawson could see between himself and 
any of the others was that he knew two of the Preston players from having 
played with them at Bury four years previously. “I had never even spoken to any 
of the others,” he says. “I kept asking the police how I got dragged into this 
but they wouldn’t tell me.”

One of the players, Cristian Montaño, was sacked by Oldham Athletic for gross 
misconduct when the allegations emerged.Barnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnsley> backed Dawson. “All credit to 
the manager, Danny Wilson, because he told me straight away that he didn’t 
believe it, that he knows what sort of person I am,” Dawson says. “I had spent 
20 hours being questioned in a police station and then the next day, without 
any sleep, I was leading the team out as captain against Brighton. It really 
helped knowing that there were people ready to stand by me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2Fstephen-dawson-match-fixing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F16%2F1421429861485%2Fa5dfe7d8-5709-4040-a233-2c71549ccf02-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Dawson%3A%20the%20police%20told%20me%20I%20could%20go%20to%20prison%20for%20match-fixing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2Fstephen-dawson-match-fixing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Dawson%3A%20the%20police%20told%20me%20I%20could%20go%20to%20prison%20for%20match-fixing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2Fstephen-dawson-match-fixing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F16%2F1421429861485%2Fa5dfe7d8-5709-4040-a233-2c71549ccf02-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Rochdale midfielder Stephen Dawson at the club’s training ground. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for The Guardian. 
Barnsley offered to give him footage of three games under investigation. “I 
didn’t look at them,” Dawson says. “The police already had them. I didn’t need 
to see them because I know how I play.”

Other people, however, began to look at him differently. “People were saying: 
‘You don’t get arrested for nothing, surely there must be something awry with 
him,’” he says. “Things were written about me. Opposition players were saying: 
‘Are you going to get booked today for a few quid?’ and fans chanted: ‘Cheat!’ 
and so on. You have to be big enough not to react. But there were times in 
games towards the end of last season where I just had enough and I was ringing 
my mum and dad in Ireland and saying: ‘I’m thinking of coming home.’ I’m far 
from the best player but I think I’ve shown over the 400 or so games I’ve 
played here that I’m a wholehearted one who gives 100% every time he goes on to 
the pitch. But after 11 or 12 years of giving it my all over here, I was nearly 
broken.”

His family were affected, too. His younger brother, Kevin, a midfielder at 
Yeovil Town, also began to get funny looks and comments even though the 
authorities never even asked about him. “And my daughter had kids coming up to 
her in school saying: ‘Your dad’s going to jail,’ and stuff like that,” Dawson 
says. “How do you explain to a seven-year-old that the police made a mistake 
and they won’t be coming back to the house? For nine months, every time there 
was a knock on the door we were scared.”

Dawson believes his career suffered. The allegations came when he was at the 
height of his playing and earning powers – he was in his third season in the 
Championship and felt he had proven his ability at that level, even though 
Barnsley were ultimately relegated. The club offered him a new contract but he 
wanted to stay in the Championship and, since there had been talk of interest 
from other clubs, he rejected Barnsley’s offer. But he soon found that interest 
in him had evaporated. Even clubs from lower leagues turned their backs on him. 
At the start of this season he was unemployed. “One former manager of mine rang 
me and said ‘This stuff is hurting you, you shouldn’t be without a club.’” In 
the middle of August 2014 another former manager, Keith Hill, who had signed 
him for Barnsley from Leyton Orient in 2012, offered to bring him toRochdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale>. It was a league lower down on 
a one-year contract with a salary less than half he had been earning at 
Oakwell, but Dawson was short of options. “Obviously he had to ask me about 
[the allegations] and I explained exactly what I knew and asked him: ‘Will this 
affect me?’ and he said: ‘I know you,’ so from then I just wanted to kick on 
and do everything I could for him and the club to thank them for believing in 
me.”

By that stage, although he was still free only on bail, the investigation into 
him was faltering. The trial ofTulisa Contostavlos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tulisa-contostavlos> collapsed over doubts 
about Mahmood’s credibility, and the Judge Alistair McCreath said there were 
“strong grounds” for believing that the journalist had lied under oath and 
attempted to manipulate a witness. The threat of prosecution continued to hang 
over the players, however, until last Wednesday, when they each received 
letters from the NCA informing them that the case against them would be 
dropped. “It just said no further action would be taken and my belongings will 
be returned next week,” Dawson says. “I can’t describe the relief. This week I 
had the first good night’s sleep in ages.”

Finally Dawson can concentrate on his football. “It was hard on and off the 
pitch. I’m blessed to have had the support of my family and throughout we just 
kept saying to stay positive, that the truth will come out eventually. But it 
isn’t easy playing football when you’re wondering if somebody is watching you 
and ready to interpret any mistake as a sign of corruption. I even asked the 
manager this season: ‘If I mistime a tackle are they going to say I did it 
deliberately?’ From the day after I signed, the players gave the typical 
football banter, saying: ‘I hope we’re not going to be leaving training in a 
police car today,’ and such things. It was light-hearted stuff but I didn’t 
feel like laughing at the time. It’s nice to be able to put all that to bed now 
and concentrate on playing.”

He still intends to get to the bottom of the accusations that were made 
against him. “This was not a mediocre little thing,” he says. “Somebody tried 
to wreck my career and I was told I could do serious prison time. That’s not 
something you can let go lightly. I want to find out who dragged me into it and 
try to get some sort of justice.”

For now, though, his mind is on a big week for promotion-chasing Rochdale, who 
face Crawley Town on Saturday before a midweek trip to Oldham followed by one 
of the biggest matches of Dawson’s career – the FA Cup fourth round tie with 
Stoke City. “The arrest couldn’t have come at a worse time, but the letter 
couldn’t have come at a better time,” Dawson says.
 