
What should have been a hurdle well cleared became an afternoon racked with 
inconvenience for Southampton. There had been little suggestion thatNorwich City
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/norwichcity> would come back to stir a 
half-full Carrow Road into life when, 87 seconds into added time, an unmarked 
Steven Naismith flicked his team’s second equaliser into the far corner.

If Claude Puel’s side win the replay they will wind up playing nine games in 
January; they are out of form, stretched and fatigued and will count this as a 
missed opportunity to clear their heads.

The Norwich manager, Alex Neil, described the result as “fair-ish” and 
accepted his team were fortunate.

Leicester come back to sink Everton with Ahmed Musa’s quickfire double
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/everton-leicester-city-fa-cup-match-report>
There was little they could do about the volley from Virgil van Dijk, who 
watched a Dusan Tadic cross all the way before cracking it past Michael 
McGovern, that gaveSouthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> a deserved lead seven 
minutes before half-time, but a stroke of fortune afforded them the goal that 
made the game’s course less predictable.

It marked a tough welcome for Southampton’s debutant goalkeeper, the 
19-year-old Harry Lewis. He had been let off without a caution for carrying the 
ball outside his area in the first half but was less lucky after miscontrolling 
a harmless Van Dijk backpass in the 51st minute. His heavy touch was seized 
upon by Cameron Jerome, the subsequent foul on the Norwich striker was coming a 
mile off and Steven Whittaker beat him from the penalty spot. Having left 
Shrewsbury Town for Southampton in 2015, Lewis shares an alma mater with Joe 
Hart; the spotlight on their abilities with the ball at their feet seems an 
unfortunate coincidence.

Lewis’s error looked set to be a footnote when Maya Yoshida thudded a fine 
header past McGovern. Neil was annoyed that Timm Klose, his centre-back, had 
hobbled off the pitch and receive treatment for an achilles injury in the 
buildup. With Klose missing, the away side capitalised and until Whittaker 
found Naismith at the near post looked to be seeing things out with assurance.

Booing Joey Barton the only sport as Sunderland and Burnley draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/sunderland-burnley-fa-cup-match-report>
Instead, Puel has to raise the confidence of Southampton, who arrived after 
three consecutive defeats, before Wednesday’s League Cup semi-final first leg 
against Liverpool. “We did the most difficult thing [by scoring] the second 
goal and it’s our fault we gave them an opportunity to come back,” he said, but 
he has more on his plate than an analysis of his team’s failings.

Among Puel’s eight changes was the omission of José Fonte, who was revealed on 
Thursday to have requested a transfer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/southampton-jose-fonte-submits-transfer-request>
. “I don’t want to give a reason, it’s just a particular situation with a 
player who has a question about his future,” Puel said, adding he would decide 
by Monday whether to consider Fonte for the match with Liverpool. The 
defender’s leadership might have averted the most irritating of outcomes here.
 