
Steve McClaren did not expect to be here again. When it emerged that he would 
be returning to Derby County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/12/steve-mcclaren-set-for-shock-derby-county-return-manager>
, 17 months after being sacked by the club, eyebrows were raised, to say the 
least. McClarendeparted the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/25/derby-county-steve-mcclaren-sacked>
 after a catastrophic run of form during which the club dropped from the top of 
the Championship in March to out of the play-off spots in May, but his 
dismissal came about after a flirtation with Newcastle United towards the end 
of the season – a flirtation that, of course, eventually turned into a 
relationship.

“The circumstances in which I left weren’t ideal and that’s my fault,” 
McClaren said on Friday, apologising for “not quashing” rumours he might leave. 
“To get a second chance, I’m very lucky. There’s some unfinished business.”

Steve McClaren back as Derby County manager 17 months after being sacked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/12/steve-mcclaren-set-for-shock-derby-county-return-manager>
McClaren apologised for the way things ended but only after being pressed a 
few times. From the off it is clear that this is not a standard managerial 
appointment.

When McClaren talked of being lucky, he meant it in the way someone talks 
about being blessed with a wonderful family, rather than the sense of being 
fortunate to get a job given his recent record. But his managerial career 
(certainly post‑Twente) has largely been built on a sense of optimism that 
might not be entirely justified. Nottingham Forest appointed him despite his 
failure with Wolfsburg, Twente took him back despite his time at the City 
Ground ending quickly and Derby brought him in (the first time) despite his 
being sacked by the Dutch club. Newcastle then pursued their interest despite 
that late-season collapse at Derby and now he is back at the iPro Stadium, 
despite all of those things.

His last clear success was the Dutch title in 2010. Since then highlights have 
come intermittently. Yet, along with a reputation as an excellent coach, that 
has been enough to keep him in employment. This latest appointment seems the 
most optimistic of all, as quite apart from this questionable record, the 
“baggage” between club and manager remains. As with a marriage reconciled after 
previous infidelity there may always be suspicion.

“There was a certain amount of healing,” McClaren said of the talks in which 
previous differences were “thrashed out” between him, the chief executive, Sam 
Rush, and the owner, Mel Morris. “Whenever I’ve been successful in the past 
it’s because of the relationship with the owner.”

Therein lies the rub. Morris’s relationship with his managers has sometimes 
been tricky and McClaren is Derby’s fifth manager of the calendar year: Paul 
Clement began it in charge, then after he was sacked Darren Wassall took over 
until the end of the season. Then Nigel Pearson arrived in the summer and, when 
his brief spellwas brought to an end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/derby-county-part-company-nigel-pearson>
, Chris Powell had a couple of games. Leeds United will be McClaren’s first 
opponents on Saturday and, when a managerial situation is less stable than at a 
Massimo Cellino club, it is clear something is awry.

“You go into a football club and sometimes it takes off and sometimes it will 
take time,” McClaren said, aware that time has not been a luxury available to 
many of his predecessors. “It’s whether you actually get the time to get 
through that. That’s what you always hope for. We will have conflict and 
disappointments and things to sort out but, as long as we do it together, 
there’s no reason why we can’t be successful again.”

Perhaps unwittingly, McClaren thereby touched upon what has arguably made 
Derby the most frustrating side in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>, if not the country. This 
is a club at which everything seems to be right in theory, from squad to 
stadium to training ground, but things keep going wrong. Is bringing back a man 
sacked last year the best course of action? Maybe. They have tried most other 
things, so why not?

Maybe McClaren deserves a second chance on purely footballing grounds. In 2013 
he inherited a team in the wrong half of the table and turned them into the 
best side in the division,cruelly losing in the play-off final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/24/derby-county-qpr-championship-play-off-final-match-report>
. And then, before the collapse, for three-quarters of the following season 
they were the same, winning while playing brilliant football, a point 
emphasised by him and Rush.

This is perhaps McClaren’s last real chance for success but for the club it 
therefore represents a significant gamble. Life is rarely dull atDerby County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/derbycounty>.
 