
Ben Kennedy scored the only goal as League Two Stevenage shocked the 
Championship sideIpswich with a 1-0 EFL Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/efl-cup> win at Portman Road. Kennedy was 
quickest to react after Dean Gerken could only parry a deflected shot from 
Charlie Lee eight minutes after the interval.

There was another victory for a League Two side over a Championship opponent 
thanks to Luke Berry’s extra-time goal forCambridge United against Sheffield 
Wednesday. With the tie looking to be heading for penalties at 1-1, Berry 
popped up to fire home the winner in the 118th minute.

Jack Dunn scored a hat-trick for Morecambe as the Championship side Rotherham 
were sent packing in an extra-time 5-4 defeat.

Ryan Harley scored in the 100th minute to give Exeter a 1-0 win over Brentford 
and Kevin van Veen struck twice in extra time to giveScunthorpe a 2-0 victory 
againstNotts County.

The substitute Ryan Lowe scored both Crewe goals as they came from behind to 
beatSheffield United 2-1 and Matthew Dolan scored from inside his own half as 
Yeovilsprang another shock by beating Walsall 2-0.

Northampton needed a John-Joe O’Toole header in extra-time to beat Barnsley 
2-1 and Liam Sercombe wasOxford’s hero when he grabbed the winner in the 1-0 
victory overBirmingham.

Coventry beat Portsmouth 3-2, Blackpool overcame Bolton 4-2 and Accrington beat
Bradford 11-10 on penalties after the game had finished 0-0.

Louis Dodds struck the winner 13 minutes from time to earn Shrewsbury a 2-1 
victory overHuddersfield. Ajay Leitch-Smith had given the Shrews a flying start 
with a first-minute opener. Elias Kachunga hauled Huddersfield level six 
minutes before the break but Dodds latched on to Ivan Toney’s ball to win the 
game.

Josh Law popped up with an 83rd-minute winner to send  through with a 2-1 win 
overWigan and Anthony Stokes took his goal tally for the season to three with 
two forBlackburn in their 3-1 win at Mansfield.

Eoin Doyle’s last-minute goal gave Preston a 1-0 triumph over Hartlepool and 
Tammy Abraham’s second goal in two games earnedBristol City a 1-0 win at Wycombe
.

Conor Coady helped Wolves to a 2-1 victory over Crawley and first-half goals 
from Joey van den Berg and Roy Beerens gaveReading a 2-0 win over Plymouth.

Cauley Woodrow scored twice to help Fulham to a 3-2 win at Leyton Orient and 
Jamie Murphy also scored twice as Brighton eased pastColchester 4-0.

Richard Keogh gave Derby a 1-0 victory over Grimsby, Millwall safely 
progressed to the second round after a 4-0 win atBarnet and Jamie Ward’s 
stoppage-time winner helpedNottingham Forest to a 2-1 triumph at Doncaster.

There were also wins for MK Dons, Peterborough, Gillingham, Rochdale, Carlisle 
andCheltenham.
 