
Steve McClaren has returned to Derby County as manager only 17 months after he 
was sacked by the Championship club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/25/derby-county-steve-mcclaren-sacked>
 in acrimonious circumstances. The former England manager held talks with Derby 
on Wednesday with a view to taking over from Nigel Pearson and the two parties 
reached agreement on a contract that runs until the end of next season.

Out of work since being dismissed by Newcastle United in March, McClaren fell 
out with the Derby board at the end of the 2014-15 season, when his contract 
was terminated after a poor end to that campaign. Derby’s promotion challenge 
was derailed after they won only two out of their last 13 league games and the 
feeling within the club at the time was that their cause had not been helped by 
constant rumours linking McClaren with the Newcastle job.

Aston Villa prepare to announce Steve Bruce as new manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/steve-bruce-new-aston-villa-manager>
McClaren, however, has patched up any differences with Mel Morris, Derby’s 
owner, and is ready to go back to the club for a fourth time. He represented 
Derby as a player between 1985-88, returned as Jim Smith’s assistant in 1995 
and was appointed as manager in September 2013.

“I am excited to be back at Derby County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/derbycounty> as the club’s manager,” said 
McClaren. “I have a great affiliation with the club, having been here on three 
previous occasions, and I am really delighted at the prospect of finishing what 
we started back in September 2013. I regret how my time at Derby ended back in 
2015 and I am very motivated to put things right for the club and our 
supporters.

“My ultimate aspiration remains exactly what it was before, to take Derby 
County back to the Premier League. This football club has fantastic ambition, 
brilliant supporters and wonderful backing from the chairman Mel Morris.”

McClaren led Derby to the Championship play-off final in that first season in 
charge, only to lose 1-0 to Queens Park Rangers. There has been little 
stability at Derby ever since. Paul Clement replaced McClaren in 2015 and was 
sacked eight months later, with the club fifth in the table at the time. Darren 
Wassall then took over until the end of the season, when the club turned to 
Pearson.However, an explosive row with Morris led to Pearsonleaving the club by 
mutual consent on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/08/derby-county-part-company-nigel-pearson>
.

Chris Powell, Pearson’s No2, was placed in temporary charge for the recent 
matches at Cardiff and Reading, during which Pearson was suspended pending an 
internal investigation, and the former England left-back was thought to be the 
favoured choice to take over permanently. Yet Powell will instead retain his 
role as assistant manager and work alongside McClaren, whose first game back in 
the Derby dugout will be at home against Leeds United on Saturday. Derby are 
currently 20th in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> with 10 points from 11 
matches.
 