
You will rarely hear anything like the joyful relief that greets a first home 
win of the season. Steve McClaren’s second spell in charge of Derby County 
began as his first did,with victory against Leeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/derby-county-leeds-united-championship-match-report>
, this one their first at the IPro Stadium since April. Crowd and manager, the 
latter reappointed this week 17 months after being sacked, sighed deeply when 
the 1-0 win was confirmed.

McClaren left his seat in the stands in favour of the bench only for the final 
part of each half, presumably because it would be poor form to pace frantically 
around the directors’ box. When pitchside he was repeatedly shooed back into 
the technical area by the ever-officious fourth official, once catching himself 
stepping over the line and ostentatiously hopping back in. Afterwards he was 
asked how he had found his second Derby debut. “Endure is the word, not enjoy. 
Especially the last 10 minutes.”

Football League your thoughts: Norwich and Newcastle on track for quick return
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/oct/15/football-league-thoughts-newcastle-norwich-brighton>
For while this win gave plenty to encourage McClaren, Derby were clinging on 
in the closing stages, as Leeds hit a post in injury time, and the manager 
admitted they “rode their luck” at points. “I think you could see the 
nervousness of the players,” he said, but overcoming those nerves was a huge 
positive, particularly against a tough Leeds side. “Amongst all that 
nervousness the players still fought, the attitude was great.”

He was right to be pleased but McClaren’s biggest problem is goals. Nobody in 
the division has scored fewer than Derby’s anaemic seven this season, while 
they have scored two in a game only once. A baffling summer in the transfer 
market is partly to blame. Under Nigel Pearson, Derby essentially stood pat 
until the last week, before sending the centre-forward Chris Martin on loan to 
Fulham and signing the winger Ikechi Anya and a forward, Matej Vydra, who does 
his best work playing off a bigger No9. Moving Martin on was not an 
unreasonable move as last season was not one of his best, but not directly 
replacing him was curious.

It also leaves McClaren with a frontline that is not blessed with physicality. 
Tom Ince, Vydra, Anya and the match-winner, Johnny Russell, all did well 
against Leeds but their collective lack of size does limit their play. “There’s 
no point in us kicking it long,” McClaren said, “so we have to play in a 
certain style, and that takes courage. It takes a lot of work, and we’ve 
certainly got the players to do that.”

The team McClaren has inherited is very different from the one he left. Of the 
14 players that appeared in his last game in May 2015, six remain, of whom 
three started on Saturday. One of the departed is England’s newest 
international Jesse Lingard, a loanee at the time and perhaps an illustration 
of the change at Derby that the chief executive, Sam Rush, described as 
“astonishing”.

“It’s a completely different team to what we had,” he said. “It plays in a 
different way. That’s gone and we have to rebuild it.” For McClaren this must 
be like trying to navigate a town he lived in years ago. The bones of the place 
are the same but everything is slightly unfamiliar; Main Street has been 
pedestrianised, the old Kings Arms is now a gastropub and there is an 
e-cigarette store where Woolworth’s used to be. “It’s different,” he said on 
Friday when asked if the new squad was better than the old, saying he would 
need a few weeks to assess its quality. “I saw certain aspects I liked and the 
potential of the team,” he said on Saturday, pausing before a rueful chuckle. 
“And a lot of work. We’ve got a long way to go. But if we’ve got that attitude, 
and we fight and work, I have no complaints.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsteve-mcclaren-task-transform-derby-county%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1aab6e3f6e8db19cf1d29d4f251e2c51e0c656d%2F0_0_3153_1892%2F3153.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20McClaren%20needs%20time%20to%20rebuild%20Derby%20County%20and%20nurture%20potential%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsteve-mcclaren-task-transform-derby-county%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20McClaren%20needs%20time%20to%20rebuild%20Derby%20County%20and%20nurture%20potential%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsteve-mcclaren-task-transform-derby-county%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1aab6e3f6e8db19cf1d29d4f251e2c51e0c656d%2F0_0_3153_1892%2F3153.jpg>
 Steve McClaren speaks to Pontus Jansson during the match. Photograph: Lynne 
Cameron/Getty Images 
McClaren requires time to work out if these players are up to snuff and, if 
not, time to build his own team. It must be hoped he will be given that but, as 
he is Derby’s fifth manager of the calendar year and the chairman, Mel Morris, 
is, shall we say, ‘hands-on’ (last season he took it upon himself to visit the 
dressing room and give the team a personal ticking off, and that was after a 
draw) the lurking fear is he might not be. Pearson was at least partly 
dismissed due to a disagreement with Morris, so McClaren has making nice with 
the boss to contend with as well.

The good news is that, given their poor start to the season, expectation might 
be a little lighter. McClaren saw potential, the green shoots of a good team 
against Leeds but that more or less sums up the last three years at Derby. This 
is theoretically an excellent team and has been for a while. McClaren’s task is 
to make it excellent in practice.

Talking points

• Also at Derby Chris Powell, who returned to his role as assistant manager 
after McClaren’s arrival, provided more evidence that he is in fact the nicest 
man in football. Before the game he was larking around with some ballboys, when 
one of them nutmegged him with a backheel. Rather than tick off the lad for his 
impertinence, he high-fived all the ballboys present. Then afterwards, as he 
was leaving the stadium, an eager fan approached him to ask if he’d sign a 
picture of himself, the problem being that the photo he was handed was, oddly, 
of former Leicester striker Ade Akinbiyi. As he’s Chris Powell, he took it in 
good heart.

• The Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> has a 
new leader. After Huddersfield were beaten by Sheffield Wednesday, Norwich now 
top the division after they beat Rotherham 3-1, Wes Hoolahan scoring the 
stand-out goal with a wonderful twinkle-toed effort. Newcastle are level on 
points with the Canaries after they beat Brentford by the same score, both 
sides just a point ahead of Huddersfield. It’s tight now, but this could be the 
first sign of the two favourites for promotion pulling clear.

• Two clubs wallowing in despair met at The Valley, as Coventry visited 
Charlton. Both sets of fans stood in solidarity with each other before the 
game, the home fans lamenting thecontinued presence of the owner, Roland 
Duchâtelet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/08/charlton-athletic-boycotts-roland-duchatelet-katrien-meire>
, while the visitorswish to be rid of Sisu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/12/coventry-city-decline-despair-league-one>
, the group that controls their club. And they joined forces during the match 
too,throwing hundreds of toy pigs on to the pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/charlton-coventry-pigs-owner-protest-valley>
, disrupting the play but very much making their point.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsteve-mcclaren-task-transform-derby-county%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcde684f0a0b082209736da9a9bf68760b1420f33%2F0_0_2443_1784%2F2443.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20McClaren%20needs%20time%20to%20rebuild%20Derby%20County%20and%20nurture%20potential%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsteve-mcclaren-task-transform-derby-county%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20McClaren%20needs%20time%20to%20rebuild%20Derby%20County%20and%20nurture%20potential%20%7C%20Nick%20Miller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fsteve-mcclaren-task-transform-derby-county%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcde684f0a0b082209736da9a9bf68760b1420f33%2F0_0_2443_1784%2F2443.jpg>
 Foam pigs thrown on to the pitch at The Valley. Photograph: 
ProSports/Rex/Shutterstock 
• It was a day of protests, with Leyton Orient fans unfurling a banner at 
their game against Luton calling for the owner, Francesco Becchetti, to leave 
the club. And one can see why: it is not just that Orient are out of the League 
Two relegation zone only on goal difference, two seasons after making the 
League One play-offs, but rather the general chaos under the Italian. If a 
two-game caretaker spell from Andy Edwards is included, Orient have had nine 
different managers in the two years since Becchetti arrived, the latest fish in 
a barrel being Alberto Cavasin. The 60-year-old Italian had not coached for 
five years since leaving Sampdoria in 2011, and Orient have lost both of his 
games so far. Really, it is something of a surprise the protest was just one 
banner.

• With Bradford’s late defeat at Oxford, only one undefeated club remains in 
the Football League. Step forwards Carlisle, who beat Hartlepool in a 
to-and-fro tussle that swung wildly between the two teams in the latter stages, 
but Carlisle held out and went third in the table in the process. That is 
Carlisle’s longest ever unbeaten start to a league campaign, at 13 games, and 
although they have still drawn as many games as they have won, it was achieved 
despite having only 10 men. “It looks to me that people are beginning to like 
what they’re seeing and this is a lovely place to be,” said the manager, Keith 
Curle, after the game. Lovely indeed.

• A brief dip back into non-league, to provide an update on the curious goings 
on at York. You may remember thatlast week the manager, Jackie McNamara, issued 
a self-imposed ultimatum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/07/york-city-jackie-mcnamara-braintree-town>
, saying that unless a positive result was achieved he would resign.Their draw 
with Braintree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/10/york-city-jackie-mcnamara-positive-result-braintree-town>
 was not considered positive enough and he stepped down,but stayed around until 
a replacement could be appointed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/10/jackie-mcnamara-york-city>. 
That replacement is Gary Mills, returning to the club as manager after leaving 
for the first time in 2013. However, it turned out not to be the end for 
McNamara,who of all things was appointed the club’s chief executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/york-city-manager-resigned-caretaker-now-chief-executive>
. “Jackie will focus on all operational aspects of the club with specific 
attention paid to the development of a communication strategy, effective both 
internally and externally, administration management, aspects of the academy, 
aspects of the foundation and commerciality [sic] to name just a few of the 
areas of his involvement,” the club said. So that’s all clear, then.
 