
When Dave and Sam Beasant joined Stevenage last year  
<http://www.thecomet.net/stevenage-fc/fa_cup_winner_joins_stevenage_as_goalkeeping_coach_1_3650232>
it was always possible one of them would feature in this season’s League Two 
play-off final. Watching from the Broadhall Way bench asStevenage drew 1-1 with 
Southend United <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mz6JOHfmTxE>in their 
semi-final first leg, however, was not the Beasant family member anyone had 
expected to find checking his gloves and fastening his shin-pads.

Dave Beasant, the 56-year-old Stevenage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stevenage> goalkeeping coach who has not 
made a first-team appearance for more than 10 years, was pushed into service 
following an illness to Sam, his son and the second-choice keeper.

The two-time England international watched his side’s 1-0 win against Carlisle 
as a substitute on 25 April before assuming the same duties in their final 
league match against Luton and the play-off withSouthend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southend> four days ago. The second leg 
is on Thursday evening and Sam is likely to remain sidelined meaning that if 
Dave plays he would become the oldest ever professional player in England.

Dave last appeared in a professional match for Brighton & Hove Albion on 4 May 
2003, having previously amassed more than 750 league appearances at 13 
professional clubs including Wimbledon, Southampton, Newcastle and Chelsea.

Stevenage have seen the funny side of an unexpected return to the limelight 
for Dave, who used to be renowned for his 80s perm. “For those asking, no we 
haven’t any Dave Beasant perm wigs in the club shop. You never know though,” 
they tweeted.

Victory over Southend would also set Beasant down memory lane to Wembley, site 
of his most famous exploit, in 1988. Springing to his left, he becamethe first 
goalkeeper to save a penalty in an FA Cup final at Wembley 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nq_osen03Z8> as he saved from Liverpool’s John 
Aldridge. Wimbledon went on to win the FA Cup for the first and only time in 
their history thanks to Lawrie Sanchez’s header in the 37th minute.
 Dave Beasant, right, celebrates winning the FA Cup final with his Wimbledon 
team-mate Lawrie Sanchez after the defeat of Liverpool in 1988. Photograph: 
David Cannon/Allsport 
An appearance would also mean Beasant eclipses Neil McBain, who played in goal 
for New Brighton against Hartlepool in 1947 at the age of 51, in the English 
record books. Stanley Matthews played his final game for Stoke City at 50.

A number of goalkeepers have played into their 40s including Peter Shilton, 
Pat Jennings and John Burridge while Colombia’s Faryd Mondragón and Tunisia’s 
Ali Boumnijel appeared at World Cup finals in their fifth decades. Tottenham’s 
Brad Friedel, who will be 44 next week, announced on Thursday that he would 
retire at the end of the season, though his most recent appearance came 14 
months ago.

Beasant cannot possibly have dreamed of returning to Wembley 27 years on from 
lifting the FA Cup. A Stevenage victory this evening and everything remains 
possible.
 