
Partick Thistle produced a fine display to beat Ross County 3-1 in the 
Scottish Premiership <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-premiership>
 at the Global Energy Stadium, in front of 3,331 supporters.

Steven Lawless struck two goals early in the second half after Kris Doolan had 
opened the scoring. Graham Carey scored a consolation goal for County with a 
deflected shot, but there was no way back into the match for the home side.

After a cagey opening spell, the visitors created the first real threat when 
Lawless chipped the ball into the box for Doolan but County full-back Mihael 
Kovacevic did well to get in a block tackle.

But the opener was not long in coming. Thistle forced the first corner of the 
match in the 18th minute and Gary Fraser's delivery was knocked on by Conrad 
Balatoni for Doolan to pounce and score at the back post.

The home side came close to an equaliser in the 42nd minute when Mihael 
Kovacevic found Orhan Mustafi, 12 yards out, but his effort was blocked in 
front of goal by Thistle defender Aaron Muirhead.

County made two substitutions at the start of the second half, with MelvinÂ De 
Leeuw and Steven Ross replacing Branislav Micic and Darren Maatsen. It was 
Thistle who almost doubled their advantage in the 47th minute, when Sean 
Welsh's cross into the box was headed on by Muirhead, but Ben Gordon was well 
positioned on the goalline to head the ball clear.

Thistle almost capitalised on a poor clearance from home keeper Mark Brown 
when Lawless was picked out by James Craigen, but the County goalkeeper 
recovered to save superbly.

However, the visitors took advantage of a poor passage of play by Ross County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rosscounty> in the 53rd minute and, after 
a Stuart Bannigan effort was kept out, Lawless was on hand to power home the 
rebound. It got worse for County six minutes later, when Bannigan sent a 
diagonal ball across goal for Lawless to score at the back post.

County kept trying and they pulled a goal back in the 71st minute, when Carey 
scored with a deflected shot from outside the area.

Rangers put their off-field troubles to one side as they eased to a convincing 
4-1 home victory overBrechin City, with Chris Hegarty, Nicky Law, Ian Black and 
Dean Shiels scoring a goal each in their opening League One game in front of a 
crowd of 44,380 at Ibrox. Steven Jackson pulled a goal back for the visitors.

Before kick-off, the Third Division championship flag was unfurled by club 
legend Sandy Jardine andRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> 
fans rose to their feet again with just over a minute played when the home side 
took an early lead. Law's drive was blocked and Hegarty reacted first to strike 
home the loose ball from close range and open his scoring account for the club.

Rangers' unrelenting pressure paid off five minutes before the interval when 
Law rounded Gerry McLauchlan to score. Rangers could have been further ahead 
shortly after the restart when only the crossbar prevented Jackson from sending 
an attempted clearance from Black's free-kick into the back of his own net. 
Jackson had an even more dramatic impact at the other end when he hauledBrechin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brechin> back into the game after 65 
minutes with a superb overhead kick that left goalkeeper Scott Gallacher 
helpless.

George Salmond then pointed to the spot after a Paul McLean foul on Little, 
before sending off the City player. Black stepped up for the penalty, which was 
blocked by Smith, but the midfielder blasted home the rebound to put the match 
beyond Brechin after 81 minutes. Shiels then capped the win with a fine curling 
shot into the top corner with five minutes remaining.
 