
Mark Hughes has revealed that the Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stokecity> goalkeeper Jack Butland could 
miss the rest of the season due to the injury he sustained while playing for 
England 10 months ago.

Butland fractured his right ankle close to half-time of the 3-2 victory over 
Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/26/germany-england-international-friendly-match-report>
 in Berlin on 26 March. The player left on a stretcher and was forced to miss 
the European Championship in France. He was, however, expected to return for 
Stoke’s first Premier League match of the season, at Middlesbrough, but 
aggravated the ankle just 24 hours before that game and has suffered a number 
of setbacks to his recovery since.

Willian double sinks brave Stoke and extends Chelsea run to 13 straight wins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/chelsea-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
A further operation last month was intended to mean a return to action in 
March, but Hughes, speaking afterStoke’s 4-2 defeat at Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/chelsea-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday, and in the context of tieing up a long-term deal for loanee 
goalkeeper Lee Grant, said the 23-year-old may not play again during the 
current campaign.

“That’s a priority for us because we’re in a little bit of a situation with 
Jack Butland being unavailable for any number of months and he might not come 
back this season,” said Hughes. “He may well get back April/May time, we’re not 
sure. But we’re more comfortable with his situation now and understand what the 
problems have been. So he’ll be fine when he gets back.”

Butland was in excellent form for Stoke before his injury and was deemed a 
certain member of Roy Hodgson’s squad for Euro 2016.Sam Allardyce was also 
known to view Butland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
 as a serious contender to Joe Hart as England’s No1 during his brief spell in 
charge of the national team.

Eric Dier seals England’s stunning comeback against Germany
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/26/germany-england-international-friendly-match-report>
Having managed Butland while in charge of England Under-21s, Gareth Southgate 
may well be keen to involve him at senior level, and would have potentially 
been able to do so for the friendly away to Germany on 22 March and World Cup 
qualifier at home to Lithuania four days later. However, the earliest Southgate 
might be able to select Butland is likely to be for the qualifier against 
Scotland at Hampden Park on 10 June.

In Butland’s absence, Grant, 33, has impressed following his arrival from 
Derby County at the end of August. He made another string of eye-catching saves 
at Stamford Bridge and is expected shortly to turn his loan deal into a 
transfer, thought to be in the region of £1.5m. Derby had originally wanted 
closer to £4m for the player.

“We lost Jack the Friday before the first game of the season so had to move 
quickly,” said Hughes. “Thankfully our goalkeeping coach Andy Quy had worked 
with Lee at Derby, so he knew him. It was still a risk. He’d had 300-odd games 
at a good level but had never played in the Premier League. But credit to him, 
he’s proven he’s a Premier League keeper.”
 