
New South Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> 
has announced a $73m compensation package for survivors of the stolen 
generations, 20 years after it was first recommended in the groundbreaking 
Bringing them Home report.

The redress scheme, which is expected to offer one-off compensation of $75,000 
per person, has drawn a mixed response from members of the stolen generations.

Dunghutti man Richard Campbell believes it is a positive first step, but it 
does little to make up for the trauma he has suffered, or the childhood that 
was taken from him.

Australia must act now to prevent a new Stolen Generation tragedy | Michael 
Lavarch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/08/australia-must-act-now-to-prevent-a-new-stolen-generation-tragedy>
Removed from his family’s home near Bowral under NSW’s forced assimilation 
powers, Cambpell and his siblings were taken to the courthouse, processed, and 
then dumped at the infamous Kinchela Aboriginal boys’ home.


He still vividly remembers the day, 12 October 1966.

“It was hell. As soon as you walk in the gate, they’re straight into you, they 
hit you like a man,” he said.

“Grown men hitting young kids ... with their fists and whips and big sticks.

“As soon as I walked in they said you’re not black anymore, you’re white. 
You’re not Richard Campbell anymore, you’re number 28.”


By the time Kinchela closed down four years later, Campbell’s sense of 
identity had been shattered.


“It just kept going until they’d brainwashed us into believing that we were 
white, that my name wasn’t Richard Campbell and I didn’t have a culture or a 
language,” he said.

NSW’s $73m package will include $59m for compensation of one-off payments of 
up to $75,000.


It will also establish a grant-based stolen generations healing fund of $5m 
over 10 years, which will be used to support healing centres, memorials and 
keeping places.

The stolen generations: an unending disaster for Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/23/the-stolen-generations-an-unending-disaster-for-australia>
A separate fund will also help fund the funerals of stolen generations members 
through payments of up to $7,000 each.

The announcement is the government’s response to a NSW parliamentary inquiry 
on the stolen generations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/23/stolen-generations-in-new-south-wales-should-be-paid-reparations-inquiry-finds>
, which tabled its report titled “Unfinished Business” in June.

The inquiry heard that time was running out for many to be compensated for the 
trauma caused by forced assimilation policies.


The Aboriginal affairs minister, Leslie Williams, said the response 
“acknowledges the real and heartbreaking trauma” caused by forcible removal and 
past government policy.

Other survivors believe the announcement is too little, too late. 


Biripi man Lester Maher was taken from his family at the age of three, and 
spent 12 years in institutions, including Kinchela. He suffered physical and 
emotional abuse, and strongly remembers being stripped naked and flogged with a 
cane after an escape attempt.

Maher said the money on offer was an “insult” compared with the lifetime of 
damage wrought by the government’s policies.

“I mean they put us in there, with no thought, to get us taken away from our 
parents. That’s not stolen, that’s kidnapping,” he said. “If a black man would 
have done that to a white kid back in those days, he would have been strung up 
by the nearest tree.”

They put us in there to get us taken away from our parents. That’s not stolen, 
that’s kidnapping
Biripi man Lester Maher 
Both South Australia and Tasmania already have similar schemes to that 
announced by NSW on Friday.


NSW’s Aborigines Protection Act, which gave the government and the Aborigines 
Welfare Board almost complete control over the lives ofIndigenous peoples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indigenous-peoples>, was only repealed in 
1969.

It gave NSW authorities the power to remove children from their homes, acts 
that caused intergenerational trauma and damage.

Thousands of Aboriginal children were forcibly removed in NSW between the late 
1800s and 1970s.

We haven't learnt the lessons of the stolen generations. We are still failing 
Koori kids | Andrew Jackomos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/27/we-havent-learnt-the-lessons-of-the-stolen-generation-we-are-still-failing-koori-kids>
Campbell says the reparations were a start, and said that at least the 
government was starting to recognise the wrong done to the stolen generations.

But he said children were still being taken away from families far too often. 
“With this reparation, I still don’t think they understand the repercussions of 
what they’re doing to our children,” he said. “They just don’t understand what 
they’re doing.”

Campbell and Maher now help run the Kinchela Boys Home Aboriginal Corporation 
<http://www.kinchelaboyshome.org.au/>, which helps members of the stolen 
generations heal and take control of their own future.
 