
Jack Duggan was Stourbridge’s hero after his late strike enabled the 
lowest-ranked team left in theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> to beat Northampton 1-0 and 
advance to the third round for the first time in their history.

After the original fixture was postponed this one looked to be heading for a 
replay, but with four minutes left a Luke Benbow free-kick caused all sorts of 
problems in the visitors’ penalty box. Duggan slammed the ball home to set up a 
third-round clash at Wycombe.

Fleetwood overturned a two-goal deficit to set up a trip to Bristol City with 
a 3-2 home success againstShrewsbury.

Jim O’Brien put the visitors ahead as half-time approached but Shrewsbury had 
Adam El-Abd sent off at the start of the second half. Despite their numerical 
disadvantage they extended their lead after an hour through Louis Dodds, but a 
Devante Cole double levelled up the tie before Ash Hunter won it for Fleetwood 
deep into injury time.

Oxford booked their place in the third round – and a trip to Rotherham – with 
a 3-0 win over 10-manMacclesfield at the Kassam Stadium. Goals from Ryan 
Taylor, Joe Rothwell and Kane Hemmings took Oxford past their National League 
visitors, who had Mitch Hancox sent off just before half-time with the score at 
1-0.

The Eastleigh manager, Martin Allen, will return to his former club Brentford 
in round three after two goals from Scott Wilson, including one from the 
penalty spot, secured a 2-0 victory overFC Halifax, who had Scott Garner sent 
off.

In the only tie that went to extra time MK Dons overcame Charlton and their 
former boss Karl Robinson 3-1 to set up a trip to the Championship leaders, 
Brighton. Daniel Powell put the Dons ahead early on but the former Dons 
defender Adam Chicksen equalised midway through the first half and it remained 
that way until extra time. Goals from Ben Reeves (94) and Dean Bowditch (97) 
enabled the Milton Keynes club to advance.
 