
Two more Scottish Football League clubs, Stranraer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stranraer> and Stirling, have come out 
against the idea of a newco Rangers joining the First Division amid speculation 
that some Premier League clubs are on the verge of a u-turn.

Stranraer and Stirling <https://www.theguardian.com/football/stirling> said 
Charles Green's club should have to apply for membership of the Third Division, 
ahead of Tuesday morning's Hampden meeting of SFL clubs.

Six others have already stated their opposition while Airdrie have said they 
will abstain from any vote as they would be promoted should the Ibrox club be 
denied SPL and First Division status.

No vote will be taken at Tuesday's meeting but the SPL clubs will be hugely 
interested in any feedback 24 hours ahead of their vote on Green's SPL 
application.

Seven SPL clubs have already publicly confirmed their opposition but Green 
says he is confident chairmen will listen to his pleas to consider the impact 
on Scottish football ifRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> 
are removed.

Reports on Tuesday morning claim Green, who met several SPL clubs over the 
weekend, has offered a six-point plan to secure top-flight football including a 
points deduction and making a public apology on behalf of the oldco club.

A document presented to SFL clubs includes a claim that the Third Division 
option could cost Scottish football Â£16m and Green hopes SPL clubs will now 
balk at the consequences of rejecting his bid.

Green told the Rangers website: "I know the chairmen will listen. The problem 
some of them have to a lesser degree than I have here is fan pressure.

"We think the important thing is Scottish football and we need to draw a line 
and move forward. There are some big decisions and none are more material than 
Rangers being excluded from the league and the financial incomes this club 
drives for the benefit of all Scottish clubs."
 