
A few hours before the publication of the Chilcot report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/iraq-inquiry-key-points-from-the-chilcot-report>
 yesterday, I heard an Iraqi man talking on the radio. He was one of the many 
who had cheered the fall of Saddam Hussein. Now, 13 years on, he looked back on 
pre-invasion Iraq with nostalgia. For him and his family, life under a 
murderous dictator seemed far safer than it did today.

“They came to save us but they had no plans,” says an Iraqi exile, bitterly, 
at the end of David Hare’s 2004 playStuff Happens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/sep/11/theatre.politicaltheatre>, which 
was last night given a one-off revival – to mark the publication of the Chilcot 
report – in a rehearsed reading, directed by Hare, at the Lyttelton theatre. 
“Iraq has been crucified,” continues the exile. “By Saddam’s sins, by 10 years 
of sanctions, by the occupation and now the insurgency. Basically it’s the 
story of a nation that has failed in only one thing. But it’s a big sin. It 
failed to take charge of itself. And that meant the worse person in the country 
took charge. A country’s leader is a country’s own fault.”

What does that say about us? Both at that time, under Tony Blair, and now, as 
our next prime minister is being chosen? And what about in the US, where Donald 
Trump is a contender for president?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fstuff-happens-david-hare-chilcot-lyttelton-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f856f6e062ea8ff9a0abb6d4c9f227e255589d7%2F0_78_4272_2563%2F4272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stuff%20Happens%3A%20David%20Hare's%20history%20play%20seems%20even%20more%20incisive%20after%20Chilcot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fstuff-happens-david-hare-chilcot-lyttelton-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stuff%20Happens%3A%20David%20Hare%27s%20history%20play%20seems%20even%20more%20incisive%20after%20Chilcot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fstuff-happens-david-hare-chilcot-lyttelton-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f856f6e062ea8ff9a0abb6d4c9f227e255589d7%2F0_78_4272_2563%2F4272.jpg>
 Julian Sands as Tony Blair in the rehearsed reading of David Hare’s Stuff 
Happens on 6 July. Photograph: Atri Banerjee 
Those questions hang accusingly in the air throughout this canny piece of 
programming by the NT – which has become increasingly adept at responding to 
immediate events, with pieces such asRichard Bean’s Great Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/01/richard-bean-satirical-comedy-great-britain>
 , about phone-hacking, and Gillian Slovo and Nicholas Kent’sAnother World: 
Losing Our Children to Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/08/nicolas-kent-gillian-slovo-national-theatre-production-another-country-islamic-state-uk-young-people>
. It’s hard for any theatre, particularly a great beast like the NT, to be 
nimble and responsive. Good plays take time to cook, and are usually programmed 
far in advance. If you are heading to Edinburgh this year, it’sunlikely that 
you will find any Brexit plays 
<http://www.whatsonstage.com/london-theatre/news/matt-trueman-theatre-didnt-tackle-brexit_41155.html>
 – although it may of course be a fruitful area for comedians. So in this 
instance, rifling through the back catalogue is a productive way of responding 
to the here and now, and reminding us,as Chris Thorpe has put it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/07/chris-thorpe-theatre-confirmation-a-nations-theatre>
, that theatre is “a national laboratory for thinking about … how and what we 
are”.

Hare originally described Stuff Happens as “a history play”. Some people at 
the time took that as a sign of bloated Shakespearean ambition, but actually it 
is perfectly justified, not least for the way that the play charts how 
political policy can be decided on a whim, or on the back of personal 
ambitions, without either a glance back or forward. We now know how such 
policies have played out, not just in Iraq but throughout the Middle East, and 
we can count the costs in the many thousands of deaths, thespread of terrorism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/intelligence-files-support-claims-iraq-invasion-helped-spawn-isis>
 and the numbers of refugees and the displaced. History is, as Konrad Adenauer 
observed, “the sum total of the things that could have been avoided”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fstuff-happens-david-hare-chilcot-lyttelton-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa82905111334404a65e0e9b8b3c57ce23fd2b6e3%2F332_176_3940_2364%2F3940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stuff%20Happens%3A%20David%20Hare's%20history%20play%20seems%20even%20more%20incisive%20after%20Chilcot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fstuff-happens-david-hare-chilcot-lyttelton-national-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stuff%20Happens%3A%20David%20Hare%27s%20history%20play%20seems%20even%20more%20incisive%20after%20Chilcot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fstuff-happens-david-hare-chilcot-lyttelton-national-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa82905111334404a65e0e9b8b3c57ce23fd2b6e3%2F332_176_3940_2364%2F3940.jpg>
 Alex Jennings (George W Bush) and Adjoa Andoh (Condoleeza Rice). Photograph: 
Atri Banerjee 
Much of the same material in Hare’s play is covered in Chilcot, but of course 
the 2.6m-word report has much greater depth. Back in 2004,some critics and 
commentators accused Hare of bias 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/sep/03/theatre.iraq> in his portrayal 
of Blair and George W Bush and his account of the diplomatic chess game in the 
run up to invasion. Actually, Hare seems remarkably even-handed, almost timid. 
Inthe damning light of Chilcot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/the-guardian-view-on-the-chilcot-report-a-country-ruined-trust-shattered-a-reputation-trashed>
, the play looks well researched and insightful. It shows us a Bush – in a 
masterful performance byAlex Jennings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/02/alex-jennings-lady-van-alan-bennett-maggie-smith-james-corden-interview>
 – whose bumbling comic persona disguises steely intent as he manoeuvres 
towards war under the hawkish eyes of Donald Rumsfeld (Nicholas Woodeson) and 
Dick Cheney (Corey Johnson), and a fawning Blair (Julian Sands) who sees Iraq 
as an opportunity to secure his place in the history books.

Blair certainly got that spot in the history books, but not in a way that he 
can ever have imagined when he unleashed catastrophe with his promise to Bush: 
“I will be with you, whatever.” It has taken 13 years for the British 
government’s actions to be fully scrutinised and laid out in public. Stuff 
certainly does happen, and when it does, Hare’s play reminds us that theatre is 
one small and crucial way of holding politicians – and ourselves – to account.
 