
Cosmetic surgery <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cosmetic-surgery> 
clinics that fail to provide good quality care will be named and shamed for the 
first time under government plans.

Clinics offering such cosmetic procedures are to be rated online, which Jeremy 
Hunt, the health secretary, said would help “end the lottery of poor practice”.

An eight-week consultation will be launched on Monday by the Department of 
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>. It wants to expand the 
ratings programme that is run by the health regulator, the Care Quality 
Commission, and applies to NHS services such as hospitals and GP surgeries.

Up to 100 cosmetic surgery clinics will be given transparent ratings that will 
give potential users a simple guide to the quality of the clinics in their 
area. There will be four ratings: outstanding, good, requires improvement or 
inadequate.

The government has been trying to ensure safer cosmetic surgery for patients 
since thePIP breast implant scandal in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/15/pip-breast-implant-scandal-7000-more>
, which led to theKeogh Review in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/15/french-breast-implant-scandal-health-and-wellbeing>
.


Hunt said: “Our proposals to extend the CQC’s powers to rate more providers 
are an important step forward in improving standards and will help to end the 
lottery of poor practice in parts of the cosmetic industry.”

The proposals also involve rating up to 1,000 providers of procedures and 
services including substance misuse centres, refractive eye surgery providers, 
independent community health providers, ambulance services and dialysis units. 
Clinics offering termination of pregnancy services could also be rated.

The announcement comes after Marie Stopes International suspended abortions 
for all under-18s and vulnerable groups of women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/marie-stopes-suspends-some-abortion-services-over-safety-issues>
 and sent hundreds of them to other clinics following surprise inspections by 
the CQC. The health regulator had “specific immediate concerns” about consent, 
training and the competence of staff.

More than 10,000 providers have been rated by the CQC since 2014 but it has 
focused on providers with the most patients, includingNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> trusts, foundation trusts, GP 
practices, adult social care providers and independent hospitals.


Douglas McGeorge, consultant plastic surgeon and former president of the the 
British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS), said the proposals 
were welcomed by the industry. However, he said the ratings would apply to the 
facilities rather than clinicians, so users still needed to be “extremely 
vigilant” and check their surgeon’s credentials.


“We welcome – and indeed, have been calling for during the last decade – as 
much government scrutiny as is possible of the cosmetic sector. This is an 
arena where regulation has historically been lax and many practitioners can 
engage in procedures they are not trained or even qualified to perform,” he 
said.

The CQC’s remit will involve inspecting a facility or practice’s equipment, 
record-keeping and administrative areas, rather than individual surgeons, 
McGeorge said.

The Department of Health said: “Shining a light on poor care in this manner is 
an essential part of developing an open and honest learning culture, where 
mistakes are acted upon and prevented from reoccurring.

“Since the PIP breast implant scandal in 2012, we have made good progress 
raising the standards of care in the cosmetics industry so patients can feel 
confident they are getting the best care from professionals with the right 
qualifications.”
 