
In a few decades Mumbai will be the biggest city in the world 
<http://www.techinsider.io/10-most-populous-cities-2050-2016-2>. Already a 
sprawling megalopolis that stretches out like a giant crab’s claw, you can 
travel from the tip to the north for two hours by train or car without 
breaching its borders. Its growth – fuelled by trading cottons, silks and 
tobacco overseas for the past 500 years – has beckoned workers from all over 
India, transforming it into a glorious mix of cultures, people and food. It has 
made it what it is today: the best place in the world to get a snapshot of 
Indian food from all around the country.

Among these offerings, the vegetarian food is unrivalled. India is home to 
half a billion vegetarians, which is more than the rest of the world’s 
vegetarians put together; naturally, many of India’s greatest hits are served 
here. It is a vegetarian’s paradise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3dfa0a67ef947459b57d065c6620867c35e93a8%2F0_113_2736_1642%2F2736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sunrise%20to%20sundown%2C%20Mumbai%20is%20a%20vegetarian%E2%80%99s%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sunrise%20to%20sundown%2C%20Mumbai%20is%20a%20vegetarian%E2%80%99s%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3dfa0a67ef947459b57d065c6620867c35e93a8%2F0_113_2736_1642%2F2736.jpg>
 Thali from Shree Thaker Bhojanalay, Kalbadevi. Photograph: Meera Sodha/for the 
Guardian 
On my last trip to Mumbai I arrived on a 6am flight, intentionally, so that I 
could squeeze in as many meals as possible during the next 24 hours. I was 
picked up, as always, in an old Padmini taxi by my uncle, Mahesh and friend, 
Sam. In all the years I’ve been travelling to the city, our plan has always 
been the same: to eat the best food in the city, as much as possible, with no 
rules (except the obvious abstention of meat).

As we moved across town, past the rickshaws and motorbikes carrying families 
of five, we smelled on the roadside what the city was eating for breakfast: 
freshaloo parathas, big vats of steaming poha: flattened rice with caramelised 
onions, potatoes and lemon. Sandwiched between them, the chai-wallahs, with 
their muzzein-like calls “chai, chai, chai”, were pouring tea from great 
heights in an act of showmanship.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66a782bb417874b110844670def316f1e755f02a%2F0_126_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sunrise%20to%20sundown%2C%20Mumbai%20is%20a%20vegetarian%E2%80%99s%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sunrise%20to%20sundown%2C%20Mumbai%20is%20a%20vegetarian%E2%80%99s%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66a782bb417874b110844670def316f1e755f02a%2F0_126_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Panki, a rice and dill pancake steamed between two banana leaves served with a 
hot and lemony coriander chutney. Photograph: Meera Sodha for the Guardian 
Around every corner, another smell, another stall. Amid the smoke and steam of 
the city, you can eat everything here from lace-edgeddosas from the south to 
creamychole (chickpeas) with flying-saucer bread baturas from the heart of 
Punjab, at all times of the day. The best places tend to have one thing in 
common: they do one thing very well. The eggbhurji man I met near Churchgate 
station had been cooking that same recipe for 35 years, while Sanjay Singh, a 
sandwich-wallah in Kala Ghoda had been making his sandwiches for 22 years. Both 
are masters of their craft.

This street-level excellence means that everyone agrees that expensive doesn’t 
equal the best, not here in Mumbai. Few follow food critics, most prefer to 
follow their nose, or the words of their friends. It works. Lawyers, students 
and manual workers all queue together at the best places in a rare show of 
egalitarianism in a city otherwise split by race, caste and money.

We stopped at Kyani and Co 
<https://www.zomato.com/mumbai/kyani-co-marine-lines> (JSS Road, opposite Metro 
Cinema, Jer Mahal Estate, Marine Lines, +91 22 3015 0864; breakfast for two 
£3.50). This isa Parsi cafe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/may/10/mumbai-parsi-cafes-indian-food>
, where we orderedakuri: super-creamy scrambled eggs mixed with green chillies, 
tomatoes and onions and served on toast. Pow! What a start to the day. For a 
small community, the Parsis have had an enormous impact on Mumbai food culture 
with slow-paced, airy cafes and an obsession witheedu per (eggs on everything).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49edfe1d785f505d759287ae5a34c349ffc86d2d%2F0_99_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sunrise%20to%20sundown%2C%20Mumbai%20is%20a%20vegetarian%E2%80%99s%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sunrise%20to%20sundown%2C%20Mumbai%20is%20a%20vegetarian%E2%80%99s%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49edfe1d785f505d759287ae5a34c349ffc86d2d%2F0_99_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 Breakfast stop … Parsi cafe, Kyani and Co. Photograph: Getty Images 
A walk through nearby Crawford Market <http://www.crawford-market.com/> was 
mandatory to pay homage to the pyramids of pineapples and watermelons before a 
mid-morning stop atBadshah <https://www.zomato.com/pt/mumbai/badshah-cst> for 
falooda (152/156, LT Marg, opposite Crawford Market, +91 22 23421943; around 
80p for a falooda). Falooda is a milkshake with a long tradition. It used to be 
made using ice gathered from the mountain-tops. Today’s incarnation is a tall 
glass filled with rose syrup, milk, glass noodles, ice-cream and topped with 
slippery delicious basil seeds. In 40C heat, it was everything I needed in one 
glass.

Refreshed and in search of the city’s best street food, we took the 
superhighway north to Bandra – the hipster enclave of Mumbai – and pulled up 
outsideElco Pani Puri Center <http://elcocateringservices.com/>. This was no 
hole in the wall joint, it was discovered by the Bollywood set some time ago. 
Crispy semolina shells are filled with a mixture of pulses, dunked into a tangy 
tamarind chutney and then ice-cold mint and coriander water – there you have 
pani-puri. You have to eat it quick, before it explodes! There’s no other way. 
It was a vibrant clash of sweet, sour, cold and crunchy: a rollercoaster of 
flavours. Thepani-puri is made with mineral water here, so it’s a safe place to 
get your fill.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73af763b95fa4a94eaf9228090ab5dd0f853a9de%2F0_924_3400_3400%2F3400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sunrise%20to%20sundown%2C%20Mumbai%20is%20a%20vegetarian%E2%80%99s%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sunrise%20to%20sundown%2C%20Mumbai%20is%20a%20vegetarian%E2%80%99s%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73af763b95fa4a94eaf9228090ab5dd0f853a9de%2F0_924_3400_3400%2F3400.jpg>
 Shake it up … Falooda, a drink made with rose syrup, milk, glass noodles and 
ice-cream. Photograph: Alamy 
Although dinner options are vast in the city, Shree Thaker Bhojanalay 
<https://www.zomato.com/pt/mumbai/shree-thaker-bhojanalay-kalbadevi> is one of 
Mahesh and Sam’s go-to vegetarian restaurants (31 Dadisheth Agyari Lane, 
opposite GT High School, Kalbadevi, +91 22 22069916; around £12 for twothalis). 
Gujarat, a state on the west coast of India is famous for itsthalis: a plate 
onto which a rainbow of seasonal curries, chutneys and a variety of breads are 
served. The waiters walked around barefooted hawking our plates ready to top us 
up until we begged for mercy (just like with any Gujarati mum).

After dinner, we headed to Chowpatty Beach where Mumbai’s young lovers go to 
hold hands (and escape their parents), while the rest gravitate towards the 
whizz, pop, bang of the food and entertainment stalls. Ordinarily, I’d have 
gone toBachelorr’s <http://bachelorrs.com/> across the road for a mango juice 
or a custard apple ice-cream but I’m only human and I’d hit a wall. You can eat 
like a queen in Mumbai, for not very much, the only limitation is always the 
size of one’s tummy.

FIVE MORE GREAT VEGETARIAN FOOD STOPS IN MUMBAI
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F184fbf083db38adf4976a0a12073184a9f97ac3e%2F0_410_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sunrise%20to%20sundown%2C%20Mumbai%20is%20a%20vegetarian%E2%80%99s%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sunrise%20to%20sundown%2C%20Mumbai%20is%20a%20vegetarian%E2%80%99s%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Fmumbai-vegetarian-paradise-street-food-stalls-and-cafes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F184fbf083db38adf4976a0a12073184a9f97ac3e%2F0_410_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Customers wait at Swati Snacks, a popular pure-vegetarian neighbourhood 
restaurant in Tardeo. Photograph: Meera Sodha/for the Guardian 
Bombay Sandwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/aug/16/mumbai-sandwichwallah-day-in-the-life-blog>
 at Sanjay’s

A tower as big as the average Mumbaiker’s dreams; made up of three layers of 
bread interspersed with cooked beetroot, potato, fresh tomatoes, peppers, 
cucumber and a hot layer of mint-chilli chutney, it’s then grilled, layered 
with cheese and served with a red chutney. It’s a party for your tastebuds.
• Mahatma Gandhi Road, next to Vinod Apparels and Magna Book Store, Fort; 
sandwich £1.20

Soli’s pav bhaji at Tardeo Junction

Originally a millworker’s meal, this is a rich spiced mash of masala’d 
vegetables like potatoes, aubergines, peas and tomatoes served with rough bread 
rolls (pav) doused in hot butter. The best I’ve had is at Soli’s stall, a 
roadside two-man operation. If Soli’s is closed, Sardar on Tardeo Road, 
opposite the bus station is also excellent.
• Opposite Haji Ali Juice Centre, outside Heera Panna, around £1 a portion. 
Note: open 7.30pm to midnight

South Indian food at Dakshinayan

Most Mumbaikers will not look at any other south Indian other than Café Madras 
in Matunga but Dakshinayan on Malabar Hill is my pick. Its crispy, crunchy and 
sweet onionmasala dosas are a wonder. Its tart tamarind rice and coconut sevai 
(noodles) are delightful too and take me right back to eating my way around 
Karanataka and Kerala.
• 183 Teen Batti Road, Walkeshwar, Malabar Hill; around £8 for two

Rice pankis at Swati Snacks

This is a popular pure-vegetarian neighbourhood restaurant in Tardeo serving 
snacks from Gujarat on the west coast of India. My favourite is thepanki, a 
rice and dill pancake steamed between two banana leaves served with a hot and 
lemony coriander chutney.
• Karai Estate, opposite Bhatia Hospital, Tardeo, +91 22 6580 8406, 
swatisnacks.com <http://www.swatisnacks.com/restaurants/mumbai>; panki £2

Paneer tikka at Copper Chimney 

The Worli branch of Copper Chimney, for me, is best in show when it comes to 
north Indian cooking or Mughlai-style cooking. Its rich paneer cheese, coated 
in yoghurt and garam masalas cooked in the tandoor is divine: slightly charred, 
addictively savoury and melts-in-the-mouth. Mop it up with a thinroomali 
(hankerchief) roti before moving onto a vegetable biryani. Beware the portions 
are big, so come hungry.
• Lotus Court, Ground Floor, Dr AB Road, Worli, +91 22 24925353, 
copperchimney.in <https://www.copperchimney.in/index.php>

Meera Sodha <http://meerasodha.com/> is author of Fresh India: 130 Quick, Easy 
and Delicious Recipes for Every Day (Penguin, £20). To order a copy for £16, 
including UK p&p, visitthe guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/fresh-india.html> or call on 0330 333 6846
 