
My dad would always take a book to the Abbey. Cambridge United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cambridge-united> games aren’t always that 
interesting. And the half-time entertainment of a man dressed as a moose and 
some kids kicking a ball into a giant washing machine just didn’t do it for 
him. He happened to be sitting near the press box for the FA Cup quarter-final 
against Crystal Palace in 1990 and, as a result, I have a signed copy of 
Plato’s Republic on my bookshelf. Plato wasn’t there but the inside cover 
reads: “Dear Max, all the best, Trevor Brooking”.

I guess bringing up Greek philosophers this early doesn’t do a lot to dispel 
the myth that everything in Cambridge is intellectual. And I guarantee when 
Match of the Day starts , there’ll be some mention of Sir Isaac Newton, Stephen 
Hawking or some other chap in a gown and a pointy hat, followed by a pun about 
whether Louis van Gaal can pass the Cambridge examination. They’ll punt theFA 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> down the river, focus in on 
King’s College chapel and then cut to a portable building outside the Abbey 
Stadium. I’ll be in the main stand with my dad, as I was for the first time in 
1986 when we scraped a 2-2 draw with Exeter City.

My relationship with the U’s is less highbrow – more like an EastEnders 
marriage without the death: a whirlwind honeymoon period, followed by years of 
turgid pain, with any joy increasingly sporadic. I moved away for work and 
started having an affair with an amateur Saturday team who I still play for. 
But through it all, deep down, the love is as unstinting as ever.

Lower league football is 99% misery, false hope and baffling managerial 
appointments and 1% genuine joy and success. Rather unfairly, Cambridge United 
used up that whole per cent in the first two years that I regularly went to the 
Abbey.

In 1989, I was 10 and football was the only thing I liked, apart from mince. 
My wall was covered in Shoot and Match posters, I played football-management 
games relentlessly on my Amstrad, and John Beck became the Cambridge United 
manager. I was too young to understand the intricacies (or lack of them) in our 
tactics. I just knew we won – pretty much every week. Lee Philpott and Michael 
Cheetham crossed it, and Dion Dublin and John Taylor headed it in. That was 
football.

Philpott’s volley against Bristol City in the FA Cup fifth-round second 
replay, Dion’s header at Wembley in the Division Four play-offs in 1990, 
annihilating Sheffield Wednesday 4-0 in the fifth round the following year, 
scaring the life out of the Arsenal fans when Dion equalised at Highbury, being 
on the pitch at the end of the same season celebrating promotion to the old 
Division Two when the public-address man announced we’d won the title – I was 
spoiled with success.

And that success made the ensuing and enduring pain all the harder. We got 
ahead of ourselves, even investing in an electronic scoreboard, like the big 
clubs we’d been flirting with. It was essentially a giant-pager, brilliantly 
positioned so the hardcore in the Newmarket Road end couldn’t actually see it. 
I always felt it was that scoreboard that began our demise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fcambridge-united-supporting-max-rushden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421843191688%2Fb766f8dc-a3bc-4990-b4ae-3d9f9e344b5e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Supporting%20Cambridge%20United%20is%20like%20an%20EastEnders%20marriage%20without%20the%20death%20%7C%20Max%20Rushden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fcambridge-united-supporting-max-rushden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Supporting%20Cambridge%20United%20is%20like%20an%20EastEnders%20marriage%20without%20the%20death%20%7C%20Max%20Rushden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F22%2Fcambridge-united-supporting-max-rushden%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421843191688%2Fb766f8dc-a3bc-4990-b4ae-3d9f9e344b5e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cambridge fans await the third-round tie against Luton. Photograph: Julian 
Finney/Getty Images 
One Saturday in 1993 I was at Laser Quest – more exciting on paper if we’re 
honest. I was “going out” with Helen Stewart, the kind of going out where you 
don’t actually go out, just have really awkward phone calls once a week. It got 
to two o’clock, and I wasn’t going to miss home to Tranmere. So I just left.

For 95 minutes nothing happened. Nothing. And, if I remember correctly, their 
keeper booted it upfield, it bounced over John Vaughan’s head, and Neil McNab 
rolled it in. That season we were relegated from the second tier, never to 
return. And that season was the first where I really understood what supporting 
a lower league club was about. Helen and I didn’t stay together.

At the end of 1999, we drew 0-0 with Cardiff City in what is now League One. 
No shame in that, apart from the fact David Elleray sent off three Cardiff 
players. I can remember him brandishing the cards with glee – we didn’t get 
celebrities at the Abbey very often. They had 10 men for the second half, nine 
for half an hour. And eight (vidiprinter: EIGHT) for 15 minutes. The third red 
card was for deliberate handball on the line. We missed the penalty.

2002. March. And somehow the U’s had made it to the final of the LDV Vans 
Trophy. A French teenager called Armand Oné (a League Two Paulo Wanchope) had 
single-handedly knocked out Bristol City in the semis. As some sort of 
tragically ironic, hilarious (and yet practical) gag, my mates and I decided to 
hire an LDV van to get to the Millennium Stadium. Then, tragically, ironically, 
hilariously (and impractically) it broke down as we were crossing the Severn 
bridge. We were towed to Newport and got a train, just making it in time to 
witness a 4-1 defeat to Blackpool. We even hired Claude Le Roy to try to get us 
up League Two. Who does that? “My heart is in Cambridge and will be until the 
day I die,” he apparently said as he went off to manage Congo. Truly bizarre.

Since the early 90s, the lows have heavily outweighed the highs. Until now. 
The club are almost worryingly well run, epitomised by the chief executive Jez 
George and his, and others’, tireless work behind the scenes.

We’re back in the League, not a million miles away from the play-offs, and we 
hostManchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>. 
When the draw was made, I celebrated as if we’d won the World Cup. It is the 
biggest and best draw you could hope for. I’ve got my dad a ticket. He’s 
bringing a book, just in case.

Max Rushden presents Soccer AM on Sky Sports and Sky One, Saturdays 10-12, and 
the Warm Up on Talksport, Sundays 11-1. He has donated his fee for this column 
to the charity Street League
 