
This competition may be third in Celtic's list of priorities but their 
appetite for success in the tournament, as well as the Uefa Cup and the 
Premierleague, remains undiminished.

With a European return against Villarreal on Wednesday and only three days 
after the first-leg draw,Livingston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/livingston> arrived hoping to catch the 
Parkhead team with one eye on the more prestigious prize.

It was no more than wishful thinking, however, for Martin O'Neill's team 
displayed all of the hunger, desire and commitment they have shown through a 
memorable season.

Those qualities, together with an inherent ability, have kept Celtic on course 
for a wonderful treble although Villarreal will offer a sterner test than the 
Almondvale side.Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> simply 
strolled into a Cup final meeting with either Inverness Caley or Dunfermline, 
who drew 1-1 on Saturday and replay at Pittodrie a week tomorrow.

Yesterday's was a contest for little more than 30 minutes although had Derek 
Lilley taken a fine chance after four minutes, when he was denied by goalkeeper 
David Marshall, it might have turned out differently. One suspects not, though.

Celtic gradually stepped up through the gears and although the substitute 
Colin McMenamin offered Livingston some hope with a goal late on, the tie had 
been decided long before.

Goals from Chris Sutton after 36 and 64 minutes, both set up by the 
combination of Stilian Petrov and Henrik Larsson, came either side of a goal 
from the Swede himself, when he took full advantage of a desperate mix-up 
between Emmanuel Dorado and Oscar Rubio to get the crucial second.

That effectively ended the affair although McMenamin's header from a cross by 
Jon Paul McGovern, and a battling last 12 minutes, gave Livingston their 
credibility back.

The CIS Insurance Cup winners gave their all but as bigger names have found 
this season, that is not always enough against a Celtic team who, having 
secured a return to Hampden on May 22, can now turn their attentions to more 
pressing matters.

And on the subject of Uefa Cup business, O'Neill revealed an injury worry over 
Chris Sutton ahead of today's trip to Spain. He was replaced by Craig Beattie 
and now faces a race against time to get fit. "It is a concern and at the 
moment Sutton's groin is sore," admitted O'Neill. "He will want to play, of 
course, but there isn't much time ahead of Wednesday and we may have a problem 
there."

Just such an injury is precisely what O'Neill hoped to avoid, for he is 
already without alternatives because of long-term problems with John Hartson 
and Shaun Maloney. In addition the defender John Kennedy is also out and there 
is a doubt over Jackie McNamara, while Alan Thompson is suspended.

"We have to get on with it regardless. Some of our young players will join us 
on Tuesday after playing in an Under-21 match and the pluses for us from this 
game, aside from reaching the final which was always the objective, is that 
others like Joos Valgaeren, Johan Mjallby, Liam Miller and Craig Beattie got a 
run."

All can now be expected to play a part at Villarreal as Celtic battle to make 
the semi-finals after last week's 1-1 draw.

Livingston's manager Davie Hay, meanwhile, accepted that yesterday's game was 
just too big a task for his team but he was concerned at the way his players 
conceded the first two goals. "They could have been avoided, especially the 
second, but we put in a credible performance," he said.

 Man of the match: Stephen Pearson (Celtic) 

Â·  Two second-half goals from Billy Dodds rescued a point for Dundee United 
against Dundee and maintained their hopes of a top-six finish in the 
Premierleague. The veteran struck soon after the interval then added a late 
second from the spot after goals from Steve Lovell and Steven Milne had put 
Dundee in front.
 