
The energy and climate change secretary has given planning permission to one 
of the most ambitious and potentially expensive “green” energy schemes ever 
seen in Britain.

Amber Rudd agreed the £1bn project to provide power for 150,000 homes from a 
tidal lagoon atSwansea <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/swansea> Bay, although 
she has become embroiled in a separate but connected row over a super-quarry to 
provide stone for the Welsh project.

Mark Shorrock, chief executive of Tidal Lagoon Swansea Bay, said his marine 
power project was a “game-changer” that should trigger a much wider industry in 
tidal energy around the UK.

“The tidal lagoons that follow – at Cardiff, at Newport, elsewhere in the UK 
and overseas – must each make their own compelling social, environmental and 
economic case to proceed. But they have a pilot project to guide them and a 
blossoming technical and industrial network to support them.”

Planning permission is essential to the Swansea Bay tidal lagoon scheme but 
its future ultimately depends on a separate decision by the department on 
subsidies.

Should the UK be subsidising the world's first tidal lagoons?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/02/should-the-uk-be-subsidising-the-worlds-first-tidal-lagoons>
The Conservative party has made clear that it wants to end subsidies for 
onshore wind schemes but is understood to see opportunities for jobs and 
exports from the potentially more costly Swansea Bay scheme.

But energy and climate change and Wales office minister Lord Bourne, who 
announced the green light for the scheme, said: “We need more clean and 
home-grown sources of energy, which will help to reduce our reliance on foreign 
fossil fuels. Low-carbon energy projects like the tidal lagoon in Swansea Bay 
could bring investment, support local jobs and help contribute to the Welsh 
economy and Swansea area.”

Meanwhile, Rudd has been dragged into an escalating row over plans to mine 
stone in Cornwall for the Swansea Bay breakwater and ship it through a marine 
conservation zone.

Derek Thomas, the newly elected Conservative MP for St Ives, has joined other 
residents in opposing the reopening of Dean quarry near St Keverne. He has 
written to Rudd asking her to intervene.


“I have no doubt this is not the right place to source the stone. Any jobs 
created would not replace others that could be lost in fishing, tourism and 
diving,” he added. “The stone could be obtained more cheaply in Norway and I 
have written to Amber Rudd to explain this.”

The National Trust also said it had “serious concerns” about the plan, which 
would involve the construction of a loading jetty and shipping operations off 
the Lizard peninsula.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fswansea-bay-tidal-energy-scheme-on-brink-of-winning-planning-permission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1913e2aeb68b4bbcd77136cf5ebb0b3cf2b3b86%2F0_0_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Swansea%20Bay%20tidal%20energy%20scheme%20wins%20planning%20permission&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fswansea-bay-tidal-energy-scheme-on-brink-of-winning-planning-permission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Swansea%20Bay%20tidal%20energy%20scheme%20wins%20planning%20permission&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fswansea-bay-tidal-energy-scheme-on-brink-of-winning-planning-permission%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1913e2aeb68b4bbcd77136cf5ebb0b3cf2b3b86%2F0_0_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Several parties have raised objections to proposed works on the Lizard 
peninsula in Cornwall to supply the Swansea Bay scheme. Photograph: Stephen 
Meese/Alamy 
In a letter to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/04/quarry-threatens-cornish-beauty-spot>
 published last Thursday, Sir Nicholas Serota, director of the Tate art 
galleries, wrote in a personal capacity to express surprise that Mark Shorrock, 
the chief executive of Tidal Lagoon Power, had insistedin an interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/31/worlds-first-tidal-lagoon-clean-energy-scheme-environmental-concerns>
 that no decisions had been taken to source materials from Cornwall.

This seemed at odds, Serota said, with Shorrock telling a meeting in Cornwall 
that he was applying for planning permission to reopen Dean quarry and extract 
1.5m tonnes of rock a year.

World's first tidal-lagoon clean energy scheme prompts environmental row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/31/worlds-first-tidal-lagoon-clean-energy-scheme-environmental-concerns>
Tidal Power Lagoon said the project, which is being proposed by Shire Oak, a 
separate Shorrock company, could not go ahead until it had planning permission 
for the jetty and a contract to supply the stone to Swansea Bay, neither of 
which was yet certain.

“I don’t think it’s fair (to criticise). The whole point of going down there 
(for public meetings in Cornwall) was for early engagement to show what the 
plans for the site could be,” said a spokesman for Shorrock.
 