
Swansea will name Paul Clement as their third manager of the season on Tuesday 
after the former Derby County manager agreed a 2½-year contract to replace Bob 
Bradley.

Clement is likely to be in the stands at Selhurst Park on Tuesday evening for 
the match with Crystal Palace having asked Bayern Munich to leave his role as 
Carlo Ancelotti’s assistant in order to take over at the Liberty Stadium. The 
44‑year‑old will not travel to Doha for Bayern’s warm‑weather training camp 
havingagreed a deal in principle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/swansea-city-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
 running until 2019 with Swansea.

“Co-coach Paul Clement has asked FC Bayern Munich to hold talks with Premier 
League club Swansea City about a commitment as head coach,”read a statement on 
Bayern’s website 
<https://fcbayern.com/en/news/2017/01/talks-between-paul-clement-and-swansea>. 
“Bayern’s head coach Carlo Ancelotti and the management board of FC Bayern 
Munich have fulfilled this wish.”

Clement, who has served as Ancelotti’s assistant at Chelsea, Paris 
Saint‑Germain and Real Madrid, will take over with Swansea bottom of the table 
having endured a fourth successive Premier League defeatagainst Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/swansea-city-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
 on Saturday. They trail 17th-placed Palace by four points, who are still 
looking for their first win under Sam Allardyce.

Allardyce’s attempt to appoint Clement as his assistant with England was 
blocked by Bayern in July because the club were not keen on him job-sharing and 
the now Palace manager has admitted the former teacher has gained significant 
experience from working at some of the world’s biggest clubs.

“It’s down to his coaching, his coaching of the players, organisation of the 
players and the experience he’s gained with Ancelotti,” said Allardyce. “Going 
into that position, I’ve been there many times before so I’m not going to shell 
out any advice now because I don’t want to give him anything he might be able 
to use. We’ll talk after the game by which time we’ve won hopefully, fingers 
crossed.”

Crystal Palace v Swansea City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/crystal-palace-swansea-city-match-preview> 