
The future of a revolutionary plan to generate electricity from a lagoon in 
Swansea Bay has been thrown into further doubt after the UKgovernment unveiled 
plans for a six-month review of the wider tidal power sector. 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/review-of-tidal-lagoons>


The promoters of the £1bn plan, Tidal Lagoon Power, said it welcomed any extra 
focus on this type of renewable energy but needed a final decision from 
ministers on its southWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> project 
within six weeks.

The government has been in negotiations with Tidal Lagoon Power for more than 
a year and has repeatedly failed to meet company expectations about when it 
would agree a final subsidy necessary to make the project commercial.

A Department of Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and 
Climate Change spokeswoman said talks would continue with Tidal Lagoon Power 
but there would be no final decision on Swansea Bay aid till the review ended 
in the autumn.

Energy minister Lord Bourne argued that government still needed to make sure 
that tidal power was in the interest of the country and household energy 
consumers.

“Tidal lagoons on this scale are an exciting, but as yet an untested 
technology. I want to better understand whether tidal lagoons can be 
cost-effective, and what their impact on bills will be - both today and in the 
longer term.

“This review will help give us that clarity so we can determine what role 
tidal lagoons could have as part of our plans to provide secure, clean and 
affordable energy for families and businesses across the country.”

Tidal lagoon technology gets multimillion-pound boost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/01/tidal-lagoon-technology-gets-multimillion-pound-boost>
The move followed comments by David Cameron that his enthusiasm for Swansea 
Bay had been “reduced” over affordability issues 
<http://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-committees/liaison/2016-01-12-PM.pdf>
 despite the scheme being contained within the Conservative party’s election 
manifesto.

Critics said the review was another disastrous setback but Tidal Lagoon Power 
put a brave face on the announcement saying it was a “clear signal” that 
ministers could see the advantage of this innovative technology.

But the company is sticking to its view that Swansea Bay needs agreement on 
subsidies within four to six weeks 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-south-west-wales-35532915> regardless of 
the wider review.

“We will be pushing for government support to demonstrate the potential of 
tidal lagoon power by giving the goahead for the Swansea Bay project, thereby 
avoiding the still birth of a game-changer for UK energy and UK industry,” said 
Mark Shorrock, the chief executive of Tidal Lagoon Power.

A spokesman for the company said it would be a waste of time to have a review 
without a prototype at Swansea Bay going ahead in the meantime. He declined to 
say whether the scheme would be shelved if the six-week deadline was not met.

Tim Farron, the Lib Dem leader, said he feared the government planned to dump 
the scheme.

“I said that the tidal lagoon in Swansea Bay is a litmus test of this 
government’s position on green energy, and the environmental and economic case 
for this project is clear. I am concerned that this review could just be used 
as a smokescreen to try and justify even more cuts to the green energy sector.”
 