
It would be “utter madness” for the government to withdraw its support at this 
late stage from a£1bn revolutionary tidal energy scheme at Swansea Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/02/swansea-bay-tidal-energy-scheme-strives-generate-waves-of-optimism>
, Lib Dem leader Tim Farron will tell his party’s spring conference in Cardiff 
on Saturday.


The planned project, awaiting a funding decision from the Department of Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and Climate Change, would 
provide hundreds of jobs and much-needed low carbon power for over a century, 
he argues.

Farron spoke out amid mounting speculation that ministers are growing cold on 
the tidal lagoon project, which was included in the Conservative manifesto but 
has been delayed by tortuous negotiations on subsidies.

“The Swansea <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/swansea> Bay tidal lagoon must go 
ahead. It will provide hundreds of jobs and supply energy for 120 years – over 
three times as long as a nuclear plant,” argued Farron.

“It would be utter madness for the government to pull further investment from 
the renewable sector which generates economic growth and jobs. We have been a 
world leader in this field and maintaining that status is now in jeopardy. The 
tidal lagoon is a litmus test for the government. Do you care about this 
agenda? Or was it all for show?” he asks.

The speech comes after David Cameron told a committee of MPs recently 
<http://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-committees/liaison/2016-01-12-PM.pdf>
 that his enthusiasm for the scheme had been “reduced” by concerns over the 
high subsidies needed to make the project commercial.

“The problem with tidal power, simply put, is that at the moment we have not 
seen any ideas come forward that can hit a strike price in terms of pounds per 
megawatt hour that is very attractive,” he said.

Amber Rudd, the energy and climate change secretary, also omitted the lagoon 
schemefrom a November keynote speech on energy infrastructure 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/amber-rudds-speech-on-a-new-direction-for-uk-energy-policy>
.

Tidal Lagoon Power, the company that wants to build the scheme and five others 
around the coast of Britain, said it was still “fully confident” that it could 
reach a deal with the government.

But the Conservatives have been slashing subsidies to other low carbon 
technologies such as solar and onshore wind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/24/the-9-green-policies-killed-off-by-tory-government>
 and talking up gas schemes as a way of keeping down household fuel bills.

Swansea Bay was supported by former Lib Dem energy secretary, Ed Davey, noted 
Farron in his speech in Cardiff.


“For five years we fought sceptical Tories to ensure the coalition was the 
greenest government ever. In the last six months this progress has been 
unraveling at an alarming pace.

“The huskies, shot by Cameron ages ago when their usefulness to him had run 
its course, will be turning in their graves. I also feel sorry for Amber Rudd 
who was told by the prime minister that they‘d gone to live on a farm in Devon.”

A spokeswoman for the Department of Energy and Climate Change said: “Our 
priority is to provide secure, clean and affordable energy for hardworking 
families and businesses.

“We are carefully considering the Swansea Bay project to see whether it is in 
the best interest of bill payers. At this point it would be inappropriate to 
comment further.”
 