
Lagom is a distinctly Swedish word. Like the now ubiquitous hygge, it doesn’t 
have a literal English translation, but essentially means “just enough”. It 
stands for moderation, or not going over the top. It is a defining element of 
Swedish culture and sums up much about the country, from its understated design 
and architecture to the conformism of its people. But it’s a concept that was 
stretched by one of the fathers of Swedish modernism, architect and designer 
Josef Frank.
 Manhattan, one of Frank’s best-known prints. Photograph: Svenskt Tenn Archive 
Frank is best known for his vivid textiles for Swedish firm Svenskt Tenn 
<http://www.svenskttenn.se/en/since-1924/josef-frank/>. He created 160 prints 
for the brand, almost all of them a riotous antitheses of lagom: from vibrant 
tropical flowers, ferns and insects to  oversized leaves in emerald and blue 
and a now iconic hand-drawnmap of Manhattan 
<http://www.svenskttenn.se/en/range/textile-department/fabric/curtain-fabric/josef-frank/textile-manhattan/sku-100686/>
, where he lived in the early 1940s. He also designed chairs, sofas, lamps, 
bowls, vases, trays, tables, stool and cabinets.
 Josef Frank’s Butterfly. Photograph: Svenskt Tenn Archive 
Born in Austria of Jewish heritage, Frank moved to Stockholm with his Swedish 
wife in 1933, aged 48, to escape growing Nazi discrimination. A committed 
socialist, he had a successful practice in Vienna,Haus & Garten 
<https://www.dorotheum.com/en/departments/all-departments/design-specialists/haus-garten.html>
, where he designed houses, interiors, furniture and fabrics. But when he 
arrived in Sweden, as an immigrant and a Jew, he couldn’t find work. “It was 
very difficult for him to get established,” says Svenskt Tenn creative director 
Thommy Bindefeld. “People didn’t want Jewish immigrants taking their work.” 
Svenskt Tenn founder Estrid Ericson was the exception: she hadcreated the brand 
in 1924 <http://www.svenskttenn.se/en/since-1924/>, with a focus on pewter 
pieces (“tenn” means pewter), but by the early 1930s her interest had shifted 
to interiors. Her style was functional and utilitarian, popular in Sweden at 
the time.
 Josef Frank’s Delhi. Photograph: Svenskt Tenn Archive 
Ericson had long been an admirer, so she asked Frank if he’d consider 
designing for her brand. His first pieces were opulent and glamorous, using 
luxurious materials such as brass and velvet, and introducing pattern. “She 
trusted her eye and her tastes, and didn’t worry too much about what other 
people thought,” Bindefeld says. “She gave Frank a platform. He would have 
found life much harder without her, but the opposite is true, too: Svenskt Tenn 
wouldn’t be here today without him.”

A year after his arrival, the pair took part in a design exhibition for which 
they created a Hollywood-style room set, with a 2.5m curved sofa upholstered in 
a floral pattern, an animal-skin rug and a glamorous drinks cabinet. It caused 
quite a stir.Design <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/design> historian 
Hedvig Hedqvist knew Frank when she was an intern at Svenskt Tenn in the 50s. 
He was, she says, probably thumbing his nose at the restrained Swedish 
aesthetic. “Unlike Vienna, then the cultural heart of Europe, Stockholm was a 
bit of a backwater. I think he was teasing the puritanical Swedes a bit.”
 Svenskt Tenn founder Estrid Ericson. Photograph: Svenskt Tenn Archive 
Frank believed in creating homes with character, that define the people who 
live there. His furniture was comfortable, often with rounded edges, and he 
used colour and pattern to add warmth and personality. Back then, this was a 
radical idea. “He always put people at the centre of his designs,” says 
Bindefeld. “Comfort was really important; and he believed you had to soften 
white walls with prints and pattern to be able to relax in a space.”

Following German annexation of Austria in 1938, Frank found himself stateless. 
He applied for Swedish citizenship – a process that required two attempts and 
some high-profile support – then moved to New York for the duration of the war. 
It proved fertile ground for his textile designs. Some of his most striking 
patterns emerged during his time there, including the sunflowers and 
watermelons of hisDixieland 
<http://www.svenskttenn.se/en/range/textile-department/fabric/curtain-fabric/josef-frank/textile-dixieland/sku-100615/>
 print,Italian Dinner 
<http://www.svenskttenn.se/en/range/textile-department/fabric/fabric-samples/josef-frank/fabric-sample-italian-dinner/sku-104375/>
 with its squid, lobster and tomatoes, and the hand-drawn map of Manhattan that 
highlighted his favourite streets. In 1944, he sent 50 new designs to Ericson 
for her 50th birthday.
 Josef Frank’s Gröna Fåglar. Photograph: Svenskt Tenn Archive 
In 1946, Frank returned to Sweden and continued his collaboration with Svenskt 
Tenn until his death in 1967. In 1951, they were commissioned by sculptor Carl 
Milles to design the interior of a newly built house. CalledAnne’s house 
<http://www.millesgarden.se/annes-hus.aspx>, it was built for his secretary, 
Anne Hedmark.

Svenskt Tenn still owns all Frank’s designs, and they are made to his original 
instructions; of the 160 fabrics he created, some 45 are in production at any 
one time. They are seen as distinctly Scandinavian, their optimistic energy 
continuing today at Ikea and Marimekko. “Frank brought something to Sweden that 
we didn’t have,” saysMillesgården Museum 
<http://www.visitstockholm.com/en/See--do/Attractions/millesgarden/> curator 
Maria Wiberg. “His work makes you happy.”

• Josef Frank Patterns: Furniture-Painting 
<http://www.ftmlondon.org/ftm-exhibitions/josef-frank-patterns-furniture-painting/>
 runs from 28 January-7 May at The Fashion and Textile Museum, London SE1; go to
ftmlondon.org <http://www.ftmlondon.org/> for details.
 