
Albania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> waited 70 years to play 
in a major tournament and then lost their first match in one inside the opening 
five minutes.

The culprit was Etrit Berisha, the Albania goalkeeper who will not wish to see 
again how he flew at a Xherdan Shaqiri corner and missed it to allow Fabian 
Schär to head into an empty net for what proved to be the winner.

This was a contest billed as “special” by Shaqiri due to links between the 
nations that gave it a strong feel of kinship, the sense crystallised by 
Switzerland (and Arsenal’s) Granit Xhaka facing his elder siblingTaulant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/10/xhaka-brothers-albania-switzerland-euro-2016-granit-taulant>
 , who lined up in Albania’s midfield.

Albania 0-1 Switzerland: Euro 2016 – as it happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/11/albania-v-switzerland-euro-2016-live>
While this was the first time brothers faced each other in the European 
Championship finals’ 56-year history, 10 of Gianni De Biasi’s squad were born 
or grew up inSwitzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> , 
many Albanians having sought refuge in the country due to the troubles 
affecting the Balkans.

All of this was reflected in a huge United We Stand banner displayed before 
kick-off and the way the opposing players greeted each other like long lost 
brothers.

Of actually playing against his brother, Granit Xhaka said: “It was a special 
moment for my family, they had brothers on opposite sides which was rather 
bizarre. We’re both very happy – me a bit more maybe as we have won.”

By the end an honest contest featuring a strong seam of niggle had been 
witnessed in which Albania had their chances to at least share the spoils. De 
Biasi was particularly infuriated to see the substitute Shkelzen Gashi spurn a 
golden chance when clear through as the final whistle neared.

From kick-off the Swiss had been a blur of white and after seeing nothing come 
from their first corner of the game, they then took the lead from the second.

Ricardo Rodriguez made a mug of Elseid Hysaj along the left before a corner 
from the opposite side was eventually won. Now came the calamity defending that 
would find an unfortunate repeat later in the half when Lorik Cana was sent off 
by the referee, Carlos Velasco Carballo.

Shaqiri sent over the set piece, Berisha did what he should not have done, and 
Schär netted for a sixth international goal on a 21st appearance, not a bad 
rate for a central defender.

Before this Granit Xhaka indicated his blend of ball-playing, tough-tackling 
football will be present when trotting out for Arsenal next season. The way he 
cleaned out Amir Abrashi with no concern for the midfielder’s limbs made him 
fortunate not to be booked by Carballo.Yet asked about this Xhaka said: “That 
is just the way I play, I like to play hard. I’m only 23 years old, I’m only 
young, so I’m going to make mistakes still.”

Switzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> were the 
dominating force before the break but were fragile when the Eagles attacked. 
The closest Albania came to an equaliser was via Taulant Xhaka and though his 
shot was spooned over his brother was the closest defender and still a yard 
away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Falbania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e18eb241ae5b66da788e6da203c81db9bbfebc9%2F0_0_1489_940%2F1489.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Switzerland%20and%20Fabian%20Sch%C3%A4r%20quick%20to%20spoil%20Albania%E2%80%99s%20bit%20of%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Falbania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Switzerland%20and%20Fabian%20Sch%C3%A4r%20quick%20to%20spoil%20Albania%E2%80%99s%20bit%20of%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Falbania-switzerland-euro-2016-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e18eb241ae5b66da788e6da203c81db9bbfebc9%2F0_0_1489_940%2F1489.jpg>
 Fabian Schär heads home the only goal. Photograph: Darren Staples/Reuters 
This was about as good as it got for the Albanians in front of goal during the 
first half as proceedings became pretty dire near their own. First Haris 
Seferovic, the lone outrider in Vladimir Petkovic’s 4-2-3-1, broke free and saw 
his shot beaten away by Berisha. Then came Cana’s dismissal. The captain had 
been booked earlier for going through the back of Blerim Dzemaili. Now, he 
allowed Seferovic to gain ground and, as the ball rolled towards them, Cana 
slipped and felt forced to commit a handball. Out came Carballo’s yellow card 
again and off the 32-year-old went, meaning he misses Wednesday’s game against 
France in Marseille. Dzemaili banged the free-kick off Berisha’s left-hand 
post, the Swiss inches away from doubling their lead.

Later Seferovic, who had earlier warmed Berisha’s fingers, should have scored 
when racing in on the keeper who after his crucial error was keeping his side 
in this second Group A match. By the close there had been seven yellow cards 
and an occasion that will be remembered by the two nations but with mixed 
feelings from the Albanian side. As De Biasi said afterwards: “We needed a good 
start and that didn’t happen. The pressure got to us and for 20 minutes we were 
under par. Once you concede it is that much more difficult.”

England and Wales bring another domestic rivalry to this stadium on Thursday, 
a venue which holds 35,000 – the tournament’s second smallest – but if their 
fans can match the noise made here it should make for some atmosphere.
 