
Roll up, Circus City has come to town: specifically, to Parramatta as part of 
theSydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> festival – and 
25km west of where most of the three-week festival program has been located for 
the past 40 years.


The Spaghetti Circus <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/circus> Big Top is set 
up in Prince Alfred Square and more circus events are taking place in adjacent 
Riverside Theatres, from high-calibre shows to participatory workshops for the 
public who want to learn basic tumbling skills. It’s a bold and, judging by its 
first weekend, successful move that blends professional and amateur seamlessly, 
in a region that has been crying out for more arts programming.


Circus City has some fabulous local and international acts: Circa from 
Brisbane, Cirque Éloize from Montreal and, coming this week, Ockham’s Razor 
aerial theatre company from the UK.


The Season review – family comedy gives wing to some spirited performances
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2017/jan/13/the-season-review-family-comedy-gives-wing-to-some-spirited-performances>
There’s an additional, gorgeous family show called Kaleidoscope, by the 
Australian performing arts group Company 2, which revolves around a remarkable 
13-year-old boy, Ethan Hugh, who has Asperger’s syndrome. Kaleidoscope hums 
with fresh perspective, blending circus and narrative in an exploration of the 
world through Ethan’s eyes. The cast tumbles, cartwheels and backflips around 
Ethan, who remains the show’s anchor. He even performs some neat balancing 
tricks himself.


Judging by their declarations of wonder during the performance, the kids in 
the audience of the performance I saw were as awestruck at the skills on 
display as they were by the body painting and feathers flying in pillow fights. 
I reckon Kaleidoscope in particular will inspire many children, as much as any 
of the adult shows in the main theatre and Big Top, to ask their parents if 
they can attend a circus workshop in the Riverside forecourt just a few metres 
away.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fsydney-festivals-circus-city-delights-and-astounds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faedfc542b0e06d664f5c59335e276a55e940ec03%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20festival's%20Circus%20City%20delights%20and%20astounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fsydney-festivals-circus-city-delights-and-astounds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20festival%27s%20Circus%20City%20delights%20and%20astounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fsydney-festivals-circus-city-delights-and-astounds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faedfc542b0e06d664f5c59335e276a55e940ec03%2F0_0_7360_4912%2F7360.jpg>
 Kaleidoscope from Company 2 revolves around a 13-year-old boy, Ethan Hugh, who 
has Asperger’s syndrome. Photograph: Dylan Evans/Sydney festival 
The forecourt on the Saturday morning I attended was full of such children, 
aged 18 months to four years old, dressed as pirates and fairies, butterflies 
and ironmen, juggling brightly coloured balls and spinning hula hoops as part 
of the Tiny Tots Take Off! workshop. A couple of the little novices in their 
loaned costumes experimented with the low-hanging trapeze, falling safely on to 
thick mats, while others climbed into silks hung from the ceilings.


There was a light, energetic atmosphere in the space and, as Lisa Hanssens, a 
teacher from the Canterbury-based circus skills school Aerialize, told me: 
“Even after one class, you can see a sparkle of confidence in the kids’ eyes 
that says: I did things I didn’t know I could do.” Parents were turning up 
asking for their children to take part on the spot.


The spirit was welcoming and I had registered for the free Ground Controllers! 
workshop, conducted by two fit men named Rodrigo and Vestri. Soon I was 
crouched on all fours on a mat as a tall stranger named Lulu with her hair in 
plaits balanced on all fours on top of me. Before long we were taking turns 
standing on one other’s knees.


What’s important is how inviting these amateur workshops were: I am in my 50th 
year; another woman balancing on top of me was a septuagenarian. It was a neat 
complement to the awe-inspiring skill on display in the theatres.


The three circuses I saw all paid respects to the skills of the artform in 
different ways, but Circa’s brand new production Humans in the Big Top was, for 
me, the five-star favourite: a clear demonstration of the artistry of circus 
and its potential to draw together multiple theatrical forms. Directed by the 
company’s founder, Yaron Lifschitz, Humans has more in common with modern dance 
given its level of abstraction. What I adored was its fluid take on humanity 
and gender roles: women caught men falling backwards; men leapt towards and 
were caught by men. As the ensemble moved themselves into sculptural, abstract 
shapes, reaching higher to the ceiling for the denouement, I felt moved by 
their vulnerable, collective humanity.


In contrast, iD from Cirque Éloize felt a little remote in the theatre – I 
wish it could have been staged in the Big Top to feel more intimate – but what 
made it click into place was its extraordinary synchronisation of circus and 
dancing performers.

Among the many sequences in iD that will have you cheering is one involving 
multiple jump ropes, through which Thibaut Philippe threads his bicycle – after 
he has raced through one theatre door, through the Riverside foyer, chasing a 
skater, and back through another door – and the contortionist Nicole Winter’s 
feet chasing one another in 360-degree circles around herown head.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fsydney-festivals-circus-city-delights-and-astounds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26ceff575f4f282ed58e523565ece40e0964b458%2F384_0_3363_2744%2F3363.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20festival's%20Circus%20City%20delights%20and%20astounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fsydney-festivals-circus-city-delights-and-astounds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20festival%27s%20Circus%20City%20delights%20and%20astounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fsydney-festivals-circus-city-delights-and-astounds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26ceff575f4f282ed58e523565ece40e0964b458%2F384_0_3363_2744%2F3363.jpg>
 Humans by Circa at the Spaghetti Circus Big Top at Prince Alfred Square. 
Photograph: Pedro Greig/Sydney Festival 
All of these performances concentrated the mind on humanity: iD had plenty of 
standard circus fare but also a loose theme of two tribes coming together, 
suspicious of one another’s identity but working out they’re better as a team. 
Kaleidoscope, with its ripples of sensory energy, challenged any jaded grown-up 
audience members to look at the world anew. The themes in Humans – love, lust, 
jealousy, madness – worked on a deep, visceral level.


Never again, I’m convinced, should circus be reduced to the idea of shallow 
popcorn-munching entertainment, the poor cousin of so-called high arts, on the 
evidence of the first weekend of Circus City.

Less successful was the evening atmosphere around the Big Top. The circus is 
confined to one corner of Prince Alfred Square and there’s no alcohol on sale, 
and not quite enough room for crowds to relax between shows. It lacked a 
certain buzz for a Saturday night. What really mattered, however, were the 
performances.


A former director of the Sydney and Melbourne festivals, Leo Schofield 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/sydney-festival/sydney-festival-forced-to-end-free-opening-events-20131012-2vf6y.html>
,  
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/sydney-festival/sydney-festival-forced-to-end-free-opening-events-20131012-2vf6y.html>
once said 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/sydney-festival/sydney-festival-forced-to-end-free-opening-events-20131012-2vf6y.html>
 festivals were expected to spend a large amount of money on free 
entertainment. “That’s not what I believe [a festival] should be,” he said. “It 
should be a celebration of excellence in the performing arts. If it is going to 
be bread and circuses then it needs to be properly funded.”


Schofield remains right on the money, regarding the money. Proper funding of 
arts across New South Walesremains a sore point 
<http://businesschamber.com.au/Sydney-Business-Chamber/Advocacy/Focus-Western-Sydney/WS-Cultural-Infrastructure-Report_Final>
: western Sydney is home to one in 10 Australians but attracts only 1% of 
national arts funding and 5.5% of NSW state cultural arts, heritage and events 
funding.


There are other performing art forms here at Parramatta during the festival, 
of course: there’s a Church Street restaurant venue for Hakawati, a show by the 
new National Theatre of Parramatta that combines Arabic storytelling with food. 
There are also posters advertising a Symphony Under the Stars concert on 28 
January, featuring Mozart, Elgar and Tchaikovsky works, at Parramatta park – 
whereTropfest will  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/15/tropfest-announces-move-to-parramatta-after-rocky-12-months>
make its much publicised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/15/tropfest-announces-move-to-parramatta-after-rocky-12-months>
home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/15/tropfest-announces-move-to-parramatta-after-rocky-12-months>
 as of this February. From 2018 the festival’s open-air symphony and opera 
concerts will move permanently from the inner-Sydney Domain to Parramatta park. 
That’s a smart decision given the populations swelling out west, much as 
traditionalists in the Domain will moan at their loss.


Measure for Measure review – Russians add layers to Shakespeare's problem play
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/jan/09/measure-for-measure-review-russians-add-layers-to-shakespeares-problem-play>
The downside to Sydney festival’s huge focus on circus in Parramatta is that 
there’s not much space left for some of the other artforms. The festival has 
notable Australian first-run productions such as Measure for Measure, featuring 
Russian performers, and The Season, featuring an all-Indigenous cast, director 
and writer, at the Roslyn PackerTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> and the Sydney Opera House 
respectively, and performances of plays like these should also be seen in the 
festival’s Parramatta arm.


Given the demand for cultural enrichment is growing here, alongside a 
population that is 45% overseas-born and collectively speaks 140 languages, 
there is no good reason for keeping western Sydney the distant cousin.


Yes, there is the Parramasala <http://www.parramasala.com/about/> food, 
markets and party festival each March, and the Powerhouse museum may yet move 
from inner-city Ultimo to the Parramatta riverbank, despite protests. Sydney 
festival could perhaps do more here, if better funded, in line with plans to 
make Parramatta a“dual CBD city” <http://www.cityofparramatta.com.au/dual-cbd/>
. Either way, it’s well past time for the region to have a bigger share of the 
Sydney festival calendar. Just make sure the circuses keep coming.

• iD <http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/id> is playing at Sydney festival 
until 22 January;Kaleidoscope 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/kaleidoscope> until 18 January; Humans 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/humans/> until 19 January. Ockham’s 
Razor’s show,Tipping Point <http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/tipping-point>
, runs from 17 to 21 January
 