
Long Bay jail in Sydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> is 
one of a number of sites being considered to build a new maximum-security 
facility for prisoners facing terrorism-related offences.

In a statement on Sunday, Corrective Services New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> confirmed it was 
“taking proactive steps to manage the rising number of people on remand facing 
terrorism-related offences”.

It follows concerns raised 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-10/supermax-prison-to-be-overhauled-due-to-radicalisation-fears/7918782>
 last month by the NSW corrective services commissioner, Peter Severin, that 
the Supermax high-risk management centre in Goulburn in the Southern Highlands, 
was causing younger inmates to become further radicalised by hardened 
extremists.

Sydney counter-terrorism raids: teenager charged with foreign fighter offence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/03/two-arrested-in-sydney-counter-terrorism-raids>
On Sunday a NSW Corrective Services spokeswoman said in a statement: “The 
installation of a new high-risk management unit closer to Sydney to house them, 
and a small number of other extreme high-risk inmates, is in the early planning 
stages.”

She said the facility would be located closer to Sydney to allow NSW 
Corrective Services “to meet its requirements to provide legal access and 
transport for inmates on terrorism-related offences, as the existing high-risk 
management unit is located at Goulburn, 195km from central Sydney”.

Severin told News Corp 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/supermaxstyle-prison-to-cater-for-inmates-facing-terrorism-charges/news-story/674315e281201a28b2d18f29c3266571?login=1>
 the rising number of people facing terrorist-related charges meant “we need to 
create new options”.

“We need to be prepared,” he said. “There is an expectation of more activity 
and this is really a proactive step. We are continuously looking at managing 
people who are extreme high risk.”

But RMIT university professor and security expert, Joseph Siracusa, said the 
new facility risked replicating the issues being experienced in the Goulburn 
Supermax.

“Putting a bunch of people on similar offences together in the one place is a 
bad idea, unless you keep them in isolation from each other,” Siracusa said.

“Supermax prisons are designed to break people. They do their jobs in terms of 
keeping people locked up, but it sounds in this case that there is no talk of 
rehabilitation to run alongside it. In Minnesota there is a maximum security 
prison where judges are working with younger people on serious charges to give 
them a chance to come back and to rehabilitate.

Radicalisation in Australia: Muslim leaders work to dissipate 'fixation' with 
Isis among youths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/10/radicalisation-in-australia-muslim-leaders-work-to-dissipate-fixation-with-isis-among-youths>
“If this is just going to be just another supermax facility, then that’s not 
very progressive.”

He said there were about 135 people in prisons across Australia on 
terrorism-related offences.

The opposition NSW corrections minister, Guy Zangari, told the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-11-27/sydney-jail-for-terror-suspects-considered-by-nsw-government/8061254>
 that he was concerned moving high-risk inmates to Long Bay in Port Botany may 
place the public at risk.

“This is around suburban Malabar, Chifley and Little Bay, there is increasing 
development around the area and a growing population, surely they don’t want to 
wake up to the news that supermax prisoners will be housed in the heart of 
their suburb,” he said.
 