
Anders Horsholt, the FC Copenhagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fccopenhagen> director, has revealed 
discussions have been held over a potential European league involving teams 
from Scotland, Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium, Norway and Sweden.

In February, reports in Scotland suggested that Celtic’s chief executive, 
Peter Lawwell, was in favour of establishing the league as they feared being 
frozen out of plans to reorganise theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>.

Would an ‘Atlantic league’ be good for European club football?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/atlantic-league-good-european-club-football>
Now, Horsholt, whose side face Leicester City in the Champions League next 
week, has admitted talks are ongoing.

In an interview with the Danish newspaper BT 
<http://www.bt.dk/superligaen/klar-til-at-forlade-superligaen-fck-forhandler-om-ny-international-liga>
, he said: “Yes it’s true. If we do not act now, we will see the biggest clubs 
grow larger and stronger while it will be increasingly difficult for clubs like 
us.

“We must therefore look at which alternative international opportunities for 
FC Copenhagen in the future.

“Here it is still too early to talk about specific models, but the discussion 
of leagues across European borders is a theme that we look at and actively 
participate in.”

Last month the president of Spain’s La Liga admitted he is considering 
proposals to form a breakaway competition to rival the Champions League because 
it represents a “greater opportunity to generate more revenue”. In July the 
Dalian Wanda Group, which is owned by China’s richest man Wang Jianlin, 
revealed it had begun discussions with clubs to create a tournament which would 
rival the current competition run by Uefa.

That followed Uefa’s announcement that Europe’s top four leagues will have 
four automatic places in the Champions League group stage from the 2018-19 
season onwards – a move that was supported by clubs in Spain and Italy.

“We understand that the biggest clubs act as they do,” Horsholt said. “But it 
also means that we must look at the market it leaves and seek alliances with 
teams from other countries in the same situation.

“This is not a situation that we have created, but we have to deal with it 
because we cannot live with the alternative accounting. We must continue to 
develop as a club and be attractive to sponsors, the most skilled players and 
staff. Therefore, it is essential that we are at the European level.

“FC Copenhagen and other European clubs that will be part of a new European 
league will step out of their domestic leagues. It is still well in the future, 
but it may well be the result.”

In February the Daily Record revealed 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/atlantic-league-back-table-dutch-7377289>
 that a consortium of businessmen based in England had approached the former 
PSV Eindhoven chairman Harry van Raaij in a bid to resurrect his idea for an 
Atlantic League, which was originally rejected in 2000.
 